Get Wonkbook delivered to your inbox or mobile device every morning . 
It 's like reading it on the blog , only much more convenient . 
Your essential source for the latest news on the intersection of Wall Street and Washington . 
Michael Leachman of the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities argues that the stimulus has created more jobs than recovery . 
Bruce Katz , Emilia Istrate , and Jonathan Rothwell note that rising exports would do a lot for metropolitan areas . 
The Sustainable Defense Task Force proposes cuts to the defense budget . 
Barry Eichengreen and Peter Temin compare the Gold Standard and the Euro . 
Flavio Cunha and James Heckman revew research suggesting that non-cognitive skills are important for young people 's life prospects . 
A New Spin on the `` Giant Pool of Money '' Theory We 've talked before about the `` giant pool of money '' hypothesis . 
This is the idea that the actual trigger for the financial crisis was that emerging economies were running huge trade surpluses because a series of currency crises had convinced them that they could n't sustain trade deficits . 
All that money , however , needed somewhere to go . 
And it went to developed countries . 
In particular , it went to America , and more specifically than that , to treasuries . 
Problem was , those huge inflows of cash pushed interest rates on Treasurys pretty far down , which made them an abnormally low-performing investment . 
Martin Wolf had a nice graph expressing some of this last week : With Treasury bond yields falling through the floor , there was considerable demand for safe assets with better yields . 
The financial sector , sensing a market opportunity , jumped into the breach with securitized loans and AAA tranches and all the rest . 
Meanwhile , the strangely low interest rates fed a housing and credit bubble . 
In this telling , the key culprit behind the financial crisis was not the doings on Wall Street , but the giant hose of money the rest of the world pointed at us . 
If this is true , then fixing the financial system is like taking medicine to cure your symptoms . 
The disease still exists . 
That , at least , is how I 've understood the argument . 
But I just had a conversation with Steve Pearlstein that 's making me somewhat reconsider the point . 
The causality , he argued , is n't as clear as all that . 
It may be that we developed these exotic financial instruments as a response to the river of money being pumped into our system . 
Or it may go the opposite way : That money was pumped into our system because we concocted abnormally attractive investments that caught the eye of foreign investors . 
This is a slightly different spin on the same argument : In this telling , the current account deficit was still the problem . 
But it grew so large not because of foreign investors but because of Wall Street 's decisions . 
Without the development of seemingly safe , high-return assets , that money would have been left to low-yield treasuries , and because those would n't have delivered sufficient returns , the money would have ended up going elsewhere . 
If that 's true , then it may be that sufficient regulation of the financial sector actually could do quite a bit to ease our current account problems . 
By Ezra Klein | June 15 , 2009 ; 3:11 PM ET Another thing that people have been saying is that the popping of the housing bubble , in and of itself , is enough to explain our current economic predicament . 
But it seems to me that the exotic financial instruments of this decade had a clear role in pumping up the bubble in the first place , as these ` safe ' but relatively high-yielding investments greatly increased the demand for securitized packages of loans , which in turn greatly increased the demand for something whose supply is normally fairly inflexible : homeowners to lend money to . 
I get all that - I heard the This American Life story about the giant pool of money , which I believe aired nearly a year ago - well before Paulson yelled fire in the crowded theater last fall . 
But I ca n't begin to understand how this `` giant pool of money '' persuaded mortgage brokers to lend to anyone who showed up at the table - regardless of ability to pay back the loan . 
I ca n't see how the giant pool forced financial firms to develop `` innovative tools '' that hid the risk of the securitized debt . 
I ca n't logically link this pool of money to the failure of ratings agencies to properly rate the risk of `` innovative '' investments . 
I do n't see how this pool forced people into thinking that terrible risks should be taken with other people 's money `` because everyone else was doing it . '' 
There was money there . 
What people did with it was something they should be held accountable for . 
Much of that is due to inequality . 
Rather than being directed toward concrete projects that would satisfy real human needs , the money went round and round in speculative games . 
Why would anyone invest in , say , renewable energy here , or infrastructure in Africa , or heating equipment for China , when they could make a quick buck on the US housing bubble ? 
The lack of buying power among those with real human needs , combined with the wealthy 's willingness to gamble and trust in financial alchemists -LRB- because they did n't really need the money they were investing -RRB- , were the deadly combination . 
When the haves want to `` get richer more quickly , '' and the have-nots have so little buying power that they ca n't even pay for life-saving drugs they need , why are we surprised that investment degenerates into a speculative game of musical chairs ? 
The core issue is still the fact that work does n't pay adequately . 
The first step in this disaster was the repudiation of the progressive income tax structure under the Reagan administration -LRB- God , I still ca n't believe we elected a stupid , jingoistic B-movie actor as President -RRB- . 
The progressive tax structure was useful in that it made it effectively much cheaper to distribute profits broadly than to concentrate those funds into hundred million dollar comp packages . 
The true core of the disaster happened when American businesses went overseas to circumvent American law for the purpose of exploiting the labor of the world 's poorest people . 
This replacement of well-paid , economically productive jobs with bare subsistence labor eliminated the source of funding for economic demand in America . 
The credit bubble resulted from the desire to maintain economic activity in the face of the ensuing combination of overproduction and diminishing incomes . 
You just ca n't run an economy without funding the demand side of the equation . 
In the presence of the massive demand deficit , we kept the GDP numbers up through borrowing and housing inflation , creating a sham prosperity , an economic time bomb . 
There is no regulation that could have prevented us from exhausting our creditworthiness under those conditions . 
The ONLY fix for this is to make work pay again . 
A revival of demand can come only at the expense of distributing profits more broadly through raising wages . 
In a globally competitive environment , we have to find ways of raising wages globally . 
All aspects of the financial crisis are symptoms of the consequences of inflating profits at the expense of working people . 
Regulatory reform is all very well , but the need to make work pay better is the vital core issue upon which our fate truly rests . 
