Making Financial Regulation Work : What Would Have Helped This is part of a series on The Hearing called `` Making Financial Regulation Work . '' 
This guest post is from economist Arnold Kling . 
The financial crisis is often blamed on an atmosphere of deregulation . 
This strikes me as overly vague . 
What were the specific regulatory failures ? 
On close examination , a number of specific issues are not as important as they might appear . 
For example , adjustable-rate mortgages are risky , but adjustments in interest rates caused only a small portion of the problems in the mortgage market . 
Starting in the 1960s , commercial banks and investment banks developed products and services that competed with one another , vitiating the 1930s Glass-Steagall attempt to separate the two types of institutions and culminating in a formal repeal of Glass-Steagall in 1999 . 
However , it is hard to pin the decline in mortgage lending standards or the surge in leverage at banks on this development . 
Another alleged regulatory failure concerns financial derivatives , and in particular credit default swaps . 
A credit-default swap is an insurance policy on a bond or mortgage security . 
CDS were traded over-the-counter , meaning that individual firms wrote contracts . 
With over-the-counter trading , AIG insurance wrote CDS to insure many mortgage securities , never dreaming that there would be enough mortgage defaults that they would have to pay claims . 
As the mortgage crisis unfolded , AIG 's counterparties worried that AIG had not set aside enough reserves to pay its obligations , demanded that AIG put up short-term securities as collateral . 
These collateral calls were difficult for AIG to meet , and the government stepped in as a backstop . 
During the Clinton administration , there were some who argued that CDS instead should have been traded on an organized exchange , and many policymakers have since come around to this view . 
I am not sure what difference it would have made . 
Had the same transactions taken place on an organized exchange , AIG would have been faced with margin calls from the exchange rather than collateral calls from its counterparties . 
If AIG had not been able to meet these margin calls , the exchange would have taken large losses and probably failed , creating a mess for policymakers . 
Moreover , even if an organized exchange would have done a better job of preventing or handling the AIG fiasco , this was only one part of the overall financial crisis . 
There still would have been catastrophic bank failures due to mortgage defaults . 
I am also skeptical about the claim that we needed a systemic risk regulator to prevent the crisis . 
This would be true if most of the financial damage could not have been prevented by any individual regulator . 
However , the fact is that the Federal Reserve , which regulates most of the nation 's largest banks , had enough power to prevent bank failures with better capital regulations . 
Preventing failure at Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae also did not require a systemic risk regulator what was needed was tighter supervision by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight , which regulates those institutions . 
That in turn would have required support from Congress , which generally was instead more prone to tampering with the regulator than with the housing enterprises it was supposed to regulate . 
If you could turn back the clock and change regulations to prevent the financial crisis , the focus would be on two areas : mortgage underwriting standards and bank capital regulations . 
The housing bubble , culminating in a crash with severe mortgage defaults , was the trigger of the financial crisis . 
The crisis devastated the banking system because banks had found ways to accumulate tremendous amounts of mortgage credit risk without capital for protection . 
If mortgage underwriting standards had not been dramatically weakened starting in the late 1990s , there would have been much less dangerous housing speculation , less fraud , and fewer poorly qualified borrowers with mortgages . 
But there was nobody in Washington who wanted to see mortgage underwriting standards made more rigorous . 
Tight underwriting standards were not in the interest of home builders , real estate agents , mortgage security traders , or anyone who wanted to see expanded homeownership . 
In fact , there are some who argue that underwriting standards were driven downward because of the Community Reinvestment Act , which puts pressure on banks to lend to minority borrowers , as well as by affordable-housing quotas that were imposed on Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae . 
Even if those policies were not major contributors to the decline in mortgage quality , it is fair to say that no regulator who tried to push for tighter mortgage underwriting standards in 2004 or 2005 -LRB- when such a move would have been timely -RRB- would have survived the wrath of Congress . 
In my view , the worst regulatory error was allowing bank capital regulations to be evaded . 
In the late 1980s , after many savings and loans had failed in the United States , international bank regulators developed the Basel capital accord . 
Although this was flawed in many respects , it did represent a formal requirement for banks to hold capital based on risk . 
Most assets required 8 percent capital . 
Some low-risk assets required 4 percent capital , and some government securities required even less . 
Soon after the capital accords were rolled out , banks began to come up with ways to game the system . 
For mortgages , the two most important techniques were securitizing mortgages and creating off-balance-sheet vehicles . 
Securitization allowed banks to get large portions of their mortgage portfolios rated AAA , and these AAA ratings in turn lowered capital requirements , particularly after a revision to the capital requirements that was formalized on Jan. 1 , 2002 . 
The off-balance-sheet entities were an even bigger scam , because generally-accepted accounting principles -LRB- which the regulators copied -RRB- allowed the banks not to count the mortgage securities in these entities as assets at all . 
All of this was done right under the nose of the regulators . 
An article in 2000 in the Journal of Banking and Finance , called Emerging problems with the Basel Capital Accord : Regulatory capital arbitrage and related issues , was written by a Federal Reserve staffer . 
Although such scholarly articles always carry disclaimers that the contents do not represent the opinions of the Fed , it clearly showed an awareness of how banks were using techniques to evade capital requirements . 
The author rationalizes this in part by suggesting that without the ability to evade capital requirements , banks would have been less competitive in the market to finance mortgage loans or other low-risk assets . 
In hindsight , the case for allowing regulatory capital arbitrage to take place was flimsy . 
At the time , a group of market-oriented economists known as the Shadow Regulatory Committee was arguing in the opposite direction . 
The Shadow Regulatory Committee warned specifically that basing capital requirements on credit-rating-agency classifications would lead to distorted rating estimates that would undermine risk controls . 
I do not believe that regulatory capital arbitrage was tolerated out of an ideology of deregulation . 
It appears to have been tolerated because regulators felt that the Basel capital accords were making it too difficult for banks to finance mortgages in their portfolios . 
What seemed at the time to be a small regulatory adjustment turned out to be an enormous error . 
Regulators constantly must make these sort of judgment calls . 
The fact that some seemingly minor mistakes can have catastrophic consequences does not bode well for the view that regulatory reform will be sufficient to prevent another financial crisis . 
Instead , I agree with those who would like somehow to have banks broken into smaller units and subject to market discipline -LRB- through subordinated debt , for example -RRB- , so that regulators are under less pressure to get regulations right or to engage in bailouts when banks fail . 
-- Arnold Kling is an economist who worked at the Federal Reserve Board and at Freddie Mac . 
He regularly blogs at econlog.econlib.org . 
By Terri Rupar | June 15 , 2009 ; 12:12 PM ET -RRB- calls from the exchange rather than -RRB- collateral calls from its counterparties . -RRB- 
If AIG had not been able to meet these -RRB- margin calls , the exchange would have -RRB- taken large losses and probably failed , -RRB- creating a mess for policymakers . 
Could you explain more clearly how an `` exchange '' would have changed the way CDSs were created , tracked , and what would have happened differently than what actually did happen when the `` bottom '' fell out ? 
I submit that the manner in which a realty bubble morphed into a SubPrime Mess , with the connivance of all the components in that chain , effectively substantiates that the above sentiment is wrong-headed . 
There were , in fact , two failures : \* The first was the repeal of Glass-Steagal which reinforced a certain laxity in the federal watchdog agencies , foremost of which was the Fed under Greenspan , with his `` markets are self-regulating '' nonsense . 
-LRB- Five global financial ruptures before our own SubPrime Mess , shows that markets are NOT self-regulating and that national supervisory agencies - with teeth - are a clear necessity . -RRB- 
\* The second was the profits feeding frenzy that induced both Private Finance and Semi-private Finance -LRB- Fannie ; Freddie -RRB- agents to loosen creditworthiness criteria , which spawned the bad loans . 
This happened in the face of TILA -LRB- Truth In Lending Act -RRB- that should have prevented `` teaser loans '' and down-the-line `` balloon payments '' . 
Some federal agency , responsible for supervising TILA , was asleep at the wheel . 
The demise of Glass-Steagal paved the way for the consequences that we know all too well today . 
And , who is paying more the consequence of that inanity ? 
Wall Street or Main Street ? 
Moreover , at about the same time as the demise of Glass-Steagal , here is the suggestion of the American Community Banker 's Association to Congress when that body , in 1998 , was considering reform of TILA : `` Addressing Abusive Practices Must Occur Separately From Streamlining and Simplifying Mortgage Disclosures Abusive lending practices exist and are a threat to both unsophisticated borrowers and the general mortgage lending industry , but any proposed actions directed at curbing and eliminating these abuses must be explored separately from a discussion focused on streamlining and simplifying TILA and RESPA disclosures . '' 
ACB supports and is committed to the simplification and streamlining of the disclosures provided to consumers under TILA and RESPA . 
We will continue to work with other groups , the regulators , and Congress to achieve meaningful reform . 
Education for and understanding by consumers about the mortgage process is in the best interests of all parties . 
We look forward to continuing our discussions with all concerned parties , as well as assisting the subcommittees in any way toward this end . '' 
Yeah , right ... ten years later and how many American families are suffering because of our lack of foresightedness and unfounded trust in BigFinance ? 
Just when are we going to get Financial Regulation right ? 
Meaning this : Any `` financial engineering '' must adhere to EXACTLY the same principle as engineering projects anywhere in the world . 
They must demonstrate clearly that they adhere to `` fail-safe '' guarantees . 
