Over the past two years , we have faced the most severe financial crisis since the Great Depression . 
The financial system failed to perform its function as a reducer and distributor of risk . 
Instead , it magnified risks , precipitating an economic contraction that has hurt families and businesses around the world . 
We have taken extraordinary measures to help put America on a path to recovery . 
But it is not enough to simply repair the damage . 
The economic pain felt by ordinary Americans is a daily reminder that , even as we labor toward recovery , we must begin today to build the foundation for a stronger and safer system . 
This current financial crisis had many causes . 
It had its roots in the global imbalance in saving and consumption , in the widespread use of poorly understood financial instruments , in shortsightedness and excessive leverage at financial institutions . 
But it was also the product of basic failures in financial supervision and regulation . 
Our framework for financial regulation is riddled with gaps , weaknesses and jurisdictional overlaps , and suffers from an outdated conception of financial risk . 
In recent years , the pace of innovation in the financial sector has outstripped the pace of regulatory modernization , leaving entire markets and market participants largely unregulated . 
That is why , this week -- at the president 's direction , and after months of consultation with Congress , regulators , business and consumer groups , academics and experts -- the administration will put forward a plan to modernize financial regulation and supervision . 
The goal is to create a more stable regulatory regime that is flexible and effective ; that is able to secure the benefits of financial innovation while guarding the system against its own excess . 
In developing its proposals , the administration has focused on five key problems in our existing regulatory regime -- problems that , we believe , played a direct role in producing or magnifying the current crisis . 
First , existing regulation focuses on the safety and soundness of individual institutions but not the stability of the system as a whole . 
As a result , institutions were not required to maintain sufficient capital or liquidity to keep them safe in times of system-wide stress . 
In a world in which the troubles of a few large firms can put the entire system at risk , that approach is insufficient . 
The administration 's proposal will address that problem by raising capital and liquidity requirements for all institutions , with more stringent requirements for the largest and most interconnected firms . 
In addition , all large , interconnected firms whose failure could threaten the stability of the system will be subject to consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve , and we will establish a council of regulators with broader coordinating responsibility across the financial system . 
Second , the structure of the financial system has shifted , with dramatic growth in financial activity outside the traditional banking system , such as in the market for asset-backed securities . 
In theory , securitization should serve to reduce credit risk by spreading it more widely . 
But by breaking the direct link between borrowers and lenders , securitization led to an erosion of lending standards , resulting in a market failure that fed the housing boom and deepened the housing bust . 
The administration 's plan will impose robust reporting requirements on the issuers of asset-backed securities ; reduce investors ' and regulators ' reliance on credit-rating agencies ; and , perhaps most significant , require the originator , sponsor or broker of a securitization to retain a financial interest in its performance . 
The plan also calls for harmonizing the regulation of futures and securities , and for more robust safeguards of payment and settlement systems and strong oversight of `` over the counter '' derivatives . 
All derivatives contracts will be subject to regulation , all derivatives dealers subject to supervision , and regulators will be empowered to enforce rules against manipulation and abuse . 
Third , our current regulatory regime does not offer adequate protections to consumers and investors . 
Weak consumer protections against subprime mortgage lending bear significant responsibility for the financial crisis . 
The crisis , in turn , revealed the inadequacy of consumer protections across a wide range of financial products -- from credit cards to annuities . 
Building on the recent measures taken to fight predatory lending and unfair practices in the credit card industry , the administration will offer a stronger framework for consumer and investor protection across the board . 
Fourth , the federal government does not have the tools it needs to contain and manage financial crises . 
Relying on the Federal Reserve 's lending authority to avert the disorderly failure of nonbank financial firms , while essential in this crisis , is not an appropriate or effective solution in the long term . 
To address this problem , we will establish a resolution mechanism that allows for the orderly resolution of any financial holding company whose failure might threaten the stability of the financial system . 
This authority will be available only in extraordinary circumstances , but it will help ensure that the government is no longer forced to choose between bailouts and financial collapse . 
Fifth , and finally , we live in a globalized world , and the actions we take here at home -- no matter how smart and sound -- will have little effect if we fail to raise international standards along with our own . 
We will lead the effort to improve regulation and supervision around the world . 
The discussion here presents only a brief preview of the administration 's forthcoming proposals . 
Some people will say that this is not the time to debate the future of financial regulation , that this debate should wait until the crisis is fully behind us . 
Such critics misunderstand the nature of the challenges we face . 
Like all financial crises , the current crisis is a crisis of confidence and trust . 
Reassuring the American people that our financial system will be better controlled is critical to our economic recovery . 
By restoring the public 's trust in our financial system , the administration 's reforms will allow the financial system to play its most important function : transforming the earnings and savings of workers into the loans that help families buy homes and cars , help parents send kids to college , and help entrepreneurs build their businesses . 
Now is the time to act . 
Timothy Geithner is secretary of the Treasury . 
Lawrence Summers is director of the National Economic Council . 
