BP reaches key ` milestone ' in halting Gulf oil leak BP CEO Tony Hayward says cutting away the riser was a ` very important step ' Oil company BP says it has cut a ruptured pipe from the leaking Gulf of Mexico oil well , a key step in the latest effort to cap the well . 
BP chief Tony Hayward hailed it as an `` important milestone '' and said BP could know within the next 12 to 24 hours if the capping effort would succeed . 
For now , undersea robots are preparing the well-head to receive the cap . 
President Barack Obama is to visit the gulf on Friday , his third trip there since the leak began six weeks ago . 
The White House has been under increasing pressure to show the administration is in control of the response and clean-up efforts . 
The federal government will send a $ 69m -LRB- # 47.1 m -RRB- bill to BP Plc on Thursday for expenditure incurred from its response to the spill , the White House said . 
Meanwhile , a detailed computer modelling study indicated that oil from the spill might extend along thousands of miles of the Atlantic coast and open ocean as early as this summer . 
The National Center for Atmospheric Research said once oil entered the `` Loop Current '' , part of the Gulf Stream which sweeps around the Florida panhandle , it would be only weeks before it reached Florida 's Atlantic shores . 
The latest stage in BP 's efforts to contain leaking oil has involved lowering a cap onto the failed blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- valve system on the seabed . 
The cap sits on the BOP 's lower marine riser package -LRB- LMRP -RRB- section . 
First , the damaged riser - the pipe which takes oil from the well - was cut where it nears the seabed using a remotely-operated shear . 
This was completed at 1930 CDT on 1 June -LRB- 0030 GMT 2 June -RRB- . 
The next stage was for a diamond wire cutter to saw through the riser close to the LMRP . 
The blade got stuck and had to be removed but BP eventually cut through the pipe using giant shears manipulated by undersea robots -LRB- ROV -RRB- . 
After removing the pipe , the cap was lowered onto the LMRP enabling the leaking oil and gas to be funnelled to a drill ship on the surface . 
Latest estimates suggest more than half of the leaking oil is now being captured . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT Speaking in Houston , Mr Hayward described the pipe-cutting procedure as `` simply the beginning '' . 
BP used giant shears manipulated by undersea robots to snip off the end of the pipe , after a diamond-edged saw failed to do the job . 
The challenge is now to place a containment cap securely over the cut and stop the oil flow . 
The company hopes to collect the oil on a surface ship above the well . 
`` Our task is to contain the oil , ultimately to eliminate the leaking well , and most importantly , to clean up all of the oil , defend the shoreline and restore the shoreline where oil does come ashore such that we return it to its original state , '' Mr Hayward said . 
BP estimates that the disaster has so far cost the company about $ 990m in clean-up costs . 
Two Democratic senators have written to Mr Hayward urging him to suspend payments to shareholders worth $ 10bn until all costs of the clean-up and compensation are paid out . 
On Wednesday , BP said it would pay for the construction of six sand barriers off the coast of the US state of Louisiana . 
The sand barrier project will push BP 's bill to about $ 1.4 bn . 
BP share prices have continued to plummet in trading on the London Stock Exchange , amid news the US justice department has opened several civil and criminal inquiries into the Gulf spill . 
Clean-up costs so far : $ 990m -LRB- # 674m -RRB- Estimated cost of sand barrier project $ 360m -LRB- # 244m -RRB- Dividend payment 2009 : $ 10.5 bn -LRB- # 7bn -RRB- BP scheduled to make a first-quarter dividend payment to shareholders on 21 June At its worst BP saw 34 % wiped off the company 's value Share prices on London Stock Exchange fell from a pre-disaster high of 655.4 pence to 429.75 p Mr Obama has used the disaster to urge Congress to pass a bill to overhaul US energy policy and end tax breaks for oil companies . 
The oil began leaking into the Gulf of Mexico on 20 April when the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig , leased to BP , exploded , killing 11 workers . 
BP is drilling two relief wells to permanently stop the leak but they are not expected to be completed until August . 
A `` top kill '' procedure , which had been considered the best hope for plugging the leak , failed over the weekend . 
Engineers were unable to pump enough heavy mud into the well to staunch the oil flow . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
