By Finlo Rohrer BBC News , Washington Everything so far tried has failed The experts have tried and failed to stop the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , but could the thousands of ordinary people ringing BP have the answer ? 
So far the blowout preventer has broken down , the containment dome has iced up , the insertion tube did n't get enough oil and top kill has n't come off . 
Everything so far has failed , but the problem is n't just being considered among the elite group of engineers and experts gathered by BP . 
Would-be solvers can call +1 2813665511 . 
Also , send us your ideas using the text form at the bottom If you have an images of your idea e-mail : yourpics@bbc.co.uk, subject SPILL IDEAS Int MMS : +447725100100 The public are also doing their part . 
By 2 June , BP had received 31,600 suggestions from members of the public on how to plug the well , or deal with the oil slicks already in the sea . 
The company 's helpline , which has 80 telephone operators , deals with interested citizens . 
Of the 31,600 ideas , 8,000 have been submitted on paper . 
BP then puts the plans through a four-stage process . 
The first is a primary evaluation to weed out ideas that have already been considered or are just not possible . 
The second stage is classification into categories such as `` dispersants '' or `` mechanical '' . 
The third stage is a more detailed technical review and the fourth stage is field testing . 
There are 235 ideas currently in stage three and four , says BP . 
Of those , just 10 % are about how to plug the well . 
Some might ridicule the idea that interested amateurs might be able to solve a problem that is foxing a giant company with immense resources at its fingertips . 
John Harrison should have won the Longitude Prize But the notion has a long pedigree . 
One of the most famous examples of attempting to tap the public brain came in the Longitude Prize , established in the UK by Parliament in 1714 . 
For a seafaring nation , the ability to accurately measure longitude was a massive challenge . 
The act of Parliament offered # 20,000 to the person who could do it , and the clockmaker John Harrison established the principles for the marine chronometers that revolutionised navigation . 
Another prize was offered in late 18th Century France for the creation of soda crystals from sea salt . 
Harrison was met with scepticism and never received the full prize , while the French winner Nicholas Leblanc was denied his cash because of the revolution . 
The term `` crowdsourcing '' , coined by journalist Jeff Howe , author of Crowdsourcing : Why the Power of the Crowd Is Driving the Future of Business , is now often used to describe this phenomenon . 
Howe says that it is sometimes the case that problems that have proved insoluble to hand-picked experts can be solved when placed before a wider , but less expert , audience . 
I 'm looking at it from the point of view of doing home maintenance - if this happened in someone 's house how would I fix it ? '' 
End Quote Barry Redd Would-be solver '' -LRB- Crowdsourcing -RRB- is an acknowledgment that 99 times out of a 100 the best person to solve a problem is an expert . 
If it 's a chemistry problem , you want a chemist . 
`` But one time out of a hundred the problem seems intractable . 
Crowdsourcing has revealed - in those intractable cases - you need someone who is not trained . 
All the steps the experts have thought to do have n't worked . 
You need the unexpected . '' 
That might be why BP is using some of its resources to test these suggestions from the public . 
They wo n't reveal any of the detail of the submissions they have had , but look at some public forums on the web - not run by BP - and you can get a flavor of the sort of ideas that might be arriving . 
Barry Redd , from Louisburg , North Carolina , submitted an idea to BP , also posting it on BP Oil News , an independent blog critical of the company . 
His idea - heavily paraphrased - involves the use of a pipe smaller in diameter than the casing of the oil well . 
This would have valve at one end and inflatable tubes in the other . 
Dispersant used - scientists warn it may kill marine life Huge dome placed over leak - became blocked by ice crystals Top hat - smaller dome not yet used Mile-long tube - fails to suck up large amount of oil `` Top-kill '' method to pump heavy mud - abandoned With the valve open , the smaller pipe would be inserted , the tubes quickly inflated to form a seal , cemented in place and then the valve closed . 
Looking on the web you can see solutions involving pre-cast concrete plugs , giant screws , explosives , sealant pumps , giant magnets , liquid nitrogen , inflatable bladders and all manner of other devices . 
Mr Redd , who runs a pressure washing and home maintenance business , says he was motivated to try and solve the leak after watching news coverage . 
`` I was expecting all those engineers to have an idea , that they would have had contingency plans . 
Eventually it was clear they did n't . 
`` I 'm looking at it from the point of view of doing home maintenance . 
If this happened in someone 's house how would I fix it ? '' 
Prof Steven Sears , chairman of the petroleum engineering department at Louisiana State University , has himself received suggestions in two categories . 
`` The first are things like using hay to put down on the seashore to absorb the oil . 
`` The second category is more directed towards stopping the oil flow . 
Those have been similar to what is being attempted . 
`` There has n't been in what I 've seen a really novel approach . '' 
But despite the public enthusiasm , there 's a feeling among some experts - not brought in by BP - that they are n't able to contribute their own ideas because of a lack of detail from the oil firm . 
`` The problem is there is not a whole lot of detailed information released , '' says Prof Sears . 
`` Exactly what are the pressures , temperatures , flow rates and pipe sizes ? 
`` The more information is released the more analysis can be done by people that are not directly involved . '' 
It will probably be somebody with some sort of engineering or science background who could come up with an answer , says Howe . 
It is unlikely that `` a random guy with an English degree '' will crack it , he notes . '' 
-LRB- It might be -RRB- someone who has some tangential experience - it is n't some experience that BP think to tap . '' 
Harrison was a self-educated genius , who already made clocks , and Leblanc had a scientific background . 
The prize approach made sense in a time when the pool of formal academics was tiny compared with today . 
And if an ordinary citizen comes up with the solution , they have to hope that the powers-that-be treat them a bit better than they did Harrison and Leblanc . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
