The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the deteriorating situation in Syria , and expresses profound regret at the death of many hundreds of people . 
The Security Council condemns the widespread violations of human rights and the use of force against civilians by the Syrian authorities . 
The Security Council calls for an immediate end to all violence and urges all sides to act with utmost restraint , and to refrain from reprisals , including attacks against state institutions . 
The Security Council calls on the Syrian authorities to fully respect human rights and to comply with their obligations under applicable international law . 
Those responsible for the violence should be held accountable . 
The Security Council notes the announced commitments by the Syrian authorities to reform , and regrets the lack of progress in implementation , and calls upon the Syrian government to implement its commitments . 
The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty , independence , and territorial integrity of Syria . 
It stresses that the only solution to the current crisis in Syria is through an inclusive and Syrian-led political process , with the aim of effectively addressing the legitimate aspirations and concerns of the population which will allow the full exercise of fundamental freedoms for its entire population , including that of expression and peaceful assembly . 
The Security Council calls on the Syrian authorities to alleviate the humanitarian situation in crisis areas by ceasing the use of force against affected towns , to allow expeditious and unhindered access for international humanitarian agencies and workers , and co-operate fully with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights . 
The Security Council requests the secretary general to update the Security Council on the situation in Syria within seven days . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
