Unverified amateur footage purportedly shows newly-dug graves in Syria Syrian security forces have continued their siege of the central city of Hama as they maintain an offensive in which scores of people have died . 
Residents told the BBC that many people were fleeing to nearby villages , fearing a full-scale assault . 
The government does not control Hama , and its attack on the city is part of a nationwide crackdown on dissent that began on Sunday . 
The UN Security Council is set to resume discussions on the crisis . 
International pressure has been mounting on the Syrian government to call off its offensive against Hama . 
However , diplomats say a strong UN resolution is unlikely , and on Tuesday , the Security Council was unable to agree to a text condemning the violence . 
-LRB- President Assad -RRB- must be aware that under international humanitarian law , this is accountable '' End Quote Ban Ki-moon UN Secretary General Syrian Defense Minister Ali Habib was among five Syrian officials targeted by European Union asset freezes and travel bans , the EU said on Tuesday . 
And Italy has recalled its ambassador to Syria for consultations , citing the `` horrible repression '' of citizens . 
In Washington , US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton met Syrian dissidents , who pressed her to call on Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to step down immediately . 
Mrs Clinton `` expressed her admiration for the courage of the brave Syrian people who continue to defy the government 's brutality '' , a state department spokesman said . 
Human rights groups say some 140 people have been killed by the authorities since Sunday , most of them in Hama . 
More than 1,600 civilians are believed to have been killed since protests began in March . 
President Assad has promised reforms but says citizens and security forces are being attacked by `` armed gangs '' backed by unspecified foreign powers . 
International journalists have been denied access to Syria and it is not possible to verify accounts by witnesses and activists . 
After renewing their assault on Hama on Tuesday , Syrian tanks and troops held their positions around the city . 
Residents said three more people were killed by tank and sniper fire . 
Residents told Reuters news agency that the violence resumed after nightly Ramadan prayers on Tuesday , with tanks shelling the eastern Rubaii and al-Hamidiya neighborhoods , the Aleppo road in the north and the eastern Baath district . 
Hama - a bastion of defiance - occupies a significant place in the history of modern Syria . 
In 1982 , then-President Hafez al-Assad , father of Bashar , sent in troops to quell an uprising by the Sunni opposition Muslim Brotherhood . 
Tens of thousands were killed and the town flattened . 
The city , with a population of 800,000 , has seen some of the biggest protests and worst violence in Syria 's 2011 protests . 
It was slow to join in , but has now become one of the main focuses of the revolt . 
Witnesses and activists told Reuters that tens of people had also been injured after troops opened fire in western Damascus , in the north-eastern city of Hasaka , and in the coastal city of Latakia . 
Mobile phone footage purporting to show tanks firing in Hama on Monday was posted on social media websites . 
But Syrian state television has been showing its own footage , apparently also shot on mobile phones , saying it was taken in Hama on Sunday . 
It showed some anti-government protesters carrying shotguns , sticks , and knives , and one man wearing an ammunition vest and carrying an AK-47 rifle . 
Later , it reported that a group of `` saboteurs '' had stormed the main courthouse in Hama and set fire to much of the building . 
But Mr Hamawi told AP that a shell fired from a government tank had caused the fire . 
The London-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said 24 people were killed across Syria on Monday , including 10 in Hama . 
The current crackdown appears aimed at preventing protests from growing during Ramadan , when Muslims visit mosques for prayers after breaking their dawn-to-dusk fast . 
The government fears the gatherings could then turn into large protests , observers say . 
The UN Security Council is due to resume the debate on Wednesday . 
Council members including Russia , China , India and Brazil have been opposed to a draft resolution circulated by European members that would condemn Damascus . 
Diplomats said significant differences remained over the text and it had not been decided whether the end result should be a resolution or a less weighty council statement . 
Russia and some other countries are pushing for what they say is a more balanced text that would blame both Syrian authorities and the opposition for the violence , but Western nations say the two sides can not be equated . 
But the latest violence has led to wider acceptance that the council must act . 
As the council met again on Tuesday , UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon condemned the Syrian president . 
`` This is a totally unacceptable situation , '' Mr Ban said . 
`` I believe that he lost all sense of humanity . '' 
Syria 's anti-government protests , inspired by events in Tunisia and Egypt , first erupted in mid-March after the arrest of a group of teenagers who spray-painted a revolutionary slogan on a wall . 
The protests soon spread , and the UN says 3,500 people have died in the turmoil - mainly protestors but also members of Syria 's security forces - while thousands more have been injured . 
Although the arrest of the teenagers in the southern city of Deraa first prompted people to take to the streets , unrest has since spread to other areas , including Hama , Homs , Latakia , Jisr al-Shughour and Baniyas . 
Demonstrators are demanding greater freedom , an end to corruption , and , increasingly , the ousting of President Bashar al-Assad . 
The government has responded to the protests with overwhelming military force , sending tanks and troops into towns and cities . 
Amateur video footage shows tanks and snipers firing on unarmed protesters . 
There may have been an armed element to the uprising from its early days and army deserters have formed the Free Syrian Army . 
Some of the bloodiest events have taken place in the northern town of Jisr al-Shughour . 
In early June , officials claimed 120 security personnel were killed by armed gangs , however protesters said the dead were shot by troops for refusing to kill demonstrators . 
As the military moved to take control of the town , thousands fled to neighbouring Turkey , taking refuge in camps . 
Although the major cities of Damascus and Aleppo have seen pockets of unrest and some protests , it has not been widespread - due partly to a heavy security presence . 
There have been rallies in the capital - one with an enormous Syrian flag - in support of President Assad , who still receives the backing of many in Syria 's middle class , business elite and minority groups . 
The Assad family has been in power for 40 years , with Bashar al-Assad inheriting office in 2000 . 
The president has opened up the economy , but has continued to jail critics and control the media . 
He is from the minority Alawite sect - an offshoot of Shia Islam - but the country 's 20 million people are mainly Sunni . 
The biggest protests have been in Sunni-majority areas . 
The uprising has cost 3,500 lives , according to the UN and Jordan 's King Abdullah says that President Assad should now step down . 
The Arab League has suspended Syria 's membership and voted for sanctions . 
The EU has frozen the assets of Syrian officials , placed an arms embargo on Syria and banned imports of its oil . 
But fears remain of Syria collapsing into civil war . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
