Anti-government demonstrations have continued despite a violent crackdown The Arab League 's decision to impose economic sanctions on Syria in punishment for its crackdown on anti-government protests has generated extensive comment on both conventional and social media platforms . 
Arab press commentators were generally supportive of the decision , and the story was the top headline in three pan-Arab newspapers , with the Saudi-owned Al-Hayat describing the sanctions as an `` Arab siege '' on the Syrian regime . 
A Syrian pro-government daily dismissed the plan as a conspiracy against Damascus . 
Comment from Iran was scarce , with only a program on Iran 's Arabic-language Al-Alam TV channel observed to be discussing the story on Sunday . 
Syria 's Tishrin newspaper portrayed Arab League leaders as `` oil emirs '' who had been trying to destabilise Syria since 2006 in punishment for its support for Hezbollah in the war with Israel . 
`` One can not rule out that these stances are principally American and Israeli . 
They are implementing US-Israeli agendas , '' it said . 
Similar language was used by Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Moualem on Twitter . 
He said the sanctions will only make Syrians `` more resilient to malicious conspiracy '' . 
Mr Moualem had returned to the micro-blogging site after his account was hacked over the weekend and used to falsely announce the resignation of President Bashar al-Assad . 
London-based pan-Arab newspapers viewed the sanctions as the first step of a process to transfer the crisis to the international community . 
In an editorial entitled `` Arabising the crisis in preparation for internationalising it '' , Al-Quds al-Arabi hailed the cooperation between Arab states against Syria , but expressed concern that the impact on the regime would be limited . 
Al-Sharq al-Awsat also questioned the effectiveness of the sanctions , saying they would `` not deter Al-Assad 's regime nor will they topple it '' . 
It called for the `` battle '' to be transferred to the UN Security Council . 
Saudi Arabia 's Al-Watan chose to emphasise that the sanctions were not aimed at ordinary citizens `` but at a regime which refuses to listen to the voice of reason and conscience '' . 
Meanwhile the Saudi paper Al-Jazirah highlighted the `` strong and active participation of Turkey '' in efforts to resolve the Syrian crisis , which demonstrated the `` natural evolution '' of Ankara 's standing in world affairs . 
The Oman daily newspaper took a similar line , describing the co-ordination between the Arab League and Turkey as `` remarkable '' . 
Lebanon 's Al-Mustaqbal asked how President Assad can `` dream of leading the Syrian people whom he is slaughtering every day '' . 
Elsewhere in the Arab world , commentators looked to the future , with some fearing that the ongoing crisis could destabilise Syria and the region . 
Jordan 's Al-Dustur said the decision `` paves the way for foreign intervention which means tearing apart the state and threatening its unity , as well as exposing the security and stability of the whole of the region to danger . '' 
This theme was echoed in a commentary in the United Arab Emirates ' Al-Ittihad newspaper , which warned of a change to `` the regional balance of power stretching from the Gulf , Iran to Lebanon '' . 
A commentary in Turkey 's Vatan said the Assad regime did `` not have much time left '' , which poses a problem to its `` closest ally '' Iran . 
Milliyet pointed to a global balance-of-power issue which may see the US using the Arab Spring as an `` excuse further to strengthen its position in the Middle East '' . 
It said this should be of concern to Russia , which has supported both Syria and Iran , and places Turkey in an awkward position because of its `` unhesitant '' stance on the crisis . 
Syrian Twitter users were generally observed to be calling for more action from the Arab League . 
Addressing the League , prominent Deraa-based user @Taimhawi wrote : `` Your sanctions wo n't stop bloodshed , people want : a no-fly zone , isolated zone , expel ambassadors , support Free Syrian Army . '' 
Damascus-based @Sub7ei , a user with over 900 followers , took a similar line , calling on the League to take a firmer position through `` recognition of the National Council and explicitly inviting Assad to step down '' . 
Similar sentiments were conveyed in a cartoon posted to the Jordan-based satirical website Mahjoob which was linked to by a number of Twitter users . 
In the image , a meat-cleaver-wielding Assad is depicted butchering a corpse while Arab League delegates look on passively . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
