Psychiatrist M Scott Peck , who has died aged 69 , made millions with his first book by advocating self-discipline , restraint , and responsibility - all qualities he openly acknowledged were notably lacking in himself . 
The Road Less Travelled was first published in 1978 . 
It eventually spent 13 years on the New York Times bestseller list to create a paperback record , sold 10 million copies worldwide and was translated into more than 20 languages . 
The opening words were : `` Life is difficult . '' 
This was a pronouncement to which Peck could personally attest . 
He spent much of his life immersed in cheap gin , chain-smoking cigarettes and inhaling cannabis , and being persistently unfaithful to his wife , who eventually divorced him . 
He also went through estrangement with two of his three children . 
Peck wrote openly of his adulterous affairs in another of his total of 15 books : In Search of Stones : A Pilgrimage of Faith , Reason and Discovery -LRB- 1995 -RRB- , based on a visit to Britain to see ancient stone monuments . 
Never lacking in personal honesty , at least in print , he once said he had `` the rare privilege of being able to give advice without having any responsibility '' . 
Peck , whose personalised car number plate was THLOST , also spent much of his life seeking religious fulfilment -LRB- he was baptised a Christian at 43 after embracing Zen and then Sufism -RRB- , and used this to explain his infidelities . 
`` There was an element of quest in my extramarital romances , '' he wrote . 
`` I was questing , through sexual romance , at least a brief visit to God 's castle . '' 
Such visits , however brief , ceased when he became impotent , he disclosed . 
The Road Less Travelled was written while Peck was running a successful private practice in Connecticut , but he received only $ 7,500 for publication after one publisher had dismissed it as `` too Christ-y '' . 
Although a slow starter , its eventual massive success established Peck on the lecture circuit as well as confirming a valuable new genre for American publishers . 
Peck was born in New York , the son of a lawyer who later became a judge . 
His education at the Phillips Exeter academy was unhappy and he later attacked its `` Spartan , almost vicious adolescent culture '' . 
After psychological counselling , he moved to the Friends seminary , a Quaker school near Greenwich Village . 
There he read about Zen and became a Buddhist , but retained an ambition to write `` the great American novel '' . 
After briefly attending Middlebury College , from where he was expelled for refusing the required officers ' training classes , he entered Harvard thanks to his father 's influence . 
He graduated in social relations and , despite his literary desires , began studying medicine at Columbia University before graduating from Case-Western Reserve University school of medicine in Ohio in 1963 . 
While at Columbia Peck met and married Lily Ho , a Chinese student from Singapore . 
This caused his father , who was half Jewish but always concealed it , to disown him -LRB- her parents disapproved , too -RRB- . 
But he later relented and paid his son 's tuition fees . 
Then Peck joined the army because , he later said , he needed the regular pay to support his wife and a family ; yet he also opposed the Vietnam war , then escalating . 
He rose to become assistant chief of psychiatry at the US surgeon general 's office in Washington DC from 1970 to 1972 , when he left the service with the rank of lieutentant colonel . 
Years of private practice began and he incorporated case histories into the Road book and others . 
After its success he followed with another bestseller , People of the Lie : The Hope for Healing Human Evil -LRB- 1983 -RRB- . 
It was well received by critics , but with reservations about `` moral preachment '' . 
His books included two novels and one for children . 
Other non-fiction included The Different Drum -LRB- 1987 -RRB- and sequels to his first book , Further Along the Road Less Travelled -LRB- 1993 -RRB- and The Road Less Traveled and Beyond -LRB- 1997 -RRB- . 
His last work was Glimpses of the Devil -LRB- 2005 -RRB- , recounting his fascination with exorcism . 
The success of his books was partly based on their mystical-spiritual content and although Peck always eschewed the idea of being a guru , there were cultish aspects to his popularity . 
Of this he said : `` Half the time when people want to touch my robe , it feels incredibly icky - yuck ! 
The rest of the time , it feels very good , honest , right . '' 
He and Lily divorced in 2003 and he remarried last year . 
He is survived by his second wife , and his two daughters and one son by Lily . 
Morgan Scott Peck , author and psychiatrist , born May 22 1936 ; died September 25 2005 Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article appeared on p32 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 00.43 BST on Wednesday 5 October 2005 The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off Busfield : `` Beagles come in 2 sizes 13 inch and 15 inch . 
Like a MacBook Pro '' says @Mister_Solomon : Westminster Dog Show - live ! 
