Roberto Benigni is once again testing the boundaries of good taste . 
Having found the funny side of the Holocaust in Life is Beautiful , his latest film sees him on a comic love quest through war-torn contemporary Iraq . 
John Hooper reports from Rome Wednesday 5 October 2005 17.14 BST Please , please laugh ... Critics have suggested that the sympathetic portrayal of US troops in The Tiger and the Snow is a craven appeal to the American box office The Oscar-winning Italian actor-director Roberto Benigni looks certain to stir a lively debate on whether you can mix comedy and carnage when his latest movie is released next week . 
The Tiger and the Snow -LRB- La tigre e la Neve -RRB- is said to be the first full-length feature film to be set in post-invasion Iraq - and its climactic scene is a gag on the theme of suicide bombing . 
But the mix of humor and horror failed to shock the Italian critics who got a first look at the movie this week . 
And that included critics writing for the conservative press which has hitherto been consistently hostile to the left-leaning Benigni . 
`` In the drama of a bombed and invaded Baghdad , weakened by 12 years of embargo , Benigni 's farce finds just the right element of contrast , '' wrote Il Giornale , the Milan daily owned by the family of Italy 's conservative prime minister , Silvio Berlusconi . 
Benigni 's latest film sees him back on the same delicate territory he trod eight years ago in Life is Beautiful , which was partly set in a Nazi concentration camp . 
This time , he plays Attilio , a Rome university lecturer and poet madly , but forlornly , in love with a writer , Vittoria , played by his wife , Nicoletta Braschi . 
Vittoria goes to Baghdad in 2003 to interview Iraq 's leading poet . 
An Allied bombing raid puts the luckless Italian scribe into a coma and Attilio tricks his way into the war-torn country to bring her the medicines she needs but ca n't obtain in a Baghdad hospital . 
Blinded by passion to the risks he is courting , he dodges through minefields and crosses the desert by camel and motorbike . 
The underlying message is the same as that of Life is Beautiful : love conquers all . 
A convinced left-winger , Benigni has been a persistent critic of Italy 's government . 
Mr Berlusconi is a prime supporter of American policy in Iraq where the third-biggest contingent in the US-led coalition is made up of Italian troops . 
Not unnaturally , movie world observers had been expecting Benigni to come up with a pacifist film in which the Americans were the villains . 
Benigni insisted this week that The Tiger and the Snow was `` profoundly '' anti-war and , indeed , the Iraqi poet , Fuad , takes his own life in despair at the chaos brought by the US-led invasion . 
But , Benigni told a press conference in Rome : `` In general , war films appeal to reason , to the head of the viewer . 
This one points at the heart . 
There is no ideology , but for that reason it is stronger . 
The Tiger and the Snow does not takes sides overtly against the US-led invasion and , just as suprisingly perhaps , it shows the American military in a generally sympathetic light . 
Only in one scene , depicting the search of a building , are American troops shown behaving roughly . 
When the movie 's hero appears at a checkpoint , apparently kitted out as a suicide bomber , they lower their guns on hearing he is a poet . 
`` I am not judging them '' , said Benigni . 
`` I know that they are often poor lads without work and without future . 
I feel pity for them . '' 
Several newspapers accused the actor-director of shying away from criticism of the Americans in the hope of repeating the US success of Life is Beautiful , which scooped three Oscars at the 1998 Academy awards . 
But Benigni said it was not his job to sit in judgment . 
Paradoxically , therefore , it could be Italy 's largely pacifist left that finds itself pondering whether to jeer or cheer . 
`` Unrealistic , silly , well-intentioned and opportunistic ? '' 
asked the critic of Italy 's most distinguished left-of-centre daily , La Repubblica . 
She eventually concluded , however , that `` at a time of widespread , apocalyptic pessimism '' , The Tiger and the Snow sent a necessary message : `` Never lose hope , never give in to horror , never accept ruin , fight on , and be certain of making it in the end . '' 
In case you were wondering about the film 's title , it is meant to convey the idea of two things that rarely come together - like war and laughter . 
