Your browser 's settings may be preventing you from commenting on and viewing comments about this item . 
See instructions for fixing the problem . 
Thursday , October 23 , 2008 ; Page A01 Employers are moving to aggressively cut jobs and reduce costs in the face of the nation 's economic crisis , preparing for what many fear will be a long and painful recession . 
The labor market has been weak all year , with a slow drip of workers losing their jobs each month . 
But the deterioration of the job market is now emerging as a driver of economic distress , according to a wide range of data and anecdotal reports from corporate America . 
In September , there were more mass layoffs -- instances in which employers slashed 50 or more jobs at one time -- than in any month since September 2001 , the Labor Department said yesterday . 
And nearly half a million Americans have filed new claims for unemployment benefits in each of the past four weeks , the highest rate of such claims since just after the terrorist attacks seven years ago . 
Anecdotal reports suggest that the hemorrhaging in the job market has only begun . 
Companies that announced plans this week to cut jobs include Internet company Yahoo -LRB- 1,500 positions -RRB- , pharmaceutical company Merck -LRB- 7,200 -RRB- , National City bank -LRB- 4,000 -RRB- and Comcast , the cable company -LRB- 300 -RRB- . 
The weakening employment outlook is part of the reason that investors have become more fearful of a deep , prolonged recession -- fears that led to yet another miserable day on Wall Street yesterday , with the Dow Jones industrial average down 514 points , or 5.7 percent . 
`` The customers I 've spoken to are all living under a sense of fear , '' said Paul Villella , chief executive of HireStrategy , a Reston company that matches employers and workers . 
`` They have very limited visibility into the future and have a great degree of uncertainty , so they just want to sit steady and be conservative in hiring . '' 
Villella and others who work with employers said that for many companies , the pullback in hiring is not a direct result of tightening credit . 
Rather , firms simply do n't know whether their own customers will be affected by the financial crisis ; as a result , they want to hold their breath and delay hiring decisions until they have a better sense of the future . 
The nation has shed jobs every month this year , but at a slower overall pace than in past economic downturns . 
The slide accelerated in late summer , with declines similar to those in past recessions . 
Last month , employers shed 159,000 jobs , the most this year and more than the average number of monthly job losses in the terrible labor markets of 2001 and 2002 . 
More obscure indicators monitored by economists at the Federal Reserve and in the private sector also show an inflection point in late summer . 
For example , employers had 214,000 fewer job openings in August than in July , according to a Labor Department report . 
Over the past year , the number of openings dropped by a more modest average of 74,000 per month . 
Indeed , many companies are imposing hiring freezes . 
Such moves do n't often get the kind of headlines that layoffs do , but because they shrink the number of places people can turn to for jobs , they still hurt the economy . 
VMware , a Palo Alto , Calif. , software company , is one firm that has curbed hiring . 
Earlier this week , after reporting third-quarter earnings that beat Wall Street 's expectations , VMware told analysts on a conference call that despite a 32 percent jump in revenue , a `` hiring pause '' had been imposed for all jobs except critical ones . 
`` We are just being conservative , '' VMware spokeswoman Mary Ann Gallo said yesterday . 
The nation 's unemployment rate was 6.1 percent last month , not astronomical by historical standards . 
But the rate was up from 5 percent in April , and many forecasters now expect it to hit 7 percent or more by the end of this downturn . 
The construction and manufacturing sectors have been losing jobs for more than a year . 
But lately , job losses have begun or accelerated in a wide range of other fields . 
Retailers , stung by less consumer spending , cut 87,000 jobs in the three months ended in September . 
Employment services shed 100,000 positions in that span , reflecting the fact that companies are slashing temporary jobs . 
The leisure and hospitality industry cut 51,000 jobs , as people had less money to stay in hotels and eat in restaurants . 
In the greater Los Angeles area , Manpower , one of the nation 's largest temp agencies , has noticed a steady increase in job seekers since early September . 
Paul Holley , a spokesman for the company , said there are more applicants for fewer openings and better-qualified candidates seeking work . 
What 's particularly noteworthy , Holley said , is what 's happening in Phoenix . 
Job applications have held steady , but since September more applicants have had backgrounds in general labor and warehouse distribution . 
That 's unusual because warehouse and logistics jobs usually hold steady in the fall to support retailing for holiday shopping . 
Randstad USA , another large temp agency , reports that job applications are up in the Tucson area and that the firm is even getting inquires from people who still have jobs . 
`` In general , a lot of people seem to be insecure about their current jobs even if they are still employed , '' said Emily Cline , Randstad 's area vice president for Tucson . 
As reports of layoffs continue to pile up around the country , executives at Randstad said they have noticed a shift in psychology among job seekers . 
`` Employees are much more willing to work extra hours and to take on additional duties to enhance job security and improve their employability , '' said Eric Buntin , managing director for marketing and operations at Randstad . 
`` In a changing market , they know that 's a valuable resource . '' 
They are also willing to make less money , even as the cost of living goes up . 
Cline said some call center jobs that were paying $ 9 an hour in the Tucson area last year are now paying $ 8.50 . 
`` Their option becomes to take the job or not have the job , '' she said . 
With workers losing their leverage to negotiate raises , there could be greater downward pressure on wages , which in turn could drive down overall economic growth . 
Workers are already having a hard time getting raises ; inflation-adjusted pay for non-managerial workers fell 1.9 percent in the year ended in September , according to the Labor Department . 
Staff writer Michael A. Fletcher in Cleveland contributed to this report . '' 
