How flu strains adapt to be able to infect a new species is still a mystery The flu virus is a survivor . 
It must continually evolve in order to evade its biggest threat - the immune system . 
Mammals , including humans , make antibodies , which recognize and target the virus . 
`` So it has to keep mutating to escape being destroyed , '' explains David Morens from the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases . 
Despite these tactics , most of the strains that make people ill during the so-called `` flu season '' are sufficiently similar to infections most of us have been exposed to before . 
Our immune systems recognize common parts that these new strains share with their ancestors , and can launch an effective defense . 
Every so often , however , a different strain emerges and infects people - one that contains new genes from an animal virus . 
Its novelty is its most effective weapon against our immune defences . 
And if it is infectious enough to find its way easily into a new host - perhaps via an innocent sneeze - it can spread rapidly and cause a global epidemic - or pandemic . 
`` These events seem to be cyclical - they 've occurred about every 20-40 years , '' says Mark Honigsbaum a researcher at the Wellcome Trust Centre for the History of Medicine at University College London . 
`` And all of these pandemics have been associated with just a few strains , '' he says . 
Viral strains take their name from the various different types of two important proteins on their surface . 
Their initials are H for haemaglutanin , and N for neuraminidase . 
History teaches us that these pandemics ... are predictably unpredictable The haemaglutanin molecule protrudes from the surface of the virus as spikes , and enables it to lock on to receptors on the surface of cells . 
Neuraminidase allows the virus to be released from infected cells and infect new ones . 
`` There are 16 Hs and 9 Ns , but as far as we know , only H1 ,2,3 and only N1 and N2 have ever made it into a human virus , '' says Dr Morens . 
But beyond what is currently speculation that only a few strains may be transmissible among humans , the structure of flu gives us almost no clues about how it might behave and change . 
`` History teaches us to take these pandemics very seriously , '' says Howard Markel , director of the Center for the History of Medicine at the University of Michigan . 
`` But it also teaches us that they are predictably unpredictable . '' 
The first of the four pandemics was Russian flu - each takes its name from the country where the first case was reported - which emerged in 1889 . 
This was well before the science of virology had even been conceived . 
It rapidly spread through Europe , and reached North America and Latin America , lasting until 1892 and eventually killing an estimated one million people . 
Medical facilities were overwhelmed by the 1918 flu pandemic `` We have very little information about this strain , '' says Dr Morens . 
`` But in the mid 1900s , scientists started collecting , and more importantly preserving , serum samples from people who had been alive during the flu pandemic . 
So there is now some evidence that it could have been an H3 virus . 
`` If it turned out to be true that only limited types of influenza genes have the ability to work in a human virus , that would be important , because you could vaccinate the world 's population against the known possibilities of a pandemic virus , '' he says . 
Although at its early stages , work is already progressing on a universal vaccine - one that would stimulate human immune systems to recognize , and raise antibodies against parts of the influenza virus shared by all strains . 
But , during the last century , the virus has shown a deadly ability to change beyond recognition . 
In 1918 , an influenza pandemic started that became a global disaster - eventually killing more people than the Great War . 
Estimates of the death toll from the 1918 outbreak of Spanish flu range from 20 million to 40 million . 
Some historians argue it could have been as high as 100 million . 
`` There was a mild wave in the spring , but the very serious , lethal wave was in the autumn to the winter , '' says Professor Markel . 
`` Then a third wave in January to April 1919 , and a fourth wave in the winter of 1920 . '' 
This tendency for `` waves '' of infection and re-infection makes the virus yet more unpredictable . 
New vaccines for circulating strains are now designed every year At the time the medical consensus was that the disease was caused not by a virus , but by a bacterium called Haemophilus influenzae . 
So some countries , including the US and UK , distributed vaccinations against the wrong disease-causing agent . 
`` Another problem was that the authorities stuck their heads in the sand , '' says Mr Honigsbaum . 
`` Their priority was the war and they did n't have the resources to deal with the health crisis . 
`` There 's an argument that if they 'd been more proactive , and diverted doctors and nurses from the front to civilian needs , they could have saved more lives . '' 
Dr Morens refers to the 1918 H1N1 strain as `` the mother of all pandemics '' . 
`` In the category of Influenza A , which is the category of virus that has caused all human epidemics and pandemics , every virus circulated since 1918 has been a descendent of this virus in one way or another , '' he says . 
`` Descendants of the 1918 pandemic are still infecting human beings , but they have mutated again and again and again to be able to survive . '' 
The 1918 influenza pandemic gripped a vulnerable , unprepared human population , but its ability to `` reassort '' - or exchange its genes with other viruses - was what made it `` dangerously novel '' . 
We had two lineages of the disease , both of which have persisted National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases `` Every species has its own flu - when those species live together , and they can transmit their flu to different species , the virus itself changes its structure , '' says Professor Markel . 
Since our immune systems recognize and respond mainly to the H and N part of the molecule , scientists suspect that pandemics arise when a strain emerges with a big change in the structure of one of these proteins . 
But how exactly the virus adapts to enable it to attach to receptors on the cells of a different species , is an `` unanswerable '' question , says Dr Morens . 
`` With only four pandemics in over 100 years , our sample size is too small to say , but it seems that a new H -LRB- on the surface of the virus -RRB- has been the major factor , '' says Dr Morens . 
`` We do n't know where the 1918 virus came from , but the evidence is that it was a new virus . 
`` At the same time that it infected humans , it also infected pigs . 
And at that point , we began to have two lineages of that disease - the human virus , and the pig virus , which persisted too , '' he adds . 
The progeny of the 1918 influenza strain evolved and mutated as they were transmitted from one host to another . 
And on two further occasions , these strains incorporated completely new genes and spread globally once again . 
`` That 's what happened in 1957 and 1968 - a hybrid formed of the 1918 virus with genes that were never part of it before , '' says Dr Morens . 
In the case of the 1957 Asian flu outbreak , a human H2N2 virus combined with the genes of a strain found in wild ducks . 
The pandemic killed an estimated one million people worldwide . 
An outbreak of H3N2 Hong Kong flu in 1968 , when avian and human virus genes combined once again , claimed another million lives . 
In both cases , the impact was minimized by health authorities , who identified the virus , and made vaccines available . 
`` Now , every year , around summer time , a group of flu experts get together and see what strains are circulating so they can design an appropriate vaccine , '' says Dr Markel . 
And in the last few years , principally because of the global concern about avian flu , anti-viral drugs that target influenza , such as Tamiflu , have been introduced . 
The emergence of a virus that crosses a species barrier is extremely rare But Professor Markel points out that , despite having reached new levels of medical preparation , `` we live in a world of emerging infectious diseases '' . 
`` We have learned to take avian flu very seriously , and we have learned to take the animal kingdom very seriously , '' he says . 
But in the rare event that a virus does develop that is able to cross the species barrier , he points out that the close proximity of domestic farm animals to humans provides an opportunity for human infection . 
`` Human beings travel farther and faster than ever before . 
All of this means that we are set up for a potential epidemic or pandemic , '' concludes Professor Markel . 
`` We learn more every time , but the story of flu pandemics is still very much a story in progress . '' 
