Matthew Price reports from Mexico A 23-month-old Mexican child has died of swine flu in Texas - the first death from the virus outside Mexico , where it may have killed as many as 159 people . 
The child - one of 91 cases of swine flu in the US - had been visiting relatives in Texas when he fell ill . 
The World Health Organization said the virus was still spreading , even though it was now from person to person . 
And Spain says it has confirmed the first case of swine flu in a person who has not traveled to Mexico . 
US : one death , at least 91 confirmed cases The Mexican boy had arrived in the Texan border city of Brownsville on 4 April and developed flu symptoms four days later , the Texas Department of State Health Services said . 
He was later transferred to a hospital in Houston , where he died on Monday night . 
The cause of death was confirmed on Wednesday by Dr Richard Besser , acting director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . 
`` Unfortunately this morning I do have to confirm that we have the first death of a child from H1N1 flu virus , '' he told US TV channel CBS . 
Speaking in Washington , President Obama offered his condolences and said the federal government was doing the utmost to contain the virus . 
SYMPTOMS - WHAT TO DO Swine flu symptoms are similar to those produced by ordinary seasonal flu - fever , cough , sore throat , body aches , chills and fatigue If you have flu symptoms and recently visited affected areas of Mexico , you should seek medical advice If you suspect you are infected , you should stay at home and take advice by telephone initially , in order to minimize the risk of infection He also urged local public-health bodies to be vigilant and said schools with confirmed cases `` should consider closing '' . 
Texas Governor Rick Perry said closing the US border with Mexico was an option , but added that taking that step now would be `` a little premature '' . 
The assistant director general of the World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- , Keiji Fukuda , said that although the virus originated in pigs , it was now being transmitted from human to human . 
`` It is clear that the virus is spreading and we do n't see evidence of it slowing down , '' he told reporters from WHO headquarters in Geneva . 
He added that moving the pandemic alert to five - the second highest - from the current four would be a significant step , but was not necessary at the moment . 
He said the WHO would do so if infected people in at least two countries were spreading the disease to other people in a sustained way . 
The WHO has said measures like travel bans were unlikely to prove effective . 
France will ask the European Union on Thursday to suspend all flights going to Mexico because of the flu outbreak , Health Minister Roselyne Bachelot said . 
From Matthew Price in Oaxaca , Mexico At the local cemetery , a group of gravediggers pointed me towards a freshly dug plot . 
The flowers on top had wilted under the sun but still had some color . 
Here was the grave of the first confirmed victim of the virus , Adela Gutierrez , 39 . 
One of the gravediggers , Sergio Castro Lopez , told me people here are worried . 
They are waiting for the authorities to tell them what they should do . 
In Spain , the government said the first person to contract swine flu without having traveled to Mexico was the boyfriend of a young woman who had recently returned from there . 
Spanish Health Minister Trinidad Jimenez said such cases were to be expected . 
In total , the number of confirmed cased in Spain rose from two to 10 on Wednesday . 
None of them are seriously ill . 
In Mexico , the search for the source of the outbreak continues , with the focus on the vicinity of a pig farm in the eastern part of the country . 
The Mexican government is urging against jumping to conclusions and is suggesting the possibility remains that the virus originated outside the country . 
Schools across Mexico have closed , public gatherings are restricted and archaeological sites have been placed off-limits . 
Mexico City 's chamber of commerce estimated restrictions in the city were costing businesses there at least 777 million pesos -LRB- $ 57m or # 39m -RRB- a day . 
Have you been affected by swine flu ? 
You can send your experiences using the form below : A selection of your comments may be published , displaying your name and location unless you state otherwise in the box below . 
The BBC may edit your comments and not all emails will be published . 
Your comments may be published on any BBC media worldwide . 
