Christian Fraser assesses the scene at a pig farm Egypt has begun a mass slaughter of thousands of pigs in an effort to prevent swine flu spreading . 
The cull was going ahead despite there being no cases of swine flu in Egypt . 
However , neighbouring Israel has two confirmed cases in humans . 
`` It is decided to slaughter all swine herds present in Egypt , starting from today , '' said Health Minister Hatem el-Gabali , according to Mena news agency . 
Swine flu has spread from Mexico to several countries around the world . 
From Muslim Qandeel , BBC Arabic Zaraib , or Stables , is a shanty hidden away in Western Cairo . 
I had to gain access by jumping over a wall as police have blocked off the area . 
Here they breed pigs that feed on refuse . 
Thousands of Christians live here - and there is one Muslim breeder too , despite the ban on pork in Islam . 
People are anxious about the cull , fearing it will destroy their livelihood and the government will not give compensation . 
`` We have been living here for years doing this . 
We will not surrender , '' one breeder said . 
They are threatening a strike . 
`` Let Cairo drown in garbage . '' 
The pigs in Egypt , a largely Muslim country , are raised by the Coptic Christian community . 
Estimates of the number of pigs range from 250,000 to 400,000 . 
Up to 169 people are believed to have died in the outbreak - all but one of them in Mexico . 
Confirmed cases of swine flu have been reported in numerous other countries , including New Zealand , Spain , Austria and Canada , but most have been mild cases . 
Many of those victims had been to Mexico , prompting airport screening for passengers displaying potential flu symptoms . 
Egyptian authorities increased numbers of medical staff at Cairo airport to check passengers arriving from Mexico and will monitor them during their stay . 
Egypt suffered during the outbreak of bird flu , between 2004 and 2008 , with 22 deaths reported . 
The latest swine flu is a variation of H1N1 , which causes seasonal outbreaks of flu in humans on a regular basis . 
However , this strain contains genetic material that is typically found in strains of the virus that affect humans , birds and swine . 
Pigs can act as a `` melting pot '' for several flu strains . 
