30 August 11 11:00 GMT Associate fellow , Royal United Services Institute I argued in May that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad would probably survive , but new pressures , from within and without , are taking the country one step closer to the tipping point . 
The initial judgement hinged on three factors : the regime 's loyal and powerful army ; the limited spread of protests ; and outside powers ' uncertainty in confronting the regime - out of fear for some , and interest for others . 
The army is loyal because it is dominated by Alawi officers belonging to the same syncretic sect of Islam as the ruling dynasty . 
TE Lawrence - the British World War I officer dubbed Lawrence of Arabia - wrote of the Alawi that `` the sect , vital in itself , was clannish in feeling and politics . 
One ... would not betray another '' . 
Orientalist musings aside , Syria 's army will not lightly dump Mr Assad . 
Unlike Hosni Mubarak in Egypt , civil and military fates are more closely bound together . 
Syria 's military might is also greater - four times the size of the Libyan army , protected by 100 more active surface-to-air missile sites , and materially helped by Iran . 
Elite divisions of the army crushed protests sequentially , moving from one city to the other with gruesome efficiency . 
The good , the bad and the confused Syria 's two largest cities , Damascus and Aleppo , remained quiet , allowing forces to concentrate their firepower where it was needed . 
It helped that large parts of the population did not join the protests , either out of a direct stake in the regime - Sunni business elites , for instance - or simply out of fear of Lebanon-style civil war resulting from Syria 's kaleidoscopic ethnic and sectarian diversity . 
That fear also paralysed the international community . 
Syria 's foes -LRB- Israel -RRB- , friends -LRB- Iran -RRB- and the confused -LRB- Turkey -RRB- saw nothing good coming from Syria 's implosion . 
Others - like the US - had pulled most coercive levers over the past years , resulting in a sort of sanctions liquidity trap . 
That is why Mr Assad had every chance of repeating the trick his father pulled in 1982 when , in an audacious bit of counterrevolution , he simply levelled the rebellious city of Hama and murdered up to 40,000 citizens . 
The Syrian revolution of 2011 could also have been one more of those many abortive uprisings whose blood flecks the history of the modern Middle East , yet could not change its course . 
Things are no longer so clear . 
The outside world is slowly getting its act together . 
The US finally issued its `` magic democracy words '' -LRB- a term coined by US Middle East scholar Marc Lynch -RRB- and called for President Assad to go . 
No-one expects that the words will wound themselves , but they tie American hands and thereby force the machinery of US foreign policy to churn out fresh ways of hounding Damascus . 
They also send a powerful signal - not to Mr Assad , but to US allies and partners who now know that there may be a cost to hedging their bets . 
For example , their firms may be caught up in sanctions , as has occurred in the course of US policy towards Iran . 
Turkey has grown frustrated with refugee flows , and is facing domestic pressure to act on the massacre of co-religionists . 
It is treading carefully to avoid wrecking hard-won ties , but can not hold out for long . 
Saudi Arabia , a state not known for its squeamishness about crushing dissent through force , withdrew its ambassador . 
Last week , the world 's largest oil companies and traders quietly decided to stop dealing with the regime in anticipation of EU sanctions - oil exports are a third of the Syrian budget , and almost all go to Europe . 
This makes it likelier that the largely Sunni trading classes of Damascus and Aleppo , pillars of the regime , desert with their financial and political capital once the cost of the status quo begins to bite . 
The fall of Tripoli is important in this regard . 
Only now have protests in the suburbs of Damascus begun to seep into the heart of the capital , forcing more checkpoints and helicopter patrols . 
That has not happened in Aleppo . 
If it does , then that still leaves just one piece of the revolutionary jigsaw left to fall in place : the army . 
There has been a trickle of defections in the eastern tribal area of Deir al-Zour adjacent to Iraq , in the north-western province of Idlib , and in towns around Damascus and Homs . 
But core units - more powerful than Gaddafi 's own special brigades - will not melt away or agree to a democratic transition . 
The army might hold together , shed Mr Assad , and reconstitute itself around new elites - emergency surgery to save the regime , of the sort that the Egyptian generals tried and failed to perform . 
Or key loyalists could peel away to set in motion a civil war , fought against parts of the uprising fortified with departing army units . 
Turkey , Iraq , Lebanon and Israel would be the first to experience the fallout , with others not far behind . 
Neither looks an appealing outcome , but it is increasingly hard to see how Syria can now travel down any other roads . 
Shashank Joshi is an Associate Fellow at the Royal United Services Institute -LRB- RUSI -RRB- , a defense think tank , and a doctoral student of international relations at Harvard University . 
Syria profile -LRB- 28 Aug 11 | Middle East -RRB- 
