BP , battered but still standing , faces up to its post-oil spill future What executives are labeling ` Future BP ' will be a much smaller company shorn of much of its presence around the world Monday 6 September 2010 20.27 BST A sign at a BP petrol station is reflected in raindrops . 
Photograph : Reuters BP is still standing , but the Gulf of Mexico oil spill has changed the company forever . 
It could have been far worse . 
In June , some City analysts doubted whether BP could survive the crisis . 
Shares had plunged by more than half . 
Within the space of a few weeks , the official estimate of the amount of oil flowing into the Gulf had increased from 5,000 barrels to anywhere between 35,000 and 60,000 barrels per day . 
The company 's repeated attempts to stop the flow had failed and August the earliest the first relief well could be drilled seemed a lifetime away . 
The chief executive , Tony Hayward who has since resigned and BP 's chairman were summoned to meet Barack Obama at the White House . 
They were forced to scrap plans to pay shareholders a dividend and instead to set aside $ 20bn to pay damages to those affected . 
While the battle to stop the leak is over , the legal battle is only just beginning . 
BP will fight tooth and nail against accusations that it was grossly negligent . 
If the charge stands , it faces fines of up to $ 21bn . 
BP would n't be able to pass off other costs , such as the clean-up and damages , to its partners . 
With investigations by the Department of Justice , among others , only just beginning , US lawyers say it will take years to decide who was to blame for the accident and the full level of BP 's liabilities . 
The company is already selling $ 30bn worth of assets to meet its costs from the spill so far . 
What executives are labeling `` Future BP '' will be a much smaller company shorn of much of its presence around the world . 
If investigations decide it has been grossly negligent , many more asset sales will be necessary . 
BP argues that whatever happens , it is in the US 's interests that it survives so it can meet all its liabilities . 
But it may be some time before it can afford to resume paying bumper dividends , which normally make up more than one-tenth of all payouts by UK companies . 
