Allen Kruse had been a charter fishing boat captain for more than two decades -- long enough that people called him by his boat 's name , Rookie , as if they were one and the same . 
But then , two months ago , the leaking BP oil well began pouring crude into the waters where he took families fishing for snapper and amberjack . 
Two weeks and two days ago , with his fishing grounds closed , Kruse , 55 , took a job working for BP 's cleanup crew . 
For the very people who 'd caused the mess . 
Other boat captains said Kruse , like them , found the effort confusing , overly bureaucratic and frustrating . 
He told them to keep their heads down , not to worry about the hassles . 
But those close to him saw he was losing weight . 
On Wednesday morning , Kruse drove to his boat as usual . 
As the deckhands prepared for the day 's work , Kruse , as the captain , was supposed to turn on the generator . 
But after a few minutes , the crew members said , they did n't hear anything and went looking for him . 
A deckhand found him in the wheelhouse , shot in the head . 
The Baldwin County , Ala. , coroner 's office called his death an apparent suicide and said Kruse did n't leave a note . 
There 's no way to be sure why he would have taken his life . 
But his friends see the tragedy as a clear sign of the BP spill 's hidden psychological toll on the Gulf Coast , an awful feeling of helplessness that descends on people used to hard work and independence . 
`` We 're helping cover up the lie . 
We 're burying ourselves . 
We 're helping them cover up the -LRB- expletive -RRB- that 's putting us out of work , '' said a 27-year-old deckhand who was working for Kruse on Wednesday and spoke on condition of anonymity . 
He said Kruse was facing the same problems as others in his business : `` It 's just setting in with 'em , you know ; reality 's kicking in . 
And there 's a lot of people that are n't as happy as they used to be . '' 
Around the gulf , social service providers are dealing with a rising tide of mental health crises . 
Groups of Baptists are deploying extra chaplains in parishes along the coast . 
In southern Louisiana , where the impact was felt first , about 1,500 people have received counseling services from Catholic Charities . 
From past disasters , such as the Exxon Valdez oil spill in 1989 , health experts say they expect a wave of physical health problems , such as high blood pressure and heart disease . 
But they also expect more-subtle problems , as people absorb the spill 's impact on their lives : depression , anxiety , alcohol and drug abuse , domestic issues . 
`` We 're seeing already an increase in suspiciousness , arguing , domestic violence ... We 're already having reports of increased drinking , anxiety , anger and avoidance , '' Howard J. Osofsky of the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center in New Orleans said during a two-day hearing this week on the physical and emotional impact of the spill . 
Michele Many , a social worker who helps fishermen 's wives , said the stress of the spill is compounded by its uncertainty . 
Oil is still pouring out , spreading , with an unmanageable toxicity that evokes comparisons to disease . 
`` The oil spill is like a cancer or tumor , '' said Many , who works at Louisiana State University . 
`` It is creeping and unpredictable from whether people will have livelihoods or health issues later from helping clean it up . 
You just do n't know whether it is benign or malignant . '' 
In Lafitte , La. , 200 hundred miles from the marina where Kruse died , Claudia Helmer heard about the suicide Wednesday afternoon . 
