A summary of events on Wednesday , June 16 , Day 57 of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill that began with the April 20 explosion and fire on the drilling rig Deepwater Horizon , owned by Transocean Ltd. and leased by BP PLC , which is in charge of cleanup and containment . 
The blast killed 11 workers . 
Since then , oil has been pouring into the Gulf from a blown-out undersea well . 
President Barack Obama wrested a $ 20 billion compensation guarantee and an apology to the nation from BP , announcing the company would set up a major claims fund for shrimpers , restaurateurs and others whose lives and livelihoods are being wrecked by the oil flooding into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Applause broke out during a community meeting in Orange Beach , Ala. , on the news . 
`` We asked for that two weeks ago and they laughed at us , '' Mayor Tony Kennon said . 
`` Thank you , President Obama , for taking a bunch of rednecks ' suggestion and making it happen . '' 
BP said it will suspend its dividend for the rest of this year and set up the $ 20 billion fund to assure victims of the Gulf oil spill that they will be compensated for their losses . 
The British oil giant also will cut spending and sell some assets to deal with the cleanup and compensation costs , which have already hit $ 1.75 billion . 
BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg announced the moves Wednesday after emerging from the White House , where he and other BP executives met for four hours with Obama . 
The `` small people '' of the Gulf Coast have a humongous message for oil giant BP : They 're tired of the company 's big-time executives making insensitive comments . 
Svanberg told reporters in Washington : `` I hear comments sometimes that large oil companies are greedy companies or do n't care , but that is not the case with BP . 
We care about the small people . '' 
Justin Taffinder of New Orleans was not amused . 
`` We 're not small people . 
We 're human beings . 
They 're no greater than us . 
We do n't bow down to them . 
We do n't pray to them , '' Taffinder said . 
BP CEO Tony Hayward expects to tell Congress he is `` personally devastated '' by the Gulf drilling rig explosion and oil spill and understands the anger Americans feel toward him and his company . 
The explosion and sinking of the rig `` never should have happened -- and I am deeply sorry that they did , '' he said in testimony to be delivered to a House panel Thursday . 
`` My sadness has only grown as the disaster continues . '' 
A copy of Hayward 's testimony was obtained Wednesday by The Associated Press . 
BP began burning oil siphoned from the ruptured well as part of its plans to more than triple the amount of crude it can stop from reaching the sea , the company said . 
BP PLC said oil and gas siphoned from the well first reached a semi-submersible drilling rig on the ocean surface around 1 a.m. . 
Once that gas reaches the rig , it will be mixed with compressed air , shot down a specialized boom made by Schlumberger Ltd. and ignited at sea . 
It 's the first time this particular burner has been deployed in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Journalists covering the oil spill have been yelled at , kicked off public beaches and islands and threatened with arrest in the nearly three weeks since the government promised improved media access . 
Adm. Thad Allen issued a May 31 directive to BP and federal officials ensuring media access to sites along the coast . 
BP Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles followed up with a letter to news organizations , saying the company supports people 's rights to share their thoughts with reporters . 
But those efforts have done little to curtail the obstacles , harassment and intimidation tactics journalists are facing while covering the spill . 
Marine scientists studying the effects of the BP disaster are seeing some strange -- and troubling -- phenomena . 
Fish and other wildlife are fleeing the oil out in the Gulf and clustering in cleaner waters along the coast . 
But that is not the hopeful sign it might appear to be , researchers say . 
The animals ' presence close to shore means their usual habitat is badly polluted , and the crowding could result in mass die-offs as fish run out of oxygen . 
Also , the animals could easily get devoured by predators . 
After 50 years of watching wetlands created by the fertile Mississippi River turn into open water , Louisiana residents finally got what they 'd long awaited : A U.S. president saying he 'll fight to save what little is left along their eroding coast . 
Though details were vague , President Barack Obama 's pledge to restore the Gulf Coast 's degraded coast line has multibillion-dollar implications for the region 's culture and economy and could preserve wildlife endangered by the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
In an Oval Office address Tuesday night , Obama said he was committed to making sure southern Louisiana , which is hemorrhaging a football field of marshland every 38 minutes , and other coastlines are saved . 
