Wednesday : President Obama and Vice President Biden meet with BP executives in the Roosevelt Room of the White House to discuss the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Pictured , from left , are BP CEO Tony Hayward , BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg , BP General Counsel Rupert Bondy , BP Managing Director Robert Dudley , Senior Advisor Valerie Jarrett , Labor Secretary Hilda Solis , Attorney General Eric Holder , and Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano . 
-LRB- Official White House Photo by Pete Souza -RRB- This official White House photograph is being made available only for publication by news organizations and\/or for personal use President Obama announced Wednesday that BP will set aside $ 20 billion for an escrow fund to compensate victims of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , as the oil firm 's chairman publicly apologized for the disaster and said the company will not pay out any more dividends this year . 
Obama and BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg each spoke to the press separately following the president 's first meeting with top BP executives since the April 20 rig explosion that triggered the massive leak . 
`` I would like to take this opportunity to apologize to the American people on behalf of all the employees in BP , '' Svanberg said , after announcing that the firm would halt dividend payments . 
He said BP will live up to all `` legitimate responsibilities '' and that the escrow account should send the message to Americans that `` we mean what we say . '' 
The president assured the public that the $ 20 billion amount does not represent a `` cap '' on damages that BP may be liable for , but noted that it was substantially larger than the $ 75 million amount the firm is liable for under federal law . 
Obama said the account offers `` substantial assurance '' that claims will be honored . 
`` BP 's liabilities for this spill are significant and they acknowledge that fact , '' Obama said . 
`` We will continue to hold BP and all other responsible parties accountable . 
And I 'm absolutely confident BP will be able to meet its obligations to the Gulf Coast and to the American people . '' 
Obama also said the company had agreed to set up a separate $ 100 million fund to compensate oil rig workers laid off as a result of his six-month moratorium on deepwater drilling . 
The deal with the White House arranges for the company responsible for the largest manmade environmental disaster in U.S. history to set aside the money in a fund to be administered by lawyer Kenneth Feinberg . 
Feinberg oversaw payments to families of victims of the Sept. 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks and is currently President Obama 's `` pay czar , '' setting salary limits for companies getting the most aid from a $ 700 billion government bailout fund . 
The announcement follows an Oval Office address to the nation Tuesday night in which the president said he was meeting with BP executives to inform them that they are to `` set aside whatever resources are required to compensate the workers and business owners who have been harmed as a result of his company 's recklessness . '' 
Obama said the fund will not be controlled by BP but by an `` independent , third party . '' 
The meeting with Svanberg , CEO Tony Hayward and other BP executives included several administration officials -- Homeland Secretary Secretary Janet Napolitano , Interior Secretary Ken Salazar , Energy Secretary Steven Chu , Commerce Secretary Gary Locke , Labor Secretary Hilda Solis , Attorney General Holder , Vice President Joe Biden , Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel and senior adviser Valerie Jarrett , It was Obama 's first meeting with BP officials since the spill . 
While Hayward has served as the voice of the company , the White House has been emphasizing the role of the company 's chairman , Svanberg , instead . 
The BP decision to cancel dividend payments means investors will lose out on the $ 2.6 billion payment scheduled for June 21 and even more money over the rest of the year . 
For the president , the tough diplomacy with a few officials behind closed doors is a bookend to his attempt to reach millions at once . 
Using a delivery in which even the harshest words were uttered in subdued tones , Obama did not offer much in the way of new ideas or details in his speech to the nation Tuesday night . 
Instead , he mainly recapped the government 's efforts , insisted once again that BP will be held to account and tried to tap the resilience of a nation in promising that `` something better awaits . '' 
Republicans criticized him for using the speech to push energy legislation but also chided him on Wednesday for taking 58 days to hold a high-level meeting with BP executives . 
The Republican National Committee released a web video titled , `` What Took So Long ? '' 
drawing attention to all the fundraisers , golf outings and meetings with the celebrities the president has participated in since the April 20 explosion . 
The escrow account was something many lawmakers had called for . 
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid and 53 other Democratic senators had requested BP set up a $ 20 billion account , but in a letter issued Monday said that does not limit the firm from future expenses . 
After the administration reached a deal with BP for the escrow account , a senior treasury official told Fox News that Feinberg would start administering the account immediately , though he would continue to oversee bailed-out banks . 
The official said Feinberg would transition away from those duties over the summer . 
The Associated Press contributed to this report . 
