Palin Reacts to Obama 's Oval Office Address on Gulf Disaster Sarah Palin appears on ` The O'Reilly Factor ' from Wasilla , Alaska This is a RUSH transcript from `` The O'Reilly Factor , '' June 15 , 2010 . 
This copy may not be in its final form and may be updated . 
Watch `` The O'Reilly Factor '' weeknights at 8 p.m. and 11 p.m. ET ! 
BILL O'REILLY , HOST : Joining us from Wasilla , Alaska , former governor of that state , Sarah Palin . 
All right , did you have a big beef with the president tonight in any way , governor ? 
SARAH PALIN , FOX NEWS CONTRIBUTOR : I did . 
I kind of have a big beef with you too though , Bill , if you do n't acknowledge that President Obama is wrong on his call for a need for energy policy . 
Certainly we need that , but he is wrong not to acknowledge that we still need on a three-legged stool the conventional sources of energy to be drilled here . 
Otherwise , Bill , we are going to be dropped to our knees and bowing to the Saudis and Venezuela and places like Russia that will keep producing oil and petroleum products , and we will have to ask them to produce for us because we will still be dependent upon these sources of energy . 
In addition though , too , shifting more towards the renewables which , of course , we need . 
And the other leg of that stool is conservation . 
President Obama , it scares me , it saddens me that the CEO of our nation does not understand that inherent link between the conventional sources of energy that we 're dependent upon and our security , our prosperity , our freedom . 
O'REILLY : OK , what was the -- when you were the governor of the state , you dealt with oil companies all the time . 
What was the most difficult thing that you had to deal with when you were having meetings with them face to face ? 
PALIN : Believing that their perception of what the circumstances were in any situation that we dealt with them , whether it be a spill or lax infrastructure maintenance or the value of the resource that was being sold . 
In any of those issues , it was believing what they were telling me and my administration in terms of their perspective on what the facts were . 
Now , here 's where the problem lies with President Obama in waiting so long , you know , eight weeks before meeting with the CEO of BP and with the high-ranking officials that have been calling the shots . 
He has allowed this industry player to get to define the facts . 
So they are just in this position of having astronomical maximum liability exposure . 
He 's allowed them to define the facts of this spill . 
You can never be allowed to do that as a CEO and be on a level playing field , being equals there at the table when you allow one side of the table , in this case BP , in dealing with this spill to define the facts . 
O'REILLY : All right . 
But 49 percent , according to a poll today , we 'll have later , 49 percent of Americans still want BP to run the show . 
And only 45 percent want the government to run the show . 
So most Americans are n't down with the Obama administration calling the shots . 
Now , President Obama basically is , as Charles Krauthammer pointed out , a dreamer . 
I mean , he wants , I think , good for the nation as far as energy is concerned . 
You made a very valid point . 
We ca n't throw the oil people under the bus . 
If we do that , our economy is going to tank totally . 
And if we spend billions of dollars on pie in the sky stuff that does n't work , we 're going to go bankrupt . 
So what is your solution here , governor ? 
What would you do tonight ? 
Tell the nation tonight what you would have said your main point in that speech . 
PALIN : Stopping the gusher . 
That 's the No. 1 priority of the nation . 
O'REILLY : But nobody knows how to do it . 
PALIN : We need to make sure that all technology is being thrown at this problem . 
O'REILLY : Nobody knows how to do it . 
PALIN : Well , we have n't had the assurance that president -- we have n't had the assurance by the president that that has been his top priority . 
Instead , what his top priority is , Bill , is cap and tax . 
It is using this crisis , not letting it go to waste , but to use this crisis to increase the cost of energy . 
O'REILLY : All right , if that happens , there will be an outcry . 
PALIN : And that is going to stall any kind of economic recovery that we have . 
O'REILLY : Are you telling me that you do n't think the president 's top priority is stopping that leak ? 
Is that what you are telling me ? 
PALIN : What I 'm telling you is that is not what I am hearing and what the American public is hearing from the top official in our government . 
And that 's why those poll numbers show that , no , the public , we do n't know where to turn . 
If we ca n't trust BP to be able to fix this leak , we know we ca n't trust government because they 've had eight weeks of overseeing , of regulating and kind of coaching this whole process , this whole issue of stopping the leak . 
And they have n't succeeded in doing it . 
PALIN : We have to know -- we have to know that President Obama 's No. 1 priority is to stop the leak . 
O'REILLY : But I 'm assuming that it is . 
And I am assuming that it is . 
But , look , the reason I 'm pleased to have you on the program tonight is that there is not a governor in the United States who has more experience than you do dealing with the oil companies . 
You 've already said you ca n't believe them , that their word does n't mean much when you are debating issues as far as the oil company 's interest and the interest of the people . 
You ca n't believe them . 
Now , the oil company BP says we do n't know how to stop the leak . 
We 're going to try X. We 're going to dig another well . 
We 're going to do this . 
We do n't know . 
We do n't know . 
Obama obviously does n't know how to stop the leak . 
Do you know how to stop it ? 
PALIN : Well , then what the federal government should have done was accept the assistance of foreign countries , of entrepreneurial Americans who have had solutions ... PALIN : They ca n't even get a phone call returned , Bill . 
They are known in the Norwegian . 
They are known for -- for dikes and for cleaning up water and for dealing with spills . 
They offered to help and , yet , no , they too , with a proverbial ca n't even get a phone call back . 
That is what the Norwegians are telling us , and the Dutch are telling us . 
And then the entrepreneurial Americans , the company in Maine that has the boom and the absorbents , those companies that are waiting for the Obama administration eight weeks later for the regulators to come in and say , OK , we 'll purchase from you now . 
We 'll do all that we can . 
That 's where some of the frustration is . 
Now , we saw the same thing though with Katrina , did n't we ? 
So , I 'm not going to point fingers and make this a partisan issue at all , point fingers at different administrations . 
But it is that inherent problem that we have with government , not necessarily being prepared , because our priorities in government are wrong . 
National security , safety of the people , needs to be the top priority . 
That 's where we need to be funding instead of funding these other things on the periphery that really just get in the way of the private sector 's progress , their ability to produce and to thrive and to prosper , Instead , our priorities in the national government have been screwed up . 
Now , as governor of Alaska , what I did in dealing with the oil companies , and I 'll bet you , 75 percent of my time was being taken up by energy issues here in this state . 
I had to set up our Petroleum Systems Integrity Office so that we could be there on the front lines making sure what the oil companies were telling us was legit , when they were dealing with their corroded pipes that we found out and other lax maintenance issues . 
PALIN : It took us putting that as the highest priority to protect our resources , to protect our environment , including not just the physical environment but the human environment here . 
O'REILLY : All right . 
Well , that 's a good point . 
There was n't anybody from the management service or whatever -- Mineral Management Service out on the pipeline checking it out . 
That 's for sure . 
Hey , Governor , always a pleasure . 
Thanks for coming on . 
O'REILLY : Go ahead , real quick . 
We ca n't -- we ca n't afford though to -- we ca n't afford to demonize these energy producers to such an extent though that they go under . 
We do need to work with them though , but we need to verify everything it is and hold them accountable for all that they have done in this situation . 
O'REILLY : All right , governor . 
Content and Programming Copyright 2010 Fox News Network , Inc. . 
All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced , distributed , transmitted , displayed , published or broadcast without the prior written permission of Roll Call . 
You may not alter or remove any trademark , copyright or other notice from copies of the content . 
