June 16 : President Obama meets with BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg in the Oval Office . 
Svanberg told reporters afterward that BP cares about ` the small people , ' a remark that drew an icy reception in the Gulf Coast . 
White House VENICE , La. -- The `` small people '' of the Gulf Coast have a humongous message for oil giant BP : They 're tired of the company 's big-time executives making insensitive comments . 
On Wednesday , BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg told reporters in Washington : `` I hear comments sometimes that large oil companies are greedy companies or do n't care , but that is not the case with BP . 
We care about the small people . '' 
He later said he was very sorry for speaking `` clumsily . '' 
Orange Beach , Ala. , Mayor Tony Kennon laughed when he heard Svanberg 's remark . 
`` They can call me small , miniature , they can call me anything they want . 
Just write the check and send it to us , '' he said . 
But Justin Taffinder of New Orleans was not amused . 
`` We 're not small people . 
We 're human beings . 
They 're no greater than us . 
We do n't bow down to them . 
We do n't pray to them , '' Taffinder said . 
Svanberg is Swedish , and his comments -- in English -- may have been an unintentional slight . 
He uttered the remark to reporters following a joint press conference with President Barack Obama -- who had spoke of the small business owners , the fishermen and the shrimpers affected by the spill . 
`` What I was trying to say -- that BP understands how deeply this affects the lives of people who live along the Gulf and depend on it for their livelihood -- will best be conveyed not by any words but by the work we do to put things right for the families and businesses who 've been hurt , '' Svanberg said in a statement . 
But coastal residents already were angry over the oil spill disaster and at BP CEO Tony Hayward 's earlier comments that he `` wants his life back . '' 
Lyn Ridge , 47 , ferried reporters to see oil clean up operations Wednesday in a bay at Plaquemines Parish . 
He just shook his head when told about the `` small people '' comment . 
Ridge describes himself as `` commercial contractor that ca n't find work and driving boat trying to make a living . '' 
To make matters worse , Ridge figures his house on the water in Myrtle Grove has lost half it 's value due to the oil spill . 
`` They can say he did n't mean it that way , but that 's how they think of us , '' Ridge said . 
`` They ca n't keep their foot out of their mouth , '' he added referring to Hayward 's comments . 
In Alabama , Terry Hanners , who owns a small construction company in Gulf Shores , said the chairman 's remark revealed something about BP 's frame of mind . 
`` These BP people I 've met are good folks . 
I 've got a good rapport with them , '' said Hanners , 74 . 
`` But BP does not care about us . 
They are so far above us . 
We are the nickel-and-dime folks of this world . '' 
Kennon said he is relieved that BP agreed to put $ 20 billion in an escrow fund , and joked , `` They better be lucky I called off the invasion of 10,000 rednecks with their rifles headed toward England anyway . '' 
