The BP oil crisis : What leaders will emerge ? 
The BP oil spill that began with the April 20th Deepwater Horizon explosion is now estimated to be the largest oil spill in history . 
Multiple story lines have evolved from this disaster , and each provides an opportunity for leaders to succeed or fail in remarkable ways . 
To follow are five ongoing themes from the disaster that have the potential to offer lasting lessons on leading through crises From the beginning , BP CEO Tony Hayward has seemed to bungle his way through the crisis . 
From the minimal early estimates of the amount of crude gushing into the Gulf of Mexico to his perplexing attendance at a yacht race and subsequent cancellation of a speaking appearance at an oil conference , Hayward has been consistently inconsistent . 
While the BP Board offered the embattled CEO public support , his role as the public face of BP has already been diminished , and there 's speculation that the CEO will be terminated after the well has been capped . 
Can any leader rebound from the sheer number of gaffes following a disaster of this magnitude ? 
Nearly two months after the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon , President Obama addressed the nation . 
Obama was his usual calm , cool , and collected self , but pundits on the right suggested that Obama had n't talked with the executives at BP soon enough . 
Those on the left suggested he missed the opportunity to call for substantive carbon cap legislation . 
However , Obama was quick to acknowledge that he failed to reform the Mineral Management Services with sufficient urgency , and he also convinced BP to create a 20 billion dollar fund for Gulf Coast residents who have been impacted by the spill . 
Obama 's legacy will be shaped , in part , by his handling of this disaster , but how will that narrative evolve ? 
Leader -LRB- s -RRB- of Clean-up Efforts While it 's certain that there will be a significant environmental impact to the Gulf Coast , the extent of the damage is still unknown . 
The Niger Delta may be the closest example of what happens to an area after repeated oil spills , but the size and scope of this spill , combined with the depth of the gusher , have never been encountered . 
Early efforts were quick to rely upon releasing oil dispersants into the gulf , but they may have their own unintended environmental impact . 
While BP continues to tout their clean-up efforts , some suggest they are more for show . 
This presents a huge opportunity for smaller players to emerge . 
For example , Kevin Costner has invested in a project that has created a centrifuge that separates oil from seawater , and three of his machines are presently being used and 32 more have been ordered by BP . 
Who else will emerge as a leader , and who will galvanize Gulf Coast residents with their clean-up efforts ? 
While not directly related to the BP oil spill , emerging energy companies have been offered a window to introduce their products to a public that may be fairly receptive to new energy ideas . 
For example , Ginkgo BioWorks has engineered E. coli bacteria so that it converts carbon into transportation fuels . 
And Bill Gates has funded TerraPower , a company that uses depleted uranium -LRB- previously viewed as nuclear waste -RRB- to create clean energy . 
Will emerging leaders in private industry like Gingko BioWorks and TerraPower be able to create momentum with their products and reduce our dependence on oil ? 
Many of us may have ties to the Gulf Coast , but unless you are a resident , it is difficult to imagine the sheer magnitude of this disaster . 
Yet the constant coverage of the oil spill has the potential to push the disaster to the background while more novel stories slowly grab the spotlight . 
After all , that 's the nature of modern media . 
Some have already issued a call to arms . 
But the larger question remains : will we learn and apply lessons from this disaster , continue to focus attention on clean up efforts , and help reduce the odds that a future event like this occurs ? 
This disaster will have widespread implications for years . 
It has already hurt the fishing , tourism and oil industry in the Gulf Coast , and other supporting businesses . 
In the long term , it has the potential to impact oil consumption habits and shape future drilling policy . 
But the above are the major themes we 've been following . 
What story lines have you noticed , and how will leaders have an impact ? 
Have an idea for what we should write about next ? 
Be in touch at info@menoconsulting.com or visit us at Meno Consulting . 
Please email us to report offensive comments . 
The US Government has promised transparency in all matters pertaining to the Gulf Disaster . 
Maybe it is time to seek further assurances that the sea food is truly safe to eat , the air is truly safe to breathe and that the rains which are falling , supposedly to nourish the land , are not toxic at all . 
Assurances too that BP will pay your claims !! ... . . 
And yes Virginia , there really is a Santa Claus . 
A final word Mr. President : Are you feeding seafood from the Gulf of Mexico to your children ? 
Are you going to send them down to the Gulf for a vacation , to play on the sand and breathe in the air ? 
Will they go swimming in the warm waters also ? 
It 's about infrastructure , education , economy and emotional healing . 
A new documentary shows what disaster recovery looks like in the long-term , by examining three survivors of the 2004 tsunami in Southeast Asia . 
`` Kepulihan : Stories from the Tsunami '' follows the lives of three survivors over the course of the four years immediately following one of the worst natural disasters in human history . 
It will air on ABC on November 21 , 2010 . 
For more information , please visit our website at www.thetsunamifilm.com , or find us on Facebook by searching for `` Kepulihan : Stories from the Tsunami . '' 
