` Top kill ' BP operation to halt US oil leak fails Doug Suttles of BP : `` We have been unable to overcome the flow '' The latest attempt to stop the Gulf of Mexico oil leak has failed , the oil giant BP has said . 
BP chief operating officer Doug Suttles said the firm was now shifting to a new strategy to stop the spill . 
In the failed procedure - known as `` top kill '' - the firm had been blasting waste material and heavy mud into a ruptured well . 
US President Barack Obama said the continued flow of oil was `` as enraging as it is heartbreaking '' . 
The worst oil spill in US history began when a drilling rig exploded and sank last month , killing 11 people . 
The thick crude has already permeated more than 70 miles -LRB- 110km -RRB- of Louisiana 's coastline , threatening fragile wetlands and putting the vital fishing industry at risk . 
Mr Suttles said BP had determined that the `` top kill '' method - which had been going on since Wednesday - had failed after studying the results for three days . 
`` We have not been able to stop the flow , '' he told reporters on Saturday . 
`` This scares everybody , the fact that we ca n't make this well stop flowing , the fact that we have n't suceeded so far , '' he said . 
The company says it pumped 30,000 barrels of mud into the well , in three attempts , at rates of up to 80 barrels a minute , but it had not worked . 
Oil booms - partly successful Dispersant used - scientists warn it may kill marine life Huge dome placed over leak - became blocked by ice crystals Mile-long tube - fails to suck up large amount of oil `` Top-kill '' method to pump heavy mud - abandoned It is the latest procedure to have failed since attempts to plug the leak began , with BP having spent more than $ 940 million -LRB- # 645 million -RRB- so far . 
An initial plan to place a 125-tonne dome over the leak failed when it became blocked with ice crystals . 
A mile-long tube designed to capture some of the gushing oil was also unsuccessful . 
The next option after the failure of `` top kill '' is called the lower-marine-riser-package -LRB- LMRP -RRB- cap containment system . 
It involves an underwater robot using a saw to hack off the leaking pipe and place a cap over it . 
The LMRP cap is already on site and the operation is expected to last four days . 
BP says it can not guarantee that the new method - which has not been carried out at depths of 5,000 feet before - will be successful . 
At least 12,000 barrels -LRB- 504,000 gallons -RRB- are leaking into the Gulf every day . 
The BBC 's Andy Gallacher says the failure is another blow for the region . 
Our correspondent says that people in Louisiana are growing increasingly impatient and angry . 
Some fishermen have nailed up signs , with one reading `` BP , you ruined our futures and our heritage '' , our correspondent adds . 
`` Everybody 's starting to realize this summer 's lost . 
And our whole lifestyle might be lost , '' Michael Ballay , the manager of Cypress Cove Marina , told Associated Press . 
On Friday , US President Barack Obama toured oil-hit areas , saying the US would `` do whatever it takes '' to help those affected . 
He said he would triple the manpower to contain and clean up the spill . 
A total of 20,000 people have already been deployed . 
Mr Obama said he would take responsibility for `` solving this crisis '' , though he said BP would be held financially accountable for the `` enormous damage '' . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
