Giant skimmer ' A Whale ' tested at BP oil spill site The skimmer could help block millions of gallons of oil from reaching land A giant tanker refitted to scoop up spilled oil is being tested at the site of the Gulf of Mexico oil leak . 
The Taiwanese vessel - called `` A Whale '' - is designed to vacuum up oily water , separate the oil and return the water to the sea . 
It is undergoing two days of testing before starting work , a Coast Guard spokeswoman said . 
Much smaller skimming vessels have been working off Louisiana , but they have been affected by rough seas . 
`` We are skimming today in Louisiana , but not in Alabama , Mississippi and Florida , '' Coast Guard spokeswoman Stephanie Hebert told the AFP news agency . 
Oil has been gushing from a ruptured well in the Gulf of Mexico since 22 April , when BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig exploded and sank . 
Crude oil has been leaking at a rate of between 35,000 to 60,000 barrels per day , according to US scientists . 
Two containment ships capturing about 25,000 barrels of oil per day are now in place , and there are plans to double this by connecting a new vessel , the Helix Producer . 
But these plans have been delayed by tropical storm Alex , which brought high seas and strong winds to the region . 
Offshore skimming in Alabama , Mississippi and Florida has been on hold for almost a week . 
Testing of the giant skimmer vessel - which its owners say can process 21 million gallons of oily water per day - began on Saturday . 
The 275m -LRB- 300-yard -RRB- tanker takes in oily water through 12 vents . 
In a series of tanks , the oil is separated for transfer to another vessel , while the clean water is returned to the sea . 
`` In many ways , the ship collects water like an actual whale and pumps internally like a human heart , '' Bob Grantham , a spokesman for TMT Shipping , told the Associated Press news agency . 
`` A Whale '' is currently operating north of the wellhead area and results from the testing are expected on Monday . 
If successful , the vessel could provide a boost to clean-up efforts . 
Admiral Thad Allen , who is overseeing the response to the spill , also said that he hoped to have the Helix Producer containment vessel in place by Wednesday , AFP news agency reported . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
