U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article FEATURE - British veterans of Spain 's Civil War honored LONDON | Sun Jul 3 , 2011 2:33 pm IST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Their spirit and convictions undiminished by age , British veterans of the Spanish Civil War were honored this weekend at a ceremony marking the 75th anniversary of the outbreak of the epic conflict . 
The International Brigades fought for the Republican side against fascism . 
And though General Francisco Franco won the 1936-39 war , the deaths of their colleagues was not vain and the eventual return of democracy in Spain had made it all worthwhile , speakers said . 
The event took place at the International Brigade Memorial in a park by the River Thames in London . 
Relatives and supporters of veterans raised one-fisted salutes , laid wreaths and sang songs of solidarity . 
The guests of honor were David Lomon and Thomas Watters , two of only four known British volunteers still living . 
`` I was Jewish , I was an anti-fascist . 
Hitler and Mussolini were all over Europe . 
Mosley was stirring up trouble in London . 
I had to do something , '' said Lomon , now aged 93 , of his decision to join the International Brigades . 
The war broke out on July 18 , 1936 , with a military uprising against the reformist Republican government . 
Franco was supported by Hitler and Mussolini . 
Russia aided the Republicans but Britain and other powers followed a non-intervention policy . 
But some 35,000 British , American and other nationalities joined the brigades , many of them dockers , miners or other workers who saw Spain as the frontline against a global threat . 
Lomon told Reuters he volunteered just after his 18th birthday through the Anti-Communist League and was given a train ticket to Paris . 
From there he was taken to the French-Spanish border , walked over the Pyrenees into Spain , and after a few weeks training found himself at the frontline manning a Maxim machinegun . 
`` It was scary . 
It was an education for me , '' he said . 
`` The people were so wonderful . 
The peasants suffered but they helped us so much , they made it all worthwhile . '' 
`` I fell in love with Spain . 
It was worth fighting for , '' he said , dapper and still sharp-minded at the age of 93 . 
Lomon was captured by Italian troops during the Republican retreat of 1938 and spent several months in a prison camp until he was repatriatad . 
`` When I came back I decided I would carry on the fight . '' 
With the outbreak of World War Two , he joined the Royal Navy and served on minesweepers in the English Channel and Asia . 
Watters , 98 , served with the Scottish Ambulance Unit . 
Born in Alloa , he trained as a medic while working as a bus driver in Glasgow and his main motivation was to help people . 
`` I had to go . 
There were many wounded . 
They asked for volunteers and I had to do it . 
I was n't political , '' he told Reuters . 
He was at the Battle of Jarama in February 1937 , where both sides suffered huge casualties . 
After two years in Spain , he returned to his job on the buses . 
Last week , the British government released intelligence files that said about 4,000 British and Irish men and women joined the anti-fascist fight , some 1,500 more than previously thought . 
Around 500 are known to have been killed . 
Britain 's MI5 spy agency kept records on them into the 1950s due to its fears of their possible communist links . 
Among then were Eric Blair , better known as George Orwell , who wrote about his experiences in `` Homage to Catalonia '' , and author Laurie Lee . 
In the decades since the conflict , it has become a reference point for many other foreign interventions and civil wars , particularly during the Central American wars of the 1980s . 
This year British Labor Party leader Ed Miliband and Australian Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd both evoked it when calling for international action in support of Libyan rebels . 
Cuba 's Fidel Castro compared the NATO bombings to the German and Italian support for Franco . 
And as the anniversary nears , the war is still controversial in Spain , which has been wary of reopening old wounds . 
Peter Preston , regarded as the war 's leading historian , said in remarks at the ceremony organised by the International Brigade Memorial Trust that after the war , Franco `` brainwashed '' people into thinking he stood for freedom . 
Recent attempts to account for the thousands of dead from extra-judicial killings during and after the conflict had been stymied , he said , noting the removal from office by the conservative judiciary of investigating judge Baltasar Garzon . 
`` The struggle continues , '' Preston said , quoting the Republican rallying cry . 
Still , a Spanish diplomat attended the ceremony and praised the foreign veterans . 
`` Their solidarity , their generosity , their courage and their decency is an example to the younger generation , '' said Fidel Lopez Alvarez , cultural counsellor at the Spanish Embassy . 
In 2007 , Spain passed a law giving citizenship to the veterans . 
Lomon said he had received his passport two weeks ago . 
`` You deserve it , '' Lopez Alvarez told him . 
-LRB- Reporting by Angus MacSwan ; Editing by Michael Roddy ; -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
