A rebel prepares his improvised 68mm rocket launcher on the front line , in the village of Kikla , which lies approximately 150 km -LRB- 93 miles -RRB- south of the capital Tripoli , July 2 , 2011 . 
MADRID\/TRIPOLI , July 3 | Sun Jul 3 , 2011 12:10 am BST MADRID\/TRIPOLI , July 3 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton stepped up Western calls on Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi to quit , brushing off his threat to attack Europeans in their homes and offices . 
`` Instead of issuing threats , Gaddafi should put the well-being and the interests of his own people first and he should step down from power and help facilitate a democratic transition , '' Clinton told reporters on a trip to Spain . 
In an address relayed to some 100,000 supporters in Tripoli 's Green Square on Friday , Gaddafi urged NATO to halt its bombing campaign or risk seeing Libyan fighters descend on Europe `` like a swarm of locusts or bees . '' 
`` Retreat , you have no chance of beating this brave people , '' Gaddafi said . 
`` They can attack your homes , your offices and your families , which will become military targets just as you have transformed our offices , headquarters , houses and children into what you regard as legitimate military targets , '' he said . 
NATO announced it had stepped up strikes on Gaddafi forces in west Libya including the capital Tripoli , saying it had carried out more than 50 attacks since Monday . 
Spanish Foreign Minister Trinidad Jimenez said the alliance stance was unchanged . 
`` Spain 's and the international coalition 's response is to maintain the unity and determination with which we have been working these past months , '' she said . 
Libyan rebels who had advanced to within 80 km of the capital were stopped in their tracks on Friday by a barrage of rocket fire from government forces , underlining the dogged resistance of Gaddafi troops to a five-month revolt . '' 
-LRB- It -RRB- was obviously a strategic withdrawal because of the battlefield situation and the amount of bombardment that the revolutionary forces were receiving , '' said rebel spokesman Ahmed Bani . 
`` But we hope to counter that within the next 48 hours . '' 
In Tripoli , a senior source in Gaddafi 's government said there was reliable intelligence indicating the rebels were planning to attack oil export terminals in the eastern towns of Brega and Ras Lanuf . 
`` The Libyan government will do whatever -LRB- possible -RRB- to prevent such attacks , '' the source , who did not want to be identified , told Reuters . 
`` It urges international oil companies as well as international insurance companies to put pressure on their governments to force the rebels , who are supported by NATO , to stop their destructive operations , '' Coalition military officials refuse to characterise the situation on the ground as a stalemate after a 104-day bombing campaign that has strained alliance firepower and tested unity , with internal divisions over strategy surfacing . 
Analysts say part of NATO 's strategy is to use the attacks to hinder efforts by authorities to put down any future uprising in Tripoli . 
Britain 's Defense Ministry said Apache helicopters hit three tanks and a bunker firing position in an attack on an army camp west of Tripoli late on Friday . 
Libyan state TV said NATO also bombed the central Al-Jufrah region on Saturday . 
A document seen by Reuters showed African Union leaders had agreed on Friday that member states would not execute the arrest warrant for Gaddafi , leaving open the possibility that he could go into exile in one of the African Union 's 53 nations . 
The grouping also offered to host talks on a cease-fire and a transition to democratic government , but did not call on Gaddafi to step down and left open whether he had a future role . 
Mansour Sayf al Nasr , the rebels ' representative in France , told reporters at the summit in Equatorial Guinea : `` We understood that the spirit of the document is that Gaddafi will not have a role to play in the future of Libya . '' 
Abdel-Hafiz Ghoga , vice president of the Benghazi-based rebel council , told Reuters : `` We reject the African Union proposal because it includes nothing concerning our demands . 
We are only demanding one thing : Gaddafi 's resignation ... We can gain freedom and democracy only if Gaddafi steps down . 
`` I think we can obtain freedom only through military operations and we will be able to do this . '' 
In Tripoli , government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim did not comment on whether any AU-hosted negotiations should start on the assumption that Gaddafi would step down , saying only : `` We have been saying for months that we will have talks with all parties . '' 
