The International Criminal Court is still trying to link Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi , his son and his brother-in-law to rapes , but it does not yet have enough evidence to do so , prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo said Tuesday . 
It has evidence that rapes have taken place in Libya 's civil war , he said , but he can not prove Gadhafi ordered them . 
The court issued arrest warrants Monday for Gadhafi , his son Saif al-Islam Gadhafi , and his brother-in-law Abdullah al-Sanussi on other charges . 
Saif Al-Islam Gadhafi is a close adviser to his father . 
His arrest warrant came two days after his 39th birthday . 
Al-Sanussi serves as Gadhafi 's head of intelligence . 
The warrants are `` for crimes against humanity , '' including murder and persecution , `` allegedly committed across Libya '' from February 15 through `` at least '' February 28 , `` through the state apparatus and security forces , '' the court said in a news release . 
The court could file charges against `` one or two other names , but in principle the first investigation focuses on these individuals , '' Moreno-Ocampo said Tuesday . 
The court is not asking international forces operating in Libya to arrest the suspects , he said , explaining that Libya has the primary responsibility to do so as a United Nations member . 
NATO confirmed in a news conference that it is not seeking to arrest anyone , as that is not part of its mission . 
Lt. Gen. Charles Bouchard of NATO gave a mixed assessment of the mission to protect civilians , saying Libyans were writing `` Thank you , NATO '' on their roofs . 
But , he said , Gadhafi 's forces were using civilians as human shields , making NATO operations `` more difficult , but not impossible . '' 
And he said NATO had reports that government forces had `` put down very severely '' attempts to demonstrate against Gadhafi 's rule . 
`` Security forces continue to inflict pain and harm on the population , '' Bouchard said at a briefing in Naples , Italy , where Operation Unified Protector is based . 
NATO struck civilian and military locations in the Badr Al-Osta Milad area of Tripoli on Tuesday , Libyan state TV reported without further details . 
Elsewhere Tuesday , rebels attacked a government weapons depot some 30 kilometers south of Zintan , an opposition stronghold in western Libya . 
It was a location that had previously been a target of NATO attacks . 
Two people died and four were injured in the fighting , according to Khalid Shhop , a doctor stationed at the depot . 
Rebels overtook government forces and were later seen carting away ammunition , he said . 
