05 February 12 01:10 GMT Fresh protests have taken place outside the Syrian embassy in London amid reports that at least 55 people were killed by shelling in the country . 
Twenty two people were arrested on Saturday after crowds had initially gathered during the early hours , with some trying to enter the building . 
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office condemned the attack on the embassy and said security was being reviewed . 
Foreign Secretary William Hague said he was `` horrified '' at reports from Syria . 
His comments come as an Arab and Western-backed resolution condemning the violent crackdown in Syria was vetoed at the UN Security Council by Russia and China . 
Mr Hague said he `` unequivocally '' condemned the use of tanks , mortars and artillery in civilian areas in the city of Homs . 
`` It is all the more chilling that these events occurred on the 30th anniversary of the Hama massacre , in which it is estimated that 20,000 people were killed , '' he added . 
`` The Syrian regime 's actions display President Assad 's cold-blooded cynicism in the face of mounting international pressure for the UN Security Council to do its utmost to end the bloodshed in Syria . '' 
After the UN vote , Mr Hague issued a statement to say that the veto `` lets the Syrian people down and will only encourage President Assad 's brutal regime to increase the killing '' . 
`` It did not impose any sanctions , nor did it authorise military action . 
At every stage we worked to accommodate the concerns of some Council members and tabled a text which did just that , '' he added . 
In London , crowds of people , chanting and waving flags , turned up outside the embassy in Belgrave Square calling for the Syrian Ambassador to be expelled by the UK . 
Two police officers were taken to hospital with minor injuries after an attempt was made to break in overnight . 
Scotland Yard said of the arrests , 21 were on suspicion of public order offences including entering the embassy , and another was on suspicion of assaulting a police officer . 
During the day , rocks and bottles were thrown at the building , which was being guarded by police . 
The clashes came as protesters forced their way into four other Syrian embassies in European and Middle Eastern cities . 
The FCO said the Met were reviewing security arrangements at the Embassy and would take `` appropriate action '' to ensure the safety of its staff inside . 
`` The UK takes seriously its obligations to protect the staff and premises of foreign states in the UK , '' a spokesman said . 
`` The FCO commends the swift action of the Metropolitan Police who have arrested a number of the protesters involved in the break-in . 
`` Our thoughts are with the friends and family of the two officers who were hospitalised as a result of injuries sustained while responding to the protests . '' 
