BP 's announcement on Wednesday that it will pay $ 20 billion into an escrow account may sound like a win for the USA and victims of the Gulf oil spill . 
In fact , it could be a powerful new tool for the White House 's political machine , and is the latest manifestation of the Obama administration 's willingness to work outside the law . 
It also lays bare Big Oil 's willingness to get cozy with the left . 
There is no legal basis for the Obama administration to induce BP to pay $ 20 billion into a kitty to be controlled by one of its political appointees . 
While this may play well in populist circles , create the appearance of action , and was apparently easy to foist onto BP 's hapless management , it weakens the rule of law by essentially circumventing the law . 
There is already a well-established legal process for remedying the economic cost of someone else 's negligence . 
Every day , thousands of Americans sue other individuals or companies , either by themselves or via class actions that combine their efforts . 
The design and rules of these legal processes are laid out in laws crafted by Congress and state legislatures . 
BP 's $ 20 billion was extracted outside of this legal framework for reasons that have not been explained . 
There is a high risk that this fund will be doled out based on political , not legal criteria . 
Rather than judges and juries making decisions , an economic commissar will . 
This fits the emerging pattern of lawlessness in Mr. Obama 's Washington . 
Before this , Exhibit A was the health care bill . 
The procedure by which it was passed , and its more novel provisions -LRB- e.g. , compulsory insurance -RRB- , were conjured with general disregard of the Constitution and legal and legislative norms . 
More recently , Mr. Obama 's technology guru at the White House unethically used the power of his office to browbeat private businesses into offering him discounts . 
And the man who will administer the new $ 20 billion fund , Kenneth Feinberg , is the government 's so-called `` Pay Czar , '' and has used questionable government power to dictate compensation levels for financial industry employees . 
Lost in this mess is any reference to limits on government set forth in the Constitution or law . 
For its part , BP has done a great disservice to its shareholders . 
Despite its charitable pay-in to a Democratically-controlled kitty , the company can still be sued separately by anyone with a grievance . 
Congress can theoretically change this so that compensation is managed through the fund . 
But BP CEO Tony Hayward probably should have sought that before signing over his shareholders ' money . 
At present , the $ 20 billion has won BP no legal protection and amounts only to history 's most expensive P.R. move . 
As time goes by , Mr. Hayward comes increasingly to resemble the character James Taggart in the Ayn Rand novel `` Atlas Shrugged . '' 
Both men came to run mighty businesses created by more talented managers . 
Both were beguiled by cunning creatures of government who sought to bring wealth and wealth-creators under the heel of the state . 
James Taggart sought the love of the aptly named lobbyist-turned-economic-dictator `` Wesley Mouch . '' 
Hayward and his contemporaries throughout Big Oil crave a similar acceptance from those who plot their destruction , and on their way to that end , the erosion of the rule of law . 
Indeed , it is a canard of the left that Big Oil is a bulwark of capitalism and private property rights that hinders the march of progressivism . 
BP has sought cozy relations with liberal environmental groups . 
It has donated $ 10 million to the Nature Conservancy and $ 2 million to Conservation International . 
It has a partnership related to wind power with groups like the Sierra Club , the Natural Resources Defense Council , and the Union of Concerned Scientists . 
Other Big Oil giants play a similar game . 
In 2008-09 , Chevron peppered Washington , D.C. subway stations with sanctimonious ads showing people vowing to lead green lifestyles and use less of Chevron 's own product . 
Last year , Chevron 's CEO agreed in a debate with the Sierra Club 's executive director that there ought to be a new energy tax . 
Currently , Chevron 's website on corporate social responsibility has a link to the left wing Human Rights Campaign , whose notable contribution to the 2004 presidential race was printing stickers declaring `` George W. Bush : ` You 're Fired . '' ' 
All of this brings to mind Winston Churchill 's definition of an appeaser as `` one who feeds the crocodile hoping it will eat him last . '' 
So it is with those currently running Big Oil . 
Unfortunately , they are not only victimizing their shareholders , but everyone else in the radical environmentalists ' cross hairs , including Americans who do things like drive cars and heat their homes in winter . 
Two solutions are wanting . 
First , voters could use elections this November to elect a conservative Congress that starts insisting Mr. Obama respect the rule of law and the limits of constitutional government . 
Second , shareholders of oil companies could insist on a management able to focus more on long-term shareholder value -- and political strategies smarter than attempting to appease enemies committed to their demise . 
Otherwise , shareholders might suddenly find that those who are supposed to represent their interests have instead given $ 20 billion away to liberal politicians for nothing in return . 
Christian Whiton served in the administration of President George W. Bush . 
Fox Forum is on Twitter . 
Christian Whiton was a State Department senior adviser from 2003-09 during the administration George W. Bush administration . 
He is principal at DC International Advisory . 
Follow him on Twitter@ChristianWhiton . 
