BP CEO Tony Hayward arrives on Capitol Hill in Washington , Thursday , June 17 , 2010 , to testify before the House Oversight and Investigations subcommittee hearing on `` the role of BP in the Deepwater Horizon Explosion and oil spill . 
-LRB- AP -RRB- May 28 : BP CEO Tony Hayward speaks during recovery operations at the Deepwater Horizon oil spill site in the Gulf . 
AP Hayward 's testimony came after members of the House Energy and Commerce Committee 's oversight and investigations subcommittee took turns in a long-awaited public flogging intended to capture the outrage of the nation . 
The panel is investigating the explosion that killed 11 workers and unleashed a flood of oil that has yet to be stemmed . 
As Hayward began his testimony , a woman identified as Diane Wilson , who appeared to have oil smeared on her face and clothes , shouted from the back of the room : `` You need to be charged with a crime . '' 
She was grabbed by Capitol police and taken from the room . 
Moments later , Hayward began his remarks , saying that the Gulf oil spill `` never should have happened '' and that he regretted the impact the spill has had on the environment and the people of the Gulf Coast . 
Before Hayward 's testimony , lawmakers accused him of being oblivious to the risks of the company 's deep-water operations . 
Some of the sharpest criticism came from Rep. Bart Stupak , D-Mich . 
`` We are not small people . 
But we wish to get our lives back , '' he told Hayward . 
`` I 'm sure you 'll get your life back , and with a golden parachute to England . '' 
It was a reference to Hayward 's much-criticized earlier remark that some day he hoped to get `` my life back '' and to comments on the White House driveway on Wednesday by BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg that `` we care about the small people '' of the Gulf Coast . 
Hayward sipped a beverage and jotted notes as one lawmaker after another scorched him . 
Early on , attention shifted away from Hayward as lawmakers traded barbs over the agreement President Obama announced on Wednesday with BP for the establishment of a $ 20 billion relief fund . 
Rep. Joe Barton , R-Texas , accused the White House of a `` $ 20 billion shakedown '' of BP by requiring the company to establish the huge fund to compensate those hurt by the oil spill . 
`` I 'm ashamed of what happened in the White House '' on Wednesday , Barton said . 
But Rep. Ed Markey , D-Mass . 
, fired back that the fund is `` not a shakedown . '' 
`` Rather , it was the government of the United States working to protect the most vulnerable citizens that we have in our country -- right now , the residents of the Gulf , '' he said . 
`` It 's BP 's spill , but it 's America 's ocean and it 's American citizens who are the ones being harmed . '' 
Hayward expects to tell Congress he is `` personally devastated '' by the Gulf drilling rig explosion and oil spill and understands the anger Americans feel toward him and his company . 
The explosion and sinking of the BP-operated Deepwater Horizon rig `` never should have happened -- and I am deeply sorry that they did , '' he said in testimony to be delivered to a House panel Thursday . 
`` My sadness has only grown as the disaster continues . '' ' 
`` To be sure , neither I nor the company is perfect , '' Hayward said . 
`` But we are unwavering in our commitment to fulfill all our responsibilities . '' 
He said the British-based company has spent nearly $ 1.5 billion since the April 20 explosion , and wo n't stop until the job is done . 
Hayward also called the explosion `` a complex accident , caused by an unprecedented combination of failures . '' 
A group of protesters milled in the hallway outside the hearing room , including Diane Wilson , 61 , a fourth-generation fisher from Seadrift , Texas , near the Gulf Coast . 
Wilson , appearing with a black-stained hand , said she wanted to send a message : `` Hayward should go to jail . '' 
She was joined by Ann Wright , 63 , of Honolulu , Hawaii , who wore a BP hardhat , overalls and sunglasses adorned with dollar signs . 
`` BP does n't really care about this , '' she said , pulling out an oil-stained rubber ducky . 
Thursday was Hayward 's inaugural appearance since the largest oil spill in U.S. history . 
Hayward has said he 's got thick enough skin to handle the verbal assaults . 
`` I 'm so far unscathed , '' he told analysts in a recent conference call , referring to the general criticism he 's received . 
`` No one has actually physically harmed me . 
They 've thrown some words at me . 
But I 'm a Brit , so sticks and stones can hurt your bones but words never break them , or whatever the expression is . '' 
The BP CEO follows a long list of corporate faces used as congressional punching bags . 
Just this year , executives from Goldman Sachs spent nine hours trying to fend off accusations from senators that they bilked investors , and Toyota President Akio Toyoda personally and repeatedly apologized for deadly defects in his company 's cars , only to have angry lawmakers forcefully respond that was hardly sufficient . 
The Associated Press contributed to this report . 
