Earthquake rescue : How survivors are found To see how rescue workers go about their vital work , click on the links below . 
Rescue workers need to be swift to assess where they are most likely to find survivors inside collapsed buildings . 
Stairwells or the spaces under large concrete beams can provide what rescue workers call ` voids ' . 
It is in places like these that the living can be found . 
Local people often know the best locations to begin the search for survivors . 
After speaking to them rescue workers can quickly select the most promising place to begin their work . 
Diggers -LRB- here pictured in India -RRB- and hydraulic jacks are among the heavy machinery that rescue workers employ to shift rubble . 
Large concrete slabs on the outside of buildings can be pulled aside by diggers , enabling rescuers to get a view of any people still trapped inside . 
Specialist sound equipment can detect the faintest of noises to within a few metres . 
Silence on the site is needed while a member of the rescue team bangs three times and hopes to hear a response . 
Carbon dioxide detectors can be used to find survivors rendered unconscious . 
They work best in confined spaces where they detect the greater CO2 concentration in the air exhaled by those still breathing . 
Video cameras placed on the end of flexible poles can be squeezed through gaps in the rubble to help locate survivors . 
Using this technique means time is saved as less rubble is shifted unnecessarily . 
Thermal imaging equipment can be used to locate people not directly in a rescuer 's line of sight as their body heat can warm the rubble around them . 
Many of the buildings in Haiti are made of flimsy materials . 
Buildings like these are quick to collapse in an earthquake but their light weight and low height can give people a relatively good chance of getting out . 
Dogs are extremely effective at using their sense of smell to pick up on signs of life that human rescuers can not . 
They are also able to cover large areas quickly , speeding up the search and rescue process . 
Heavy-lifting equipment is in short supply in Haiti , leaving some rescuers little option but to shift rubble by hand or with pick-axes and shovels . 
Other tools used by rescuers include chainsaws , disc-cutters and rebar cutters - which can be used to tackle the metal bars in reinforced concrete . 
How long can search and rescue last ? 
The co-ordinating agency , usually the UN , and the host country , have to take the difficult decision of when to stop looking for a few remaining trapped people and concentrate resources on looking after the thousands of other survivors . 
The average time for this switch is between five and seven days , but individuals have been known to survive as long as 13 days trapped if they have access to water . 
