PLEASE NOTE : We are unable to offer transcripts for our program interviews . 
Today is broadcast live and the running order is subject to change . 
There is growing anger in Haiti at the slow pace of the earthquake relief operation . 
And 900 jobs will be lost after car-parts manufacturer Bosch said it would close its factory near Cardiff . 
A national appeal for aid for the victims of the Haiti earthquake is to be launched this morning . 
Up to three million people live in the area worst hit by the quake . 
Brendan Gormley , director of the disasters emergency committee -LRB- DEC -RRB- discusses the relief effort . 
You can make a donation to the DEC Haiti appeal here . 
Mobile provider O2 is struggling to cope with the technological demands of the iPhone . 
The surging popularity of downloading video clips , surfing the internet and loading applications is causing outages and problems for users . 
Technology correspondent Rory Cellan-Jones outlines the iPhone 's growing popularity , and Peter Cochrane , former chief technology officer at BT and chief executive officer of Cochrane Associates , discusses how network providers are trying to cope with the demand . 
The first presidential election since the Orange Revolution is to take place in the Ukraine this weekend . 
Five years ago the results of a fraudulent poll were overturned by mass street protests , in what was seen as a victory for freedom and democracy over control from Moscow . 
But many are now disappointed with the results of the Orange Revolution . 
Gabriel Gatehouse reports from Kiev . 
David Cameron is to announce his party 's security strategy at Chatham House today . 
In a policy overhaul , the Tories say they will move away from conflict intervention towards conflict prevention . 
The report 's author , shadow security minister Baroness Neville-Jones , discuses the new approach . 
The shortlist for the TS Eliot award , the UK 's most prestigious prize in poetry , has been announced . 
Inaugurated in 1993 to celebrate the Poetry Book Society 's 40th birthday and honor its founding poet , the award comes with a # 15,000 cash prize , the largest in British poetry . 
This year the Today program will play one poem written and read by each of the ten shortlisted poets . 
Christopher Reid reads a poem from his collection , A Scattering . 
Frustration is mounting amongst the survivors of the earthquake in Haiti , as people who are venturing out into the streets have to face the sight of scores of dead bodies . 
In one part of Port-au-Prince , angry residents have set up roadblocks with the corpses to protest at the delay in emergency aid reaching them . 
Shaul Schwarz , a photographer for TIME magazine , was an eyewitness . 
The first day of the salmon fishing season on the River Tay begins today . 
But fishermen are being urged to throw back everything they catch because of declining salmon numbers . 
James Cook reports from the River Tay . 
Thought for the day with Reverend Dr Giles Fraser , Canon Chancellor of St Paul 's Cathedral . 
Should the UK follow the US in imposing a levy on banks ? 
President Obama has introduced the tax to recoup money US taxpayers are expected to lose from bailing out the banks during the financial crisis . 
Vince Cable , Liberal Democrat treasury spokesman , and Terry Smith , chief executive officer of money brokers Tullett Prebon , debate whether a bank levy could work in the UK . 
Aid arriving in Haiti is struggling to get through to those who need it , leading to growing unrest . 
Matthew Price reports from the capital , Port-au-Prince where unrest is growing over the lack of food and medical supplies . 
Lord Mark Malloch-Brown , former United Nations Deputy Secretary-General , discusses how the aid effort is being organised . 
The shortlist for the TS Eliot award , the UK 's most prestigious prize in poetry , has been announced . 
Inaugurated in 1993 to celebrate the Poetry Book Society 's 40th birthday and honor its founding poet , the award comes with a # 15,000 cash prize , the largest in British poetry . 
To mark the awards , the Today program is playing extracts of the shortlisted poets reading their own works . 
Hugo Williams reads a poem from his collection , West End Final . 
As the great thaw descends on the country , the London Ice Sculpting Festival begins . 
Five national teams will compete against each other in carving two-metre blocks of ice . 
Philip Hughes , managing director of the Ice Box , demonstrates how to make an ice sculpture . 
Surgeons from the UK are traveling to Haiti to help set up emergency medical support . 
Richard Villar , an orthopaedic surgeon , discusses the role of emergency response units . 
The Today program has been receiving regular reports of life on the frontline in Afghanistan from Major Richard Streatfeild who is serving in Helmand province with The Rifles . 
In his latest despatch , Major Streatfeild welcomes the arrival of US troops on his patch and says the locals have started telling them where the Taliban have planted their bombs . 
Patients should be weighed each time they are prescribed antibiotics , according to new research . 
Doses of antibiotics and other antimicrobial agents should take into account the patient 's bodyweight , to maximize their potential effectiveness . 
Matthew Falagas , director of the Alfa Institute of Biomedical Science in Athens which carried out the research , explains the findings . 
The winner of this year 's TS Eliot Prize for poetry will be announced on 18 January . 
The award , the UK 's most prestigious prize in poetry , honors the author of the best new collection of poetry published in the UK and Ireland in the last year . 
To mark the awards , the Today program is playing extracts of the shortlisted poets reading their own works . 
Eilan N Chuillenain reads a poem from her collection , The Sun-fish Gallery . 
Cities on stilts and mass evacuations in cities like Hull and Portsmouth are among the ideas proposed in a report from the Institution of Civil Engineers -LRB- ICE -RRB- and the Royal Institute of British Architects -LRB- RIBA -RRB- . 
Alex Schofield , who helped produce the report , outlines its recommendations . 
Earlier in the program , ice sculptor Philip Hughes described the art of carving ice and has spent the last half sculpting . 
Mr Hughes reveals his work . 
Haiti 's 7.0 magnitude quake was the worst the country has seen in two centuries and a series of aftershocks continue to disturb rescue workers still sifting through the devastation . 
Professor Roger Searle from the Earth Sciences department at Durham University discuses whether earthquakes and aftershocks can be predicted . 
