Even buildings in downtown Port-au-Prince came tumbling down Experts say it is no surprise that shoddy construction contributed to the level of destruction in Haiti following Tuesday 's earthquake . 
But the scale of the disaster has shed new light on the problem in the impoverished Caribbean nation . 
Tens of thousands are feared dead after being crushed by buildings that collapsed . 
Scores more remain trapped under the rubble . 
`` It 's sub-standard construction , '' says London-based architect John McAslan , who has been working on a project linked to the Clinton Global Initiative in the country . 
`` There are n't any building codes as we would recognize them , '' he added . 
Mr McAslan says most buildings are made of masonry - bricks or construction blocks - which tend to perform badly in an earthquake . 
Concrete blocks are being made in people 's backyards and dried out in the sun There are also significant problems with the quality of building materials used , says Peter Haas , head of the Appropriate Infrastructure Development Group , a US-based non-profit group that has been working in Haiti since 2006 . 
`` People are skimping on cement to try to cut costs , putting a lot of water in , building too thin , and you end up with a structure that 's innately weaker , '' said Mr Haas , who was on his way to Haiti to help assess the safety of damaged buildings . 
`` Concrete blocks are being made in people 's backyards and dried out in the sun , '' he said . 
Mr Haas said there were also `` serious problems '' with the enforcement of building codes in Haiti . 
He said the government did not function at all in several parts of the country , and many communities lacked basic services such as electricity , sanitation services or access to clean water . 
`` So the problem of code enforcement is low down on the list , '' he said . 
Even before the quake , Haiti 's building safety record was poor . 
Almost 100 people - mostly children - died when two schools collapsed within days of each other in November 2008 . 
At the time , Haitian authorities blamed poor construction for the accidents . 
Roger Musson , head of seismic hazard at the British Geological Survey , said he was `` not at all '' surprised at the level of destruction in Haiti . 
Some homes on hillsides collapsed on to the ones below -LRB- Photo : American Red Cross -RRB- He said Haiti , the poorest country in the western hemisphere , was not used to dealing with earthquakes of this magnitude . 
Tuesday 's quake was the worst in two centuries . 
The country is more used to dealing with hurricanes , which have been getting more frequent in recent years , according to Mr Musson . 
`` Most buildings are like a house of cards , '' he said . 
`` They can stand up to the forces of gravity , but if you have a sideways movement , it all comes tumbling down . '' 
Ironically , people living in the shanty towns might have had a better chance of survival than those trapped under concrete buildings , many of which `` pancaked '' . 
`` A simple shack 's collapse is likely to cause less damage to human safety than a multi-floor building that collapses , '' Mr McAslan said . 
Mr McAslan says it is more complex and expensive to earthquake-proof a building than equip it for hurricane damage . 
`` The priorities have inevitably been elsewhere , but I 'm absolutely certain that the attention of the government will be to build back better . '' 
He said the main task for the authorities now was to save as many lives as possible , then to stabilise damaged buildings so they could withstand any aftershocks , and finally , to assess how to create buildings that could reasonably withstand another earthquake . 
According to Mr McAslan , the extent of deforestation in Haiti also contributed to devastation . 
He said that on the hillsides of Petionville , a suburb east of Port-au-Prince , buildings simply `` collapsed and collapsed and collapsed '' on to each other as there was no forest to protect them . 
According to the US Geological Survey , the loss of life from earthquakes is typically 10 times higher in developing countries than the West and the damage can be up to 100 times worse . 
