Haiti earthquake : Your stories Wednesday 13 January It is feared thousands of people have died in an earthquake in Haiti . 
The earthquake had a magnitude of seven , and there were a number of aftershocks . 
BBC News website readers have been describing how the earthquake has affected them . 
SUSAN WESTWOOD , PORT AU PRINCE , HAITI I am a paediatric nurse working for an orphanage just outside Port-au-Prince . 
I was in the intensive care room looking after a nine-month-old baby girl when the earthquake hit . 
The floor started shaking violently and the whole building shook from side to side . 
It lasted about 45 seconds . 
After that , there was a constant shuddering . 
The babies were really frightened and started to cry . 
Other staff and carers were screaming , they were so terrified . 
It was very upsetting . 
A collapsed apartment in Cabaret , Haiti . 
Picture : Michael Gill I could n't stand upright so I dropped to my knees . 
I was able to keep hold of the baby girl and I grabbed hold of another baby . 
Objects were falling from shelves , there was debris crashing all around . 
I clung on to the babies and shielded them as best I could . 
Then came the aftershocks . 
It was impossible to even move . 
After a while we managed to take all the children out onto the driveway . 
We spent the whole night outside . 
It was chilly but we were OK . 
Some children are dehydrated now though because we could n't get any medical supplies out of the building . 
Thank goodness our building is alright as is our other home up the road . 
I ca n't believe there 's no damage and that we are all safe . 
I clung on to the babies and shielded them as best I could We have 85 children under two-years-old here at the God 's Littlest Angels home . 
We also run another orphanage up the road . 
The age group there is from two to 11 . 
There are 65 children there . 
All the children in our care are incredibly vulnerable . 
Most of them are n't orphans but they are here because their families ca n't afford to look after them . 
Haiti is very , very poor . 
I see a lot of children who are malnourished . 
Often , it is too late by the time they come to us . 
Others are here because they are premature babies and we can look after them . 
When I look around the area and see that other buildings have just crumbled to the ground , I know that soon we will have lots more babies and young children to care for . 
I was driving through the mountains on my way home to Jacmel when the car started to shake . 
It was like a very strong wind was blowing and I nearly lost control of the car . 
Rocks started falling on the road . 
I continued driving slowly and I saw people in the road screaming . 
The mountain was collapsing and a building to one side had already fallen down . 
A huge dust plume raised from the valley floor . 
I just knew that if I had reached that spot five minutes earlier , I would have been killed I drove further and found the road totally blocked by a massive landslide on the road . 
I just knew that if I had reached that spot five minutes earlier , I would have been killed . 
I had to abandon the car and continue on foot . 
I run a food security project in Haiti which focuses on improved agriculture , mother and child health nutrition and early warning systems . 
I prepare for natural disasters but mainly for hurricanes not earthquakes ! 
We have offices across Haiti . 
Our office in Jacmel seems to be intact , but there is major destruction here . 
My staff in Jacmel are all safe but I ca n't reach my people in Port au Prince . 
Last night they asked all Jacmel residents to sleep on the airstrip as the aftershocks continued and there was major damage to houses in Jacmel . 
CHRISTINE BLANCHARD , NEW JERSEY , USA My family is still missing . 
The phone lines are down and I have n't been able to get in touch with them . 
I was born and raised in Haiti . 
My parents and I came to America a few years ago but the rest of my family , my grandparents , aunts , uncles , cousins and friends are still there . 
It 's just so awful . 
I feel sick with worry . 
I am devastated I am using social network sites to try to track them down . 
I know this is how a lot of my friends have got in touch with each other . 
I 've heard that a lot of people are at the Hotel Oloffson because it 's one of the few hotels still standing . 
I 'm in touch with people there and they will let me know if any of my family arrive . 
I have been up all night trying to get in touch with people . 
Haiti is very small so everybody knows everybody else , I hope this will help . 
It 's just so awful . 
I feel sick with worry . 
I know every building that has collapsed . 
I know how long those buildings took to build and now they are just rubble . 
