Haiti quake aid effort hampered by blockages Makeshift camps are sprouting up in Port-au-Prince Bottlenecks and infrastructure damage have been holding up aid efforts in Haiti , where Tuesday 's earthquake has left as many as 45,000-50 ,000 dead . 
There is little sign of aid supplies beyond the airport , and correspondents cite increasing anger among survivors . 
Many are spending another day without food and shelter in the ruined capital . 
The US defense secretary said the Haiti relief effort was the main US priority in the western hemisphere , as an aircraft carrier arrived off the coast . 
And the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , Adm Mike Mullen , said a hospital ship and more helicopters would be sent in the coming days , and 9-10 ,000 troops would be in or off Haiti by Monday . 
On Friday , the UN said a total of about $ 270m -LRB- # 165m -RRB- in international aid had been pledged so far for the relief effort . 
It will launch an emergency appeal for $ 550m later on Friday , UN spokeswoman Corinne Momal-Vanian said . 
People are doing what they can to survive here in Port-au-Prince . 
Every morning the first jobs of the day involve getting the very basics . 
Loaded with old plastic bottles or anything else that can hold water , they fill up where they can . 
Some from broken pipes from collapsed buildings , that still have a supply . 
The relief effort is under way , the near constant buzz of planes landing with supplies can be heard overhead . 
On the ground the aid is materialising slowly . 
There are still bodies on the streets , but for those who can afford it , those who can be identified , a decent burial . 
I saw six men carrying a roughly carved casket , singing as they walked toward the cemetery . 
But for others , a less dignified burial , as mass graves have started to be used across the city . 
On the ground , correspondents say there is little immediate sign of a co-ordinated relief effort . 
The UN 's World Food Programme -LRB- WFP -RRB- says that in total two million people will need food aid , but that it has so far managed to feed just 4,000 . 
Meanwhile the head of the charity Medecins Sans Frontieres -LRB- Doctors Without Borders -RRB- said thousands of people were waiting for surgical treatment in Haiti 's hospitals , AFP news agency reported . 
Port-au-Prince 's small airport is filled to capacity and US air traffic controllers have taken charge of air traffic control to help manage the influx of planes . 
However because of fuel shortages , some aircraft are clogging up the tarmac . 
Meanwhile the port is too damaged to use and roads are blocked by debris . 
The BBC 's Andy Gallacher in Port-au-Prince says survivors are dying in huge numbers , and clean water , food and medical supplies are desperately needed . 
`` We hear on the radio that rescue teams are coming from the outside , but nothing is coming , '' said one man , Jean-Baptiste Lafontin Wilfried . 
They want us to provide them with help , which is , of course , what we want to do `` Our biggest problem is insecurity , '' Delfin Antonio Rodriguez , the rescue commander from the neighbouring Dominican Republic , told AFP news agency on Friday . 
`` Yesterday they tried to hijack some of our trucks . 
Today we were barely able to work in some places because of that . '' 
The WFP initially said its warehouses in Port-au-Prince been looted , but this was later denied . 
`` We do still have that 6,000 tonnes of food , '' spokeswoman Caroline Hurford told the BBC . 
`` Apparently there were unconfirmed reports of looting taking place but once our teams got down to the dockside they were able to see that there was some mistake . '' 
Shaul Schwarz , a photographer for Time magazine , told the BBC he had seen a roadblock formed with bodies of quake victims on a main road , south of the capital . 
He said he believed this was an `` act of anger '' on the part of people who are not getting help . 
About 45,000-50 ,000 people have died since Tuesday 's 7.0 magnitude earthquake and 300,000 have been made homeless , the UN estimates . 
US President Barack Obama said some US rescuers were already on the ground in Haiti and more were on their way . 
Speaking on Thursday , he promised the country `` every element of our national capacity , our diplomacy , and development assistance '' . 
US defense secretary Robert Gates said the relief effort was the `` highest priority for US military assets in this hemisphere '' , and all necessary resources would be made available . 
The USS Carl Vinson aircraft carrier has arrived in Haiti and the USS Bataan , carrying a marine expeditionary unit , is on its way . 
Aid groups say it is a race against time to find trapped survivors . 
A British rescue team with heavy lifting gear and dogs has reached Haiti . 
Other plane-loads of rescuers and relief supplies are arriving from China , the EU , Canada , Russia and Latin American nations . 
Mr Obama and French President Nicolas Sarkozy , working with Brazil , Canada and other countries , will organise a conference on reconstruction in Haiti , the French presidency has announced . 
