French fight in Mali town French troops fight militias in Mali streets ; Iraq bombs target Kurds ; horsemeat recipes HAITI CRIPPLED BY DEVASTATING EARTHQUAKE Haiti was hit by a massive earthquake this week that released as much energy as half a megaton of TNT . 
It was the worst earthquake to hit the Caribbean nation in over a century and flattened entire neighborhoods in some places . 
Science in Action speaks to Mike Kendall , Professor of Seismology at the Department of Earth Sciences at Bristol University in the UK to look into the reasons why this earthquake caused as much damage as it did . 
GENE MAP OF PLANT MAY PROVIDE CHEAPER MALARIA DRUGS Artemisia annua is a plant used to create highly effective drugs to fight Malaria . 
These drugs are expensive , and despite an increase in demand , production and planting areas are reducing . 
However , the publication of the genetic map of the plant has given new hope scientists looking to make cheaper drugs in larger quantities . 
The genetic map will help scientists determine which of the plants will give high yields and will help develop variants suitable for growing in diverse conditions . 
Professor Ian Graham of the Centre for Novel Agricultural Products at the University of York tells Jon Stewart all about these breakthroughs . 
PUBLIC CONSULTATIONS OVER INTRODUCTION OF GM CROPS IN INDIA Proposals to introduce GM crops in India have faced many protests in the past . 
Now , a government-appointed committee has given the go-ahead for the introduction of Bt brinjal , a genetically modified variety with the ability to produce its own pesticide . 
Many organic activists and farmers are worried by this step and the government plans to hold a series of public consultations until mid-February before taking a final decision . 
Science in Action 's Tinku Ray visits the state of Karnataka to find out more . 
SOLAR-POWERED IRRIGATION BENEFICIAL IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA Irrigation has been said to be a good way to help people out of poverty , by allowing them to grow crops all year long , instead of just when it rains . 
It can also help in adapting to potential changes in the climate . 
A recent study that analyzed the effectiveness of solar-powered irrigation in Benin has concluded that it improves both the diet of the people as well as their household income . 
Dr Jennifer Burney from Stanford University studied the solar-powered systems installed by an organization called the Solar Electric Light Fund in two villages in Benin and tells Science in Action what she found . 
Galaxies are clusters of billions and trillions of stars , each unique in some way color , shape or orientation . 
But why did each galaxy not end up identical to all others ? 
Jon Stewart visited Dr Andrew Benson at the California Institute of Technology , hoping to find an answer . 
