As it happened : Haiti earthquake 15 Jan Live coverage following Tuesday 's earthquake in Haiti , in which tens of thousands are feared to have been killed and some three million displaced . 
Hopes of finding survivors in the rubble are fading and the focus is now on getting urgent aid into and around the country . 
2300 The BBC is discontinuing this live update page for the night . 
For the latest developments , please go to our main news page . 
2259 The BBC 's Andy Gallagher in Port-au-Prince says : `` The airport is now busier than ever . 
But even as the plans land , and the supplies are unloaded , there are major problems distributing the aid . 
Much of it remains on the runway - tents , blankets and medical supplies sitting unused . 
Military personnel told me the logistical complexity of working out of such a tiny airport is a major stumbling block . 
But the fact remains that very little aid has reached those who need it . 
In the city itself , I have seen the UN handing out supplies . 
But it is the injured and dying who require most help . 
Haiti has now handed over control of the airport to the US , a move that could finally speed up the relief effort . '' 
2255 Lord Malloch Brown , the former UN deputy secretary general , tells the BBC that the rescue effort has been damaged by the loss of much of the UN team in Haiti , but that it is well-placed to recover quickly . 
`` Obviously any organization which so tragically has its leadership decapitated is in chaos for a bit . 
But in fact the UN is much bigger in Port-au-Prince than it is in most places in the world because of the big peacekeeping operation there . 
The UN is in a better place to regroup and recover than would be the case in many parts of the world where natural disasters strike and the UN has almost no presence . 
But I think the really big factor here is the proximity to the US , which is able to project by far the most capable logistics operations in crises like this , '' he says . 
2237 US Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano says undocumented Haitians in the United States will be granted `` temporary protected status '' , which will allow those eligible to continue living and working there for the next 18 months . 
There are an estimated 30,000 Haitians living illegally in the US . 
TPS is granted to foreigners who may not be able to return safely to their country because of a natural disaster , armed conflict or other reasons . 
2228 UK International Development Secretary Douglas Alexander tells the BBC those involved in the aid operation are working against the clock . 
`` We are acutely aware that at this stage in the crisis every hour matters - that 's why we have our British firefighters on the ground already , trying to save lives . 
We 'll be working round the clock to make sure not just that we save lives , but we tend to the needs of those who have been left devastated by this terrible earthquake . '' 
2224 US pop star Madonna announces she will donate $ 250,000 to to assist Haiti 's earthquake victims through the charity , Partners in Health . 
`` My prayers are with the people of Haiti . 
I ca n't imagine the terrible pain and suffering they are experiencing , '' she says . 
2219 The BBC 's Matthew Price in Port-au-Prince says : `` I have been standing outside a nursing college in the capital for several hours . 
One desperate woman , who is part of the management team , has told me that inside the remains of the college , which used to be five storeys high , there are 260 dead bodies and 25 people still alive , even after three days . 
She says the principal has received a text message from inside to that effect . 
A Brazilian rescue team has been trying to get access to them , but progress has been very slow . 
The several hundred locals gathered nearby are getting increasing alarmed . '' 
2208The BBC 's Nick Davis in Port-au-Prince says : `` On one of the main roads from the airport into the city , you would expect to see convoys of trucks carrying aid . 
But there are n't any . 
A logjam at the airport caused by the logistical nightmare of the earthquake , and the poor infrastructure that existed before Tuesday , makes getting the help where it is needed almost impossible . 
At one cemetery nearby , bodies have been turning up all day . 
The hope is the urgent supplies will arrive before more die . '' 
2202 The commander of the USS Carl Vinson , Adm Ted Branch , tells the BBC that more food supplies are expected in Haiti on Saturday as they arrive from the US military base at Guantanamo Bay . 
A shorter flying time has been made possible by an agreement with Cuba allowing US relief flights to use Cuban air space . 
`` When the supplies do start to rolling in , we 'll have our procedures in order , and we 'll be able to more efficiently deliver the relief , '' he says . 
2156 Apparent delays in aid reaching survivors have prompted anger across Haiti , and there have been reports of looting . 
But Ian Rodgers of Save the Children says its teams in Port-au-Prince have not seen any evidence of crime . 
`` As we move through areas , people are desperately expressing what their needs are , and calling for assistance . 
But the population is still at this point being very , very supportive , '' he tells the BBC . 
People ran from police when they tried to stop supplies being taken from shops 2149 Mrs Clinton says they will remain at Port-au-Prince 's airport during the visit and will not be using any valuable resources needed for the relief effort . 
She said she had been asked to come by Haiti . 
2142 US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton says at a news conference that she will go to Haiti on Saturday with USAID administrator Rajiv Shah . 
`` We will be meeting President -LRB- Rene -RRB- Preval and other members of the Haitian government along with the members of the US government team on the ground , '' she says . 
2130 UN humanitarian chief John Holmes launches a flash appeal for $ 562m , saying the aid is needed for three million people affected by the earthquake for a period of six months . 
2056 Reuters news agency quotes secretary of state for public safety Aramick Louis as saying the authorities have buried 40,000 bodies and believe another 100,000 probably died . 
2045 Haiti 's Prime Minister , Jean-Max Bellerive , says more than 15,000 bodies have been collected by the authorities since Tuesday , according to the AFP news agency . 
Earlier it reported that Haitian Public Health Minister Alex Larsen had told a news conference that 50,000 people had been killed and 250,000 injured 2032 Gen Douglas Fraser , the commander of US SOUTHCOM , says around 90 aid flights a day are landing at Port-au-Prince 's airport . 
At present , there are 4,200 US military personnel in Haiti , or are involved in the relief effort , and thousands more will arrive next week , he says . 
In the meantime , the US is looking at the possibility of establishing a support base in the Dominican Republic , so supplies can be brought in by land , he adds . 
`` If the citizens of Haiti will just remain in place and remain calm , help is on the way , '' Gen Fraser pledges . 
2012 Thomas Ewald , the leader of a special US rescue unit that arrived in Haiti on Thursday , tells the Miami Herald that it is likely most of the victims will be buried in mass graves . 
Following lessons learned from the 2004 Asian tsunami , recovery teams will only be able to take snapshots of the dead before the bodies decay and snip pieces of clothing to show relatives . 
DNA sampling and medical records can not be used in Haiti , where many people are destitute and have never received adequate medical care . 
1948 The authorities in Haiti have counted 9,000 to 10,000 dead since Tuesday 's earthquake , French Secretary of State for Co-operation Alain Joyandet tells the AFP news agency . 
The minister also says eight French citizens have been identified among the victims . 
1925 Mobile phone users in the US have now contributed more than $ 10m to Haitian earthquake relief through text messages , which the Mobile Giving Foundation says is a record for a single cause . 
Its chief executive , Jim Manis , told the Reuters news agency it was receiving up to 10,000 messages a second , many donating as much as $ 10 . 
1912 Haiti 's permanent representative to the UN , Leo Merores , tells the BBC that the government is able to function . 
`` Of course , as you have seen on TV , the national palace and , as well as a number of technical ministries have been completely destroyed or severely damaged , but that does n't mean that the government is not functioning , '' he says . 
`` We can understand that the population is getting a little bit impatient but I would like to assure you that the government is doing its best to come to their assistance . '' 
1901 The BBC 's Matt Frei in Port-au-Prince says : The evidence so far suggests that Port-au-Prince is a city left to its very own meager resources . 
The patients of the general hospital have spilled into the open spaces around it . 
Dozens of people are slowly dying while their relatives try to keep them alive with water or aspirin , or anything else they can get their hands on . 
Shade is their only luxury here . 
During our one hour visit , we saw not a single doctor or nurse . 
And all the time you can hear the US military helicopters overhead and aid planes landing . 
The airport is slowly filling up , the city needs all the help it can get and time could not be more scarce . 
1858 Around a dozen US television networks will team up for an all-star telethon for Haitian earthquake relief next Friday . 
1851 Dominican Republic President Leonel Fernandez met his Haitian counterpart , Rene Preval , in Port-au-Prince on Friday and pledged to help the rescue effort and re-establish communications , electricity and water supplies , the Dominican Today newspaper reports . 
1838 The BBC 's Matthew Price in Port-au-Prince says : `` On Liberty Street , not far from the epicentre , I found people digging with their bare hands , but not for the dead . 
` We 're looking for drinks and food - we do n't have any , ' one man told me . 
In places , some help is beginning to appear . 
But elsewhere the desperation is beginning to show . 
Some fought as they searched for food at one supermarket . 
On the ground , people are just not seeing any of the aid . 
People are having to help themselves , getting any belongings they can out of their houses . 
This is a resourceful country , used to dealing with disaster , but it can not cope alone . '' 
Survivors dig with their bare hands , looking for food and water 1828 US Agency for International Development -LRB- USAID -RRB- administrator Rajiv Shah says there is still an important `` rescue element '' to the relief operation in Haiti . 
`` Our belief is now that there is a significant urban search and rescue effort underway and it is still attempting to save lives . 
There is still an important open window of time today , tonight and perhaps even parts of tomorrow when we have ability to save lives ; Haitian lives , American lives and the lives of partner governments and people that are there on the ground , '' he says . 
1815 Mr Obama says he will meet former US presidents Bill Clinton and George W Bush at the White House on Saturday `` to discuss how to enlist and help the American people in this recovery effort '' . 
1813 US President Barack Obama says the scale of the devastation in Haiti is extraordinary , and it will take time to establish distribution points so food and water can be delivered safely and effectively . 
`` I want the people of Haiti to know that we will do what it takes to save lives and to help them get back on their feet , '' he adds . 
1809 The BBC 's George Alagiah in Port-au-Prince says : `` I 've been out on the streets this morning and I sense a change in mood . 
The resignation and fear that was there in the immediate hours after the tragedy is now changing into frustration and even anger . 
The aid is beginning to get through , but it is not yet reaching those who need it most . 
So many of the injured remain untreated , and many of the dead remain unburied . '' 
1758 European Union development ministers will hold talks in Brussels on Monday to discuss the bloc 's response to the earthquake . 
`` While we are making sure that Haiti receives the immediate and urgent support it needs , we also have to get ready for the very important next step in helping Haiti to rebuild the country , '' says the EU 's foreign affairs chief , Lady Ashton , in a statement . 
1746 UN humanitarian chief John Holmes says it will launch a flash appeal for around $ 560m to help victims at 2100 GMT . 
`` Almost half of that , as is usual in these situations , will be for food , emergency food aid . 
And there will be amounts of between $ 20m and $ 50m for health , water and sanitation , nutrition , emergency shelter , early recovery and agriculture . 
Some 3 million people are believed to have been badly affected by the earthquake , and we will be looking for relief to keep them going for six months , '' he tells reporters . 
1743 The US military has begun distributing aid in Haiti , the Associated Press reports . 
A rapid response unit from the U.S. Army 's 82nd Airborne Division is handing out food , water and medical supplies to Haitians outside the airport in Port-au-Prince . 
Capt Mike Anderson says : `` We 're here to do as much good and as little evil as we can . '' 
1738 The BBC World Service is broadcasting special programs in Haiti over the weekend in French , Spanish and English . 
They can be heard on 11860 kHz -LRB- 25 MB -RRB- and 9410 kHz -LRB- 31 MB -RRB- . 
Twitter users can also follow bbccaribbean . 
1733 Paul Bertoni in Petionville e-mails : `` At around 10pm last night , a neighbor of a relative we went looking for asked us if we could help him get his 13-year-old son from under the rubble . 
He pointed to a spot under the rubble and asked me if I could see the boy 's hand . 
There were three little fingers in the middle of the concrete and the metal . 
I said I could n't help . '' 
1717 The UN 's Chief Humanitarian Aid Co-ordinator , John Holmes , says $ 360m -LRB- # 221m -RRB- has been pledged to help Haiti and that aid agencies are working hard to distribute supplies . 
`` People are passing many sleepless nights trying to get this aid there , '' he says . 
1707 The BBC 's Matt Frei in Port-au-Prince says : `` The streets are absolutely packed with people . 
Every available space in the shade - and it is about 40C -LRB- 105F -RRB- in the sun - has got people living in it . 
Everyone else is basically on foot or on some form of transport trying to get out of town . '' 
1705 Interpol announces it is to send a team of victim-identification experts to Haiti on Monday to help the national authorities . 
1703 Barbara Gloudon writes in the Jamaica Observer : `` The first question was why ? 
Why must the people of Haiti endure such pain , over and over again ? '' 
1701The BBC 's Nick Davis in Port-au-Prince says : `` The only convoys going through the streets are full of Haitians in the back of pick-up trucks and lorries , carrying what little belongings they have left . 
Many are leaving because the water , food and medicine they so desperately need has not reached them yet . 
Much of it is here , but is stuck at the airport . '' 
1654 The Pan-American Health Organization , the Americas arm of the World Health Organization , estimates the death toll may be as high as between 50,000 and 100,000 . 
`` It 's just a huge guess . 
I just want to be clear that we really do n't know , '' Dr Jon Kim Andrus , deputy director of the PAHO , tells a news conference , according to the Reuters news agency . 
`` We just do n't have the information . '' 
1643 The BBC 's Andy Gallagher at Port-au-Prince airport says : `` It is a very different scene from how it looks a couple of days ago . 
There are people here from nations across the world but overwhelmingly it is the Americans that are here in force . 
The search and rescue operations is well and truly underway . 
But the picture on the ground may be very different . '' 
1635 Mr Ban says as many as 50 % of the buildings in worst-hit areas either damaged or destroyed . 
`` A high proportion of the 3 million people in the capital area are without access to food , water , shelter and electricity . 
We are still in the search-and-rescue phase , and we are trying to save as many lives as possible . 
A major humanitarian effort is now well under way . 
Although this is inevitably slow and more difficult than any of us would wish . 
We are mobilising all resources as fast as we possibly can , '' he adds . 
1630 UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon describes the search-and-rescue operation in Haiti as a `` monumental '' task . 
As for sheltering the homeless survivors , he says the UN needs `` tents and more tents '' . 
1628 Canada 's Foreign Minister , Lawrence Cannon , says some 1,415 Canadians are missing in Haiti . 
Four are confirmed to have died . 
About 6,000 Canadian citizens live in Haiti , but Mr Cannon said earlier this week that only 700 were registered with the embassy in Port-au-Prince . 
The Globe and Mail has information on some of the victims . 
1624 Roger Hilaire has posted pictures of the destruction in Pitchon Ville and Delmas on his Flickr account . 
1616 UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon says it will launch a flash appeal for $ 550m -LRB- # 338m -RRB- later on Friday . 
He says logistics are `` extremely difficult '' in Haiti , but that the international community 's response to the crisis has been `` generous and robust '' . 
`` We are gearing up rapidly and effectively , despite the challenging circumstances , '' he adds . 
Mr Ban plans to visit Haiti `` very soon '' 1612 President Preval asked Mr Obama to pass on a message to the American people : `` From the bottom of my heart and on behalf of the Haitian people , thank you , thank you , thank you , '' he said , according to the White House . 
1611 US President Barack Obama has offered his Haitian counterpart , Rene Preval , his `` full support '' during a telephone conversation . 
1610 US Defense Secretary Robert Gates says the primary goal is to distribute aid as quickly as possible `` so that people do n't , in their desperation , turn to violence '' . 
He says military planners have been reluctant to drop food and water packages from the air because it could lead to rioting . 
At present , security is `` pretty good '' , he adds . 
1606 Dozens of US citizens are gathered at Port-au-Prince 's airport , waving their passports in the hope of being evacuated , according to the Associated Press . 
`` I do n't know how much longer we can stand , '' says Beatrice Aristide , waiting with her 19-month-old baby . 
US citizens had to hold up their passports to gain entry to Port-au-Prince 's airport 1604 Adm Mike Mullen , the chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff , says the US will have up to 10,000 troops in Haiti by Monday . 
1602 Rear Adm Victor Guillery , the man overseeing the US Navy 's operations in Haiti , tells the BBC that the aircraft carrier , USS Carl Vinson , will effectively act as a `` sea base '' outside Port-au-Prince . 
`` Essentially , it allows for the staging of helicopters , supplies and to be responsive to the needs ashore . 
So , while there is a tremendous amount of effort to complete a port survey and to open a port to allow a greater amount of supplies to come across the pier to the effort , initially much of the work will be done by air , '' he says . 
1553 Medecins Sans Frontieres says thousands of people are waiting in Haiti for surgical treatment . 
Speaking from Brussels , MSF Operations Director Jerome Oberreit tells the BBC the charity has had to construct makeshift hospital outside the structures that we were using before the earthquake . 
`` This means that the way they can operate is extremely difficult . 
They do n't have the infrastructure that they would have had ? 
The priority is to be able to set up surgical facilities that can answer to the acute needs of this population , '' he says . 
Extra medical workers have had to come in overland , because Port-au-Prince 's airport is only accepting cargo planes , he adds . 
1541 The BBC 's Nick Davis , Port-au-Prince says : `` People have been hearing on their portable radios that the international community has pledged a great deal of aid and they can see the planes landing , but they can not get to it . 
They can not get to the water , which is so vital as the days get hotter . 
Some people have gone three days without food or water . '' 
1537 Andre Berto , a Haitian-American professional boxer who represented Haiti at the 2004 Olympic Games , tells the BBC World Service he is still waiting to hear news about some of his family . 
`` It has been tough . 
Everyone 's in a frenzy trying to find their family . 
I have a charitable foundation in Port-au-Prince and we disperse supplies and food , but the building has been crushed . 
I have the biggest fight of my life coming up , but Haiti is my life . 
We will continue trying to bring awareness to Haiti and let it be known that we are fighting to get this country where it needs to be , '' he says . 
1534 The BBC 's Imogen Foulkes in Geneva says : `` Tonnes of aid may by heading towards Haiti but little seems to have reached those in need so far . 
Aid co-ordinators here say there are now enough large items such as field hospitals and search and rescue teams , but there remains an urgent need for food , clean water , doctors , nurses , medical supplies and body bags . '' 
1531 Only a handful of stories have emerged so far of people being pulled alive from the rubble of buildings . 
Rescue workers say that the first 48 hours are crucial for such rescue efforts . 
The BBC has published an info-graphic showing how they go about their vital work . 
1528 UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown says there has been an `` extraordinary '' response to the disaster from the British public . 
`` We are determined to make sure that the generosity of the British people is matched by the delivery of aid to the people of Haiti , '' he says . 
1525 A spokeswoman for the UN World Food Programme , Emilia Casella , rejects criticism from those watching the suffering in Haiti that the aid operation is too slow . 
`` Pictures can get out instantly , and so everybody can see and hear the pictures , and that 's important because the world needs to know . 
But getting physically tonnes and tonnes of equipment , and food , and water is not as instant as Twitter or Skype or 24-hour television news , '' she says . 
A security guard warns people queueing for fuel in Port-au-Prince 1521 Former Cuban president Fidel Castro says Haiti 's extreme poverty is `` an embarrassment for our times , in a world in which most people still are victims of exploitation and abuse '' , according to the AFP news agency . 
In an editorial published by official media , he says it is `` time for real and true solutions for this brother nation '' . 
1517 The Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff , Adm Mike Mullen , says the United States is sending extra troops and marines , a hospital ship , and more helicopters to Haiti in the coming days . 
1514 BBC science and technology reporter Jason Palmer has been looking at how technology and social networking sites have helped news about the earthquake spread around the world , despite the collapse of many communication systems . 
1509 UN spokesman Mark Cutts tells the BBC `` no-one should underestimate the difficulties of operating in a country like Haiti '' . 
`` Even at the best of times , it 's a difficult place to operate . 
It 's going to be difficult , but we do have a lot of teams which have been mobilised - many of them are in the air , others are already on the ground and we are seeing this operation gear up very quickly . '' 
Solbrook tweets : `` I wish the media would stop calling it looting . 
It 's people desperate for food and water not hifis and TVs . '' 
1503 US Defense Secretary Robert Gates tells a news conference in Washington that the relief effort in Haiti is the `` highest priority for US military assets in this hemisphere '' . 
1500 Brazilian General Jose Elito Siqueira Carvalho , a former head of UN peacekeepers in Haiti , tells the BBC World Service that co-ordination is vital due to the country 's lack of infrastructure . 
`` If you put materials there without order , this can cause more problems . 
All 7,000 soldiers are working hard to support the people and it 's tough work . 
They have to have the motivation to start again . 
That 's the history of Haiti . 
And they are ready to re-start , '' he says . 
1454 Troy Livesay has posted pictures of rubble and make-shift hospitals in Port-au-Prince today on his Flickr account . 
Barbara Jones from Milton Keynes , UK emails : One of my family in the US has spoken to a member of my family in Haiti . 
She got through by chance on the phone , we had all been trying . 
My aunt and my cousins are OK - they are living in the street in Port-au-Prince so they wo n't get hurt by falling buildings . 
We still do n't know about my mother . 
1443 Former US president Bill Clinton , the UN Special Envoy for Haiti , urges Americans to make donations to help provide basic supplies for Haitians affected by the earthquake . 
`` You 've got unprecedented numbers of the people roaming the streets at night with no place to sleep . 
They have n't had any sleep in two days , they do n't have water , they do n't have food , '' he tells CNN . 
1437 Lt Cmdr Ron Flanders , a spokesman for the US 4th Fleet in Florida , tells the BBC that the USS Carl Vinson has arrived off Haiti and begun ferrying emergency aid ashore . 
`` We have sent two helicopters ashore into Port-au-Prince that were loaded with pallets of food and medical supplies . 
Those helicopters also contained the maritime commanders , '' he says . 
A young French citizen evacuated from Haiti arrives at an airport in Paris 1426 US journalist Andres Oppenheimer , writing in the Miami Herald , says a monitoring commission should formed right away to prevent aid `` being squandered in a country with a history of massive corruption '' . 
`` In a country where the state is so weak that it ca n't run virtually any public services and corruption is rampant , many fear that once the story fades from the headlines , the flow of international aid will diminish , and that much of what gets to Haiti will be stolen , '' he writes . 
A report last year by FRIDE , a Spain-based think tank , stated that `` foreign co-operation has contributed over $ 2.6 bn to Haiti since 1984 , with little to show for it '' , he adds . 
1413 Raymond Joseph , Haiti 's ambassador to the United States , tells the BBC World Service that he is still hearing reports about strong aftershocks in his country . 
`` I am from the south-west peninsular , from the city of Aux Cayes . 
The aftershock was so strong in Aux Cayes that the only hospital in the city collapsed , '' he says . 
Charles Gomila , London , UK emails : I ca n't believe the most powerful nation in the world can not get aid to the people in Haiti quickly enough . 
No excuses , just do it ! 
1404 Jan Egeland , the former UN emergency relief co-ordinator , tells the BBC he believes that the situation will improve in the next 24 hours when the US military arrives . 
`` The biggest logistical capacity on Earth is in the hands of the US military . 
The military will come , and I think today and tomorrow you will see great logistical change - chains being established by them . 
And what is good to hear is that the US government and its military will work very closely with the UN , which is also working very closely with the Red Cross . '' 
On the ground in Haiti with survivors as they desperately plead for help 1400 Ansel Herz , an American journalist in Port-au-Prince , tells the BBC there are children outside the UN compound who have not eaten in `` one , two or three days '' . 
`` I just talked to a young boy whose parents died as their house collapsed . 
He 's out there searching , waiting for some kind of food and if anybody could give it to him . 
He has no money , no resources to get any aid of any kind , and that 's just the case for so many children and families that are basically stranded out in Port-au-Prince . 
There 's not a massive visible relief effort that I can see on the streets , '' he says . 
1352 Jimmy Felter , a film-maker based in the US and founder of the charity , Voice of Haiti , tells the BBC World Service that Haiti 's already poor infrastructure will hamper the rescue effort . 
`` Haiti was hanging on by a string before this - there was starvation before this , '' he says . 
`` There is no infrastructure there , so if you start trying to have an operation where everything starts pouring in it can cause much trouble and confusion . 
It 's been too little , for too late , for too long . 
But the spirit of the Haitian people can not be underestimated . 
I 'm not giving an optimistic outlook but I would never give up hope . '' 
1350 The UN World Food Programme earlier said its warehouses in Port-au-Prince had been looted , but this has now been denied . 
`` We do still have that 6,000 tonnes of food , '' WFP spokeswoman Caroline Hurford tells the BBC . 
`` Apparently there were unconfirmed reports of looting taking place , but once our teams got down to the dockside they were able to see that there was some mistake . '' 
1341 Penny Lawrence of the charity , Oxfam , tells the BBC that the breakdown in communications in Haiti is causing many problems on the ground . 
`` All of our systems rely on mobile phones , telephones , sat-phones , email , and the internet . 
And we are struggling very , very much without those . 
We understand people are getting impatient , but I do think there are extraordinary levels of devastation , '' she says . 
1335 The BBC 's Nick Davis in Port-au-Prince says : `` People are doing what they can to survive . 
Every morning the first jobs of the day involve getting the very basics . 
Loaded with old plastic bottles or anything else that can hold water , they fill up where they can . 
Some from broken pipes from collapsed buildings , that still have a supply . '' 
1327 Olafor Rotsson , a spokesman for the Icelandic Volunteer rescue organization , tells the BBC power shortages and security concerns are slowing the search down at night . 
`` When people get tired , hungry , and thirsty - and maybe lose hope - it gets more difficult . 
Up to now all the locals have welcomed us and we have n't had any problems at all , but the UN says ` security stage three ' , which means you are not allowed to work in the night . '' 
1325 Susan Westwood , at an orphanage in Haiti , blogs : `` We need powdered formula , nappies , baby wipes , baby cereal , infant Tylenol -LRB- paracetamol suspension -RRB- , infant and children 's vitamins , and baby care items such as lotion , powder , baby shampoo . 
We also hope to be able to assist the surrounding community with clothing , medical supplies , household items , hygiene items such as soap , toothbrushes , toothpaste , blankets and towels . '' 
1323 The Disasters Emergency Committee -LRB- DEC -RRB- in the UK says it has raised # 2m -LRB- $ 3.3 m -RRB- in the first 36 hours since launching its appeal for Haiti - Queen Elizabeth II is among those to have made a donation . 
1313 The New York Times has compiled an informative topographic map of Haiti highlighting the areas affected by the quake . 
1304 Daniel Sergile from Amsterdam e-mails : `` My cousin , Joel , was at work when his building collapsed . 
Initially he was reported to be safe , but it now appears that he is trapped under rubble . 
Two other cousins have been found safe . 
Phone lines are still down but we are able to communicate via satellite internet . '' 
1257 Oxfam says ensuring access to clean water for survivors is `` probably the most immediate problem to resolve now '' . 
1249 Haiti 's sea , land and air entry points have all suffered damage in the quake - as well as government and aid agency buildings - which is hampering efforts to distribute aid . 
Singing in Haiti 's temporary camps 1231 A US Catholic charity is considering organising a mass airlift of orphaned children from Haiti , the Miami Herald reports . 
1227 Anne Wilkinson , in Ilkley , UK e-mails : `` I worked in Haiti for five years from 2001-2006 . 
The latest news I have is that St Joseph 's in Petionville has been destroyed but all have been evacuated . 
Two boys are seriously injured but have not been able to get medical attention . '' 
1224 CNN has posted a video of a woman rescued uninjured from rubble after being trapped for 50 hours . 
1219 The BBC 's Andy Gallagher in Port-au-Prince says the dead are being buried in mass graves . 
`` There 's no time now to identify the bodies . 
That 's something Haitians are going to have to deal with for years and years to come . '' 
1217 The US says it has been granted rare permission to use Cuban airspace to fly aid to Haiti - AFP report . 
1215 Emerson Tan , Dominican Republic , texts : `` Got turned away twice from PAP -LRB- Port-au-Prince -RRB- yesterday so we 're still in Dominican Republic . 
Sounds really chaotic on the ground with conflicting stories about landing clearances . 
Hopefully third time lucky . 
We really need to get in there to be more effective . '' 
1212 The BBC 's George Alagiah in Port-au-Prince says : `` It would n't be the first crisis in which people resorted to what we call looting , but they are just trying find some food and water . '' 
1209 Troylivesay tweets : `` Treating water right now then out to pick up people from the embassy and start planning a clinic in our area . '' 
1202 The BBC 's Andy Gallagher in Port-au-Prince says : `` People here want to talk to us and tell the world about the situation . 
The security situation on the ground seems fairly good , people are in as good spirits as they possibly can be . 
But it is now a critical situation as the hours go by , and those voices reported from inside the rubble have fallen silent . '' 
1201 World Food Programme spokeswoman Emilia Casella says looting is `` not unusual '' in disaster situations and that aid distribution takes time . 
`` Getting physically tonnes and tonnes of equipments , of food and water is not as instant as Twitter or Skype or 24-hour satellite news , '' AFP quotes her as saying . 
1150 Anjali Kwatra of UK-based charity Action Aid , tells the BBC World Service : `` In the first 48 hours after a disaster , it is n't international aid that makes a difference - that usually comes in after two or three days . 
It 's the local people who go in , who rescue people , who provide what food , water and shelter that they can . 
What we 're seeing in Haiti is that there is n't the ability to do that , because so many people have been affected . '' 
1146 A spokesman for UN peacekeepers in Haiti says people are `` slowly getting more angry and impatient '' with the lack of aid . 
`` We 're all aware that the situation is getting more tense as the poorest people who need so much are waiting for deliveries . 
I think tempers might be frayed , '' David Wimhurst tells the Associated Press . 
1141 The UN says 36 members of its staff in Haiti are confirmed to have died , while nearly 200 are still missing . 
1136 Prospery Raymond , a Christian Aid staff member in Haiti tweets : `` This morning I went to a pharmacy and asked for help and they gave me all their antibiotics , which I took to the hospital . '' 
1126 US actor George Clooney is to run a telethon on MTV to raise money for victims of the Haiti quake . 
1122 France has asked members of the Paris Club to write off Haiti 's international debts , French Economy Minister Christine Lagarde says . 
1119 Firesideint tweets : `` I am starting to run - literally , run - every time an aftershock hits . 
Seen far too many bodies . 
Do n't wanna add to that number . '' 
1114 Mark Thomas , who works at an orphanage in Jacmel about 32km -LRB- 20 miles -RRB- south of Port-au-Prince , tells the BBC : `` We 've had thousands of people killed in the city and we 've had no help , there has been absolutely no aid in the city at all . 
We 're so happy people have come to the rescue of Port-au-Prince but we have to get the message out that there are other cities . '' 
1111 Former Haitian President Jean-Bertrand Aristide , in South Africa , says he is `` ready to leave today , tomorrow , at any time , to join the people of Haiti , to share in their suffering , help rebuild the country . '' 
1108 Singer Wyclef Jean in Haiti tweets : `` Haiti needs emergency supplies right away !!! Water , Dry Goods , Blankets , and Clothing !! Pls contact state officials right now 4 drop off pts . '' 
The BBC 's Mark Doyle at the airport in Port-au-Prince says : `` If some planes are now arriving , it 's far from clear how effective the distribution of the aid may be . 
There are problems of coordination with the Haitian Government , which is dysfunctional at the best of times , and some roads are reported to be blocked by buildings toppled in the quake . '' 
1100 Steve Matthews from World Vision tells the BBC World Service : `` I met a woman today clutching a picture of her husband . 
She was crying in the streets . 
There are people being carted through the streets on doors - or whatever they can use as stretchers . 
Everywhere you go there 's something crazy that you can hardly believe you are looking at . '' 
1054 BellaBaita tweets : `` My brother pulled from rubble of Hotel Montana 55 hrs after quake - still hope for others . '' 
1034 American Red Cross spokeswoman Gloria Huang tells the BBC social networking sites have helped them raise $ 35m -LRB- # 21.5 m -RRB- in the US , with $ 5m raised through a text message campaign alone . 
`` The immediacy is a very strong point . 
This mobile texting campaign is really the centrepiece of the whole thing - it 's the first time we 've ever done anything like this , '' she says . 
1031 The World Food Programme -LRB- WFP -RRB- says its warehouses in Port-au-Prince have been looted - AP reports . 
1016 The International Organization for Migration -LRB- IOM -RRB- tells the BBC it needs around $ 30m -LRB- # 18.4 m -RRB- for its emergency shelter and non-food distribution in Haiti . 
IOM 's Chief of Mission in Haiti , Vincent Houver , says access to fuel and electricity are growing concerns . 
1012 Dixie Bickel , who runs an orphanage in Port-au-Prince , tells the BBC World Service : `` People are leaving Port-au-Prince in masses . 
They 've picked up what they can find , they 've put it on their head and out they go . 
We 're seeing people on the road , carrying their dead with them . 
They 're going out in the countryside to bury them . '' 
1005 UN spokeswoman Elisabeth Byrs says 10 % of homes in Port-au-Prince have been destroyed , leaving some 300,000 people homeless . 
0957 Building experts tell the BBC sub-standard housing and a lack of building regulations have contributed to the level of devastation in Haiti . 
0934 Emerson Tan , an aid worker in Dominican Republic , e-mails : `` Unable to land at Port-au-Prince due to overcrowding . 
Circled for 15 minutes before fuel forced us to head back to Dominican Republic . 
All air ops suspended until they can turn stuff on the ground around . 
We 're putting pressure on the US who are running stuff on the ground . 
Dog teams -LRB- who need to be in first -RRB- are very annoyed . '' 
0928 Troy Livesay tweets : `` I 've seen the UN and many other aid orgs stuck in traffic today - fewer visible Haitian police on the streets where I 've been than usual . '' 
0924 The BBC 's Richard Lister in Washington says : `` The US military mobilisation is now well under way . 
The air force has taken over air traffic control at the airport in Port-au-Prince , operating it around the clock . 
The USS Carl Vinson will be the launch pad for additional aid flights with its fleet of 19 helicopters . 
A US hospital ship , the Comfort , will arrive next week with 250 beds and 12 operating theaters . '' 
0917 Harry Brown in Macau e-mails : `` Just getting word - via my sister in Montreal - that 11 family members in Carrefour aged between 18 months and 60 years have survived . 
To what extent , we do n't know yet . 
The relief is mixed with guilt . 
I am relieved to have received positive news yet there are thousands upon thousands of families hit by this tragedy . '' 
0908 International aid charities are appealing for help for the victims . 
Here are some of the ways you can help . 
The Disasters Emergency Committee is co-ordinating donations in the UK . 
0907The BBC 's Andy Gallagher in Port-au-Prince says : `` The aid is now trickling into the airport and some search and rescue teams are on the ground , bringing much needed help and expertise . 
But as the hours tick by , the bodies are piling up and the stench is now filling the air across the city . 
Many here have shown patience so far , but now the mood is changing . '' 
