Children in Haiti face are incredibly vulnerable to injury , illness and trauma Some of the most harrowing stories coming out of the devastation in Haiti are those of children , alone , scared and severely injured . 
Under-18s make up almost half of Haiti 's 10-million population and aid agencies are warning they are at great risk from ongoing physical and psychological trauma . 
Already the country faces the highest rates of infant and child mortality in the Western hemisphere with diarrhoea , respiratory infections , tuberculosis among the leading causes of death . 
Many will have been orphaned or are badly injured themselves and in urgent need of medical help Gareth Owen , Save the Children It is also estimated there are 19,000 children with HIV\/Aids with few drugs available to treat them . 
Unicef , which suffered heavy damage to its own offices in Port-au-Prince , says children are `` tremendously vulnerable '' . 
Gareth Owen , Save the Children 's director of emergencies , said petrified children were sleeping amongst dead bodies and were in grave danger . 
He estimates up to two million children could be affected by the disaster . 
`` Many will have been orphaned or are badly injured themselves and in urgent need of medical help . '' 
`` Thousands more will have lost all contact with their families and friends and are now struggling to survive alone in the rubble . 
`` They are sleeping on their own , trying to cope with the trauma of seeing dead bodies , and will have no idea where to go for help . 
Bev Collin , a paediatric nurse with Mdecins Sans Frontires -LRB- MSF -RRB- , provided care in Indonesia after the tsunami . 
She says childhood diseases already prevalent in the country will be greatly exacerbated by the devastation left by the earthquake . 
`` There will be a lot of dust around so the air quality will be poor which can aggravate things which are already high risk in children , such as pneumonia . 
`` The other things that are high risk are hepatitis A and E , typhoid fever and diarrhoeal diseases , which are made worse by lack of water . 
These are kids who are already sick and you want to be able to continue their care Bev Collin , Mdecins Sans Frontires `` And food or water borne diseases will be a major problem because there is probably no drainage and sewage system . '' 
The initial days after the earthquake will all be about survival , digging people out of the rubble and dealing with crush injuries but there are also ongoing dangers of injury from collapsing and broken buildings , she says . 
`` But in three or four weeks the wet season will be starting and that is really going to cause problems because then you are looking at malaria . 
`` Also Japanese encephalitis is endemic and is a particular problem for children . '' 
She says aid agencies will be trying to co-ordinate who is responsible for what and getting children to a place of safety is paramount . 
Those who have lost parents will usually be cared for by older siblings , other family members and the wider community , she says . 
But it is absolutely vital that they can access medical facilities in the coming months . 
`` The thing is these are kids who are already sick and you want to be able to continue their care . '' 
Physical wounds are of course not the only issue , there will also be psychological scars . 
Professor Richard Williams , lead officer for disaster management at the Royal College of Psychiatrists , said most people , children and adults , will experience fear , anxiety , guilt , disorientation , hopelessness and other related feelings within the first few days of a disaster . 
But that is usually temporary and 80 % will not have lasting mental health problems . 
For a small group there is a longer term risk of depression and anxiety as well as post-traumatic stress disorder . 
`` Children are particularly vulnerable because they depend on adults to care for them . 
`` If they have lost contact with familiar adults there will be the additional burden of grief and bereavement . 
`` It is right to focus on children but the good news is they are just as resilient as adults . '' 
He says the psychological `` first aid '' that is needed is practical help and that includes food , water and shelter . 
`` After that it is about re-establishing normality and relationships and routine - reconnecting children with their families and getting them back to school . 
`` All these things are incredibly protective of mental health . '' 
