The DEC appeal for victims of the earthquake in Haiti Britons have donated more than # 2m to an appeal to help earthquake-stricken Haiti in the space of 36 hours . 
The Disasters Emergency Committee -LRB- DEC -RRB- , which has broadcast appeals on TV and radio , said it was delighted and Gordon Brown called it `` extraordinary '' . 
UK rescue workers are among those trying to find survivors . 
So far 30 Britons have been found safe and well , but one UK woman is still missing . 
A two-year-old girl was rescued from a collapsed building by UK firefighters . 
The child was trapped under piles of rubble in the capital Port-au-Prince and was rescued on the first full day of deployment for the 64-strong team . 
Mike Thomas , chief officer of the fire and rescue team , said finding the girl had been `` a real boost '' . 
Meanwhile , Haitians in the UK are awaiting news of loved ones . 
Tuesday 's 7.0-magnitude earthquake has left as many as 45,000-50 ,000 people dead . 
The aid operation is being hampered by poor infrastructure - the small airport is struggling to deal with the number of flights and the roads and port have been badly damaged . 
The Foreign Office is checking on Britons and will start repatriations from the Caribbean island , but concern is growing for Ann Barnes , a personal assistant to the UN police commissioner in Haiti . 
Ann Barnes , 59 , is originally from Leigh-on-Sea , Essex Ms Barnes 's sister Irene Marquet said the family feared the worst . 
`` There 's been absolutely no trace , which is horrendous , '' she said . 
`` One wants to remain hopeful but it gets more and more difficult as time goes on . '' 
The former British Airways stewardess has worked for the UN for more than 20 years and has been in Haiti for about two years . 
The UK ambassador to the Dominican Republic and other consular staff have gone to neighbouring Haiti . 
A British search and rescue team - made up of 71 people , mostly from the fire services , and including two search dogs - flew to the region on Thursday . 
Forty of them are working alongside Chinese rescuers in the Carrefour district on the edge of the capital , Port-au-Prince . 
The Department for International Development said they had UN protection . 
Another group was searching a ruined church in the city center where a child was thought to be trapped . 
The DEC , an umbrella organization that co-ordinates responses to major disasters overseas , thanked the British public for their contribution to its quake appeal so far . 
David Loyn , BBC correspondent , with a rescue team in Haiti Food , water , medical supplies and shelter are needed on a huge scale for several months to come . 
Rescue teams from a dozen countries are doing what they can in the capital , which was the epicentre of the earthquake . 
A Spanish team that arrived on Thursday morning had pulled out five people by nightfall including a two-year-old boy . 
Although the team did not have any of their heavy equipment , which is still stuck in the gridlock at the airport , they dug with simple tools . 
Annika Coll , the head of the team , said that `` goosepimples went up on my arm '' when the boy answered when she called out . 
He was unharmed after 50 hours without food or water . 
The rescue teams know that there could be many more people like that under the rubble and are frustrated by being unable to get out to work . 
There are also security concerns . 
Some 9,000 UN military and police personnel have been trying to keep order , and all rescue teams have had armed guards . 
But it appealed for more financial aid in a BBC One TV appeal presented by Kirsty Young . 
She said the small Caribbean nation had suffered devastation `` beyond measure '' and added : `` Aid agencies are worried if they do n't deal with problems like sanitation immediately , disease will break out and many more people will die . '' 
Mariella Frostrup also presented an appeal on BBC Radio 4 . 
The Queen donated an undisclosed amount to the DEC and the Prince of Wales gave a private sum to a Red Cross fund . 
DEC chief executive Brendan Gormley said : `` Efforts on the ground have been hampered by a lack of power and communications problems after the devastating quake but aid is starting to get through and DEC members are working hard in the field . 
`` It is vitally important that people continue to donate . '' 
The # 2m figure for online giving was hit at around 0800 GMT on Friday , and donations by other means are not included . 
Money donated to the DEC - which brings together 13 major British-based charities - is being spent on search and rescue , medical care , food , clean water , temporary shelter and clothes . 
The prime minister , who visited DEC staff at their north London headquarters on Friday , reassured the public their money would get through . 
Shelane Chapman , from Downham in Kent , is one of the 1,000-strong Haitian community in the UK . 
She has no idea what has happened to her family . 
She heard rumors that her mother 's house collapsed in the earthquake , killing her six-year-old cousin , but has been unable to verify the news . 
Sanitation equipment on its way to Haiti Mrs Chapman said : `` We 're sick with worry because we ca n't get through at all . 
We keep redialling my mother 's mobile number but it just wo n't work . 
If the house has gone , where could she be ? 
Where could they all be ? '' 
Judith Craig of United Haitians in the UK , says the charity has seen its membership jump since the earthquake hit . 
She attributes the increase to people wanting to find out more and seek solidarity with others . 
The Red Cross has set up a website to help people abroad to try to contact their relatives . 
A similar site has been created by two Haitians in the US . 
The Disasters Emergency Committee is co-ordinating an appeal to help the people of Haiti There are 13 charities involved including the British Red Cross , Islamic Relief and World Vision Donate via the DEC website or by telephoning 0370 60 60 900 He said it was mainly water and sanitation equipment . 
`` There was also plastic sheeting , '' he said . 
`` And sadly - we very rarely send this - there were body bags as well . '' 
Muslim Aid , which launched a # 250,000 aid campaign and donated # 75,000 , said its teams were installing purification units to provide clean drinking water and setting up a mobile field hospital . 
It also made provisions for emergency shelter and food aid . 
British Airways said it had a Boeing 747 standing by to fly to Haiti with supplies on Saturday , crewed by volunteer BA pilots and cabin crew . 
Virgin Atlantic said it was flying supplies , along with key medical personnel , aid agency workers and rescue teams to the region . 
The quake , Haiti 's worst in two centuries , has flattened whole areas in the country 's capital . 
