Welsh rescuers help Haiti victims Up to 200,000 people are unaccounted for in Haiti after the earthquake Firefighters from Wales are among international rescuers heading to Haiti after a devastating earthquake there left as many as 45,000-50 ,000 dead . 
Hundreds of buildings collapsed and over three million people have been displaced in the quake which measured 7.0 on the Richter Scale . 
Aid has been sent from around the world , although infrastructure damage has been holding up aid efforts . 
Members of the Mid and West Wales Fire Service will help to search for people . 
Their immediate responsibilities will be to scour the debris for those trapped underneath , though , as the window of opportunity for survival closes , their attention will soon turn towards helping to make safe damaged buildings and erecting temporary structures to provide badly-needed shelter . 
Douglas Alexander , International Development Secretary , said : `` The people of Wales can be proud of the efforts of the search and rescue professionals from Mid and West Wales Fire and Rescue Service . 
`` They are helping the people of Haiti at a time of dire need and their skills and experience are vital to the ongoing search for survivors in the rubble in Port-au-Prince . 
`` I would like to thank them on behalf of the British government for their commitment and bravery as part of this international mission . '' 
I have heard nothing from my friends in Haiti since the earthquake Unfortunately the familiar sight around disaster zones of Anglesey 's International Dog Rescue service have n't been able to join the mission . 
The veterans of the 1999 Turkey earthquake and the 2004 boxing day tsunami in south east Asia have been thwarted , not by the conditions on the ground , but by the adverse weather back here in Britain . 
`` The irony is bitter to say the very least , '' said Russell Vaughan of International Dog Rescue . 
`` With all the disruption in Port-au-Prince , it 's the British weather which has hamstrung us . 
`` As soon as news came through on Tuesday night , we were booked on a British Airways flight to Jamaica on Wednesday , in time to meet a Royal Navy ship carrying aid to Haiti . 
Firefighters from around the UK have flown out to the quake zone `` Unfortunately the snow meant that all flights from Gatwick were grounded yesterday , and the next service which could have accommodated all the dogs is n't until this evening . 
`` Sadly that would have meant that we 'd have arrived in Port-au-Prince on Saturday , which realistically is getting towards the end of the viable window for survival in the very hot conditions in Haiti . 
`` By Saturday we 'd have been of limited use , and we 'd have simply been taking up time , space and resources needed by other aid workers , and holding up the transition from a search and rescue mission to a humanitarian and clean-up one . '' 
Gareth Owen from Dolanog near Welshpool , Powys , who is director of emergencies at Save the Children , is heading up the operation to protect the estimated two million children caught up in the disaster . 
As the quake hit during school time on Tuesday , many more children than usual have become separated from their parents and are having to fend for themselves on the ruined streets . 
Over three million were displaced in the quake `` As well as getting basic supplies in , it 's crucial that children struggling on their own are protected from being crushed by more debris and are kept safe from abuse on the streets . 
This is not a safe place for children , '' Mr Owen said . 
`` They are sleeping on their own , trying to cope with the trauma of seeing dead bodies , and will have no idea where to go for help . 
`` Children mimic adults in these sorts of crises . 
They see grown-ups scrabbling through the debris looking for bodies , and will try to follow suit . 
`` Aside from the damage this is doing to their mental health , it 's putting their safety in danger as buildings will be very unstable and may still collapse . '' 
He added that rescuers are still searching for 20 members of the Save the Children team who have n't been seen since the quake on Tuesday . 
Welsh artist Cherry Pickles spent most of last year in Haiti , from where she drew inspiration for her collection currently on display at the Dylan Thomas center in Swansea . 
After hearing about the crisis , she 's decided to offer all proceeds from the exhibition , valued at around # 20,000 , to help the victims . 
`` I have heard nothing from my friends in Haiti since the earthquake , '' she said . 
`` When I confided to my mum that the idea of me talking about Haiti in the current situation makes me feel very uneasy , she suggested that I try to arrange a sale or auction of the work , all of the proceeds of which would go specifically to help Haiti . 
`` That is what I am going to do . 
I would want this money to go to support education in Haiti as that is the area my Haitian friends think will make the most significant long term difference there . '' 
