May 18 : Crews collect sand samples at Fort Zachary Taylor State Park beach in Key West , Fla. , to analyze tar balls found on shore . 
AP KEY WEST , Fla. -- The Coast Guard says the tar balls found off Key West are n't linked to the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
A report released Wednesday says tests show the tar balls do n't match the type of oil from the Deepwater Horizon spill . 
The source of the tar balls is n't known . 
Tar balls can occur naturally or come from other sources such as ships . 
Twenty were found Monday and several others Tuesday . 
Scientists are anxiously awaiting signals about where the massive oil slick may be heading , while containment of the looming environmental catastrophe proves elusive . 
With fears growing that the gushing well could spread damage from Louisiana to Florida , Interior Secretary Ken Salazar told a Senate panel Tuesday that his agency had been lax in overseeing offshore activities and that may have contributed to the disastrous spill . 
`` There will be tremendous lessons to be learned here , '' Salazar said in his first appearance before Congress since the April 20 blowout and explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig that killed 11 people . 
Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen told another committee that the growing size and scattershot nature of the spill were creating `` severe challenges '' in containing it and cleaning it up . 
He called it more complicated than any spill he 's ever seen . 
`` What we 're basically trying to do is protect the whole coast at one time , '' Allen said . 
The House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee was set to address the spill at a hearing Wednesday . 
Government scientists were surveying the Gulf to determine if the oil had entered a powerful current that could take it to Florida and eventually up the East Coast . 
Questions remained about just how much oil is spilling from the well , and senators expressed frustration about a lack of answers during a full day of hearings that included top executives from BP PLC , the oil giant that leased the blown well , and Transocean Ltd. , the rig owner . 
New underwater video released by BP showed oil and gas erupting under pressure in large , dark clouds from its crippled blowout preventer on the ocean floor . 
The leaks resembled a geyser on land . 
Salazar promised an overhaul of federal regulations and said blame rests with both industry and the government , particularly his agency 's Minerals Management Service . 
