This article incorrectly said that the total public debt held by the American people last September stood at $ 5.8 trillion , excluding debt issued to the Social Security Trust Fund or held by the Federal Reserve . 
In fact , that sum includes debt held by the Federal Reserve . 
We 're Borrowing Like Mad . 
Can the U.S. Pay It Back ? 
In its battle against the financial crisis , the U.S. government has extended its full faith and credit to an ever-growing swath of the private sector : first homeowners , then banks , now car companies . 
Soon , President-elect Barack Obama will put the government credit card to work with a massive fiscal boost for the economy . 
Necessary as these steps are , they raise a worry of their own : Can the United States pay the money back ? 
The notion seems absurd : Banana republics default , not the world 's biggest , richest economy , right ? 
The United States has unparalleled wealth , a stable legal tradition , responsible macroeconomic policies and a top-notch , triple-A credit rating . 
U.S. Treasury bonds are routinely called `` risk-free , '' and the United States has the unique privilege of borrowing in the currency that other countries like to hold as foreign-exchange reserves . 
Yes , default is unlikely . 
But it is no longer unthinkable . 
Thanks to the advent of credit derivatives -- financial contracts that allow investors to speculate on or protect against default -- we can now observe how likely global markets think it is that Uncle Sam will renege on America 's mounting debts . 
Last week , markets pegged the probability of a U.S. default at 6 percent over the next 10 years , compared with just 1 percent a year ago . 
For technical reasons , this is not a precise reading of investors ' views . 
Nonetheless , the trend is real , and it is grounded in some pretty fundamental concerns . 
The most important is the coming surge in the federal debt . 
At the end of the last fiscal year , in September , the total public debt held by the American people -LRB- excluding debt issued to the Social Security Trust Fund or held by the Federal Reserve -RRB- stood at $ 5.8 trillion , or 41 percent of gross domestic product -- about what the debt-to-GDP ratio has averaged since 1956 . 
But the Congressional Budget Office projects deficits of $ 1.9 trillion over the next two years . 
Add almost $ 800 billion of stimulus spending , and U.S. debt soars to 60 percent of GDP by 2010 -- the highest level since the early 1950s , when the nation was working off its World War II and Korean War debts . 
The other major cause for concern is that the federal government has taken on massive `` contingent liabilities '' -- loans and guarantees that do n't become actual costs until the borrower defaults and the federal guarantee has to be honored . 
For example , Washington has purchased $ 45 billion of preferred stock of Citigroup but has also agreed to backstop up to about $ 240 billion of its losses . 
Bianco Research , a Chicago financial research firm , puts the total of such contingent liabilities -LRB- as of Dec. 29 -RRB- at more than $ 8 trillion . 
The U.S. government wo n't shell out anything close to that , of course ; it may not pay out any money and might even turn a profit . 
But the worse the economy gets , the more likely it is that some of those contingent liabilities will become actual liabilities . 
How unprecedented would default be ? 
The United States has never failed to repay a debt in its history . 
But it has twice altered the repayment terms , notes a study by Carmen M. Reinhart of the University of Maryland and Kenneth S. Rogoff of Harvard University . 
In 1790 , when the infant republic took over the states ' colonial-era debts , it deferred some interest for 10 years . 
A more pertinent case occurred during the Great Depression . 
In 1933 , President Franklin D. Roosevelt devalued the dollar by 41 percent against gold . 
This helped end the vicious cycle of bank failures , deflation and default that had worsened the economic downturn , but it created another dilemma . 
Since the Civil War , borrowers in the United States , including the government , had routinely issued bonds that allowed the holder to demand repayment in gold or its dollar equivalent , based on the price of gold when the bond was issued . 
Devaluation would have dramatically raised , in dollar terms , the burden of repayment . 
So in 1933 , Congress repealed the gold clause , a decision the Supreme Court upheld in 1935 . 
Reinhart argues that these episodes show that there are many forms of default other than the outright failure to redeem a bond . 
She thinks it exceedingly unlikely that the United States would ever default on its Treasury debt but says that a default is more likely to happen on the `` periphery '' : A state government or a federally backed entity might renege . 
Reinhart notes that Washington has issued a lot of guarantees recently , such as the Treasury Department 's declaration that it `` effectively '' backs the debts of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
Future governments could balk at honoring those guarantees . 
Now , one reason the United States should not have to default is that , in a pinch , it can print the money it needs to pay off its debt . 
In practice , it would not literally print dollar bills ; rather , the Federal Reserve would purchase its bonds . 
Still , the effect is the same : The Fed , by `` monetizing '' government debt , would create vast new supplies of dollars to chase the same goods and services and thus also create inflation . 
This money-printing option is not available to countries that issue debt payable in foreign currencies or to countries that have adopted the euro , which is controlled by the independent European Central Bank . 
All the same , a country may not always prefer inflation to default . 
Reinhart and Rogoff found numerous instances of countries defaulting on their domestic currency debts , such as Russia , which did so in 1998 . 
`` Why would a government refuse to pay its domestic public debt in full when it can simply inflate the problem away ? '' 
`` Sometimes , the government may view repudiation as the lesser evil . '' 
Default would certainly seem preferable to the social and economic unrest that hyperinflation has visited on Zimbabwe today or on Latin America in the 1980s . 
Of course , it would be ridiculous to put the United States in the same company as Russia , much less Zimbabwe . 
Nonetheless , even if Washington never defaults , it can still suffer if questions about its ability to repay its debts affect its creditworthiness and thus its cost of borrowing . 
Consider Japan , which spent the 1990s running up enormous budget deficits in an effort to kick-start economic growth . 
It failed , and gross government debt rose from 71 percent of GDP in 1990 to 115 percent in 1998 , when Moody 's Investors Service stripped Japan of its triple-A credit rating . 
Moody 's figured that Japan 's probability of default , while still low , had nonetheless risen -- even though that debt was owed almost entirely in yen . 
Japan 's rating continued to slide until 2002 , at which point its gross debt had reached 154 percent of GDP . 
Having its credit rating slashed was a stunning comedown for the world 's second-largest economy and largest creditor nation . 
Nonetheless , Japan 's borrowing costs were n't much affected , in part because almost all its debt was held by Japanese investors , who were not much inclined to sell it . 
The U.S. government might not have the same good fortune : More than half of its publicly held debt is owned by foreigners . 
-LRB- Of course , many of those foreigners are central banks with no attractive alternatives to the dollar . -RRB- 
One key lesson of Japan 's experience : It 's not just the level of debt that affects a country 's creditworthiness but the performance of the underlying economy . 
The size of the economy determines the resources the government can call on to repay its debts . 
