The slick has now grown to about 1,500 sq km There are fears of an environmental disaster in the Gulf of Mexico , as efforts to clear up an oil spill have been suspended because of bad weather . 
A drilling rig leased by the oil company BP exploded and sank off the Louisiana coast last week . 
Some 1,000 barrels of oil a day are leaking into the sea from the damaged well , officials say . 
They say the oil leak has the potential to damage beaches , barrier islands and wetlands across the coastline . 
Eleven workers are still missing and presumed to have been killed in the accident . 
The search for them has been called off . 
More than 100 other workers were rescued . 
The Deepwater Horizon had been burning for 36 hours when it sank on Thursday in 5,000 ft -LRB- 1,500 m -RRB- of water , despite efforts to control the flames . 
It was carrying out exploratory drilling 84km -LRB- 52 miles -RRB- south-east of Venice , Louisiana when the blast occurred . 
Bad weather caused cleanup efforts to be suspended over the weekend , allowing the slick to grow to about 580 sq miles -LRB- 1,500 sq km -RRB- , officials say . 
Oil leaks from a sunken drill pipe 5,000 ft beneath the ocean surface BP has been using a robot submarine to try to activate a blowout preventer - a series of pipes and valves that could stop the leak . 
However , this was a `` highly complex task '' and `` it may not be successful '' , chief operating officer of BP 's exploration and production unit Doug Suttles was quoted as saying by Reuters . 
The company has also brought in more than 30 cleanup vessels and several aircraft to spray dispersant on the floating oil . 
At the moment , the weather conditions are keeping the oil away from the coastline and it is hoped the waves will break up the heavy crude oil , allowing it to harden and sink back to the ocean floor . 
The coastguard earlier said it had thought it was dealing only with a surface residual oil spill from the rig . 
`` In addition to that , is oil emanating from the well . 
It is a big change from yesterday ... This is a very serious spill , absolutely , '' said Rear Adm Mary Landry . 
In 2009 , BP PLC was fined a record $ 87m for failing to improve safety conditions following a massive explosion that killed 15 people at its Texas City refinery . 
But the US Mineral Management Services found no violations on the Deepwater Horizon rig when it carried out routine inspections in February , March and April this year . 
President Barack Obama said on Thursday that the government was providing `` all assistance needed '' for both the rescue and clean up efforts in the troubled area . 
He described the crisis on the BP-leased rig as his administration 's `` number one priority '' . 
No cause for the blast has yet been identified . 
