Robot vessels used to cap Gulf of Mexico oil leak The US Coast Guard has described it as a `` very serious spill '' Robotic submersibles are being used to try to stop oil leaking into the Gulf of Mexico from a damaged well almost a mile -LRB- 1.5 km -RRB- below the surface . 
Some 1,000 barrels -LRB- 42,000 gallons -RRB- of oil a day have been gushing from the well since a drilling rig exploded and sank off the Louisiana coast last week . 
British oil company BP , which leased the rig , said the `` first-of-its-kind '' attempt would take 24 to 36 hours . 
A nearby oil platform has been evacuated as a precaution . 
Workers on the rig , the Ocean Endeavour , were taken away because the oil slick was coming dangerously close , said the US Minerals Management Service . 
Conservation experts say the oil has the potential to damage beaches , barrier islands , wetlands and wildlife reserves along hundreds of miles of coastline in four US states . 
Whales have been spotted near the spill but they did not appear to be in distress . 
For now , the weather conditions are keeping the oil away from the shore and it is hoped the waves will break up the heavy crude oil , allowing it to harden and sink back to the ocean floor . 
The oil is not expected to reach land for at least another three days . 
Officials are monitoring the environmental effects by boat and plane . 
BP - which is responsible under federal law for the clean-up - said it was using four submersible vehicles , equipped with cameras and remote-controlled arms , to try to activate a blow-out preventer - a series of pipes and valves that could stop the leak . 
1991 : 520m gallons were deliberately released from Iraqi oil tankers during the first Gulf War to impede the US invasion 1979 : 140m gallons were spilt over nine months after a well blow-out in the Bay of Campeche off Mexico 's coast 1979 : 90m gallons leaked from a Greek oil tanker after it collided with another ship off the coast of Trinidad 1983 : 80m gallons leaked into the Gulf over several months after a tanker collided with a drilling platform 1989 : 11m gallons were spilt into Alaska 's Prince William Sound in the Exxon Valdez disaster However , this was a `` highly complex task '' and `` it may not be successful '' , said chief operating officer of BP 's exploration and production unit , Doug Suttles . 
If the blow-out preventer does not seal off the well , the company intends to place a large dome directly over the leaks to catch the oil and send it up to the surface , where it could be collected by ships . 
This has been done before , but only in shallow waters , Mr Suttles said . 
Another alternative is to drill a `` relief well '' intersecting the original well , but he warned that this might take two to three months to stop the flow . 
BP has brought in more than 30 clean-up vessels and several aircraft to spray dispersant on the oil floating on the surface . 
Bad weather forced the operation to be suspended at the weekend . 
In that time , the oil slick was estimated to have grown to about 600 sq miles -LRB- 1,550 sq km -RRB- , officials said . 
The US Coast Guard has described it as a `` very serious spill '' . 
Coast Guard Petty Officer Connie Terrell said 32 vessels were waiting for conditions to improve to resume the clean-up . 
She could not say when they would be back at work , but said 23,000 ft -LRB- 7km -RRB- of containment booms had been deployed , 70,000 ft more were ready to go when the effort resumed , and another 50,000 ft were on order . 
The Deepwater Horizon burned for 36 hours before it sank on Thursday . 
It had been carrying out exploratory drilling 52 miles south-east of Venice , Louisiana , when the blast occurred . 
Eleven workers are still missing and presumed dead . 
The search for them has been called off . 
Another 126 workers were rescued . 
An investigation into the cause of last Tuesday 's explosion is continuing . 
In 2009 , BP was fined a record $ 87m -LRB- # 53m -RRB- for failing to improve safety conditions following a massive explosion that killed 15 people at its Texas City refinery . 
The US Mineral Management Services found no violations on the Deepwater Horizon rig when it carried out routine inspections in February , March and April this year . 
The current leak would have to continue for more than eight months to match the 11m-gallon spill from the oil tanker Exxon Valdez off Alaska in 1989 , the worst oil spill in US history . 
The Economist \* Trouble on oiled waters - 2 hrs ago Mail Online UK Giant underwater dome could stop oil leaking from rig explosion reaching fragile U.S. coastline - 2 hrs ago Citizen . 
co. za Robotic subs race to cap leaking US oil well - 9 hrs ago New York Times Robots Working to Stop Oil Leak in Gulf of Mexico - 14 hrs ago NEWS.com . 
