Tue Jul 26 , 2011 2:44 pm BST \* Media-Saturn Q2 loss 44 mln euros vs yr-ago profit 41 mln \* Confirms 2011 earnings outlook , no word on sales goal \* Aims for 5 bln euros online sales at MMS by 2015 \* Identifies 500 mln euros cost-savings by 2014 \* Shares up 1.8 pct , top blue-chip gainer -LRB- Adds management comments , changes dateline -RRB- ASCHAFFENBURG , Germany , July 26 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - German retailer Metro AG has stepped up cost cuts and set a date for the start of online sales at its electronics unit , promising a poor second quarter would not hit group earnings for the year . 
`` We are certain that we will see a correction within the second half , '' said Rolf Hagemann , finance chief of Metro 's MediaMarkt-Saturn -LRB- MMS -RRB- , the largest consumer electronics retailer in Europe , which swung to a bigger than expected loss in the April-June quarter . 
Metro group Finance Director Olaf Koch said the group still stuck to its outlook for a rise of around 10 percent in full-year profit before special items . 
`` Except for Media-Saturn , all sales divisions of Metro Group are within market expectations , '' he said . 
The comments boosted Metro 's battered shares , which have lost 30 percent this year as investors anticipated a profit warning . 
They were up 1.8 percent at 1204 GMT , the best performer on the German blue-chip index . 
`` What 's having a positive effect on the shares is that Metro confirmed earnings guidance and expects a better performance for MMS in the second half , '' BHF Bank analyst Peter Steiner said . 
MMS rivals Dixons Retail and Kesa Electricals have warned on trading this year and there are signs that consumers in Germany , which saw a bumper recovery at the start of the year , are holding back , too . 
Metro , which last year changed management at MMS after it struggled to put in place a strategy for online sales , said it was targeting online sales of 5 billion euros -LRB- $ 7.2 billion -RRB- by 2015 , with 1 billion to come from pure online player Redcoon . 
`` We are late coming to online . 
But the European market is still fragmented , and so we 're not too late , '' Koch said . 
MMS will also cut costs by a further 500 million euros by 2014 , including shedding about 3,000 jobs in 2011 , so it can cut prices further to attract more customers , Hagemann said . 
The group will start sales via the Saturn website in October , with the mediamarkt . 
de website to follow in January 2012 and will look to buy specialist online players , following the purchase of discount online retailer Redcoon . 
Specialist online retailers such as auction and coupon sites are currently growing fast , especially in the United States . 
Amazon.com Inc , the world 's largest online retailer , last month bought Woot , which offers a new item every day for sale until it has sold out . 
For the second quarter MMS posted a loss before tax , interest and special items of 44 million euros -LRB- $ 63 million -RRB- , hurt by a drop in sales in Germany and start-up losses in China . 
There was no mention in the statement of the group 's previously stated target for 2011 sales to grow by 4 percent , and a spokesman told Reuters the group would not be commenting on the sales target on Tuesday . 
Some analysts have predicted Metro would walk away from the sales target when it reports second-quarter results next week Tuesday . 
-LRB- $ 1 = 0.698 euros -RRB- -LRB- Additional reporting by Matthias Inverardi and Frank Siebelt ; Editing by Erica Billingham and Will Waterman -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
