Chancellor George Osborne walks into Downing Street in London March 23 , 2011 . 
LONDON | Tue Jul 26 , 2011 3:56 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - George Osborne 's `` Age of Austerity '' mantra was the kind of tough medicine his Conservative party and voters wanted to hear as Britain dragged itself out of the financial crisis and faced up to a mountain of unsustainable debt . 
The son of a baronet and heir to a successful wallpaper business was key in placing a harsh austerity plan at the heart of his party 's 2010 election campaign and it paid off as voters turned on a 13-year-old Labor government . 
But there was one glaring hole in the argument . 
While avoiding credit downgrades was seen as the best way to stabilise any recovery , there was little evidence that a finance-starved private sector could make up for Osborne 's retrenchment in government spending . 
But the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government under Prime Minister David Cameron knows it must stick to its guns in the hope that the economy will improve by the time of the 2015 election . 
Dismal figures for the second quarter of this year on Tuesday -- growth of just 0.2 percent after the economy effectively flatlined in the previous six months -- may have just called Osborne 's bluff . 
`` We were somehow promised this double mantra of cutting debt but also miraculously sustained and ever rising economic growth -- it 's in a dream world that you can achieve these things , '' said Jonathan Tonge , professor of politics at the University of Liverpool . 
`` The jury is still out on this coalition government . 
People do n't necessarily trust its economic strategy to deliver and people are still suspicious that there is a slight ` fetish-isation ' of spending cuts because there are Conservatives involved . '' 
Where Osborne had so easily sold his austerity and growth plans last year , the media-shy Conservative is now finding it hard to explain why it does not seem to be working . 
Many major Western economies are struggling to get going again after the credit crunch , but Britain is lagging behind . 
Economists polled by Reuters earlier this month showed a consensus expecting 2.5 percent growth in the United States , 3.4 percent growth in Germany and 1.3 percent in Britain . 
The government 's deficit plan -- to all but eliminate a budget deficit of about 10 percent of national output over four years -- is based on forecasts for 1.7 percent this year . 
Osborne has so far managed to avoid much of the criticism . 
Lesser ministers have been wheeled out , often from the smaller Lib Dem side of the coalition , to announce austerity measures and then face the wrath of protesters . 
Like his former Labor nemesis Gordon Brown -- who ruled the Treasury for a decade before taking over from Tony Blair as prime minister in 2007 -- Osborne has learned the knack of disappearing and leaving others to face the music . 
Daily Telegraph columnist Jeremy Warner compares him to TS Eliot 's Macavity the mystery cat , marvelling at his `` ability to float , like the fakir in Eliot 's Macavity , above the wreckage of the coalition 's first , turbulent year in office . '' 
But dangers lie ahead for a man who is said to have his heart set on the top political job and is widely recognized as a strategic force within the government . 
Questions have been asked about his role in the hiring of former News of the World editor Andy Coulson as Cameron 's communications chief after the phone hacking scandal engulfed Rupert Murdoch 's British media operations . 
The Conservatives have been accused of getting too cosy with Murdoch 's empire in their quest for political glory as have their Labor opponents . 
Osborne has not escaped the backlash . 
Perhaps more worryingly , reports suggest Cameron is becoming frustrated with the lack of economic growth . 
This could be the year it all goes sour for the Cameron-Osborne axis of power , although Osborne dismissed those fears on Tuesday . 
`` Their past comradeship offers no guarantees , '' said Stephen Lewis at Monument Securities . 
`` Latest reports that the prime minister is not happy with the chancellor 's performance could presage deep trouble for the coalition government . 
`` There is much concern in some quarters that the shortfall in growth ... will result in an overshoot in government borrowing relative to budget plans . 
This can not be ruled out . '' 
Any sustained slippage in the coalition 's deficit reduction plans could see Britain at the mercy of the credit ratings agencies once again . 
A risk of a downgrade would be a disaster for Osborne who promised to safeguard Britain 's top notch triple-A rating . 
At the same time , deficit hawks say that going soft on spending cuts would prove just as disastrous . 
`` If he goes off track with the spending cuts , then of course the markets could pounce , '' said Richard Wellings , deputy editorial director at the Institute of Economic Affairs told Reuters Insider . 
`` I think really the current spending cuts are the minimum that are credible for the markets . '' 
It may not look good this week , but there is time for Osborne 's gamble to pay off , even if success could prolong Cameron 's reign and reduce his chances of leading the Conservatives . 
Financial markets were pleasantly surprised by the meager growth in the second quarter , having gambled on an even weaker number , and most polls show the public back Osborne 's plans . 
Most analysts agree that any climbdown would be political suicide . 
`` Let 's be quite clear , weak GDP growth does not mean that we should resort to Plan B with fiscal policy , '' said Graeme Leach , chief economist at the Institute of Directors . 
-LRB- Reporting by Matt Falloon ; editing by Elizabeth Piper -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
