Page last updated at 07:41 GMT , Wednesday , 9 June 2010 08:41 UK Meet Chris Caddell , a 22-year-old waiter who 's working at a local pizza restaurant in Pensacola Beach , one of the areas now being affected by the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Chris Caddell says usually at this time of year business is booming but not at the moment : `` Usually around this time , the beaches would be crowded . 
But we -LRB- only -RRB- have small business now and then . '' 
With oil coming ashore in Florida , President Barack Obama has launched his fiercest attack so far on the boss of BP Tony Hayward . 
He says the chief executive of the oil firm would have been fired if he 'd been working at the White House . 
Meanwhile at Lillo 's bar and grill , Chris Caddell says there 's no doubt the oil spill has hit business : `` Mornings have really suffered a lot . 
We 're doing a little bit better than some of the other restaurants . 
It is heartbreaking . '' 
Chris Caddell says he 's been coming to the beach since he was eight . 
He said : `` I 'm used to seeing white beaches . 
All of a sudden , it 's just black , there are tar balls everywhere . 
I 'm not really angry , I just want people to stop pointing fingers . '' 
Barack Obama has told US TV that he 's been speaking to experts , so he knows `` whose ass to kick '' . 
The amount of oil being captured has gone up by a third in 24 hours with the admiral in charge saying he never said it was going well . 
Chris Caddell says he just wants somebody to do something about the situation : `` I 'm more concerned about the wildlife . 
They ca n't defend themselves . '' 
BP boss Tony Hayward will appear in Washington next week to answer questions about the oil spill . 
Chris Caddell says everyone should stop fighting and sort out the mess : `` Everyone has an issue in this . 
Everyone has something at stake . '' 
Barriers and booms now protect many parts of the coastline in Florida and in Pensacola Beach . 
They 're there to try to stop the oil hitting the sand . 
Chris Caddell says he just wants everything to get back to normal : `` There 's really no need for calling each other out , saying , ` This is your fault , your fault , your fault ' . 
Just sit down and do something about it . '' 
With trade going down because of the oil spill , Chris Caddell says he 's worried but things will sort themselves out : `` It is heartbreaking but it 's going to fix itself at some point . 
And when everything 's said and done with , we 'll be back to normal . '' 
