Gulf spill : Salazar reassures over oil drilling pause US Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said drilling would continue in a `` safe way '' US Interior Secretary Ken Salazar has told a senate panel that a six-month moratorium on deepwater drilling will stay in place until safety is assured . 
But he sought to reassure senators that the moratorium - imposed after the huge Gulf of Mexico spill - was a `` pause '' rather a permanent halt to exploration . 
Coast Guard Adm Thad Allen said the amount of oil captured from the leaking well could almost double by next week . 
President Barack Obama has criticised BP 's efforts to deal with the spill . 
He is due to make his fourth trip to the Gulf of Mexico next week . 
Mr Salazar 's announcement came a day after he announced plans to bolster safety requirements for shallow-water oil drilling . 
He said that drilling would continue , but it `` has to be done in a safe way '' . 
Mr Salazar said the pause , which was put in place following the 20 April explosion of the Deepwater Horizon rig , would remain `` until we can have a sense of safety , until we have a sense that this can never happen again '' . 
Mr Salazar also told the panel he would ask BP to repay the salaries of any workers laid off due to the six-month moratorium . 
Three committees and two subcommittees on Capitol Hill were to discuss matters related to the oil spill and oil industry on Wednesday . 
Among the new safety regulations announced by Mr Salazar on Tuesday , oil companies drilling in US waters will now have to inspect their blow-out preventers and provide safely certificates . 
The BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill is having a devastating impact on the environment and the economy of the Gulf Coast states and their communities '' End Quote Adm Thad Allen US Coast Guard The failure of the blow-out preventer on the Deepwater Horizon rig led to the oil spill , the worst in US history . 
A containment cap placed on the blown-out well last week is now helping to contain some of the leaking oil . 
Adm Allen said in a press conference on Wednesday that the containment operation was now catching up to 630,000 gallons -LRB- 2,864,037 litres -RRB- daily . 
He said he hoped the existing containment structure would soon be able to hold 1.17 million gallons per day . 
`` We 're only at 15 -LRB- 15,000 barrels -RRB- now and we 'll be at 28 -LRB- 28,000 barrels -RRB- next week . 
We 're building capacity , '' said Adm Allen . 
At some point there might `` have to be a transition between a containment cap and a regular cap '' , he said . 
Adm Allen added that Obama administration officials were talking to BP about a longer-term containment strategy with `` built-in redundancies '' . 
The government has estimated that 600,000 to 1.2 million gallons a day are leaking from the bottom of the sea . 
BP 's efforts to tackle the spill have come under close scrutiny BP has said it will donate net revenues from the oil recovered to a fund to restore wildlife habitats on the coastlines of four affected Gulf Coast states . 
However , a BP spokesman told the AP news agency that it could not say how much of the recovered oil had been processed . 
Adm Thad Allen wrote to BP on Tuesday demanding `` more detail and openness '' about how the company is managing claims for compensation payments to individuals and businesses in the region . 
`` The BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill is having a devastating impact on the environment and the economy of the Gulf Coast states and their communities , '' he wrote . 
Meanwhile , tests have shown that underwater oil plumes have traveled at least 64km -LRB- 40 miles -RRB- from the leaking well , the US government says . 
Scientists noted that concentrations of oil in the plumes were `` very low '' , but said the plumes were very difficult to clean up , and they could damage the Gulf 's abundant sea life by depleting oxygen in the water . 
Speaking on US network NBC 's Today show on Wednesday , BP spokesman Doug Suttles maintained BP 's position that no massive underwater oil plumes in `` large concentrations '' had been detected . 
`` It may be down to how you define what a plume is here , '' he said . 
Oil has been leaking into the Gulf of Mexico since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded and sank off the coast of the US state of Louisiana , killing 11 workers . 
The morning the rig exploded , a BP executive and an official from Transocean , which operated the rig , argued over how to proceed with the drilling , survivors of the blast told CNN . 
The workers said BP had routinely cut corners and pushed ahead despite concerns about safety . 
A BP spokesman said it would not comment on specific allegations until an investigation into the accident was completed , but said that `` BP 's priority is always safety '' . 
BP chief Tony Hayward is scheduled to appear before Congress next week . 
BP shares fell 3.4 % on Wednesday over worries that the company will have to suspend its dividend payments to pay for legal claims and cleaning up the spill . 
Attempt to cap oil leak The latest stage in BP 's efforts to contain leaking oil has involved lowering a cap onto the failed blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- valve system on the seabed . 
The cap sits on the BOP 's lower marine riser package -LRB- LMRP -RRB- section . 
First , the damaged riser - the pipe which takes oil from the well - was cut where it nears the seabed using a remotely-operated shear . 
This was completed at 1930 CDT on 1 June -LRB- 0030 GMT 2 June -RRB- . 
The next stage was for a diamond wire cutter to saw through the riser close to the LMRP . 
The blade got stuck and had to be removed but BP eventually cut through the pipe using giant shears manipulated by undersea robots -LRB- ROV -RRB- . 
After removing the pipe , the cap was lowered onto the LMRP enabling the leaking oil and gas to be funnelled to a drill ship on the surface . 
Latest estimates suggest more than half of the leaking oil is now being captured . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
