\* Dana faces delayed payments from Egyptian government \* Receivables may dampen firm 's performance \* Q1 net profit 92 mln dirhams vs 33 mln dirhams yr-ago \* Co says higher prices , increased production helped in Q1 By Amena Bakr and Dinesh Nair DUBAI , May 12 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Dana Gas DANA . 
AD , the UAE energy firm , faces delayed payments of $ 148 million for gas from the Egyptian government which could have an impact on its future investments in the country , Dana 's CEO told Reuters on Thursday . 
`` We have a four to five months delayed payments from the Egyptian government which is an amount of $ 148 million , '' Ahmed al-Arbeed told Reuters in a telephone interview . 
Dana Gas has significant investments in Egypt and said it produced 4.25 million barrels of oil equivalent -LRB- BoE -RRB- in the country during the first-quarter of this year . 
`` If the payment is not made , this might make us think twice before reinvesting in Egypt but for now we are in talks with the government and we hope the issue will be resolved soon , '' said al-Arbeed . 
He said it was too early to say if the company might consider stopping further investments in Egypt . 
Dana has significant operations in the UAE , Iraq and Egypt . 
Dana Gas posted a near three-fold rise in first-quarter net profit on Thursday due to higher prices and increased production , helping it beat analysts ' forecasts . 
The Gulf 's only listed natural gas company , posted first-quarter earnings of 92 million dirhams -LRB- $ 25.05 million -RRB- , compared with 33 million dirhams for the year-ago period , it said in a statement on the Abu Dhabi bourse . 
Five analysts on average had expected Dana to post a net profit of 57 million dirhams for the first quarter according to a Reuters poll . 
-LRB- ID : nLDE739091 -RRB- But some analysts expect that ballooning receivables -- money owed to Dana by its customers -- could pressure earnings . 
`` While the shares may still outperform today on the headline numbers , the earnings do not fully reflect the reality of the company 's operating environment , '' said a research note from Nomura in Dubai . 
Dana 's price target was cut by 10 percent by research firm AlembicHC in April , which warned that receivables at the gas company were expected to balloon in the short term as the Egyptian government deferred payments . 
-LRB- ID : nL3E7FB1AO -RRB- Dana said first-quarter profit excluded an unrealised gain of 326 million dirhams on its investment in Hungary 's MOL MOLB . 
Crescent Petroleum and Dana Gas formed a consortium with Austria 's OMV -LRB- OMVV . 
VI -RRB- and MOL in 2009 that aims to pump enough gas from Iraq 's Kurdistan region to kick-start the Nabucco pipeline to Europe via Turkey . 
`` Overall from the shares we have from this deal we have made a gain , the value has more than doubled since 2009 , '' said al-Arbeed . 
Higher oil prices and increased production helped boost Dana 's first quarter profit . 
`` I would say that 60 percent of the profit comes from production and the remaining is due to the high oil price , '' he said , adding that the plan is to increase overall production by 25 percent by the end of the year . 
Oil and gas production for the quarter rose to 6 million BoE , compared with 4.5 million BoE in the year-ago period . 
Revenue rose 50 percent to 616 million dirhams . 
In April , Dana said it planned to list its shares in London . 
-LRB- ID : nLDE73J1DG -RRB- al-Arbeed declined to comment on timing . 
`` We are still studying a number of options , and can not disclose any more details at this point . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Dinesh Nair and Amena Bakr ; Editing by Jane Merriman -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
