Meso Scale Diagnostics ' Point of Care Influenza Test Led to the First Identification ... \* Reuters is not responsible for the content in this press release . 
-LRB- MSD -RRB- confirmed today that its investigational influenza test was used in detecting the first identified case of infection with the 2009 A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- swine flu . 
The MSD -LRB- R -RRB- Point of Care Influenza Test , which is being developed under a contract with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention -LRB- CDC -RRB- , is the investigational device referred to in the CDC 's Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report -LRB- MMWR -RRB- Dispatch dated April 21 , 2009 . 
As described in the MMWR Dispatch , Patient A visited an outpatient clinic in San Diego with influenza-like symptoms and participated in an ongoing clinical study of the MSD Point of Care Influenza Test , coordinated at that site by the Naval Health Research Center . 
A nasal swab taken from the patient tested positive for Influenza A on the MSD test , but the specific subtype could not be determined by the test , suggesting the possible presence of a novel influenza strain . 
Per protocols established for conducting the clinical trial , this result prompted further testing at a reference laboratory that confirmed that the virus was not a common seasonal strain . 
The virus was ultimately identified by the CDC as a novel strain that included components having swine influenza lineage . 
MSD 's Point of Care Influenza Test has been in development since 2006 under a contract with CDC , supported by the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority -LRB- BARDA -RRB- , an office under the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response -LRB- ASPR -RRB- within the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services -LRB- HHS -RRB- . 
MSD 's test supports BARDA 's goal of advancing rapid point-of-care diagnostic tests for novel influenza viruses . 
Currently-available point of care influenza tests are designed to detect influenza A and B infections . 
The MSD Point of Care Influenza Test is designed to additionally identify influenza A infections by subtype , differentiating between common human A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- , common human A -LRB- H3N2 -RRB- and avian A -LRB- H5N1 -RRB- influenza strains . 
The MSD Point of Care Influenza Test has been granted an investigational device exemption by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and is currently undergoing evaluation in a multi-site clinical trial . 
The test , which consists of a portable instrument and disposable test cartridges , reports results from a nasal swab sample within 15 minutes . 
The early identification of the 2009 A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- swine flu infection as a result of the use of MSD 's test highlights the need , identified by BARDA and the CDC , for point-of-care tests with the ability to differentiate between common and novel strains of influenza . 
Important Information This release does not reflect the views or policies , nor infer official endorsement by the CDC or the Department of Health and Human Services . 
MSD acknowledges the support of this project by the CDC and HHS\/ASPR\/BARDA . 
About MSD Meso Scale Diagnostics , LLC . 
, based in Gaithersburg , Maryland , develops , manufactures , and markets instrumentation and assays for array-based biological measurements for research use in life sciences and for biodefense applications . 
MSD is currently developing products for the clinical market focused on point-of-care and high-throughput testing for influenza and other key health panels . 
More information about MSD and its products can be found at www.mesoscale.com or by contacting MSD at pr@mesoscale.com . 
SOURCE Meso Scale Diagnostics , LLC . 
Meso Scale Diagnostics , LLC . 
, +1 -240 -631 -2522 , pr@mesoscale.com An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
