DUBAI | Mon May 4 , 2009 8:25 am EDT DUBAI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Pharmacists in the United Arab Emirates have ignored regulations on the sale of Tamiflu to satisfy `` panic '' demand for the drug following a flu outbreak . 
`` We ran out of stock about a week ago . 
When the news came out about the cases in Mexico we had people flooding into the pharmacy asking for Tamiflu , '' one pharmacist said . 
Tamiflu is one of the medicines recognized by the World Health Organization as effective in treating the H1N1 flu that has spread across the world after an outbreak in Mexico . 
Ali Al-Marzouki , director of public health affairs in the UAE emirate of Dubai , said pharmacies had been reminded that Tamiflu should be sold only on prescription . 
`` We have to protect the stocks that we have now and we can not allow people 's panic to eat through our supplies , '' he said . 
`` There is no reason for people to panic , the UAE is safe . '' 
Pharmacies are selling a box of Tamiflu with 10 tablets meant to last five days for around 180 dirhams -LRB- $ 49 -RRB- . 
New stocks of Tamiflu and face masks are expected in a week , the pharmacist said . 
Monday , the World Heath Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- said its laboratories have identified a total of 985 H1N1 flu infections in 20 countries , including 590 people infected in Mexico and 226 people in the United States . 
Marzouki said Dubai alone has 1 million Tamiflu capsules , imported four years ago during the avian flu outbreak . 
The UAE , most of whose population of 4.5 million are foreigners , is a commerce and tourism hub which has a large number of travelers transiting through its airports . 
`` The reason I want to buy Tamiflu is because I 'll be traveling to New York in two days and I 'm worried about the situation there , '' said a French businessman based in Dubai . 
-LRB- Editing by Andrew Hammond and Robert Woodward -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
