Saturday 6 August 2005 20.18 BST The former foreign secretary Robin Cook has died after collapsing on a mountain in Scotland , Scottish police have announced . 
Mr Cook had apparently collapsed with a suspected heart attack on the mountainside while out walking during his summer holidays . 
He was also reported to have seriously injured himself in a fall after his collapse . 
The father-of-two grown up sons was on the mountain for nearly half an hour before rescue services reached him . 
Then , guided by medical experts via telephone , they battled to revive him using cardio pulmonary resuscitation equipment , before he was airlifted by helicopter to hospital in Inverness . 
Mr Cook arrived at hospital at 4pm - some 90 minutes after his collapse and was declared dead five minutes later , said a spokesman for NHS Highland . 
But it was more than three hours later before police confirmed his death . 
A police spokesman added : `` As is normal in such circumstances , a report will be prepared for the Procurator Fiscal . '' 
Prime minister Tony Blair described Mr Cook as `` an outstanding , extraordinary talent '' . 
In a statement released by 10 Downing Street , Mr Blair said : `` Our thoughts and prayers are with Gaynor and all Robin 's family . 
`` This news will be received with immense sadness , not just in Britain but in many parts of the world . 
`` Robin was an outstanding , extraordinary talent - brilliant , incisive in debate , of incredible skill and persuasive power . '' 
Mr Cook was a keen hill-walker , who regularly spent his summer holidays with close family and friends enjoying the dramatic mountain scenery of Highland Scotland , rather than going abroad . 
A leading figure in the Labor party for decades , Mr Cook was put in the key job of foreign secretary when the party won power in 1997 . 
He was demoted to the post of leader of the Commons following Labor 's second election victory in 2001 and resigned from the cabinet in protest at the Iraq war in 2003 . 
He then became one of the sharpest critics of the government 's foreign policy in Iraq . 
Mr Cook 's devotion to enhancing the role of parliament as leader of the Commons made him a popular figure among backbench MPs , and his powerful resignation speech on the eve of war won him great respect from opponents of military action . 
