Lessons from the history man Robert Fisk charts the modern history of the Middle East as he examines the causes of current chaos in The Great War for Civilisation , says Rebecca Seal In 1905 , when the Middle East 's most modern crisis was in its infancy , American philosopher George Santayana wrote : ` Those who can not remember the past are condemned to repeat it . ' 
That remark came to mind when reading Robert Fisk 's latest book , which is so much more than a modern history of the Middle East . 
It starts with Fisk 's hair-raising 1997 meeting with Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan , then takes us via many of the trouble spots of the last three decades to conclude in Iraq . 
Fisk , the Independent 's veteran foreign correspondent , also examines the 1920 occupation of Iraq by British forces , the roots of the Arab-Israeli conflict and other events which lead us to the ludicrous present where soldiers from the most sophisticated armies in the world have to be protected by private security firms in Iraq and where the threat of terrorism is a fact of daily life from Bali to London . 
Fisk repeatedly emphasises messages that he feels should have been learned from history , as well as the arrogance of the decision-makers who ignored the past , or were ignorant of it . 
Did anyone heed the fact that in 1920 the well-armed British occupiers of Iraq were battered by a local insurgency which arose , among other places , in Basra ? 
Did anyone notice there has never , ever , been an easy occupation of this area ? 
Or that the mujahideen , who fought the Soviet occupiers of Afghanistan in the Eighties and have re-emerged in Iraq , would find a fertile recruiting ground in such towns as Fallujah among Iraqis who have been beaten or tortured or merely heard of atrocities by their occupiers ? 
` Torture works , ' boasted an American Special Forces friend of Fisk 's , a claim disproved by one man who claimed to have been tortured . ' 
I have a one-year-old daughter and I would happily put a bomb in her clothes and send her to the Americans to kill them ' , he said . 
Fisk claims the insurgency in Iraq could have been avoided if America and Britain had heeded bin Laden five weeks before the 2003 invasion , when he made it clear that if it went ahead , he would encourage all Muslims to co-operate with Saddam 's Baath party against the Americans and British . 
For Fisk : ` This was the moment the future guerrilla army fused with the future suicide bombers ... and we did n't even notice ' . 
But when the battle is about oil and power , decision-makers are n't looking at history for mistakes to avoid . 
They are too busy trying to get away with what they are doing . 
And there is a vast gap between knowing and caring . 
Robert Fisk , who has been dodging bullets for nearly 30 years , examines what motivates him , and others like him , to do this extraordinary job . 
He is n't above occasionally glamorising the tale , but there is a strong sense that this is , beyond his need to understand these wars , a chance for him to try to understand his other need to be present at all of them . 
Write your review of this or any other book , find out what other readers thought or add it to your lists Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@observer.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Observer review : The Great War for Civilisation by Robert Fisk This article appeared on p17 of the Observer Review section of the Observer on 15.09 GMT on Sunday 13 November 2005 . 
