Is the furore surrounding the memoirs of our former man in Washington justified ? 
Andrew Stephen examines Christopher Meyer 's DC Confidential Weidenfeld & Nicholson # 20 , pp301 Becoming Britain 's ambassador to Washington is invariably the high point of a diplomat 's career . 
Five have occupied the faux Queen Anne ambassadorial residence on Massachusetts Avenue since I went to Washington to become The Observer 's correspondent there in 1989 , all with varying success : Sir Antony Acland -LRB- 1986-91 -RRB- returned to become provost of Eton , Sir Robin -LRB- now Lord -RRB- Renwick -LRB- 1991-95 -RRB- to write a learned tome on Anglo-American relations , and Sir John -LRB- now Lord -RRB- Kerr -LRB- 1995-97 -RRB- to become permanent under-secretary at the foreign office . 
The fourth , Sir Christopher Meyer -LRB- 1997-2003 -RRB- , went back to London to become chairman of the Press Complaints Commission and to publish these tell-all memoirs , which , the publisher confidently informs us , will do for diplomacy what Alan Clark 's did for politics . 
Meyer was once press secretary to John Major , and so few will better understand the peculiarly British nature of the briefings that began last week : that Meyer has breached the sacred trusts of government , that he is doing it solely for the money and to settle old scores , and that his chairmanship of the PCC is now untenable . 
All of which may or may not be true . 
But hell , it seems , hath no fury quite like that of a scorned Prime Minister , especially after a master practitioner of Establishment wiles like Meyer managed to outsmart Tony Blair by giving the cabinet office just days to review this book before rushing it into print . 
Sir Jeremy Greenstock , Meyer 's ambassadorial colleague at the UN during the run-up to the Iraq war , gave the government longer and paid the price ; his apparently equally revealing book , The Costs of War , will now not be seeing the light of day on the personal orders , we are told , of Jack Straw . 
What other Western country , I wonder , so freely tolerates such censorship ? 
Perhaps we should not be surprised . 
Blair emerges from Meyer 's unique perspective as shallow and vainglorious , starstruck by American power and razzmatazz ; Straw as an empty suit , inexplicably tongue-tied even in the presence of such Washington non-luminaries as Janet Reno and Louis Freeh . 
We learn how the Prime Minister ` pulsed with ill-suppressed excitement ' during his first official visit to the US ; how he put on ' a pair of ball-crushingly tight dark-blue corduroys ' after ` intensive debate within No 10 ' on what was meant by informal dress ; and of the near-catastrophe when Mrs Blair 's hairdresser was left behind at Camp David , averted only when a chopper was sent for him ` as the rest of us kicked our heels ' . 
But such knockabout stuff would be mere cruel diversion were the book not also a tragic indictment of the dysfunction of 21st-century British government - the marginalisation of the Foreign Office and the soaring ascendancy of Blairite courtiers - and of the dangers of voting into office a party whose leader had nil governmental experience . 
` We want you to get up the arse of the White House and stay there , ' is the instruction Meyer says he received from Blair 's chief of staff , Jonathan Powell . 
Indeed , bitterness and resentment pulse through this book once Blair starts to stalk its pages . 
Meyer 's version of history is that he and the Foreign Office were soon jettisoned in favor of the superstar politicking to which Blair gravitated ; that , in the year leading up to the Iraq invasion , his embassy warned London of the defective plans Washington was making and its rudimentary notions of how the country would be administered after Saddam . 
Meyer concedes that he was in favor of invading Iraq and even that he found George W Bush ` as smart as a whip ' , but believes that Downing Street had a vendetta against the embassy which ultimately led to its fatal misjudgments . 
We will not know how much of this is justified until government papers are released sometime in the 2030s , or until and when Greenstock and other privileged insiders are free to have their say , too . 
What is clear , though , is that Blair simply failed to comprehend that neocons such as Paul Wolfowitz and Richard Perle , whom Meyer says Colin Powell privately dismissed as ` fucking crazies ' , saw Iraq as ` the anvil on which they could forge a realignment of the Middle East ' , and that Britain was being inexorably dragged down their path . 
Those same neocons also see a strong Europe as a threat to American hegemony , and Meyer describes how Rupert Murdoch and senior Republicans complained to him over dinner about Britain 's ` appeasement ' towards France ; such mutterings from the American right alone , it seems , were soon enough for Blair to abandon Churchill 's long-held strategy that British support for a powerful US must be balanced by strong ties to both Europe and the Commonwealth . 
` Blair 's famous bridge between Europe and America , ' Meyer notes , ` was sinking beneath the waves . ' 
His central thesis , though , that ` the ace up our sleeve was that America did not want to go alone ' into Iraq , simply does not stand up . 
Britain has always relished the deceit that , when it comes to the so-called special relationship , it plays the role of the cultured and intellectually superior Athenian murmuring words of wisdom into the ear of the mightier but uncouth Roman . 
The truth is that Washington 's ear always remains resolutely deaf unless what is said is something it wants to hear . 
Blair mouthed only sweet nothings but America would still have stormed to war with or without Britain , as Donald Rumsfeld made derisively clear at the time . 
Meyer , besides , has done himself no favors with this book . 
He emerges not so much as the Sir Crispin Mandarin of Private Eye parody but more , sometimes , as Dame Sylvie Krin . 
Eccentrically , he habitually wore red socks and he and his wife captivated Washington in a way I have never seen - perhaps the Blairites were jealous ? 
- but we read too much about his laddish ways , such as how he was ` looking at Catherine 's legs ' at the British embassy in Bonn while ` she sensed my eyes boring into her calves like red-hot pokers ' . 
What would now be fascinating to read would be the memoirs of the fifth occupant during my time of what Meyer repeatedly calls that Great House - those of Sir David Manning , the present ambassador . 
He straddled the roles of Foreign Office diplomat and inner-cabal adviser and was at Blair 's side throughout the build-up to war and beyond . 
Meyer , in fact , is still beside himself that he learned Manning was to succeed him not from the British government , but from Washington . 
So does Blair , I wonder , now listen to Manning any more than he did to Meyer ? 
Does Manning agree that the role of the British ambassador is to stay up the arse of the White House ? 
And what would Manning himself make of Bush ` splitting his sides ' when he learns that a character in a film is called Gay Focker ? 
Did he relish his ambassadorial task introducing Cherie Blair on the stage of the Kennedy Centre when she was promoting her money-spinning book ? 
We would all love to know . 
But given the experiences that have befallen both Greenstock and Meyer in Blair 's brave new Britain , I very much doubt whether we will . 
Education Lancing College ; Lycee Henri IV , Paris ; Peterhouse College , Cambridge ; Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies , Bologna . 
Career Ambassador to Germany -LRB- Mar-Oct 1997 -RRB- ; Ambassador to the US -LRB- 1997-2003 -RRB- ; chairman , Press Complaints Commission -LRB- 2004-present -RRB- . 
Family Married to Lady Catherine Laylle . 
On Blair : ` He liked the vision thing , but he was n't interested in the ballast behind the ideas . ' 
On Gordon Brown : ` Terrific company - friendliness and charm personified . ' 
On Bush : ` In public he does n't do himself justice . 
In private I found him articulate and interesting . ' 
Research by Killian Fox Write your review of this or any other book , find out what other readers thought or add it to your lists Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@observer.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Observer review : DC Confidential by Christopher Meyer This article appeared on p15 of the Observer Review section of the Observer on 14.50 GMT on Sunday 13 November 2005 . 
Find out more Tracey Thorn 's memoir lifts the lid on UK pop life with unusual charm and wit , writes Kitty Empire 
