Crisis control is an art , as BP knows all too well . 
The UK oil and gas major is sparing nothing in dealing with the fatal explosion on a Gulf of Mexico oil rig . 
Tony Hayward , the chief executive , has deployed 32 ships , two rigs , five airplanes and over 1,000 people . 
That may seem excessive for a relatively small spill , estimated at 1,000 barrels a day , but too much is better than too little . 
Mr. Hayward is clearly worried about BP 's reputation , which had been badly damaged when he took the job three years ago . 
In both a 2005 explosion in the company s Texas City refinery and problems in an Alaskan pipeline , BP was directly responsible and partly at fault . 
This case looks different : the rig was operated by Swiss contractor Transocean and the problem appears to have been technical , the failure of a key piece of equipment , the blowout preventer . 
But even if this accident was extremely bad luck -- the blowout preventer is supposed to be fool-proof -- BP designed the project and is ultimately responsible for the clean-up . 
That might take months and cost as much as $ 200 million , including the expense of drilling a relief well . 
In addition , there could be lawsuits . 
Investors seem to see even worse damages . 
They have wiped more than 6 billion pounds the company 's market capitalization since the spill , despite strong quarterly results . 
A big worry is that the spill provokes a public backlash on deep sea drilling , which is the new frontier in oil and gas exploration . 
It is hard enough to contain an oil spill on land , but it is much harder depths of 5,000 feet . 
There are n't any precedents for this kind of spill at those depths . 
The explosion gives ammunition to anti-oil environmentalists , just when President Barack Obama is considering expanding offshore drilling . 
The desire to prevent a political explosion helps explain BP 's aggressive response . 
Mr. Hayward may have cleaned up company 's deeper problems , but he stills needs maximal damage limitation , for the sake of BP and the whole industry . 
That requires is a swift clean-up , and no more freak accidents . 
It amazes me to see how disjointed the oil industry is when needing to get their message out , whether it 's to explain issues around exploration and production or address catastrophes like the fire and spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
They all still communicate like it 's the 1950s and it 's almost always in crisis mode . 
Maybe some day they 'll learn that by providing facts about E&P and addressing the potential issues , costs , benefits , dangers ... they 'll be able to put a better message out about why these events , even though disastrous , are so rare and how they constantly work for a safer working environment and a smaller environmental footprint . 
Their lack of understanding when it comes to communications leaves them wide open for criticism at times like these . 
Why have BP and Transocean not been out front to mobilize employees and volunteers to assist along the coastlines and sensitive environmental areas ? 
Have they held any public meetings in the coastal communities ? 
Yes , they are focusing on trying to stop the flow of oil but they 're big boys and they can do more than one thing at a time , especially when it comes to the environment they want to operate in . 
If we are going to explore in water we need to have foolproof methods of controlling mishaps . 
They are saying this spill is up to 5,000 barrels a day and it could take 90 days to stop the flow ! 
The damage it may cause in environmentally sensitive areas of Louisiana and over to Florida is n't easily contained or cleaned up ! 
I think they will get the clean up done and minimize damage . 
I think the fact that it is in a warm water area makes it easier . 
It takes time to figure out exactly how to fix the problem and clean up is a matter of getting enough equipment there to get it cleaned up . 
Please also do not forget that a pipeline owned by a BP subsidiary exploded near Bellingham , WA in 1999 and killed 3 people . 
It could have been even worse than it was . 
The subsidiary was found at fault . 
BP appears to have a systemic problem with managing and mitigating risk . 
Today 's article in the Wall Street Journal -LRB- 4-29-2010 -RRB- summed up the problem here in the US . 
Apparently Norway and Brazil require the use of an acoustic switch on the blow out preventer valve in addition to the cable from the control room on the drilling rig . 
The acoustic switch which can be activated remotely as a back up system to close the valve . 
It costs about $ 500,000 which is about 0.10 % of the cost of the drilling rig that was lost and about 2 hours worth of clean-up reported to currently be $ 6,000,000 per day . 
My 13 year old grand daughter read the WSJ article and said `` It was a poor decision not to have the acoustic switch installed to shut off the blowout valve on the rig '' . 
I wonder why the US Mineral Management engineers could not come to the same conclusion ? 
Could it be the decisions in all US Government Agencies are made by industry lobbyists based on saving a few dollars and are not based on good engineering practices to protect life , property and the environment ? 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The company was founded in 1999 as Breakingviews.com and was acquired by Thomson Reuters in 2009 , becoming Reuters brand for financial commentary . 
Every day , we comment on the big financial stories as they break . 
Our expert analysis is provided by a global team of 30 correspondents based in New York , Washington , London , Hong Kong , Madrid , Dubai and Mumbai . 
For the full commentary and analysis service from breakingviews.com , including regular emails containing the latest views , contact sales@breakingviews.com . 
Breakingviews has published a selection of books for purchase and download . 
