` I 'll hold Blair to account ' Reg Keys was n't interested in politics until his son Tom was killed in Iraq in a war he insists was ` illegal and immoral ' . 
Which makes him the ideal candidate to stand against the prime minister in his Sedgefield constituency , he tells Stuart Jeffries `` I 've always been a great fan of Muhammad Ali and his philosophy , '' says Reg Keys . 
`` Whenever he got into the ring with Sonny Liston or George Foreman , nobody gave him a chance . 
But he always believed that he could win . 
And , when it really mattered , he did . '' 
These are words that may well give Tony Blair a chill . 
For Keys intends to stand against the prime minister in his Sedgefield constituency in the general election , which is likely to be held on May 5 . 
And Keys is n't just the run-of-the-mill , third-rate Tory candidate who usually contests safe Labor seats like Sedgefield ; rather , he is someone who believes he has the singular moral authority to defeat Blair at the polls for taking Britain to war in Iraq . 
For several weeks now , a group of Westminster MPs , along with the musician and record producer - and former Blairite - Brian Eno , have been looking for an independent candidate with sufficient clout to topple Blair from his safe seat in County Durham . 
Their aim was to find someone akin to Martin Bell , the former BBC reporter who , as an independent candidate , ousted the disgraced Conservative MP for Tatton , Neil Hamilton , in 1997 . 
In Keys , a 52-year-old retired ambulance training manager from the West Midlands , they believe they have found their man . 
`` Unlike Martin Bell , I do n't wear a white suit and I 'm not used to the media . 
I 've got a Midlands accent and I 'm an introvert , '' says Keys . 
`` I 'm not exactly what you 'd expect of a politician , but I do know that I can embarrass Tony Blair . '' 
The reason he believes this is that Keys is a bereaved father who has entered the political process not out of personal ambition but to honor the memory of his dead son . 
Lance Corporal Tom Keys was a British military policeman killed by a 500-strong mob of Iraqis in the volatile Shia city of al Majarr al Kabir in June 2003 . 
Keys believes that his son went to Iraq trusting the false prospectus for war that Blair set before the House of Commons . 
`` I want to hold Tony Blair to account for his deceit , '' he says . 
`` I remember the last time I saw Tom , at New Street Station in Birmingham in February 2003 , when he marched off down that platform with his chest puffed out , proud to be off to do his duty for Britain . 
He believed what he was told ... But Blair lied to him , and to all those other 84 soldiers who came home in coffins after fighting in a war that was illegal and immoral . '' 
Does he really believe that he can topple the prime minister in a constituency where , historically , they do n't so much count Labor votes as weigh them ? 
`` I have got to believe that I can . 
Whenever I have any doubts about what I am doing I just think about Tom . 
I just think of when I dressed Tom and brushed his hair when his remains were returned to me , his body riddled with bullet holes . 
`` I suppose the Paxman question is ` Why are you standing in Sedgefield - you 're not from there at all ? ' 
But it 's also true that Tony Blair is n't a local . 
He was educated in Scotland and lives in London . 
Yes , he has a house in the constituency , but the only time he comes to Sedgefield is when he 's with his posh friends and he wants a photo opportunity . 
I am as local as he is . '' 
Keys longs for a face-to-face debate with Blair about the war . 
`` I would love that challenge . 
If he believes his actions were just and that no ministerial codes were broken , then he has nothing to fear . 
I do n't believe , though , that he has nothing to hide . 
He knew that the intelligence that was used to justify war was shaky . '' 
Keys had originally intended to stand against Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon in his Ashfield constituency . 
`` Then I met this hostage negotiator called Felicity Arbuthnot who worked with -LRB- the murdered aid worker -RRB- Margaret Hassan , and she said , why not stand against Blair ? 
She put me in touch with Brian Eno and some of his friends , and I realized that it would be a good idea . '' 
Who 's bankrolling your campaign ? 
`` Well , not Brian Eno . 
He 's given us his moral support and let us use his studio in London , but he is n't backing us financially . 
So far we 're just surviving on minor donations of # 100 and # 200 , but hopefully we 'll get some bigger donations as the campaign goes on . 
I 'm struggling to pay the # 50-a-night bed and breakfast bills . '' 
He says that a local pub has offered him the free use of a back room as campaign headquarters . 
Not the Dun Cow , the Sedgefield pub where Blair has entertained several world leaders in recent years ? 
`` No , the pub which offered us the room does n't want its name disclosed . '' 
The question now is whether Keys and his supporters can encourage other political parties that had intended to contest Sedgefield to stand down so that he can get a straight fight with Blair . 
`` The Tory candidate has already stood down . 
I do n't know for certain whether they 're going to put anyone else up in their place , but I think it 's unlikely , '' says Keys . 
`` I 'm not sure whether the Lib Dems are going to stand , but I am hoping that we can negotiate with them . 
Already an anti-war independent candidate has decided to throw his weight - both moral and financial - behind me . '' 
He also hopes to convince another potential independent candidate , the former spy David Shayler , to stand down . 
`` We 're trying to have a negotiation with him , but it may be that he has a book he wants to promote . '' 
Yesterday , Keys arrived in Sedgefield to test the water for his campaign . 
It would take a 22 % swing for him to defeat Blair , who , in 2001 , was elected with a majority of 17,713 . 
What struck him about the town ? 
`` It was how run down the school playgrounds looked , and it just made me think of the # 5bn that was wasted on the war , how far money like that would have gone in making places for our children to play properly . '' 
Is n't Sedgefield a constituency from which many British soldiers come and so would have strong views about your campaign ? 
`` That 's right . 
What amazed me , though , is that some people I have spoken to need to be educated . 
Some seemed to think that Saddam was involved in 9\/11 and that there were weapons of mass destruction . '' 
He says that one of the first people he met was a soldier on leave . 
`` He was just a young lad , like my son Tom was . 
And he really disagreed with what I was doing . 
He said : ' I signed on the dotted line , so no one can really complain when I 'm killed on active service . ' 
`` I can understand him saying that . 
But what happened with Tom was that he was killed in the middle of a war we should n't have been fighting , and killed in a manner that showed the army had underestimated the danger of the situation into which they were sending those young men . 
Tom had , when he was 18 , been part of a mission with the SAS to rescue a regiment . 
Had he been killed in that action , no argument . 
Or had he been killed by a weapon of mass destruction while on active service in Iraq , no argument . 
But he was n't . '' 
Keys argues that his son died as part of an army blunder . 
`` Three weeks before Tom was killed , the army had what it called a ` scale down ' . 
They took away his morphine , grenades and all his ammunition except just 50 rounds . 
It also took away the radio masts , so that all they had were vehicle-mounted , year-old Clansman radios , which were notoriously unreliable . 
They tried to get hold of satellite phones but for some reason they were refused . 
`` In that condition he was sent to this volatile Shia city where he and his section found a violent mob of 500 heading for the police station . 
They did n't have a chance . 
The Iraqi police fled , but Tom and the rest of them fought until they had no more ammunition . 
Then they were killed by a mob in a ritualistic fashion , which is common there . '' 
All six of the British Red Caps were murdered . 
`` There were no medals or honor for them . 
There was no letter from Tony Blair . 
Instead , he managed to find time to write a letter of condolence for Ozzy Osbourne when he fell off his quad bike . 
But not to my son , who was shot 31 times . 
I ca n't help but think angrily about that , and about Tom 's beautiful green eyes . 
He was four days short of his 21st birthday . '' 
He does have happier memories . 
`` Before Tom went to Iraq , everything was rosy . 
We were a family of four . 
I had retired , as had my wife , who was a hospital ward manager . 
We had moved to a barn conversion in Bala in north Wales . 
All that life has been ruined for us . '' 
Is it difficult to be a political candidate in these circumstances , when you are still clearly grieving ? 
`` Yes it is . 
It 's worse for my wife . 
We 're both very fragile , but it is worse for her . 
My son is buried in a beautiful grave at Llanaber near Barmouth in Wales . 
A very picturesque spot overlooking the sea . 
But my wife ca n't bring herself to go there . 
She ca n't quite bring herself to see his name on the grave . 
It 's too final . 
`` I feel , though , that I have a responsibility to Tom . 
I keep going back to the words of a widow of a man who died on the Kursk -LRB- the Soviet nuclear submarine whose crew perished in 2000 in an underwater disaster after a leakage of torpedo motor fuel exploded -RRB- . 
She said : ` If you betray your country you are a traitor and you will go to prison . 
But if your country betrays you , what can you do ? ' 
I think I have an answer to that : we can use our vote to get rid of those people who betrayed my son and other men like him . 
That 's what I want the people of Sedgefield to do . '' 
