Friday , May 21 , 2010 ; 8:38 PM Crews looking for injured or dead wildlife in the vast Gulf of Mexico oil spill have found a few more of them -- but they fear that many animals and fish might be dying offshore and unnoticed . 
In a conference call with reporters Friday morning , officials from several federal agencies listed the animals injured so far . 
Forty-three birds have been found dead from oil in the gulf , and 23 found `` oiled '' but alive . 
That number is up slightly from a few days ago . 
Authorities have also found 186 sea turtles , most of them dead . 
But , in all but three of those cases , the turtles showed no external signs of oil . 
They have also found 18 stranded dolphins but have no proof that the oil slick is to blame in those cases , either . 
In the call , officials said that many more wildlife probably have been killed by the oil , but their toll is hidden because their bodies have sunk in the open ocean , or been eaten by scavengers . 
`` We expect the numbers of affected wildlife to increase , '' said Ralph Morgenweck of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service . 
`` Many of the wildlife ... that die from this spill will never be recovered . '' 
So far , this spill 's impact on wildlife seems tiny in comparison to the 1989 spill from the Exxon Valdez tanker in Alaska . 
There , scientists estimated the oil killed 250,000 seabirds , in addition to bald eagles , sea otters , killer whales and other creatures . 
But now , scientists have cautioned that , because so much of the oil in the gulf is hidden deep underwater , they know very little about where it is , or where it might be harming wildlife . 
`` We 've never really seen this kind of thing , '' said Roger Helm , also of the Fish and Wildlife Service . 
`` This one 's coming in a way that has a lot of us working to understand , what is going to be the longer-term impact ? 
... How do we get our brain around this ? 
The impact on wildlife on shore might increase soon , now that thick sludge has begun washing up in marshes and on beaches in remote areas of south Louisiana . 
The Times-Picayune newspaper in New Orleans reported Friday that on Elmers Island , La. , `` Hundreds of oil-coated hermit crabs lay dead or dying along the blackened shoreline , having lost their battle to crawl out of the toxic mess . '' 
On Thursday afternoon , marine scientist Nancy Rabalais got an up-close look at the oil when she scuba dived into waters about 10 miles off the Louisiana coast . 
She was going in to change out a series of meters , attached to the legs of an oil platform , that measure underwater oxygen content . 
When she and her team dived in , Rabalais said , there was no oil in the area . 
But , after a few minutes , blobs and thick , eight-foot-long patches of it began floating in . 
When they arrived at the surface , the boat crew yelled at them to get out of the water quickly . 
`` You all gotta get out of here , right now ! '' 
Rabalais recalled him saying . 
`` It was at the surface when we came back up . '' 
Rabalais said the stuff was strong-smelling and sticky , and clung to the divers and their equipment . 
`` They say I have a glob of it in my hair , '' she said by cellphone , a few minutes after leaving the boat . 
`` I 've got to go out and get a bottle of Dawn ... and de-oil myself . '' 
Rabalais said the experience had given her an appreciation for what it must be like for animals that swim in the gulf , especially animals such as turtles and dolphins that must come to its oily surface to breathe . 
`` I , as someone who was totally covered up and breathing my own air -LRB- from a tank -RRB- , would not go back in it , '' she said . '' 
