Oil spill map : What 's at stake ? 
Watch the oil spill 's path since May 2 and view how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
See the major forms oil takes on upon water contact . 
See the vibrant ecosystem that thrives on the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico . 
One month after the start of a massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , federal officials said Thursday that oil was gushing out of the ground faster than they had estimated -- and that it would be days before they had a firm handle on the rate . 
Officials initially put the flow at 5,000 barrels a day . 
But on Thursday , the oil company BP announced that it was collecting that amount through a tube inserted into a leaking pipe , and video from the seafloor showed oil still spewing from the pipe . 
BP said oil was also leaking from a spot a few yards away . 
`` Now , it 's time to get better information , '' said Coast Guard Adm. Thad W. Allen , who is leading the federal response to the spill resulting from the explosion at the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig . 
Allen said it might be several days before scientists come up with a new estimate . 
The government did not want to issue a new estimate and then have to revise it again , he said . 
Allen repeated what Obama administration officials have said for days : that the size of the leak would not affect their cleanup efforts , which are geared to combat `` the worst-case scenario . '' 
Also Thursday , the heads of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Homeland Security told BP chief executive Tony Hayward in a letter that the company had `` fallen short '' of its promises to keep the public and the federal government informed about the spill . 
`` BP must make publicly available any data and other information related to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill that you have collected , '' EPA Administrator Lisa P. Jackson and Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano wrote . 
They asked for the results of tests looking for traces of oil and dispersant chemicals in the waters of the gulf . 
BP did not respond Thursday to requests for comment about the letter . 
Separately , the EPA told BP officials Wednesday that the company had 24 hours to choose a less toxic form of chemical dispersant to break up the oil spill and must apply the new form of dispersant within 72 hours of submitting the list of options . 
The move suggests that federal officials are concerned that the unprecedented use of dispersants could pose a significant threat to the Gulf of Mexico 's marine life . 
BP has been using two forms of dispersants , Corexit 9500A and Corexit 9527A , and so far has applied 600,000 gallons on the surface and 55,000 underwater . 
A spokesman for Rep. Jerrold Nadler -LRB- D-N.Y. -RRB- said that on Thursday , BP ordered 60,000 gallons of Dispersit -- a less toxic dispersant preferred by many environmentalists and lawmakers . 
