WASHINGTON -- The Obama administration issued a new moratorium Monday on deep-water offshore drilling that is no longer based on water depth and stresses new evidence of safety problems , hoping the revised ban will pass muster with the courts after the initial one was rejected . 
`` More than 80 days into the BP oil spill , a pause on deep-water drilling is essential and appropriate to protect communities , coasts , and wildlife from the risks that deep-water drilling currently pose , '' Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said in announcing the new moratorium . 
`` I am basing my decision on evidence that grows every day of the industry 's inability in the deep-water to contain a catastrophic blowout , respond to an oil spill , and to operate safely . '' 
The new moratorium was panned by industry groups and supported by environmentalists . 
Last week , a federal appeals court rejected the government 's effort to restore its initial offshore deep-water drilling moratorium , which was issued after the catastrophic Gulf oil spill in April . 
The moratorium was blocked first last month by U.S. District Judge Martin Feldman . 
The Justice Department said Monday that it will file a motion with the U.S. District Court seeking a dismissal of that case , because the old moratorium is no longer operative , making the challenge moot . 
The department also will ask the appeals court to set aside Feldman 's order of last month . 
The Interior Department said that like the original ban , this one applied to most deep-water drilling activities . 
The department also said the suspensions in the new moratorium `` are the product of a new decision by the secretary and new evidence regarding safety concerns , blowout containment shortcomings within the industry , and spill response capabilities that are strained by the BP oil spill . '' 
The new moratorium also establishes a process to gather and analyze new information on safety and response issues , which could allow for identifying conditions to resume certain deep-water drilling activities . 
Unlike the last moratorium , which applied to waters of more than 500 feet -LRB- 150 meters -RRB- , the new one applies to any deep-water floating facility with blowout preventers . 
The National Ocean Industries Association , an industry trade group for offshore production , said that while the new moratorium does not apply to anchored facilities using surface blowout preventers , `` such facilities are generally used in shallow water , which makes the new suspension glaringly similar , if not even more restrictive than the original moratorium . 
It is not immediately clear how many facilities will be impacted . '' 
In a Question & Answer document , the Interior Department said any count represents a snapshot in time . 
The document said that at the time of the BP spill , there were 36 floating drilling rigs that would have been affected by the new ban . 
It was unclear whether the new moratorium would be more or less restrictive than the original one . 
The offshore industry also complained that while the new moratorium opens the door to lifting the restrictions if industry provides assurance for adequate containment and response , `` The problem for industry is that it is unclear what exactly it will take to convince the administration that such capability exists . 
In a memo to Michael Bromwich , the new head of the department 's agency that oversees offshore drilling , Salazar said that the moratorium will give industry time to come up with more effective blowout containment strategies and capabilities for deep-water operations . 
`` I can not conclude at this time that deep-water drilling can move forward in a safe and environmentally sound manner , '' he wrote . 
Salazar also said that one factor in having the moratorium go through Nov. 30 is that hurricane season runs through that date . 
`` During this time of year , as we have already seen this year , the ability to contain and respond to a spill is often compromised by weather conditions , '' Salazar wrote . 
Other industry groups and pro-drilling lawmakers also criticized the new moratorium . 
`` It is unnecessary and shortsighted to shut down a major part of the nation 's energy lifeline while working to enhance offshore safety , '' said Jack Gerard , president and CEO of the American Petroleum Institute . 
`` The new moratorium threatens enormous harm to the nation and to the Gulf region . '' 
Sen. Mary Landrieu , a Democrat representing Louisiana in the Senate , said in testimony to the presidential oil spill panel that she was `` alarmed '' at the Interior Department 's statement that its decision is supported `` by an extensive record of existing and new information indicating that allowing new deep-water drilling to commence would pose a threat of serious , irreparable , or immediate harm or damage to the marine , coastal and human environment . '' 
Landrieu said that statement `` contradicts testimony given by drilling experts and ignores the history of oil and gas operations in the Gulf . '' 
Lawyers for the companies that sued to block the moratorium did not immediately return calls for comment . 
Todd Hornbeck , CEO of Covington-based Hornbeck Offshore Services , one of the plaintiff companies , said he did not know how the new moratorium would affect deep-water drilling projects . 
`` I 've got to review it first , '' he said . 
Meanwhile , environmental groups expressed support . 
Catherine Wannamaker , a lawyer for several environmental groups that support the moratorium , said the new one does not appear to be any less restrictive than the first one . 
`` We continue to believe it 's a necessary safety precaution , '' she said . 
`` The first moratorium was a rational decision made by -LRB- Salazar -RRB- and should have withstood judicial scrutiny . 
The new moratorium makes -LRB- his -RRB- reasoning more explicit and is a step in the right direction . '' 
Jacqueline Savitz , senior campaign director for Oceana , an international ocean conservation group , said the administration had no other choice . 
`` We commend the president for putting more drilling on hold , '' she said . 
