In this image taken from video provided by BP PLC at 18:01 CDT , oil flows from the broken well , center , as a new containment cap , left , hovers near the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , Monday , July 12 , 2010 . 
Deep-sea robots swarmed around BP 's ruptured oil well Monday in a delicately choreographed effort to attach a tighter-fitting cap that could finally stop crude from gushing into the Gulf of Mexico nearly three months into the crisis . 
-LRB- AP Photo\/BP PLC -RRB- NO SALES NEW ORLEANS -- BP robots attached a new , tighter-fitting cap on top of the gushing Gulf of Mexico oil leak Monday , raising hopes that the crude could be kept from polluting the water for the first time in nearly three months . 
Placing the cap on top of the leak was the climax of two days of delicate preparation work and a day of slowly lowering it into position a mile below the sea . 
The capping project -- akin to building an underwater Lego tower -- is just a temporary fix , but the oil giant 's best hope for containing the spill . 
The next unknown is whether the 18-foot-high , 150,000-pound metal stack of pipes and valves will work . 
BP plans to start tests Tuesday , gradually shutting the valves to see if the oil stops or if it starts leaking from another part of the well . 
Residents have been skeptical BP can deliver on its promise to control the spill , but the news was still welcome on the coast . 
Dwayne Touchet , a 44-year-old shrimper from Welsh , La. , said he was relieved to hear the cap was on and can only pray that it works . 
Touchet is working in the Vessels of Opportunity program , where BP employs local boat owners and fisherman out of work because of the spill . 
`` It 's not over , there 's still a lot of oil to clean up . 
We do n't know how it will affect it -LRB- the water -RRB- in the years to come , all we can do is trust in the Lord , '' he said . 
Around 6:30 p.m. CDT , live video streams trained on the wellhead showed the cap being slowly lowered into place , 11 hours after BP Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles said the company was close to putting the seal in place . 
BP officials said the device was attached around 7 p.m. . 
The cap will be tested and monitored to see if it can withstand pressure from oil and gas starting Tuesday morning for six to 48 hours , according to National Incident Commander Thad Allen . 
On his Facebook page , Allen also shared news of the development . 
`` Getting there , '' Allen wrote in a status update shortly after the cap landed on the well . 
The cap will be tested by closing off three separate valves that fit together snugly like pairs of fists , choking off the oil and blocking it from entering the Gulf . 
BP does n't want the flow of oil to stop instantaneously , said Don Van Nieuwenhuise , director of Professional Geosciences Programs at the University of Houston . 
Shutting the oil off too quickly could cause another explosion , he said . 
`` Rather than like a train running into a brick wall , it 'll be more like putting the brakes on slowly , '' he said . 
`` That 's what they 're aiming for . 
You can keep the brakes on and everyone arrives alive , or you hit the wall and have big problems . '' 
Engineers will be watching pressure readings . 
High pressure is good , because it would mean the leak has been contained inside the wellhead machinery . 
But if readings are lower than expected , that could mean there is another leak elsewhere in the well . 
`` Another concern right now would be how much pressure the well can take , '' and whether intense pressure would further damage the well , said Eric Smith , associate director of the Tulane Energy Institute . 
Even if the cap works , the blown-out well will still be leaking . 
But the newer , tighter cap will enable BP to capture all the oil , or help funnel it up to ships on the surface if necessary . 
One of those ships , the Helix Producer , began operating Monday and should be up to its capacity of collecting roughly 1 million gallons of oil a day within a few days , Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles said . 
A permanent fix will have to wait until one of two relief wells being drilled reaches the broken well , which will then be plugged up with drilling mud and cement . 
That may not happen until mid-August . 
Meanwhile , the Obama administration issued a revised moratorium on deep-water offshore drilling Monday to replace the one that was struck down by the courts as heavy-handed . 
The new ban , in effect until Nov. 30 , does not appear to deviate much from the original moratorium , as it still targets deep-water drilling operators while defining them in a different way . 
Work on the new capping operation began Saturday with the removal of a leaky cap that captured about 1 million of the 1.5 million to 2.5 million gallons of oil the government estimates is spilling from the well every day . 
Gulf residents closely watched the operation , knowing the damage already done to the biologically rich Gulf and the coast 's two leading industries , fishing and tourism . 
`` I think we 're going to see oil out in the Gulf of Mexico , roaming around , taking shots at us , for the next year , maybe two , '' said Billy Nungesser , president of Louisiana 's oil-stained Plaquemines Parish . 
`` If you told me today no more oil was coming ashore , we 've still got a massive cleanup ahead . '' 
BP `` ca n't do much , but they know how to drill wells , '' dock master Jimmy Beason said at a marina in Orange Beach , Ala. `` I think that by the end of the month it will be stopped , and this work with the cap is part of it . 
I see the light at the end of the tunnel . '' 
As of Monday , the 83rd day of the disaster , between 89 million and 176 million gallons of oil had poured into the Gulf , according to government estimates . 
The spill started April 20 when the Deepwater Horizon rig , leased by BP from Transocean Ltd , exploded and burned , killing 11 workers . 
It sank two days later . 
