Oil Spills , and Nature Suffers Heart-rending images from the Gulf of Mexico reveal the effect of BP 's oil spill on Mother Nature 's helpless creatures . 
It seems animals are the first casualties of the tragic accident . 
FORT JACKSON , La. -- The smallest victims are the biggest challenge for crews rescuing birds fouled with oil from the Gulf of Mexico spill . 
There 's no way to know how many chicks have been killed by the oil , or starved because their parents were rescued or died struggling in a slick . 
`` There are plenty of oiled babies out there , '' said Rebecca Dmytryk of the International Bird Rescue Research Center , one of the groups working to clean oiled animals . 
The lucky ones end up in a cleaning center at Fort Jackson , a pre-Civil War historic site on the Mississippi River delta south of New Orleans . 
Pelican chicks often come in cold because oil has matted down the fluffy down that 's meant to keep them warm . 
They must be warmed quickly just to survive long enough to be cleaned . 
And the youngest must be taught to eat . 
`` They only know their parents regurgitating food into their mouths . 
They do n't know how to pick stuff up , '' said Dmytryk , whose organization is working with Tri-State Bird Rescue , a company hired by BP to coordinate animal rescue and cleaning in Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama and Florida . 
That means tube feeding three times a day . 
Others , a bit older and accustomed to taking fish from a parent 's throat , must be hand-fed until they can eat fish from a bowl . 
Adults can be checked a few times a day , but babies needed two staffers ' full-time attention to be sure they are eating and are warm . 
Many adults and juvenile pelicans get coated with heavy oil diving for fish . 
That does n't happen with the chicks , though they may wade into oily puddles or get smeared by oil from their parents ' feathers . 
In general , rescuers do n't go into nesting colonies , said Mike Carloss , a Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries biologist . 
He said most rescued chicks were near shorelines or were on nests so low that oil washed onto them . 
Lightly oiled chicks will lose the oil when they shed their down feathers , he said . 
`` We 've seen a lot of those birds in those stages make it . 
A lot of them are fledging now . 
It gives you hope that is the right thing to do . '' 
Nearly 60 pelican chicks and more than 600 adults were brought to Fort Jackson in June after oil washed onto a rookery on Queen Bess and other nearby islands in coastal Louisiana . 
They 're among more than 1,000 oiled birds and more than 100 oiled sea turtles rescued since the BP-leased rig Deepwater Horizon exploded April 20 , killing 11 workers . 
About three-quarters of the birds and all but a handful of turtles have been cleaned in Louisiana . 
All but two of the sea turtles -- a 150-pound oiled loggerhead dubbed Big Mama and an 85-pound loggerhead that was sick but free of oil -- are juveniles , ranging from saucer - to dinner-plate size . 
Doses of fluids , antibiotics and a mix of cod-liver oil and mayonnaise used to help break up the oil they 've swallowed are administered based on the animal 's weight . 
But the basic treatment is the same . 
`` The difference is it takes five people to lift Big Mama and her sister . 
It only takes one person to lift the little guys , '' said Michele Kelley , Louisiana 's sea turtle and marine mammal stranding coordinator . 
Baby turtles leave their sandy nests and head straight for the sea knowing everything a turtle needs to know . 
Chicks need far more care . 
Keeping them warm can be the biggest challenge , and tern chicks are among the hardest to keep alive because they 're so small , said IBRRC staffer Mark Russell . 
The birds lose body heat through their skin , and smaller animals have more skin in proportion to their size than larger creatures . 
Some of the tern chicks are smaller than a tennis ball . 
The chicks also tend to be dehydrated and malnourished . 
`` If they 're dehydrated , they do n't want to eat because they feel sick , '' Russell said . 
And they 're so small that it 's hard to keep a tube down their throats to give water and liquid food . 
In the week he 'd been in Louisiana , he knew of two or three tern chicks that died , Russell said Friday . 
Once a chick is eating on its own , staff have as little contact with it as possible . 
`` We do n't want to be raising what is commonly referred to as a pier rat , '' said Wendy Fox , director of Pelican Harbor Seabird Station , the Miami rehabilitation center where the pelican chicks were moved Saturday . 
The babies will be housed next to adult `` role models , '' and eventually with adults , Fox said . 
Their pens also have pools deep enough to dive for fish . 
Pelicans take five to six months to reach independence . 
At Fort Jackson , one of the youngsters perched alongside a pool and flapped its wings energetically . 
`` See that ? '' 
`` He 's almost ready to learn to fly ! '' 
