TRIPOLI | Tue Apr 12 , 2011 12:49 am BST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - An African Union plan to halt Libya 's civil war collapsed , and rebels said the increasingly bloody siege of the city of Misrata by Muammar Gaddafi 's troops made talk of a cease-fire meaningless . 
The Red Cross said it was opening a Tripoli office and would send a team to Misrata to help civilians trapped by fighting , but one of Gaddafi 's ministers warned any aid operation involving foreign troops would be seen as a declaration of war . 
Rebel leader Mustafa Abdel Jalil said after talks with the AU delegation in Benghazi in the rebel-held east on Monday : `` The African Union initiative does not include the departure of Gaddafi and his sons from the Libyan political scene , therefore it is outdated . '' 
Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 's son Saif quickly dismissed the idea of his father stepping down . 
`` We want new blood , that 's what we want for Libya 's future . 
But to talk of -LRB- Gaddafi -RRB- leaving , that 's truly ridiculous , '' he told French news channel BFM TV . 
`` If the West wants democracy , a new constitution , elections , well , we agree . 
We agree on this point but the West must help us to provide a propitious climate . 
But all these bombings , this support given to rebel groups , all that is counter-productive . '' 
Libyan television said the `` colonial and crusader aggressors '' hit military and civilian sites in Al Jufrah district in central Libya on Monday . 
Rebels in the coastal city of Misrata , under siege for six weeks , scorned reports that Gaddafi had accepted a cease-fire , saying they were fighting house-to-house battles with his forces , who fired rockets into the city . 
Western leaders also rejected any deal that did not include Gaddafi 's removal , and NATO refused to suspend its bombing of his forces unless there was a credible cease-fire . 
NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen told a Brussels news briefing that Gaddafi 's government had announced ceasefires in the past , but `` they did not keep their promises . '' 
`` Any future proposal that does not include this , we can not accept , '' he said , accusing Gaddafi of bombing , shelling and shooting civilians . 
A resident of Misrata told Reuters there was heavy fighting on the eastern approaches and in the center . 
Rebels told Reuters that Gaddafi 's forces had intensified the assault , for the first time firing truck-mounted , Russian-made Grad rockets into the city , where conditions for civilians are said to be desperate . 
Human Rights Watch accused Gaddafi 's forces of indiscriminate attacks on civilians in Misrata which violated international law . 
It said about 250 people had died . 
At the front outside the eastern rebel-held town of Ajdabiyah , rebels buried the charred bodies of Gaddafi troops killed in air strikes and said they were advancing westwards . 
The International Committee of the Red Cross -LRB- ICRC -RRB- is already deployed in Libya 's rebel-held eastern territory , where it has supplied hospitals , distributed food and visited government soldiers captured during the conflict . 
Speaking in Tripoli alongside a government spokesman , its regional head Jean-Michel Monod said his team had been officially invited to the capital . 
`` Now we will officially be here open for business , '' he told reporters . 
`` Of course it was high time as a neutral , impartial and independent humanitarian organization that the ICRC would come here as well to conduct discussions with the authorities . '' 
Libyan Social Affairs Minister Ibrahim Zarouk al-Sharif said some aid operations had been used as a cover to supply rebels . 
`` If humanitarian aid is brought through humanitarian organizations who specialise in this kind of work then we would welcome it . 
But if it comes with a military face then we wo n't accept it , it 's basically a declaration of war and might lead to a much bigger conflict . '' 
At talks in Luxembourg , Italy quarrelled with other European Union governments on how to handle thousands of migrants fleeing the turmoil in Libya and elsewhere in north Africa , while the EU executive urged the bloc to do more for the refugees . 
NATO attacks outside Ajdabiyah on Sunday helped break the biggest assault by Gaddafi 's forces on the eastern front for at least a week . 
The town is the gateway to the rebel stronghold of Benghazi 150 km -LRB- 90 miles -RRB- north up the Mediterranean coast . 
Opposition fighters have been overwhelmed by Gaddafi 's firepower in western Libya , close to his base of Tripoli , but are increasingly using guerrilla tactics to weaken his hold . 
Tripoli residents said there had been several attacks on army checkpoints and a police station in the last week and gunfire can be heard at night . 
Gaddafi 's former foreign minister Moussa Koussa , speaking in Britain where he fled last month , called on `` everybody , all the parties , to work to avoid taking Libya into a civil war . '' 
`` This will lead to bloodshed and make Libya a new Somalia , '' he told the BBC . 
`` More than that we refuse to divide Libya . 
The unity of Libya is essential to any solution and any settlement in Libya . '' 
