Ian McEwan gives a global dimension to the details of a neurosurgeon 's day in Saturday , says Mark Lawson It 's odd now to think that Ian McEwan once lacked confidence as a novelist . 
His first two attempts at the longer form - The Cement Garden and The Comfort of Strangers - felt like the work of a born short-story writer being stretched on a rack by his publisher and literary tradition , needing help from typeface and spacing to qualify even as novellas . 
But with his last but one novel -LRB- Amsterdam -RRB- having won the Booker Prize and the last -LRB- Atonement -RRB- out-selling John Grisham and Tom Clancy in some weeks ' book charts , McEwan has the swagger - the literary equivalent of a tennis player in the first tournament after winning Wimbledon - of a novelist who could do almost anything . 
What he has done is Saturday , which resembles Amsterdam in sardonically examining the interior life of the contemporary middle classes but departs starkly from the century-long focus of Atonement by taking place over 24 hours , on what is supposed to be the day off of Henry Perowne , a noted London neurosurgeon . 
A recent edition of Granta carried an extract from Saturday , in which Perowne drives out of Oxford in the morning to visit his brain-hazed mother . 
I had assumed that this was the beginning of the novel but it turns out to be page 152 of a book of less than 300 pages . 
It 's a measure of the level of incident in Henry 's day - and the meticulous close-stitching of McEwan 's work as a word-surgeon - that , before his Mercedes S500 reaches the Westway , en route to his mother , he has already witnessed a potential terrorist attack , discussed the Iraq war with his son , made love with his wife , come close to murder on a central London street , lost a game of squash and shopped for a fish stew . 
Yet , while the novel is clearly an attempt to set down the textures of everyday life - close reading could improve your cooking , your squash game and even tip you off about what sort of kettle to buy - McEwan has larger concerns than , say , Nicholson Baker in the close auditing of The Mezzanine and Room Temperature . 
Saturday catalogues the local only in order to focus on the global . 
For the day on which we take account of Henry is Saturday 15 February 2003 . 
As the neuro-surgeon tries to mind his own business , hundreds of thousands of marchers are gathering in London to protest against Tony Blair 's support for the American attack on Iraq . 
As the background tramping and shouting begins to intrude on the quiet order of Henry 's life , it becomes clear that , if Saturday were to have another eight-letter S-word as its title , it would be Security . 
By recording with such loving care the elements of one rich Englishman 's life , Saturday explores the question of to what extent it is possible to insulate yourself against the world 's concerns . 
Centrally heated , pension-planned , air-bag protected , permanently loved and frequently fucked by his wife , healthy and even able to give health to others , Henry lives within a protective sac of satisfaction and achievement . 
But , as Henry knows from his profession , such sacs are not always enough to protect against disastrous impact and , on this day of rest , he takes his hit . 
The most recurrent theme in McEwan 's 10 novels is the sudden ambush of the safe and smug . 
Go shopping and you 'll never see your kid again -LRB- The Child in Time -RRB- . 
Take a hike and the hounds of hell are just around the corner -LRB- Black Dogs -RRB- . 
Fall in love and the next thing you know you 're carving up a cadaver -LRB- The Innocent -RRB- . 
Go for a picnic and one man dies while a nutter claims you as his soul-mate -LRB- Enduring Love -RRB- . 
A similar external menace is pushing at Henry 's bubble . 
Between his uxorious love-making and his squash game , he bumps into Baxter , an aggressive driver who believes that Henry should n't have been where he was . 
We 'd think , colloquially , that Baxter needs his head seeing to and has a funny look . 
Neurosurgeon Perowne immediately understands the eruptions happening in the man 's skull . 
As Saturday -LRB- like Enduring Love -RRB- is in part a story of suspense , a summary needs to be protective , but Baxter comes to challenge both the surgeon 's domestic instincts and his professional skills . 
But Saturday , in common with Philip Roth 's The Plot Against America , is subtle enough to be taken as a warning against either intervention or against isolationism . 
Is the foreign policy of Henry 's government exposing him to danger , or is his moneyed , bouillabaisse-eating existence a self-delusion in a threatening world ? 
As in the best political novels , the evidence and arguments are distributed with careful ambiguity . 
The novel is inevitably and properly clearer about its position on another internal debate . 
Perowne , although an exemplar of the civilised upper middle classes , does n't believe in literature . 
He has no time to read and even becomes confused when his daughter Daisy , about to have her first poems published by Faber & Faber , uses the tricky jargon word `` stanza '' . 
The surgeon especially ca n't see the point of novels which tell you about someone 's life in great detail . 
Surely it 's quite easy to note these things down and then type them out . 
McEwan gives Henry an even chance of victory on the squash court but , in this bit of sport about whether novels have a point , the novelist thrashes his hero in every line . 
In giving his central character not only a poet daughter and a father-in-law who writes verse but a wife who works at a newspaper , the writer could be accused of locating the story on home turf . 
But a considerable technical achievement of Saturday is that it succeeds in going inside the mind of a brain surgeon . 
In the early stages , there is a certain nervousness about whether the author is simply transcribing research notes - `` Then he let Rodney take the lead in another burr hole for a chronic subdural '' - but , by the end , there is no doubt that Perowne has the hands , eyes and thoughts of a neurosurgeon rather than a novelist . 
Medical language , though , is only one of the registers in the prose . 
McEwan is one of the least flashy stylists of his generation , less quotable than Martin Amis or Julian Barnes , but , especially in Atonement and now this book , his voice has settled into scrupulous , sensual rhythms in which even something as simple as a 24-hour news bulletin is subject to careful choices of adjective and noun : `` The synthesised bleeps , the sleepless anchor and his dependable jaw . '' 
In a novel of great sureness at the level of both action and language , McEwan makes one curious choice : the quotations from Daisy Perowne 's debut volume of poetry are actually published lines by Craig Raine , giving the book an additional subplot in which , beyond the plot 's call on various sections of the Metropolitan police , you expect the literary cops to arrive and arrest Daisy for plagiarism . 
It 's a matter of debate whether it 's the reader or the writer who is being too clever here . 
For the rest of its length , though , Saturday gives no sense of McEwan 's talent taking a day off . 
The only consolation for McEwan 's contemporaries , I suppose , is that they could taunt him that he ca n't seem to write short stories any more . 
Mark Lawson 's Enough is Enough : Or the Emergency Government will be published by Picador later this year . 
