The dangers of exporting democracy Bush 's crusade is based on a dangerous illusion and will fail Saturday 22 January 2005 12.22 GMT Although President Bush 's uncompromising second inaugural address does not so much as mention the words Iraq , Afghanistan and the war on terror , he and his supporters continue to engage in a planned reordering of the world . 
The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan are but one part of a supposedly universal effort to create world order by `` spreading democracy '' . 
This idea is not merely quixotic - it is dangerous . 
The rhetoric implies that democracy is applicable in a standardised -LRB- western -RRB- form , that it can succeed everywhere , that it can remedy today 's transnational dilemmas , and that it can bring peace , rather than sow disorder . 
Democracy is rightly popular . 
In 1647 , the English Levellers broadcast the powerful idea that `` all government is in the free consent of the people '' . 
They meant votes for all . 
Of course , universal suffrage does not guarantee any particular political result , and elections can not even ensure their own perpetuation - witness the Weimar Republic . 
Electoral democracy is also unlikely to produce outcomes convenient to hegemonic or imperial powers . 
-LRB- If the Iraq war had depended on the freely expressed consent of `` the world community '' , it would not have happened -RRB- . 
But these uncertainties do not diminish its justified appeal . 
Other factors besides democracy 's popularity explain the dangerous belief that its propagation by armies might actually be feasible . 
Globalisation suggests that human affairs are evolving toward a universal pattern . 
If gas stations , iPods , and computer geeks are the same worldwide , why not political institutions ? 
This view underrates the world 's complexity . 
The relapse into bloodshed and anarchy that has occurred so visibly in much of the world has also made the idea of spreading a new order more attractive . 
The Balkans seemed to show that areas of turmoil required the intervention , military if need be , of strong and stable states . 
In the absence of effective international governance , some humanitarians are still ready to support a world order imposed by US power . 
But one should always be suspicious when military powers claim to be doing weaker states favors by occupying them . 
Another factor may be the most important : the US has been ready with the necessary combination of megalomania and messianism , derived from its revolutionary origins . 
Today 's US is unchallengeable in its techno-military supremacy , convinced of the superiority of its social system , and , since 1989 , no longer reminded - as even the greatest conquering empires always had been - that its material power has limits . 
Like President Wilson , today 's ideologues see a model society already at work in the US : a combination of law , liberal freedoms , competitive private enterprise and regular , contested elections with universal suffrage . 
All that remains is to remake the world in the image of this `` free society '' . 
This idea is dangerous whistling in the dark . 
Although great power action may have morally or politically desirable consequences , identifying with it is perilous because the logic and methods of state action are not those of universal rights . 
All established states put their own interests first . 
If they have the power , and the end is considered sufficiently vital , states justify the means of achieving it - particularly when they think God is on their side . 
Both good and evil empires have produced the barbarisation of our era , to which the `` war against terror '' has now contributed . 
While threatening the integrity of universal values , the campaign to spread democracy will not succeed . 
The 20th century demonstrated that states could not simply remake the world or abbreviate historical transformations . 
Nor can they easily effect social change by transferring institutions across borders . 
The conditions for effective democratic government are rare : an existing state enjoying legitimacy , consent and the ability to mediate conflicts between domestic groups . 
Without such consensus , there is no single sovereign people and therefore no legitimacy for arithmetical majorities . 
When this consensus is absent , democracy has been suspended -LRB- as is the case in Northern Ireland -RRB- , the state has split -LRB- as in Czechoslovakia -RRB- , or society has descended into permanent civil war -LRB- as in Sri Lanka -RRB- . 
`` Spreading democracy '' aggravated ethnic conflict and produced the disintegration of states in multinational and multicommunal regions after both 1918 and 1989 . 
The effort to spread standardised western democracy also suffers a fundamental paradox . 
A growing part of human life now occurs beyond the influence of voters - in transnational public and private entities that have no electorates . 
And electoral democracy can not function effectively outside political units such as nation-states . 
The powerful states are therefore trying to spread a system that even they find inadequate to meet today 's challenges . 
Europe proves the point . 
A body such as the European Union could develop into a powerful and effective structure precisely because it has no electorate other than a small number of member governments . 
The EU would be nowhere without its `` democratic deficit '' , and there can be no legitimacy for its parliament , for there is no `` European people '' . 
Unsurprisingly , problems arose as soon as the EU moved beyond negotiations between governments and became the subject of democratic campaigning in the member states . 
The effort to spread democracy is also dangerous in a more indirect way : it conveys to those who do not enjoy this form of government the illusion that it actually governs those who do . 
We now know something about how the actual decisions to go to war in Iraq were taken in at least two states of unquestionable democratic bona fides : the US and the UK . 
Other than creating complex problems of deceit and concealment , electoral democracy and representative assemblies had little to do with that process . 
Decisions were taken among small groups of people in private , not very different from the way they would have been taken in non-democratic countries . 
Fortunately , media independence could not be so easily circumvented in the UK . 
But it is not electoral democracy that necessarily ensures effective freedom of the press , citizen rights and an independent judiciary . 
Eric Hobsbawm is professor emeritus of economic and social history of the University of London at Birkbeck and author of The Age of Extremes : The Short 20th Century 1914-1991 ; this is an edited version of an article that first appeared in the journal Foreign Policy ; this article has been republished from Le Monde diplomatique 's English language edition of December 2004 Le Monde diplomatique Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : . 
