Nowthatsfuckedup.com is the most horror-filled website I have ever seen ; and if you are reading this at breakfast , or anywhere near a child , you should stop right now . 
It is a site for trophy pictures , originally a place where men could trade pornographic pictures of women they knew . 
But in wartime the definition of trophy changes , so when you look at the forum now you are likely to see something such as this : A burnt and crumpled Arab face rests in a blue kitchen bowl . 
It does n't look as if the back of the head is there , but it 's impossible to be sure because everything behind the eyes is hidden in a pool of blood and everything below the jaw is missing . 
Underneath the picture are two discreet text ads for `` Free amateur teen pictures '' and `` Mother and Daughter omfg ! 
They are whores lol ! '' 
There are several hundred such pictures on the site , all apparently submitted by American soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
The deal offered by the site 's owner , Chris Wilson , is that serving soldiers get free access if they can prove they are abroad . 
He did this from a patriotic impulse : it was difficult for soldiers to make credit card payments from Afghanistan . 
So he decided to accept evidence of life abroad instead . 
This does n't have to be a picture of a mutilated corpse , but those will do nicely . 
The site now has more than 160,000 members . 
The scandal at Abu Ghraib showed that modern armies are full of people with digital cameras who will document everything they see , no matter how shaming it might be in the outside world . 
Some of these pictures are far worse than anything that came out of the prison but they show the same tangle of lust for flesh , power and killing . 
There 's some dispute about whether all of the pictures are real but it seems beyond doubt that most of the posters claiming to be soldiers actually are , not least because the American Army tries to stop its soldiers accessing the site and posting captions like this : `` Iraqi driver tried to run a checkpoint ... this is an Iraqi driver and passenger that tried to run a checkpoint during the first part of OIF -LRB- Operation Iraqi Freedom -RRB- . 
The bad thing about shooting them is that we have to clean it up . 
The car was shot at with 5.56 mm and 7.62 mm rounds . 
The 7.62 did his head '' - but the viewer must take on trust that the head existed . 
The soldier , signing himself `` vagetarian '' , who posted the picture comments : `` These are things that we have to do . 
Some of us dont like it but it must be done to protect ourselfs and our way of life . 
These are here to show we dont take anything lightly . '' 
News of the site has been circulating outside the army for about a month , since Helena Cobban , a Quaker blogger and journalist , found a reference to it in an Italian report . 
`` It underlines the deeply exploitative nature of most pornography , '' she says . 
Wilson , the owner of the site , is proud of displaying the photographs . 
He popped up himself in the discussions on Cobban 's blog to say : `` I think everyone should see them . 
This is a side of the war that is shown from the soldiers THEMSELVES . 
Where else can you go see that ? '' 
He is proud of free expression as a mark of civilisation -LRB- though , for legal reasons , the site is hosted in the Netherlands , and not Florida where he lives -RRB- . 
At the head of each column of pictures is an uplifting paragraph denouncing censorship , which starts : `` America is n't easy . 
America is advanced citizenship . '' 
`` It is '' , says Cobban , `` like finding Mistah Kurtz , sitting in the middle of the black jungle , surrounded by heads on stakes '' Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Shortcuts : The new pornography of war This article appeared on p2 of the G2 section of the Guardian on 15.19 BST on Wednesday 28 September 2005 . 
Like a MacBook Pro '' says @Mister_Solomon : Westminster Dog Show - live ! 
