By the CNN Wire Staff A remnant base section of a MAT-120 cluster munition recovered in Misrata was manufactured by Instalaza SA of Spain . 
NEW : Libyan government denies the charge Most nations have banned cluster munitions Opposition demonstrators in Benghazi say they may fail without more NATO support Rebels say they are advancing toward al-Brega Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Forces loyal to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi have fired cluster munitions into residential areas in the besieged western city of Misrata , Human Rights Watch said Friday . 
A spokesman for the Libyan government denied the charge . 
The organization said in a statement that it had seen three cluster munitions explode over the el-Shawahda neighborhood of Misrata on Thursday night . 
Researchers inspected debris from a cluster submunition and interviewed witnesses to two other apparent cluster munitions strikes , the statement said . 
HRW inspected the submunition , which it said had been discovered by a New York Times reporter , and determined that it was a Spanish-produced MAT-120 120mm mortar projectile , which opens in the air and releases 21 submunitions across a wide area . 
The submunitions explode on contact , disintegrating into molten metal that can strike people and penetrate armored vehicles , it said . 
`` It 's appalling that Libya is using this weapon , especially in a residential area , '' said Steve Goose , arms division director at Human Rights Watch . 
`` They pose a huge risk to civilians , both during attacks because of their indiscriminate nature and afterward because of the still-dangerous unexploded duds scattered about . '' 
Most nations have banned their use through the Convention on Cluster Munitions , which became international law in August . 
NATO : Give Gadhafi 's assets to rebels `` Libya needs to halt the use of these weapons immediately , and take all steps to ensure that civilians are protected from the deadly remnants they have left behind , '' Goose said . 
Human Rights Watch said cluster munitions were used about a kilometer from the battle line between rebel and government forces and appear to have landed about 300 meters from Misrata Hospital . 
But the organization , citing security concerns , said it could not inspect the impact sites and had not determined whether any civilians were hurt . 
A spokesman for the Libyan government said the charge was not true . 
`` We would never use such weapons against Libyan people , '' Musa Ibrahim said . 
`` Also , the world is watching , so we just could not do it . '' 
The charge came as Western leaders described a `` medieval siege '' Friday on Misrata , which has been pounded for days by Gadhafi 's mortar and artillery rounds . 
Some 1,200 of the more than 8,000 migrants stranded in the besieged city were rescued Friday by the International Organization for Migration -LRB- IOM -RRB- . 
The group chartered a boat to pluck them from the war-torn port city and deliver them to the Libyan rebel stronghold of Benghazi in the eastern part of the country . 
The aid group said the migrants were from various nations and included women and children . 
All were weak and dehydrated . 
Medical agencies set up a small hospital on deck . 
The IOM identified 8,300 migrants living in the open around the Misrata port without adequate food or medical care as the city came under regular fire . 
The group hopes to send back the chartered boat to evacuate a second round of people if it receives enough donations . 
`` This is a terrible situation , '' said Pasquale Lupoli , the group 's Middle East representative . 
`` They are the forgotten victims of the crisis and should n't be . '' 
In Benghazi , about 2,000 anti-Gadhafi demonstrators held up signs and shouted slogans that made it clear they are still fighting for Gadhafi 's removal . 
`` Gadhafi Go to Hell , '' read one . 
`` Thanks for USA and NATO and France and UK , '' read another . 
But several participants voiced concern that the NATO efforts were not enough , telling CNN that without more support , they may fail . 
`` They did n't do anything , the NATO , '' one man said . 
`` We want more support from the United States of America , more power , more support for our people , '' said another . 
The military deadlock in Libya between Gadhafi 's forces and rebels shows little sign of resolution . 
Western powers have said repeatedly that airstrikes were intended to fulfill a United Nations mandate to protect civilians . 
However , in a joint opinion piece that appeared Friday in three European newspapers , U.S. President Barack Obama , French President Nicolas Sarkozy and British Prime Minister David Cameron wrote about better times once there is a regime change . 
`` Our duty and our mandate under U.N. Security Council Resolution 1973 is to protect civilians , and we are doing that , '' they wrote . 
`` It is not to remove -LRB- Gadhafi -RRB- by force . 
But it is impossible to imagine a future for Libya with -LRB- Gadhafi -RRB- in power . '' 
`` The International Criminal Court is rightly investigating the crimes committed against civilians and the grievous violations of international law , '' they wrote . 
`` It is unthinkable that someone who has tried to massacre his own people can play a part in their future government . '' 
The leaders likened the fighting in Misrata to a medieval siege and called on Libyan troops to return to their barracks . 
`` We are convinced that better times lie ahead for the people of Libya , '' they wrote . 
Opposition forces kept up the fight Friday , saying they had pushed west from Ajdabiya to the town of al-Brega , which has changed hands several times and appears to remain under the control of Gadhafi loyalists . 
Warplanes were heard Friday over Ajdabiya , but CNN could not independently verify the rebel advance . 
The debate over NATO 's strategy in Libya buzzed at high-level meetings this week in Europe as well as in Qatar , host of the first gathering of the international Libya Contact Group , charged with mapping out peace for Libya . 
With the conflict at a deadly impasse , Britain and France have been pressuring NATO to step up airstrikes . 
At a NATO summit in Berlin on Thursday , Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen told reporters that NATO has the necessary assets to continue aerial strikes , but the tactical nature of the fight has changed . 
`` Now they hide their heavy arms in populated areas , where before many targets were easier to get to , '' Rasmussen said . 
`` To avoid civilian casualties , we need very sophisticated equipment . 
So , we need a few more precision fighter ground-attack aircraft for air-to-ground missions . '' 
CNN 's Frederik Pleitgen , Ben Wedeman and Reza Sayah contributed to this report . 
