The new flat-rate State Pension - how will you be affected ? 
Paul Lewis takes your calls . 
American author Jodi Picoult 's new novel , Handle With Care , explores the impact of ` wrongful birth ' litigation on an ordinary New Hampshire family and asks a number of moral questions . 
Jodi 's first story was called The Lobster Which Misunderstood . 
She wrote it when she was just five years old and it was the start of a glorious career . 
Her books have sold millions and she regularly tops the bestseller lists . 
During the 2003 SARS outbreak more than 8,000 people contracted the disease and 774 people died . 
One British woman , Sally Blower , had just returned from Malaysia and after spending a week back home in London feeling fine she packed her bags for her next work trip , this time to Brazil . 
It was in the cab on the way to the airport that she first began to feel unwell . 
Gareth Carins always dreamt of joining the French Foreign Legion . 
Unable to settle after university and looking for adventure , he followed his boyhood dream and joined up in 1996 . 
Simon Rouse , better known as DCI Jack Meadows in The Bill , chooses Up , Up and Away by the Johnny Mann Singers and All Along The Watchtower , performed by Jimi Hendrix and Bob Dylan , as his Inheritance Tracks . 
Jodi Picoult s first story was called The Lobster Which Misunderstood . 
She wrote it when she was just 5 . 
It was the start of a glorious career . 
Her books have sold millions and she regularly tops the bestseller lists . 
During the 2003 SARS outbreak more than 8000 people contracted the disease and 774 people died . 
One British woman , Sally Blower , had just returned from Malaysia and after spending a week back home in London feeling fine she packed her bags for her next work trip this time to Brazil . 
It was in the cab on the way to the airport that she first began to feel unwell . 
EXTRAORDINARY STORIES : FRENCH FOREIGN LEGION Gareth Carins always dreamt of joining the French Foreign Legion . 
Unable to settle after university and looking for adventure , he followed his boyhood dream and joined up in 1996 . 
Comedian and actor Lenny Henry shares his passion for comics with us . 
Simon Rouse , better known as DCI Jack Meadows in The Bill , chose ` Up , Up and Away ' by the Johnny Mann Singers and ` All Along The Watchtower ' performed by Jimi Hendrix . 
Murray Lachlan Young makes stand up poetry , spoken word and performance art . 
POEM : PULL YOUR SOCKS UP BRITAIN In the light of public despondency , due to socio economic and health related circumstances . 
We have , with much regret , canceled our planned tribute to the New Poet Laureate - PULL YOUR SOCKS UP BRITAIN Ladies , roll your sleeves up . 
Pull your tum in gents . 
Now is not the time to weep o er credit that s been spent . 
Out with the ready meals on with the stew . 
Here s a little list of the things you can do : Dogs under harness , pigs on the lawn . 
Out with the roses in with the corn . 
Off with the boiler on with the Woad . 
Thrash your self with nettles from the nose to the toe . 
Forage in the hedgerow , forage in the field . 
Bog to the Glen , to the Moore to the Weald . 
Nudity for vigor , jollity for wealth , Four in a bathtub Frolicking for health . 
If you a bailiff promise you can pay . 
Salt-water enemas - six times a day . 
Austerity , frugality from charity comes clarity Polarity , disparity replaced with solidarity . 
-LRB- Save , I mean spend , I mean spend , I mean save I mean H1N1 , H1N1 , H1N1 , H1 OH ! -RRB- 
Pull your socks up Britain , Shoulder to shoulder we must stoutly stand . 
Catch it , bag it , bin it , kill it . 
Pull your socks up . 
Now wash your hands . 
Celebrating the music that special guests cherish and would like to bestow to future generations . 
