Did Mexico over-react on swine flu ? 
As tests suggest the swine flu virus in Mexico may be less virulent than first feared , the BBC 's Stephen Gibbs in Mexico City looks at whether the response was an over-reaction . 
Pedro Aparicio stocked up on food so his family would not need to go outside Pedro Aparicio shows me his receipt from the supermarket . 
`` My wife thinks I spent too much , '' he says . 
Just before the partial shutdown of this country , the primary school teacher stocked up on everything he thinks he , his wife , and their young daughter Naomi will need for the next five days . 
`` Milk , beans , tuna fish , everything , '' he says , as he shows me his fully-stocked fridge . 
`` We are under quarantine . '' 
I remind him that the country 's partial shutdown of the economy does not include supermarkets . 
`` But we do n't want to go out , it might be risky , '' he says . 
A little over a week ago , this global health crisis was triggered when the Mexican government announced that it had detected a new strain of flu virus , and was closing all schools . 
It informed the World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- that it suspected 60 people had already been killed by what soon became known as swine flu . 
So many deaths , after apparently a very short time , worried the Mexican authorities . 
`` We were spooked , '' one government official admitted to me . 
`` People seemed to be dying , and we did n't know why . '' 
It takes several days for tests for swine flu infection to be verified But when those first figures were released , the word `` suspected '' was crucial . 
Mexico was not certain at that stage that 60 people had been killed by swine flu . 
And it still does not know . 
It takes several days for tests to be properly verified . 
The current , confirmed , death toll stands at 16 . 
Initial data indicates that apparent mortality rate is comparable to that of seasonal flu . 
In the grandiose health ministry building in central Mexico City , I sat down with the country 's Health Minister , Jose Angel Cordova . 
As a nod to the enduring risk of infection , he prefers not to shake hands these days , instead offering the sleeve of his perfectly cut suit . 
I asked him whether he thought that his government had initially over-estimated the deadliness of the virus . 
`` Maybe , yes , '' he said . 
But he stressed that his experts were dealing with so many unknowns at that stage . 
What they did know was that the virus was potentially virulent and potentially deadly . 
Humans had no natural resistance to it . 
As they tried to work out who was dying of what and why , it is worth remembering some complicating facts , which are peculiar to Mexico . 
You can imagine that right now there is a lot of paranoia Most of the suspected fatalities were , and still are , in the capital , Mexico City . 
The city is at an elevation of 2,300 m -LRB- 7,540 ft -RRB- . 
It is home to almost 23 million people . 
Most days , a thick polluted smog can be seen hanging over the vast metropolis . 
Every year , swine flu or not , over half a million cases of respiratory problems are reported in the city . 
`` You can imagine that right now there is a lot of paranoia , '' says Dr Franciso Moreno , an expert in infectious diseases at the ABC medical center in Mexico City . 
`` About 90 % of the patients who have come to the hospital in the last few days have mild respiratory problems , from other causes . '' 
The deluge of suspected cases has made it extremely difficult to tell who has swine flu , and who does not . 
H1N1 has had consequences which few would have ever predicted . 
Something which possibly began in rural communities in Mexico has led to the quarantine of a luxury hotel in Hong Kong , and the slaughter of all the pigs in Egypt . 
And has this all been a global false alarm ? 
The Mexican health minister says it is still too early to say . 
He says that the threat of new viruses should not be under-estimated . 
As he spends the bank holiday weekend watching TV with his family , Pedro Aparicio says he thinks that the government did exactly the right thing . 
`` You ca n't be too careful , '' he says . 
