Page last updated at 10:39 GMT , Wednesday , 28 September 2011 11:39 UK Propofol is a fast-acting hospital sedative used before anaesthetics The trial of Michael Jackson 's physician , Doctor Conrad Murray , has begun in Los Angeles with the jury being shown images of the singer lying dead in a hospital and rehearsing the day before his death . 
Dr Murray is accused of causing the 50-year-old 's death on 25 June 2009 . 
He denies charges of involuntary manslaughter . 
The prosecution team claims Conrad Murray is an incompetent physician who used an anesthetic called Propofol without the proper safeguards . 
The defense says Jackson caused his own death by taking a drug overdose , including Propofol , after Murray left his bedroom on the day of his death . 
Find out what drugs were found in Michael Jackson 's body . 
Propofol is a fast-acting hospital sedative , administered intravenously and used before anaesthetics . 
It was first used widely in the late 1980s . 
The drug , which Conrad Murray gave to the singer to help him sleep , is made by the pharmaceutical company AstraZeneca and is also sold under the brand name Diprivan . 
The prosecution team says Murray used large quantities of Propofol Experts say Propofol is extremely powerful and not meant for use outside hospitals and clinics . 
Propofol was referred to by Michael Jackson as his `` milk '' because of the milk-like appearance . 
The drug is administered either by intravenous drip or by being injected ahead of an anesthetic , or to keep a patient anesthetized during an operation . 
It is a preferred sedative in operating theaters because it is well tolerated and allows patients to recover quicker . 
It 's commonly used in outpatient surgery or as a sedative for certain examinations . 
Propofol is also used as a painkiller or anti-anxiety drug in post-operative care . 
Conrad Murray told police in 2009 that he gave Michael Jackson other drugs known as benzodiazepines , which are also used as sleep aids . 
But when they did not work , he claims Jackson demanded Propofol . 
Murray 's defense lawyer Ed Chernoff claimed the singer swallowed several pills of Lorazepam on the morning of his death , enough to put six people to sleep . 
It is widely used as a sedative and muscle relaxant . 
Also known as Ativan and Temesta , the drug is used short-term for insomnia , anxiety , seizures and for sedating aggressive patients . 
Midazolam is used in a similar way to Lorazepam . 
It is widely used as a sedative and to treat seizures . 
Also know as Dormicum , Hypnovel and Versed , the drug is also used short-term to treat severe insomnia and anxiety . 
Jackson was given four milligrams of the drug on the morning of his death . 
Diazepam is better known as Valium . 
It 's used as a relaxant for patients suffering from insomnia and anxiety as well as seizures . 
Michael Jackson was given a 10 milligram tablet of Diazepam at 1.30 am on the morning of his death because he could n't sleep . 
Lidocaine is a local anesthetic and is sometimes used to treat skin inflammations . 
It is used by dentists to anaesthetise patients ' gums . 
Michael Jackson had a dose of Propofol diluted with Lidocaine at 10.40 am on the day of his death . 
It is primarily used as an appetite suppressant and stimulant . 
