It 's the last day of the Labor Party Conference , with events drawing to a close after Ed Miliband 's speech yesterday . 
A controversial property tax has been approved in Greece as part of efforts to satisfy conditions for another bailout . 
And also on the program , how amateur astronomers have helped discover two new planets . 
To speed up the loading time for this running order , we have replaced the audio with links . 
To hear the reports , interviews and discussions , just click on the links . 
Get in touch via email , Twitter or Facebook or text us on 84844 . 
Business news with Adam Shaw . 
Inspectors from the European Commission , the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund will be back in Athens today after pulling out of discussions earlier this month . 
Constantine Michalos , chairman of the Athens Chamber of Commerce and Industry , describes a tough time to run a business in Greece . 
Alpesh Patel , founder of Praefinium Partners , casts en eye over the markets . 
And Otto Thoresen , Director General of the Association of British Insurers , previews the updated guidelines on executive pay it is releasing to company boards today . 
Download the podcast Labor is to set up its own review of policing in England and Wales under a former head of Scotland Yard . 
Chief political correspondent Gary O'Donoghue examines what the party hopes this will achieve . 
Ed Miliband told the Labor Party Conference yesterday that he was pro-business , but made a distinction between good and bad businesses as `` producers '' and `` predators '' . 
The General Secretary of the Unite union , Len McCluskey , voices his support for Mr Miliband 's categorisation . 
And Dr Mike Lynch , chief executive of Autonomy Corporation , considers whether the `` predators v producers '' distinction holds water . 
European Union members are voting on plans to beef up the European Financial Stability Facility , in an effort to help failing European economies . 
Finnish MP Antti Kaikkonen sets out why he will vote against . 
And economics editor Stephanie Flanders gauges the wider feeling on the EFSF across the continent . 
In his speech yesterday , Ed Miliband said it was time for a new generation , and a new way of doing things . 
Labor 's former leader Lord Kinnock reacts to the current leader 's address . 
Research has found that the number of people who get caught by online dating scams may be higher than thought . 
Colin Woodcock , senior manager for fraud prevention at the Serious Organised Crime Agency , explains this so called romance fraud . 
And Nicola Hillary , who spotted an online fraudster , recounts her experience . 
Sports news with Garry Richardson . 
The legendary long distance runner Haile Gebreselassie is in the UK . 
He shares the secrets of his success . 
A miner has died after after being trapped by a roof fall at a colliery in North Yorkshire , whilst his co-worker was rescued . 
Nigel Adams , the local Conservative MP , and Ken Capstick , former vice president of the National Union of Mineworkers , react to the latest mining tragedy . 
The trial of Michael Jackson 's physician Dr Conrad Murray , who is accused of involuntary manslaughter , has begun in Los Angeles . 
The BBC 's Peter Bowes gives an account of the first day . 
Nine months ago , Today program listeners were asked to help scientists look for new planets . 
Dr Chris Lintott , astronomer and a member of Planet Hunters , welcomes the news that two planets have been discovered . 
Thought for the Day with the Chief Rabbi Lord Sacks . 
The Greek parliament has approved a controversial new property tax , designed to reduce the country 's huge budget deficit . 
The BBC 's Mark Lowen reports from Athens . 
And Elena Panaritis , a member of the ruling Pasok party , considers how the tax will help the Greek economy . 
The European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso , has given his annual State of the Union address to the European Parliament in Strasbourg . 
Europe Correspondent , Chris Morris , reports on what he had to say . 
Songs of Praise , the world 's longest running religious television program , celebrates its 50th birthday this weekend . 
Religious affairs correspondent Robert Pigott considers how the program has managed to thrive . 
The Labor Party is to set up a review of policing in England and Wales , led by the former Metropolitan Police Commissioner , Lord Stevens . 
Dr Tim Brain is among those who will be undertaking the review , and looks ahead to what it will cover . 
Is it better to raise children in the city or countryside ? 
Author John O'Farrell and designer Pearl Lowe debate the virtues of urban and rural upbringings . 
