Five schools shut because of swine flu GCSE and A-level exams rescheduled as schools in London and south-west close to prevent virus spread Tuesday 5 May 2009 14.37 BST Governors at Dolphin school in Battersea decided to shut its doors as a precaution after two of its pupils were confirmed with the virus . 
Photograph : Andy Rain\/EPA Schools with an outbreak of swine flu today re-scheduled GCSE and A-level exams only hours before some of their pupils sat the tests . 
Five schools in England are now closed after pupils fell ill with the virus . 
Three of them are private schools and all but one are secondary schools . 
Alleyn 's school in Dulwich , south-east London , closed when six pupils were confirmed with having the H1N1 virus yesterday . 
The school expects to be closed until at least Sunday . 
A statement on the school 's website said teachers were drawing up contingency plans for exams this week when students were due to sit A-level art exams and language oral tests . 
All parents and staff were given a one-to-one medical consultation with GPs and nurses and offered the antiviral medication Tamiflu for their children . 
Paignton community and sports college in Devon was one of the first to close after a 12-year-old girl contracted the virus after a holiday in Mexico . 
The school said it was asking exam boards to give its GCSE and A-level pupils `` special consideration '' because of the loss of six and a half days of lessons and `` the anxiety and stress our pupils are under '' . 
Downend school , in south Gloucestershire , will be closed this week after a 12-year-old was confirmed to have the virus . 
The school said it would be making arrangements for a `` deep clean '' and hoped to open again next week . 
Tamryn Savage , the school 's headteacher , said : `` We are working closely with the awarding bodies to make alternative arrangements . '' 
South Hampstead high school in north-west London shut after a 14-year-old was diagnosed with swine flu . 
It will re-open on Thursday and has offered all year 9 pupils medication . 
Jenny Stephen , the school 's headteacher , said : `` Unfortunately large school events need to be canceled , but special arrangements are being made to accommodate GCSE and A-level exams . 
The important message is that any students who have any symptoms of a flu-like illness must not attend school and will be turned away . '' 
Two pupils who are siblings at the Dolphin school in Battersea , south London , fell ill with the virus leading the school to close . 
More than 1,200 private schools have been told to consider setting up `` quarantine rooms '' for pupils suspected of having the virus . 
The Independent Schools Council 's lawyers , Veale Wasbrough , also told the schools that they did not have to refund fees if a school was affected . 
The Joint Council for Qualifications , the umbrella group for exam boards , said examiners would take into consideration pupils who did not sit exams because of the swine flu . 
Mock exam papers may be used if a student had completed under half of their assessments for A-levels and under 35 % for GCSE . 
But `` the awarding body would need more than just the mark achieved by the student in the examination , '' the JCQ said . 
`` It would need to have the candidate 's scripts and a copy of the examination paper . 
Senior examiners would evaluate the adherence of the mock examination paper to the specification requirements . 
If the mock examination paper meets the demands of the specification and its assessment objectives , then the marks can be taken into consideration . '' 
At the Department of Health 's last count there were 27 confirmed cases in the UK 23 in England and four in Scotland . 
The government 's swine flu information line is 08001513513 . 
