The latest developments from around the world as popular tourist destinations respond to the outbreak Tuesday 5 May 2009 17.42 BST A policeman guards Hong Kong 's Metropark hotel , which is under swine flu quarantine . 
Photograph : Mike Clarke\/AFP\/Getty Images Since The World Health Organisation raised its swine flu pandemic alert to level five on 29 April , the outbreak has affected 41 countries . 
According to the latest figures from the WHO , 21 countries have officially reported 1,124 cases of influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- infection . 
The worst affected are ; cents Mexico : 101 estimated deaths -LRB- 25 confirmed -RRB- , 590 confirmed cases . 
cents US : 2 deaths , 279 confirmed cases . 
cents Canada : 140 confirmed cases . 
cents Spain : 57 confirmed cases . 
cents UK : 32 confirmed cases . 
cents Germany : 9 confirmed cases . 
cents New Zealand : 6 confirmed cases . 
Is it safe to travel ? 
In a statement on 1 May , the WHO said : `` Limiting travel and imposing travel restrictions would have very little effect on stopping the virus from spreading , but would be highly disruptive to the global community . '' 
`` Regarding the risk of being infected by an influenza virus , travellers are advised , whenever possible , to avoid crowded enclosed spaces and close contact with people suffering from acute respiratory infections . 
Hand-washing after direct contact with ill persons or their environment may reduce the risk of illness . 
Ill persons should be encouraged to practice cough etiquette -LRB- maintain distance , cover coughs and sneezes with disposable tissues or clothing , wash hands -RRB- . '' 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office advice The Foreign and Commonwealth Office -LRB- FCO -RRB- changed its advisory at 11pm on 27 April advising against all but essential travel to Mexico . 
In response to this , Thomson and First Choice Holidays canceled all holidays to Canc n and Cozumel on the Yucat n Peninsula until 8 May , as did Thomas Cook . 
Thomson and First Choice put on an extra flight last Thursday to collect 200 holidaymakers who chose to cut short their holidays in the beach resorts . 
They have now extended the cancellation of holidays to Mexico until 18 May while Thomas Cook has canceled holidays to Canc n uuntil 22 May . 
British Airways is still operating four flights a week to Mexico City , but is offering its customers the option of making amendments -LRB- a change of dates or an alternative destination up to the same value -RRB- without incurring an administration fee on bookings while the FCO advisory against travel to Mexico remains . 
On 1 May , Mexico began an unprecedented nationwide shutdown in a bid to contain the spread of the virus and Mexicans were told to stay at home for five days . 
Today , President Felipe Calderon announced a return to `` normalcy '' , with people going back to work tomorrow , cafes and restaurants reopening , and universities and schools opening their doors on Thursday . 
Cases grew to at least 279 in 36 states , and on Tuesday 28 April , California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger announced a widespread state of emergency in response to the H1N1 `` swine flu '' outbreak . 
His official proclamation mentions `` conditions of extreme peril to the safety of person and property '' . 
However , California has ostensibly been going about its business as usual . 
Asia is reacting vigorously to the new global threat , following the outbreak of SARS in 2003 , which killed 800 people . 
China suspended flights from Mexico on 2 May ; the day after the first confirmed case of swine flu in Asia was found in Hong Kong . 
At the Metropark Hotel , where the infected Mexican was staying , 274 guests and 100 workers have been quarantined and confined to the premises for a week . 
The city has been put on its highest health alert . 
The American Embassy in Beijing says four US citizens are now or have been quarantined in China due to swine flu fears . 
China has sent a plane to Mexico to collect Chinese nationals , while a plane chartered by the Mexican government arrived in Shanghai today to bring home more than 70 Mexicans who have been held in a hotel since last week despite not showing any symptoms of swine flu . 
Japan has no confirmed cases of swine flu , but has opened fever clinics across the country . 
Planes arriving from North America are being boarded by health inspectors in surgical gowns , goggles and masks , and armed with thermographic guns . 
Passengers are not allowed to leave the plane until they have filled in a government Health Status questionnaire , and flight attendants are handing out masks . 
A health department team has been stationed along the Malaysia-Thailand border to screen travellers entering the country through Pengkalan Hulu . 
It has a beautiful square Posted by chibeetle 2 May 2012 Isla Holbox is technically a peninsula but you can only reach it by ferry following a three hour bus trip from Cancun . 
The roads are all made of sand Posted by madfortravel 22 Jan 2012 
