cents Kathleen Sebelius ` optimistic ' about virus threat cents UK confirms new case of swine flu Tuesday 5 May 2009 17.04 BST The swine flu leaflet to be distributed to UK households . 
Photograph : Tim Ireland\/PA The swine flu virus could turn out to be less severe than previously feared , the US government said today , as one more new case of the outbreak was confirmed in the UK . 
Kathleen Sebelius , making her first speech as the US health secretary , said : `` We are cautiously optimistic that what we are seeing right now is presenting itself as a much milder virus than the initial cases that presented themselves in Mexico . '' 
There are 403 confirmed cases of swine flu in the US , and so far one death . 
The British government 's chief medical officer , Sir Liam Donaldson , today warned it would be `` premature '' to assume the virus was a mild infection . 
His comments came as the World Health Organisation said it had started to distribute 2.4 m treatments of antiviral drugs to 72 countries `` most in need '' . 
It declined to name the countries but confirmed that they included Mexico , which has been hardest hit by the outbreak with 590 laboratory-confirmed cases and 25 deaths , according to WHO figures . 
Donaldson predicted that a second , larger wave of infections could be expected during the usual flu season in the autumn and winter . 
Health officials today announced one more confirmed case of swine flu in Britain , taking the national total to 28 . 
The unnamed patient , from south-east England , had traveled to Mexico . 
Every household in the UK has been sent a leaflet advising how to prevent the spread of the virus , in what is the biggest public health campaign since the 1980s . 
The leaflets suggest ways in which people can reduce their chances of catching swine flu and gives advice on what they should do if they develop symptoms . 
Donaldson said officials were closely monitoring the progress of swine flu in southern hemisphere countries such as Australia and New Zealand , which are in winter . 
This week , five year seven pupils at Alleyn 's school in Dulwich , south-east London , tested positive for the virus . 
The school will close for a week on Health Protection Agency -LRB- HPA -RRB- advice . 
The five had come into contact with a pupil who had recently returned from the US and was diagnosed with the virus at the weekend . 
All of the new patients are recovering well at home . 
`` Our advice is : please do n't panic , '' said Antony Faccinello , the senior deputy head at the school . 
`` Parents should keep reading our website for advice , and stick to that advice . 
We want them to come in to the school to collect their child 's preventative dose of Tamiflu . '' 
Alleyn 's shares facilities , including buses , with at least two other schools , James Allen 's girls ' school and Dulwich College . 
The HPA said about 1,200 people , including Alleyn 's pupils and staff , would be offered the antiviral treatment . 
A course of Tamiflu involves a pill a day for 10 days , but younger children will be given smaller amounts . 
Donaldson said there was no need for the public to stock up on antiviral drugs . 
Asked on BBC Radio 4 's Today program whether people should buy Tamiflu over the internet , he said : `` No , they should not . 
We have a very large stockpile of antiviral drugs the largest in the world . '' 
Commenting on accounts from some swine flu victims who had suggested the virus was no more severe than a cold , he said : `` At the moment we do n't know enough about this virus to draw any conclusions about its severity . 
There have been deaths in Mexico it is premature to conclude that is a mild infection . '' 
In addition to the five Alleyn 's cases , two further children siblings who came into contact with a separate confirmed case in London were confirmed as being infected . 
Yesterday their school , the Dolphin school in Battersea , south-west London , said it would be closed for a few days as a precautionary measure . 
Over the weekend independent schools were issued with advice about what to do in the case of a pandemic , mirroring that already supplied to state schools . 
They are advised to set up text message systems to inform parents of school closures , and web access for pupils to work from home if necessary . 
The advice , drawn up by lawyers for the Independent Schools Council , says : `` Consider whether extra space will be required for effective quarantine of suspected victims . '' 
Melvyn Roffe , chairman of the Boarding Schools ' Association , said the organization had been in daily contact with government officials monitoring the potential for an outbreak among boarding pupils . 
`` We are stocking up on cleaning equipment and making contingency plans , '' he said . 
Later this week the exams watchdog , Ofqual , and the Qualification and Curriculum Authority will meet exam boards and representatives from the Department for Children , Schools and Families -LRB- DCSF -RRB- and the Scottish parliament and Welsh assembly to discuss this year 's exams . 
Next week 's Sats tests are expected to go ahead as planned in primary schools . 
A-level and GCSE exams are scheduled from now into June . 
Another suspected case of H1N1 came to light in Scotland , the fifth in eight days . 
A traveller from Fife , thought to have contracted the virus in Las Vegas , is under voluntary quarantine . 
Scottish officials were investigating another probable case involving a 21-year-old woman from Grampian who recently traveled to New York . 
Nicola Sturgeon , the Scottish health secretary , said further cases were still likely but said the virus appeared to be far less virulent than first feared . 
`` I remain optimistic that our containment strategy at this stage has proved successful , '' she said today . 
Sturgeon also criticised a decision by the Russian government to ban pork imports because of the outbreak . 
`` There 's absolutely not a shred of evidence whatsoever that pork products are n't entirely safe , '' she said . 
`` We 've been operating on the precautionary principle but also in a way which is proportionate , and I would n't think that action was proportionate . '' 
Scotland 's chief medical officer , Dr Harry Burns , said the UK 's veterinary authorities were clear that flu in pigs was mild and `` self-limiting '' and was not a cause for human concern . 
H1N1 had come from a combination of swine , avian and human strains . 
`` There 's absolutely no evidence you can contract influenza from infected pigs , '' he said . 
Health authorities issued an alert for passengers on board a FlyBe short-haul flight from Birmingham to Glasgow on 30 April after a man from Ayrshire and Arran fell ill . 
The man tested positive for swine flu and is being treated at home . 
A relative of the first Britons to catch the virus , Iain and Dawn Askham , from Polmont , near Edinburgh , has been flown home from a North Sea oil rig as a precaution . 
He is not showing any symptoms , and is not among the 19 other `` possible '' cases in Scotland . 
According to the WHO , 21 countries had officially reported 1,085 cases of H1N1 infection . 
China has forced dozens of Mexican nationals in quarantine , with a plane being sent to take them home , while Chinese nationals prepared to leave Mexico . 
