The `` integrity test '' that could potentially shut down the Gulf of Mexico oil gusher has been delayed until at least Wednesday , a setback in the effort to put an end to what has been called the worst environmental disaster in U.S. history . 
BP had vowed to conduct the test , which would involve closing valves on the leaking well 's newly placed cap , by midday Tuesday . 
As the day wore on , however , the well continued to billow black oil into the gulf . 
Late Tuesday evening , retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad W. Allen , the national incident commander , announced that the test had been put off for at least a day . 
As a result of discussions among government scientists and BP officials , Allen said , `` we decided that the process may benefit from additional analysis that will be performed tonight and tomorrow . '' 
BP spokesman Toby Odone offered little elaboration on those discussions , saying officials wanted to make sure `` that the test is done in a way that will produce the results that we need . '' 
The best-case scenario for the test is that it would halt the spewing of the well . 
But the well could fail the test -- and the gusher would return . 
Federal authorities and BP engineers want to see the test create a steady increase in well pressure . 
This would suggest that the Macondo well is intact , and that oil and gas are not leaking into the surrounding mud and rock formations below the gulf floor . 
The well blew out April 20 and destroyed the Deepwater Horizon rig , killing 11 men . 
If the pressure readings are too low , BP 's technicians will abandon the test and , using robotic submersibles , will reopen the valves . 
BP will resume trying to capture as much leaking oil as possible while continuing to drill a relief well that could kill Macondo with mud and concrete . 
`` Everybody hope and pray that we see high pressures here , '' BP Senior Vice President Kent Wells said Tuesday . 
`` Bear with us . 
Let 's do this test . '' 
The test could take at least two days . 
If authorities determine that the well can remain closed -- `` shut in , '' to use the oil industry terminology -- then Macondo would no longer pollute the gulf , and ships would stop collecting or burning oil and gas . 
The relief well is getting close . 
It 's four feet laterally from Macondo , with about 150 feet more to drill vertically until the interception . 
But the target is narrow -- a steel casing slightly less than 10 inches wide , with a seven-inch pipe inside . 
The final stages are painstaking , and BP and the government still say the bottom-kill is not likely to take place until August . 
Allen set up camp in Houston on Tuesday with Energy Secretary Steven Chu for what the retired admiral had anticipated would be `` a consequential day . '' 
The new `` 3 ram capping stack '' was lowered without a hitch onto the reconfigured blowout preventer Monday night . 
A new surface ship , the Helix Producer , was also connected to the well via the `` kill line '' on the blowout preventer , and by Tuesday morning was siphoning about 12,000 barrels -LRB- 504,000 gallons -RRB- of oil a day , Wells said . 
About 8,000 barrels -LRB- 336,000 gallons -RRB- a day have been siphoned and burned through the surface rig Q4000 . 
Those containment efforts will be halted to conduct the integrity test , Wells said . 
The possibility of shutting in the well from the top was raised by BP in the past few weeks . 
The oil company has expressed concern many times about trying to seal the well from the top , citing fears about the condition of the well below the gulf floor . 
During the `` top kill '' attempt in May , the well was taking as much mud as engineers were pumping into it . 
It was not clear whether the mud was leaking into the rock formations or shooting out the cracks and openings in the pipe above the blowout preventer . 
In a recent interview with The Washington Post , Wells said BP had become increasingly confident that the mud had flowed out the top . 
He did not elaborate . 
During a conference call Monday , BP Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles was asked why the new sealing cap and the shut-in strategy had not been attempted earlier . 
He defended the company 's strategy , saying that certain steps could be taken only after engineers had gathered information about the well . 
A major concern all along was to avoid anything to make the situation worse , he said . 
`` The problem is , I 've had to take these steps to learn the things I 've learned , '' he said . 
`` Without taking those steps , it 's unlikely that I would have known what I know now . '' '' 
