The story of the last cataclysmic American oil spill has evolved over time into a straightforward tale of cause and effect : In 1989 , a hard-drinking skipper ran his tanker aground in Alaska , and Exxon was unable to prevent crude from spreading along hundreds of miles of pristine shoreline . 
But the full story of the Exxon Valdez wreck is far more complex , and it offers striking parallels to today 's events in the Gulf of Mexico -- including a central role played by a consortium led by British Petroleum , now known as BP . 
A commission that investigated the Alaska spill found that oil companies cut corners to maximize profits . 
Systems intended to prevent disaster failed , and no backups were in place . 
Regulators were too close to the oil industry and approved woefully inadequate accident response and cleanup plans . 
History is repeating , say officials who investigated the Valdez , because the lessons of two decades ago remain unheeded . 
`` It 's disappointing , '' said 84-year-old Walt Parker , chairman of the Alaska Oil Spill Commission , which made dozens of recommendations for preventing a recurrence . 
`` It 's almost as though we had never written the report . '' 
Marine experts predict that the many panels investigating the Deepwater Horizon blowout -- including a presidential commission that began work this week in New Orleans -- will produce reports with numerous findings that could have been cut and pasted from the 20-year-old report written by Parker 's commission or another body that examined the Valdez accident . 
They also fear those findings may have no more impact than the Valdez conclusions have . 
In the immediate aftermath of the Alaska spill , as in the gulf , there was confusion over who was in charge -- oil companies or government officials . 
Federal authorities eventually asserted themselves but lacked the equipment and personnel to stem the damage . 
Storms slowed the response and spread contamination . 
Cleanup technology was old and ineffective . 
Environmentalists questioned the toxicity of dispersants and asked whether oil companies were using chemicals to hide damage . 
The vast Alaska containment effort recovered only a fraction of the millions of gallons of oil dumped into Prince William Sound . 
The players in the Alaskan drama also look familiar . 
Although Exxon owned the Valdez tanker , it was not responsible for the flawed emergency response plan and did not lead initial containment efforts . 
Those jobs fell to the Alyeska Pipeline Service , a consortium operating the Trans Alaska Pipeline System . 
The consortium 's controlling partner was British Petroleum . 
British Petroleum also supplied the consortium 's top executive , who later resigned under pressure . 
`` BP called the shots , '' said Tom Lakosh , an oil spill researcher . 
The Alaskan commission concluded that cost-cutting by Alyeska contributed to the disaster , just as critics allege that BP 's focus on profits contributed to the gulf spill . 
`` British Petroleum 's leadership essentially was ` asleep at the switch , ' '' the commission 's report concluded . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
