Greenpeace said it wanted the company to adopt greener policies BP filling stations across London have been shut down by activists . 
Environmental group Greenpeace said it had cut fuel supplies to all 50 BP stations in the city . 
The oil firm said 35 to 40 had been shut but many of them have now reopened . 
The protesters stopped the fuel by removing safety switches on forecourts . 
The action comes as BP reported an # 11bn loss after the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico and confirmed chief executive Tony Hayward is to step down . 
Greenpeace said it wanted the company to adopt greener energy policies . 
A BP spokeswoman said a majority of the targeted fuel stations have reopened and the rest will resume normal service by the evening . 
Greenpeace said the safety switches will be returned . 
The action was described by BP as `` an irresponsible and childish act which is interfering with safety systems '' . 
Greenpeace said the protest was being held to urge Bob Dudley , who will take over from Mr Hayward from October , to move away from `` his predecessor 's obsession with high-risk , environmentally-reckless sources of oil '' . 
At one station in Camden , north London , Greenpeace climbers replaced BP 's logo with a new version showing the green `` sunflower '' disappearing into a sea of oil . 
At others , protesters put up signs saying : `` Closed . 
Moving beyond petroleum . '' 
The organization 's executive director John Sauven said : `` The moment has come for BP to move beyond oil . '' 
A spokesman for the Metropolitan police said they were monitoring the situation but no crime had been reported and no arrests had been made so far . 
The action follows the worst oil spill in US history , triggered by an explosion on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig off Louisiana in the Gulf of Mexico on 20 April . 
BP placed a containment cap on the well last week , stopping the flow for the first time since April . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
