BP boss Hayward says he was ` demonised ' over oil spill Mr Hayward is set to join the board of BP 's Russian joint venture The outgoing boss of BP believes he was `` demonised and vilified '' over the firm 's Gulf of Mexico oil spill crisis . 
But chief executive Tony Hayward - who is to leave the top job in October - accepted that the firm could not move on with him at the helm . 
His departure was confirmed as BP reported a record $ 17bn -LRB- # 11bn -RRB- loss , having set aside $ 32bn to cover the costs of the spill . 
BP 's managing director Bob Dudley will replace him in the top job . 
`` This is a very sad day for me personally , '' Mr Hayward told reporters . 
`` Whether it is fair or unfair is not the point . 
I became the public face -LRB- of the disaster -RRB- and was demonised and vilified . 
He added : `` BP can not move on in the US with me as its leader ... Life is n't fair . 
`` Sometimes you step off the pavement and get hit by a bus . '' 
BP chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg praised the contribution Mr Hayward had made to BP during 28 years of service - but said he was not the right man to lead the rebuilding of the firm . 
The outgoing boss will be able to claim a pension worth about # 600,000 a year when he reaches his 55th birthday . 
He is currently 53 . 
Because he has left by mutual consent , the terms of his contract will be honored , meaning he will also receive a full year 's salary plus retain the rights on BP shares which could be worth million of pounds . 
Mr Hayward is also likely to retain a role within the company , with BP planning to nominate him as a non-executive director of its Russian joint venture , TNK-BP . 
The latest comments are unlikely to win Mr Hayward much sympathy in many quarters in the US , where the media has portrayed him as the public face of the world 's worst environmental disaster , including the deaths of 11 men in the rig explosion that preceded it . 
Critics argued that , as the man in charge , it was Mr Hayward 's job to take the heat . 
He did not help his cause with some misguided remarks about wanting his life back and optimistic comments about the clean-up operation . 
Other public relations own-goals included his refusal to answer questions put to him by a congressional sub-committee and his decision to participate in a JP Morgan yacht race around the Isle of Wight . 
BP : Capping the crisis . 
Jon Sopel will have the latest political and market reaction in a special live program on the BBC World Service and BBC World News from 1830 GMT . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
