Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg : BP still in ` grand shape ' despite record losses BP says it has set aside $ 32.2 bn -LRB- # 20.8 bn -RRB- to cover the costs linked to the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The company said the charge gave it a loss of $ 17bn for the three months between April and June - a UK record . 
BP 's chairman said the costs estimate was based on the company 's belief that it was not grossly negligent , and added the bill could be higher . 
BP also said Bob Dudley , head of the Gulf clean-up operation , will replace Tony Hayward as chief executive Mr Hayward will leave his post by mutual agreement in October . 
He is likely to retain a role within the company . 
BP plans to nominate him as a non-executive director of its Russian joint venture , TNK-BP . 
BP also announced it would increase its asset sales over the next 18 months to $ 30bn , a total that includes the $ 7bn-worth earmarked for sale last week . 
The $ 32.2 bn cost of the clean-up includes the $ 20bn already set aside in an escrow account for compensation claims . 
`` That estimate is also based on our belief that we are not grossly negligent , '' BP chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg told the BBC 's business editor Robert Peston . 
`` Of course we will not know precisely because it depends on how many claims are coming in and -LRB- other -RRB- things that could happen . '' 
But he insisted that the company was in good financial shape , with strong cashflow . 
`` It 's of course a huge loss that overshadows everything else , but the underlying performance of the company is actually strong , '' he told the BBC . 
`` There is no worry about our financial position and our ability to get through this . 
It 's of course a tragedy and it has large consequences , but we have no doubt that we will be able to rebuild the company , '' he said . 
Stripping out the oil spill costs , BP made a second quarter profit , on a replacement cost basis , of $ 5bn , compared with $ 2.9 bn for the second quarter of 2009 . 
AOL Time Warner : $ 54.2 bn loss in first quarter 2002 General Motors : $ 39bn loss in third quarter 2007 Bob Dudley , currently managing director and a US citizen , told ABC 's Good Morning America program , that BP would become a leaner organization . 
`` It will be smaller and financially , it will grow . 
We 're going to learn a lot from this incident and this accident ... There 's no question that we will change as a company . '' 
The announcements were welcomed by most investors for their clear-cut approach . 
Peter Hitchens , of Panmure Gordon stockbrokers , said : `` It 's basically a kitchen sink job ... `` I think it 's the board trying to wipe the slate clean . '' 
It is very difficult to describe a $ 17bn loss for three months of trading as a sparkling performance . 
But for BP it could have been a lot worse '' End Quote Robert Peston BBC business editor Tony Hayward said that , now oil had stopped spilling from the Macondo well , it was a good time to leave his post . 
`` With the leak now capped , we have reached a significant milestone . 
This provides a firm basis to reshape the company , '' he said . 
On Monday , the BBC revealed that 53-year old Mr Hayward will receive a year 's salary plus benefits , together worth more than # 1m . 
He will also be entitled to draw an annual pension of # 600,000 once he reaches the age of 55 . 
Mr Hayward 's pension pot is valued at about # 11m and he will keep his rights to shares under a long-term performance scheme which could - depending on BP 's stock market recovery - eventually be worth several million pounds . 
Carl-Henric Svanberg said Mr Hayward would be missed . 
`` The BP board is deeply saddened to lose a CEO whose success over some three years in driving the performance of the company was so widely and deservedly admired , '' he said . 
The handling of the explosion on the drilling rig off Louisiana on 20 April , which killed 11 workers and triggered the worst oil spill in the US , raised questions about Mr Hayward 's leadership . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
