Syria crisis : Can UN mission succeed ? 
By Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut The UN mission is seen by many as the last throw of the dice for a political solution in Syria Will the new acronym UNSMIS - the UN Supervision Mission in Syria - pass into the Middle East 's lexicon and take up its place alongside those of other deployments , such as UNTSO and Unifil , which have for decades been helping keep some of the region 's potential flashpoints from exploding ? 
Or will the mission collapse and withdraw in disarray , unable to carry out its task of monitoring compliance with an already highly compromised ceasefire , and with chief envoy Kofi Annan 's six-point plan for stabilising the country and fostering dialogue on its future ? 
The Americans and others are clearly sceptical , and have already warned that their support for a renewal of the mission , when its initial mandate expires in three months ' time , should not be taken for granted . 
It is certainly unlike any other peacekeeping mission the UN has embarked on in the Middle East , and possibly anywhere else . 
Normally it is a case of monitoring respect of a formal truce involving states , not trying to ensure compliance with a work-in-progress peace plan in a situation which in some ways resembles a civil war . 
Syrian-led political process to address the aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people 2 . 
UN-supervised cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties to protect civilians 3 . 
All parties to ensure provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the fighting , and implement a daily two-hour humanitarian pause 4 . 
Authorities to intensify the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons 5 . 
Authorities to ensure freedom of movement throughout the country for journalists 6 . 
Authorities to respect freedom of association and the right to demonstrate peacefully In other words , the observers are being expected to help create the peace they are supposed to be monitoring . 
Mr Annan himself has said the Security Council 's decision to deploy 300 unarmed UN monitors is `` a pivotal moment in the stabilisation of the country '' . 
That is certainly what he hopes : that the presence of the monitors will in itself help to bring the situation under control , by `` changing the political dynamics on the ground '' , as his spokesman Ahmad Fawzi put it . 
It is clearly a gamble , a last throw of the dice for a political solution to the Syrian crisis . 
It is hard to imagine any other peace project being more balanced and reasonable than the Annan plan , or garnering the unanimous international support that he has marshalled behind it . 
So if this does not work , nothing will . 
It will be back to a trial of strength on the ground , with predictably drastic consequences . 
Despite the obvious imperfections of the ceasefire , to put it mildly , the prognosis for the observer mission is not totally black . 
Syrian troops were supposed to have withdrawn from population centres by 10 April Violence has flared and sputtered in many places . 
But overall the levels of hostilities and the casualty figures are below pre-ceasefire averages . 
The tiny number of observers already deployed as the advance party have covered a surprising amount of ground , especially considering that they are also engaged in setting up liaison mechanisms with both sides and organising logistics for the full deployment . 
There have been several instances in the past few days - in Hama and Douma , for example - where visits by the monitors have taken place peacefully , only for violence to erupt again the next day . 
In both instances , the monitors returned later to verify what had happened . 
But in Homs , where two observers are now permanently stationed , the casualty figures are no longer topping the nationwide lists as they did day after day before the monitors arrived . 
The heavy weapons which wrought such carnage seem to have been more or less silenced there . 
So the deployment of the full 300-strong contingent over the coming weeks should have a considerable impact . 
They will obviously split down into small groups , and - presuming they get the freedom of access and mobility the UN has demanded and been promised - they should be able to move swiftly from one trouble-spot to another as required . 
Their task is not just to monitor compliance with the truce , but to ensure that all clauses of the Annan plan are fully implemented . 
Most crucially , that means verifying regime compliance with the provision that it must withdraw its troops , tanks and heavy weapons from population centres . 
According to Mr Fawzi , Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Muallim has informed Mr Annan in writing two days ago that those provisions have already been carried out - despite much evidence to the contrary . 
But the commitment is there , which means that confronting the authorities with evidence of breaches should in theory lead to their swift correction . 
Much will depend not just on the regime 's intentions , but on those of the various armed opposition groups . 
Once fully deployed , the UNSMIS monitors should be able to gauge the validity of the regime 's assertions that the post-truce violence has been provoked by the rebels - a contention strongly backed by Russia . 
If either side , or both , decides to keep up the violence , the observers might ultimately face no choice but to withdraw , especially if the unarmed monitors start taking casualties . 
But if the regime is clearly seen to be to blame , and consistently out of compliance with agreements it has signed , the consequences would be considerable . 
Russia , China and others who have protected Syria from punitive action by the Security Council would find themselves perhaps unable to continue doing so . 
It is doubtful that Damascus can go it alone , especially without Russia . 
If the Russians themselves remain as committed to the Annan plan as they say they are , and the rebel side complies , the regime may have no choice but to implement steps - such as freeing all detainees and allowing demonstrations to be held unhindered - that would threaten its grip on much of the country and weaken its position in any settlement dialogue . 
Some Arab analysts in touch with regime thinking believe it does understand that there will be a price to be paid for survival in any form - perhaps the formation of a government with opposition figures prominent in it . 
But many obstacles will have to be overcome on the ground before events reach anywhere near that point . 
And given the fate of the ceasefire so far , optimism is in short supply . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
