The UN hopes to deploy as many as 300 observers A sharp rise in the number of deaths in the Syrian uprising is casting fresh doubt on the success of a UN peace plan , and testing a ceasefire deal . 
Activists said nearly 70 people were killed on Monday , most in a government crackdown in the city of Hama . 
The US said the UN monitoring mission was `` risky and dangerous '' . 
The UN is pressing to increase its monitors from a handful to 300 and chief envoy Kofi Annan is currently briefing the Security Council again . 
A UN-brokered ceasefire came into effect on 12 April , but although the overall level of violence has dropped since then , President Bashar al-Assad 's government has been accused of failing to abide by key terms of the truce plan . 
Mr Annan 's spokesman said there were credible reports that people who met monitors were then approached and sometimes killed by security forces . 
In remarks broadcast on UN television , Ahmed Fawzi described the reports as `` totally unacceptable '' . 
He added there was evidence Syria had not withdrawn heavy weapons from urban centres as promised . '' 
-LRB- The Syrian authorities -RRB- are claiming that this has happened , '' he said , quoted by Reuters news agency . 
`` Satellite imagery , however , and credible reports show that this has not fully happened , so this is unacceptable , and joint special envoy Kofi Annan will be saying this to the Security Council today -LRB- Tuesday -RRB- when he addresses them in closed session . '' 
Activists have pointed to the situation in Hama as an example of the dangers of the UN mission . 
There have been attacks every day since the ceasefire deal was announced - the regime is in constant breach of this ceasefire '' End Quote Samer Hama resident One activist there , Mousab al-Hamadi , told the Associated Press -LRB- AP -RRB- news agency dissidents were punished for coming out to greet the visiting UN observers on Sunday , when they chanted `` Long live Syria ! 
Down with Assad '' . 
Syrian troops reportedly fired shells and automatic weapons in the northern Arbaeen and Mashaa al-Arbaeen districts on Monday . 
Some 40 people were said to have died . 
Another activist told AP : `` Those observers brought destruction upon us . 
Any area they visit , the regime attacks . 
It 's a tragedy . '' 
Samer , in Hama , has told the BBC government attacks on the city have continued despite the ceasefire deal , and that Monday 's assault was the worst since the truce was announced . 
`` There have been attacks every day since the ceasefire deal was announced . 
The regime is in constant breach of this ceasefire . 
`` What happens is the observers visit neighborhoods in the city , then once they leave , the shooting and shelling starts again . '' 
He said activists had been expecting further attacks on Tuesday , and that all shops apart from chemists were closed as a result . 
The government 's brief account said only that security forces `` pursued armed terrorist groups '' which had been attacking and killing citizens in the area . 
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said rebels had earlier targeted the car of an army officer in the city , killing him and an assistant . 
And on Tuesday it reported that three intelligence officers were killed in Damascus . 
Syrian TV also reported a car bomb had exploded in the center of the capital on Tuesday , injuring three people . 
A similar situation to Hama was reported in the city of Deraa , where anti-government protesters who greeted UN observers were later reportedly subjected to tear gas and gunfire from security forces . 
The BBC 's Jim Muir , in neighbouring Lebanon , says that , in contrast , the situation in the flashpoint city of Homs has been quieter , as two UN observers are now permanently stationed there . 
Syrian-led political process to address the aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people 2 . 
UN-supervised cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties to protect civilians 3 . 
All parties to ensure provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the fighting , and implement a daily two-hour humanitarian pause 4 . 
Authorities to intensify the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons 5 . 
Authorities to ensure freedom of movement throughout the country for journalists 6 . 
Authorities to respect freedom of association and the right to demonstrate peacefully He says that is why UN officials are calling this a `` pivotal moment '' in the pacification process , hoping that the deployment of the full contingent of 300 monitors over the coming weeks will change the political dynamics and prepare the way for dialogue towards a settlement . 
The UN currently has 11 unarmed observers under its Supervision Mission to Syria -LRB- UNSMIS -RRB- . 
The UN passed a resolution on 14 April for a total of 30 , then another resolution last Saturday to increase the number to up to 300 . 
Mr Annan , the UN and Arab League envoy to Syria , has said he believes the deployment of the 300 monitors can begin next week . 
But following Monday 's violence , US permanent representative to the UN Susan Rice told the Security Council : `` The regime 's long track record is one of dependable deceit and deception , thus this Syrian mission is unusually risky and dangerous . '' 
UN political chief B Lynn Pascoe added that `` human rights violations are still perpetrated with impunity '' . 
On Monday , UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon again insisted that Syria `` should provide full protection of our monitors and ensure their freedom of access , freedom of movement '' . 
The UN says about 9,000 people have died since pro-democracy protests began in March 2011 . 
In February , the Syrian government put the death toll at 3,838 - 2,493 civilians and 1,345 security forces personnel . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
