2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Seven men who played Canada s Super 7 lottery together in December 2003 were awarded a $ 12.5 million jackpot plus $ 2.35 million in interest after being declared the rightful winners , the Toronto Star reported . 
Each will receive $ 2.1 million . 
It s a little surreal , one of the men , Joseph Reaman , 35 , of Ridgeville , Ontario , said at a news conference introducing the winners , according to the Canadian Broadcasting Corp . 
I got a baby on the way , and he s pretty much set for life . 
The correction comes after three members of a family -- two of whom worked for a Burlington , Ontario , lottery outlet were charged last year on suspicion of stealing the winning ticket , according to the CBC . 
Stocks at fresh highs in ` bull vs. bear battle ' U.S. stocks managed to tick higher Thursday , pushing the Dow and S&P to their highest levels since the summer of 2008 The major indexes have been inching higher for months , but Stifel Nicolaus managing director Tom Schrader expects stocks will soon head lower The Dow and S&P 500 failed to close above key psychological levels breached earlier in Thursday 's session `` We 've got a classic bull versus bear battle going at these high levels , and I would n't be surprised to see the market pullback between 8 % and 10 % , '' Schrader said . 
Matthew Nestor , left , Jason Hayes and William Moyer were accused of obstructing justice . 
Three former Pennsylvania police officers accused of trying to cover up the investigation into the beating death of an undocumented Mexican immigrant were acquitted of the top charge of conspiracy . 
A federal jury found former Shenandoah Police Chief Matthew Nestor and officers William Moyer and Jason Hayes not guilty of conspiracy to obstruct a federal investigation in the July 2008 death of Luis Ramirez , a court official told CNN . 
The official had knowledge of the verdict but was not authorized to speak . 
Nestor was found guilty of falsifying reports and Moyer was convicted of lying to the FBI . 
Hayes , who was also accused of falsifying police reports , was acquitted of the two charges against him . 
`` I 'd just like to thank all the supporters I had , especially my family , friends and neighbors . 
I had so many well-wishers from Shenandoah , '' Moyer said after the verdict , according to CNN affiliate WNEP . 
Hayes said he will reapply for his job with the Shenandoah Police Department , WNEP reported . 
Ramirez , a day laborer and father of two engaged to a woman from Shenandoah , died three days after he was beaten into a coma in a street fight with members of the small mining town 's high school football team . 
Derrick M. Donchak and Brandon J. Piekarsky were convicted of simple assault in state court last year but acquitted of murder , prompting an outcry from Latino groups and politicians . 
Pennsylvania Gov. Ed Rendell urged the federal government to pursue the case , resulting in hate crime convictions for the two young men . 
At the time of Ramirez 's death , Hayes was dating Piekarsky 's mother and the two are now engaged , according to WNEP . 
Moyer 's son was a high school freshman who played football with the youths involved in the attack , according to an indictment . 
The three men were accused of helping the boys conceal their roles and of falsifying police reports . 
Moyer was also charged with witness tampering and lying to the FBI . 
Each of them testified in their defense and denied the allegations . 
An earlier ruling from a lower court said Rahm Emanuel did n't meet residency requirements for mayoral candidates . 
The Illinois Supreme Court has issued a ruling allowing Rahm Emanuel 's name on the Chicago mayoral ballot . 
The court was considering a previous appellate court ruling that the former White House chief of staff does not meet the state 's residency requirements for mayoral candidates . 
The state Supreme Court granted a stay on that decision and agreed to a motion for an expedited ruling . 
Emanuel is due to be in a mayoral debate Thursday night with the other major candidates : Gery Chico , Miguel del Valle and Carol Moseley Braun . 
The election is set for February 22 . 
AT&T last quarter locked in millions more iPhone users who wo n't be switching -LRB- without penalty -RRB- to Verizon anytime soon . 
A roundup of today 's CNNMoney news : AT&T locks in 4 million iPhone users : The fourth quarter marked the last full quarter of AT&T 's iPhone exclusivity agreement with Apple . 
Verizon will begin taking pre-orders for the phone on Feb. 3 and selling it in stores on Feb. 10 . 
Verizon 's iPhone wo n't spell disaster for AT&T . 
That 's partly because AT&T customers will have to pay a $ 300 + termination fee and buy a whole new phone if they want to switch . 
First iPad newspaper to launch next week : News Corp. 's iPad-exclusive newspaper , The Daily , will be the guinea pig for Apple 's new iPad subscription option . 
There has been a common thread in the recent political upheaval in Tunisia and Egypt : Social media has played a role in both influencing the protests and reporting on them . 
`` Social media is key to the revolution taking place in North Africa , and this may actually be the first time a government leader has lost power because of social media , '' said Darrell West , the vice president for governance studies at the Brookings Institution , referring to the ousting of former Tunisian president Zine El Abidine Ben Ali . 
However , social media is n't strictly a tool for those with a gripe with their government . 
Governments themselves have shown a willingness to use websites like Twitter for their own means in the wake of unrest , according to James Carafano , a senior research fellow at the Heritage Foundation . 
Any normal player might have gotten lost in the mayhem and hype of Brigham Young University 's most anticipated basketball game in school history . 
Jimmer Fredette is no normal player . 
The senior guard led the Cougars to a 71-58 rout of No. 4 ranked San Diego State Wednesday night at the Marriott Center . 
Though the nail-biting action of two top-10 teams battling it out lasted until the fourth quarter , the Aztecs fell short in their attempts to stave off Fredette 's offensive charge . 
As SI.com s Kelli Anderson writes : `` The Aztecs , the best defensive team in the conference , threw all sorts of defenders at Fredette , from D.J. Gay to Billy White to Chase Tapley , sometimes two at a time . 
The defensive pressure frequently forced him to change his mind in mid-air and pass instead of shoot -LRB- and he coughed up the ball four times -RRB- but he still filled the bucket . '' 
The game marked Fredette 's 15th in which he scored 30 points or more , clearly making him one of the school 's most fabled athletes and one of the year s biggest successes . 
He is on track to reach a rare milestone as well : nabbing a scoring title and the National Player of the Year award . 
He would join Bradley s Hersey Hawkins and Purdue s Glenn Robinson as the only three players since 1970 to achieve the honor . 
These small hand axes are at least 100,000 years old . 
A team of scientists found these tools in the United Arab Emirates . 
Scientists have discovered new evidence suggesting that modern humans first left Africa to explore Eurasia much earlier than previously thought . 
An international team of scientists has uncovered a tool kit that indicates that modern humans , who looked and perhaps behaved much like us , must have lived in eastern Arabia about 100,000 to 125,000 years ago . 
The collection of small hand axes , scrapers and other tools was found in Jebel Faya , United Arab Emirates . 
A report about the discovery appears in the journal Science . 
The people who made these tools `` are our ancestors , I have no doubt about that , '' said Hans-Peter Uerpmann , of the University of Tubingen in Germany , who collaborated on the project , at a press teleconference Wednesday . 
But the findings still do not prove definitively that modern humans made these tools , as the researchers did not find human remains near them , said Ted Goebel , anthropologist at Texas A&M University , who was not involved in the study . 
They potentially could have been made by Neanderthals or Neanderthal-like hominids , who were already in Eurasia at that time , Goebel said . 
Almost 300 protesters arrived at Athens University this week and are staging a hunger strike . 
Riot police in Athens , Greece , late Thursday surrounded a law school where 237 immigrants are waging a hunger strike , according to a Greek newspaper . 
The protesters , who arrived this week from the Greek island of Crete , are demanding residence permits , Kathimerini reported , and the police arrived after failed attempts to move the protesters to another building in central Athens . 
Athens University s Law School and the government have been at odds over whose responsibility it was to handle the demonstrators . 
The prosecutor s office for the appeals court announced an inquiry into whether the university failed to take action to prevent the immigrants from occupying the building . 
The Athens News Agency explained that under Greek law , university campuses are off-limits to police unless they have been invited or a serious crime has been committed . 
Greece s majority party says leftists have abused the law and are using the immigrants as political pawns . 
Charlie Sheen was taken by ambulance from his home to a Los Angeles hospital Thursday morning , his representative said . 
`` All I know is he has severe abdominal pains and went to the hospital , '' Sheen representative Stan Rosenfield told CNN . 
New York has never seen as much snow in January as it has seen this month . 
This has been the snowiest January the Big Apple has on its books . 
The National Weather Service reports these January totals , with old records in parentheses : Central Park : 36 inches -LRB- 27.4 , 1925 -RRB- Newark , New Jersey : 37.3 inches -LRB- 31.6 , 1996 -RRB- LaGuardia Airport : 32.4 inches -LRB- 27.6 , 1996 -RRB- Bridgeport , Connecticut : 41.8 inches -LRB- 26.2 , 1965 -RRB- Islip , New York : 34.2 inches -LRB- 21.5 , 2005 -RRB- Editor 's note : Nancy Grace 's new show on HLN , `` Nancy Grace : America 's Missing , '' is dedicated to finding 50 people in 50 days . 
As part of the effort , which relies heavily on audience participation , CNN.com news blog `` This Just In '' will feature the stories of the missing . 
This is the ninth case , and it will air on HLN at 9 p.m. ET . 
Amanda Jones has not been seen since August 14 , 2005 , when she was 26 . 
The loan processor was last seen at the Civic Center in Hillsboro , Missouri , at the horse grounds . 
Jones was allegedly meeting the man she believed to be the father of her unborn son at the center . 
Her car was found at the center , unlocked with her purse still inside . 
She has not been seen since that day . 
`` When we have information about a specific , credible threat , we will issue a formal alert providing as much information as we can , '' Napolitano said . 
That information will include a summary of the threat , steps authorities are taking to guard the public and what the public can do , she said . 
`` The alerts will be specific to the threat . 
They may recommend certain actions or suggest looking for specific suspicious behavior . 
And they will have a specified end date , '' Napolitano said in a speech at George Washington University . 
Los Angeles detectives assigned to the Grim Sleeper serial killer case say they are investigating two additional homicides that may be the work of suspect Lonnie Franklin Jr. , according to an aide for an L.A. councilman in whose district some of the killings took place . 
The detectives also said there are four missing persons cases that may be related to the overall investigation , the aide told CNN.com Thursday . 
In July , 57-year-old Lonnie David Franklin Jr. was arrested and charged with 10 murders and one attempted murder related to slayings that date to 1985 . 
He has pleaded not guilty . 
In 2009 , CNN.com published a special cold case interactive on the decades-long hunt for the killer . 
Police were led to Franklin after his 28-year-old son was arrested and gave a DNA swab , authorities said . 
When authorities announced the arrest , they revealed that Franklin had , for a time , worked as a garage attendant at a Los Angeles police station . 
Detectives delivered the news about the additional cases at a community meeting Wednesday night at Bethel AME Church in South Los Angeles . 
They were responding to a question from a family member of one of the two homicide victims , according to the Los Angeles Times . 
Dennis Gleason , a spokesman for Eighth District Councilman Bernard Parks , told CNN that the possible additional homicide victims were identified through photographs related to the Grim Sleeper case that police released to the public in December . 
Shortly after Franklin 's arrest , police searched his home and said they found Polaroids and videotape of many women . 
In December , investigators released some of those photographs -LRB- viewable here -RRB- , which generated leads , they said . 
Franklin is in custody awaiting trial . 
populous Arab nation on Friday . 
`` The barrier of fear is broken , '' ElBaradei told reporters after he arrived in Egypt from Europe on Thursday . 
`` And it will not come back . '' 
The county has been bracing for a huge outpouring of protests after Friday prayers . 
The other posting on the WikiLeaks site that caught CNN.com 's attention : `` WikiLeaks is looking for the most reliable and trustworthy organizations to collaborate with on our upcoming releases . 
If you would like to register your interest please fill out the form below . 
Should an appropriate collaboration opportunity present itself we will be in touch . 
Storms that stretched from the southern Appalachian mountains to coastal Massachusetts are the latest in a slew of wintry weather that continues to blanket much of the region . 
Even though the storm lasted a single day , it caused major problems in some areas , posting record snowfall numbers across the region , according to the National Weather Service . 
What will drug smugglers think of next ? 
Grainy video from the Department of Homeland Security shows three men priming the throwing arm of the mechanism . 
Two of the men step away , and when the remaining man lets go , the catapult chucks its wares over the fence . 
Various media reports claim the device was capable of launching about 4 pounds of pot -LRB- or , presumably , any substance -RRB- . 
Kelley Williams-Bolar left the Summit County Jail on Wednesday , having served nine days of her 10-day sentence , the Akron Beacon Journal reported . 
Williams-Bolar , a single mother living in subsidized housing in Akron , used her father 's address to register her two daughters in the high-achieving suburban Copley-Fairlawn school district . 
Copley-Fairlawn said the improper registration cost it $ 30,000 in lost tuition and $ 6,000 in investigative costs . 
The case has drawn national media attention and outrage , much of it due to its racial undertones : Williams-Bolar is black , while the Copley-Fairlawn schools are predominantly white . 
A Google search for Williams-Bolar 's name turns up 131,000 results . 
Williams-Bolar told CNN affiliate WEWS-TV in Cleveland that she plans to appeal her conviction . 
The local chapter of the Rev. Al Sharpton 's National Action Network is trying to raise money to fund the appeal , the Beacon Journal reported . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
