2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Storms that stretched from the southern Appalachian mountains to coastal Massachusetts are the latest in a slew of wintry weather that continues to blanket much of the region . 
Even though the storm lasted a single day , it caused major problems in some areas , posting record snowfall numbers across the region , according to the National Weather Service . 
What will drug smugglers think of next ? 
Grainy video from the Department of Homeland Security shows three men priming the throwing arm of the mechanism . 
Two of the men step away , and when the remaining man lets go , the catapult chucks its wares over the fence . 
Various media reports claim the device was capable of launching about 4 pounds of pot -LRB- or , presumably , any substance -RRB- . 
Kelley Williams-Bolar left the Summit County Jail on Wednesday , having served nine days of her 10-day sentence , the Akron Beacon Journal reported . 
Williams-Bolar , a single mother living in subsidized housing in Akron , used her father 's address to register her two daughters in the high-achieving suburban Copley-Fairlawn school district . 
Copley-Fairlawn said the improper registration cost it $ 30,000 in lost tuition and $ 6,000 in investigative costs . 
The case has drawn national media attention and outrage , much of it due to its racial undertones : Williams-Bolar is black , while the Copley-Fairlawn schools are predominantly white . 
A Google search for Williams-Bolar 's name turns up 131,000 results . 
Williams-Bolar told CNN affiliate WEWS-TV in Cleveland that she plans to appeal her conviction . 
The local chapter of the Rev. Al Sharpton 's National Action Network is trying to raise money to fund the appeal , the Beacon Journal reported . 
1970s , a law enforcement source said . 
Alcala , 67 , is currently on death row in California for killing four women and a 12-year-old girl there . 
He was convicted of those crimes in February 2010 and sentenced the following month . 
The California murders took place between November 1977 and June 1979 and covered a wide swath of suburban Los Angeles , from Burbank to El Segundo . 
In 1978 , Alcala was a winning bachelor on the television show `` The Dating Game . '' 
At the time , he had been convicted in the 1968 rape of an 8-year-old girl , authorities said . 
He served a 34-month sentence . 
Winter weather -- A winter storm is causing power outages and airport runway closings in the Northeast . 
New York and Boston are expected to receive 8 to 12 inches of snow before it 's done , CNN meteorologist Sean Morris said . 
Both the District of Columbia government and district public schools will be closed all day Thursday . 
Financial crisis final report -- The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission will release its report on the causes of the financial and economic crisis . 
The report will be delivered to the president and Congress and will be available to the public on the commission 's website , through the Government Printing Office , and as a paperback and an e-book . 
The commission reviewed millions of pages of documents , interviewed more than 700 witnesses , and held 19 days of public hearings in New York , Washington and communities across the country . 
Senate Tea Party Caucus -- Tea Party activists from around the country will gather on Capitol Hill on Thursday for a question-and-answer session with three senators at the first official gathering of the Senate Tea Party Caucus . 
`` What we 're trying to do , with Rand Paul , Mike Lee , and I 'm sure eventually others , is to make sure all the activists know that we 're still listening , '' Sen. Jim DeMint , R-South Carolina , told CNN . 
`` We want to get their input , we want to keep them up to date with what we 're doing . 
So it 's more a forum than a caucus to keep that interaction going . '' 
DeMint , along with Paul of Kentucky and Lee of Utah , are currently the only three members of the Senate Tea Party Caucus . 
State of homeland security -- Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano is expected to officially announce Thursday that the color-coded threat alert system in place for nine years will go away in April . 
It will be replaced by a new system , which Napolitano will unveil at what the department is calling the `` State of America 's Homeland Security address '' at George Washington University . 
Uprising in Egypt -- Egyptian Nobel Peace Prize laureate and opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei is returning Thursday to the country , which has been convulsed by unprecedented protests for the past two days . 
ElBaradei will participate in protests himself on Friday , calling on longtime President Hosni Mubarak to retire , ElBaradei 's brother says . 
Meanwhile , the Muslim Brotherhood has called for its followers to demonstrate after Friday prayers -- the first time in the current round of unrest that the largest opposition bloc has told supporters to go out on the streets . 
Davos World Economic Forum -- CEOs , world leaders and economists from all over the world are gathered in Davos , Switzerland , to discuss the future of the global economy . 
This year 's theme is `` The New Reality . '' 
Have CEOs changed the way they run their companies ? 
Is the new reality that growth will be stuck in single digits ? 
A forum spokesman said `` a small firework went off at the back entrance '' of the host hotel Thursday , causing a brief scare . 
Former President Bill Clinton is scheduled to attend a party Thursday night at the hotel , one of the most prestigious in Davos . 
Challenger anniversary events -- The 25th anniversary of the space shuttle Challenger accident is Friday , and several events are planned for Thursday : NASA remembers the crews of Apollo 1 , Challenger and Columbia , and all those who have given their lives for the sake of exploration and discovery . 
NASA Administrator Charles Bolden and Deputy Administrator Lori Garver will lay a wreath at Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia at 10 a.m. . 
A wreath will be laid at 10:30 a.m. at the Space Mirror Memorial at Kennedy Space Center . 
Kennedy Center director and former astronaut Bob Cabana will take part in the ceremony . 
At NASA 's Johnson Space Center in Houston , Center Director Michael L. Coats will be joined by astronaut family members to lay a wreath at the Astronaut Memorial Tree Grove at 12:30 p.m. ET . 
Snow may have blanketed the Northeast corridor , but that does n't mean the news is taking the day off . 
CNN.com Live has the latest from Capitol Hill and around the globe today . 
10:00 am ET - Economic outlook hearing - The economy was a key focal point of President Obama 's State of the Union address , and it 's the topic of discussion at a Senate Budget Committee hearing . 
The committee will look at the economic outlook for this fiscal year . 
The five most popular stories on CNN.com in the past 24 hours , according to NewsPulse . 
Another winter blast to hit East Coast : A quick-hitting Northeast snowstorm that began coating the nation 's capital Wednesday has forced the cancellation of hundreds of flights for travelers in New England and the Eastern Seaboard . 
20 questions that could change your life : If you 're like most people , you became obsessed with questions around the age of two or three , and scientists now know that continuing to ask them can help keep your mind nimble however old you eventually become . 
Dead councilwoman faced possible sanctions : A Nevada city councilwoman who faced possible sanctions over a travel expense voucher and public comments was found dead with her husband Tuesday , hours before a City Council meeting with her issues on the agenda . 
Jimmy Buffett got stitches for cut from stage : Singer-songwriter Jimmy Buffett fell off a concert stage and was injured at the end of a show in Sydney , Australia , Wednesday night , according to his manager . 
Body identified as Texas baby sitter , 15 : A body found near Lubbock , Texas , has been identified as that of a baby sitter seen in a motel surveillance video with a longtime family friend charged in the case , police said . 
Giffords moves to rehabilitation hospital : U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords was making `` lightning speed '' progress for a brain injury and had the drain for brain fluid removed from her head , her doctors said . 
Are you ready for the cutest , most adorable faux sporting event of the year ? 
Animal Planet has announced the lineup for Puppy Bowl VII , the annual Super Bowl antidote pitting irresistible pups against each other and a slew of chew toys on the gridiron . 
The football-with-puppies game has aired the same day as its fellow venerated American tradition , the Super Bowl , for the past seven years . 
The 20-pup starting lineup was assembled from shelters and rescues across the country and as far as the U.S. Virgin Islands , all of whom will be vying for the title of MVP , or most valuable puppy -LRB- surely you knew that -RRB- . 
An American missionary was fatally shot in Mexico on Wednesday , police said . 
The preliminary investigation indicated that Nancy Davis , 59 , and her husband were traveling on a Mexican highway near the city of San Fernando , Mexico , when they were confronted by gunmen in a black pickup , the Pharr Police Department in Texas said in a statement . 
San Fernando is south of the border city of Reynosa in Tamaulipas state . 
`` The gunmen were attempting to stop them and the victims accelerated in efforts of getting away from them , '' the police statement said . 
`` At a certain point the gunmen discharged a weapon at the victim 's vehicle and a bullet struck the victim Nancy Shuman Davis on the head . '' 
Davis ' husband , identified as Sam Davis by family friends , drove their truck `` at high rate of speed '' to the Pharr International Bridge , which crosses the Rio Grande . 
Nancy Davis was taken to a hospital in nearby McAllen , where she was pronounced dead about 90 minutes later . 
A quick-hitting Northeast snowstorm that began coating the nation 's capital Wednesday has forced the cancellation of hundreds of flights for travelers in New England and the Eastern Seaboard , according to airline spokesmen . 
Winter storm warnings were in effect Wednesday from the southern Appalachian mountains to coastal Massachusetts and were expected to expire Thursday morning , said CNN meteorologist Sean Morris . 
Snow was falling about an inch an hour in Washington , D.C. , which was expected to receive 4 to 6 inches Wednesday evening , he said . 
Federal employees and most schools in Washington ended business early on Wednesday . 
New York is expected to receive 8 to 12 inches of snow starting about midnight , Morris said . 
Utah has a state flower , a state fossil , a state cooking pot and 21 other official symbols . 
It might soon add a state gun . 
The state House passed a measure Wednesday , by a 51-19 vote , that would make the Browning M1911 pistol - designed by Utah s John Moses Browning in the early 20th century - the state firearm . 
The bill now goes to the state Senate . 
The bill 's sponsor , Republican Rep. Carl Wimmer , has said the measure aims to honor Browning . 
His M1911 was used as a standard U.S. Army sidearm from 1911 to 1985 , according to the Browning manufacturing company 's website and Jane 's Infantry Weapons . 
Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg 's profile on the social networking site was hacked Tuesday . 
A roundup of today s CNNMoney news : 8 least evil banks : As banks take turns inventing new fees and hiking existing ones , you may think there 's no escaping your bank 's dirty tricks . 
But we found eight with zero ATM fees , free checking and high-yielding accounts . 
Hottest Web IPO sets the tone : The appetite for initial public offerings is heating up , starting with Demand Media - the biggest Web IPO since Google went public in 2004 . 
Mark Zuckerberg s Facebook page hacked : The Facebook founder s fan page was hacked Tuesday when a status update appeared on his profile that opened with `` Let the hacking begin . '' 
The status attracted more than 1,800 `` likes '' before it was removed from the page . 
A call for jobs from the Swiss Alps : Executives attending the World Economic Forum are optimistic about the job outlook for 2011 , but say we have a long way to go . 
Meanwhile , check out these Best Companies ' cool perks . 
What a Tea Party budget looks like : With Washington buzzing with proposals to cut the budget , Sen. Rand Paul and Rep. Michele Bachmann - two high-profile Tea Party members - have each released laundry lists of spending cuts . 
A federal jury has begun deliberating the case of three former Pennsylvania police officers accused of trying to cover up the beating death of an undocumented Mexican immigrant . 
A Wilkes-Barre jury began deliberations Wednesday morning in the trial of former Shenandoah Police Chief Matthew Nestor and former officers Jason Hayes and William Moyer . 
The three men are charged with conspiring to obstruct justice during the investigation into the fatal beating of Luis Ramirez in July 2008 . 
Moyer has also been charged with witness and evidence tampering , and with lying to the FBI . 
If convicted , the defendants face 20 years in prison on each of the obstruction charges and an additional five years in prison for conspiring to obstruct justice . 
Ramirez , a day laborer and father of two who was engaged to a woman from Shenandoah , died three days after he was beaten into a coma during a street fight with members of the high school football team . 
The incident divided the rural mining town along racial lines and became a flash point for racial tensions nationwide . 
Former Homeland Security Chief Tom Ridge unveils the color-coded U.S. threat advisory system in 2002 . 
The Department of Homeland Security is ending its color-coded terror threat level system in April , as expected , CNN 's National Security Contributor Fran Townsend has confirmed . 
The system was established in 2002 to inform the public of the current risk of terrorist acts through a five-level , color-coded `` Threat Condition '' indicator . 
Today 's terror threat level for the U.S. government is elevated , or yellow , and for all domestic and international flights , the U.S. threat level is high , or orange , according to DHS . 
In its place , DHS will move to a system that focuses on specific threats in geographical areas . 
It will be called the National Terror Advisory System . 
DHS Secretary Janet Napolitano will officially make the announcement tomorrow at a `` State of America 's Homeland Security '' speech at George Washington University . 
There will be no `` Rafa Slam , '' no showdown with Roger Federer and no happy ending for Rafael Nadal at the Australian Open . 
The world 's No. 1 tennis player suffered a shocking upset at the Aussie Open quarterfinals on Wednesday , falling 6-4 , 6-2 , 6-3 to fellow Spaniard David Ferrer . 
Nadal , who had won three Grand Slam tournaments in a row and was hoping to hold all four majors at once , came up short due to an apparent leg injury , which forced him to call a medical timeout in the third set and visibly hampered him against Ferrer . 
`` This is a difficult day for me , '' Nadal said after the match . 
`` Today , I ca n't do more than what I did . 
He played at a very high level . '' 
In a 2008 photo , a rescued tiger leaps into India 's Sundarikati River after being released from a cage on a boat . 
The wild tiger population in Asia could triple to more than 10,000 with thoughtful land management where they live and breed , a new paper from top conservation scientists says . 
If governments were to treat the many disconnected tiger reserves throughout Asia as a single `` landscape '' and provide safe corridors for the animals to roam among them , populations could flourish , the paper argues . 
`` In the midst of a crisis , it 's tempting to circle the wagons and only protect a limited number of core protected areas , but we can and should do better , '' said World Wildlife Fund chief scientist Dr. Eric Dinerstein , a co-author of the study . 
`` We absolutely need to stop the bleeding , the poaching of tigers and their prey in core breeding areas , but we need to go much further and secure larger tiger landscapes before it is too late . '' 
Editor 's note : Nancy Grace 's new show on HLN , `` Nancy Grace : America 's Missing , '' is dedicated to finding 50 people in 50 days . 
As part of the effort , which relies heavily on audience participation , CNN.com news blog `` This Just In '' will feature the stories of the missing . 
This is the eighth case , and it will air on HLN at 9 p.m. ET . 
The disappearance of Ray Gricar is a mystery that continues to haunt the town of Bellefonte , Pennsylvania . 
Just eight months away from retirement as a 20-year prosecutor , Gricar vanished after taking a day off from work to take a scenic drive . 
When he was not heard from for 12 hours , Gricar 's girlfriend reported him missing on April 15 , 2005 . 
The next day , his red and white MINI Cooper was found in an antique mall parking lot -- his cell phone still in the car , but his sunglasses and keys missing . 
There have been many false sightings over the last five-plus years , but nothing to fully draw police to any one of the three theories they 've had since day one of Ray 's disappearance : Either he walked away from his life , met with foul play , or committed suicide . 
Police turned water cannons and tear gas on protesters in the early hours of Wednesday morning to try to break up anti-government demonstrations as the Interior Ministry warned it `` will not allow any provocative movement or a protest or rallies or demonstrations . '' 
In the heart of Cairo , where people were being beaten with sticks and fists and demonstrators were being dragged away amid tear gas . 
Witnesses saw security forces harassing journalists and photographers . 
Twelve of Australia 's most prominent citizens say it 's time to take the Union Jack off Australia 's flag . 
In a statement released by Ausflag , a nonprofit organization seeking `` a truly Australian flag , '' the dozen recipients of the `` Australian of the Year '' award say the keeping the Union Jack , flag of former colonial ruler Great Britain , as part of Australia 's flag prevents Australia from truly establishing its own national identity . 
The Union Jack is seen in the upper left-hand corner of Australia 's flag , with a large , seven-pointed white star below and the stars of the Southern Cross in the field of blue . 
FULL POST Kelley Williams-Bolar is escorted through the Summit County , Ohio , jail . 
An Ohio mother is in jail after being convicted of tampering with records to enroll her children in a better school district . 
Kelley Williams-Bolar , 40 , of Akron , illegally registered her two daughters at her father 's address in suburban Copley Township to get them into the Copley-Fairlawn school district rather than the urban Akron district , a jury decided . 
The Akron City school district met only four of 26 standards on the latest Ohio Department of Education Report Card and had a 76 % graduation rate . 
Copley-Fairlawn City Schools met 26 of 26 standards and had a 97.5 % graduation rate . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
