2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
New York and Boston are expected to receive 8 to 12 inches of snow before it 's done , CNN meteorologist Sean Morris said . 
Both the District of Columbia government and district public schools will be closed all day Thursday . 
Financial crisis final report -- The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission will release its report on the causes of the financial and economic crisis . 
The report will be delivered to the president and Congress and will be available to the public on the commission 's website , through the Government Printing Office , and as a paperback and an e-book . 
The commission reviewed millions of pages of documents , interviewed more than 700 witnesses , and held 19 days of public hearings in New York , Washington and communities across the country . 
Senate Tea Party Caucus -- Tea Party activists from around the country will gather on Capitol Hill on Thursday for a question-and-answer session with three senators at the first official gathering of the Senate Tea Party Caucus . 
`` What we 're trying to do , with Rand Paul , Mike Lee , and I 'm sure eventually others , is to make sure all the activists know that we 're still listening , '' Sen. Jim DeMint , R-South Carolina , told CNN . 
`` We want to get their input , we want to keep them up to date with what we 're doing . 
So it 's more a forum than a caucus to keep that interaction going . '' 
DeMint , along with Paul of Kentucky and Lee of Utah , are currently the only three members of the Senate Tea Party Caucus . 
State of homeland security -- Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano is expected to officially announce Thursday that the color-coded threat alert system in place for nine years will go away in April . 
It will be replaced by a new system , which Napolitano will unveil at what the department is calling the `` State of America 's Homeland Security address '' at George Washington University . 
Uprising in Egypt -- Egyptian Nobel Peace Prize laureate and opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei is returning Thursday to the country , which has been convulsed by unprecedented protests for the past two days . 
ElBaradei will participate in protests himself on Friday , calling on longtime President Hosni Mubarak to retire , ElBaradei 's brother says . 
Meanwhile , the Muslim Brotherhood has called for its followers to demonstrate after Friday prayers -- the first time in the current round of unrest that the largest opposition bloc has told supporters to go out on the streets . 
Davos World Economic Forum -- CEOs , world leaders and economists from all over the world are gathered in Davos , Switzerland , to discuss the future of the global economy . 
This year 's theme is `` The New Reality . '' 
Have CEOs changed the way they run their companies ? 
Is the new reality that growth will be stuck in single digits ? 
A forum spokesman said `` a small firework went off at the back entrance '' of the host hotel Thursday , causing a brief scare . 
Former President Bill Clinton is scheduled to attend a party Thursday night at the hotel , one of the most prestigious in Davos . 
Challenger anniversary events -- The 25th anniversary of the space shuttle Challenger accident is Friday , and several events are planned for Thursday : NASA remembers the crews of Apollo 1 , Challenger and Columbia , and all those who have given their lives for the sake of exploration and discovery . 
NASA Administrator Charles Bolden and Deputy Administrator Lori Garver will lay a wreath at Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia at 10 a.m. . 
A wreath will be laid at 10:30 a.m. at the Space Mirror Memorial at Kennedy Space Center . 
Kennedy Center director and former astronaut Bob Cabana will take part in the ceremony . 
At NASA 's Johnson Space Center in Houston , Center Director Michael L. Coats will be joined by astronaut family members to lay a wreath at the Astronaut Memorial Tree Grove at 12:30 p.m. ET . 
Well the unemployment numbers came out today showing things are a lot worse . 
Applications for unemployment rose 50,000 this week , get ready for inflation . 
Wheat is at an all time high near $ 9.40 a bushel compared to last June of $ 4.23 a bushel . 
China is buying commodities such as copper , wheat , oil , coal , sugar and soybeans with US dollars out the back door . 
This is so dumb to say the death of hundreds and thousands of birds mystery is solved , when everyday hundreds of other birds are going through these power lines , resting and even building their nests there . 
So if I understand very well , we , the people are so dumb while the majority of the deaths seem to almost be one kind . 
Tea-drinkers , have supreme court judges , politicians and the best lies rich people can buy , Terrorism was just the distraction they needed to push forth their SS agenda ! 
I am officially out , I do n't believe in the american dream anymore nor do I wish to participate in the voting process , Rich white people you 've won once again , Poor to middle class people , you idiots did this to your self and the next oppressed or enslaved race in america is on your hands and we know who will be doing the oppressing ! 
Do n't say tea . 
It makes me thirsty for ice cold sweet tea . 
What do dead birds have to do with this article ? 
Let the liberals freeze . 
Cap and trade their heating oil . 
i so good like i wished -LRB- plz no school today plz plz -RRB- my wish came true i wish thr would be no global somethin is hot ! 
but for the weather now its coooooolllllddddd brrrrr ! 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
