January 27 , 2011 | By Tim Lister and Emily Smith , CNN Protesters have used social media sites -- when not blocked -- to organize and spread pictures of demonstrations in Egypt . 
As in Tunisia , the protest movement in Egypt is taking advantage of social media to communicate , inform and organize . 
Despite attempts to block Twitter , Facebook and other sites -LRB- the government denies it was responsible -RRB- , a Facebook page devoted to Friday 's planned protests had more than 80,000 followers as of 2 p.m. ET Thursday , compared with some 20,000 the previous day . 
Following Twitter comments with hashtags such as #Cairo , #jan 25 and #Suez generates a huge flood of tweets . 
There is a breathless excitement about many entries , which are mainly in Arabic , English and French , but there are also scores of rumors , much invention and plenty of hyperbole . 
Sifting the wheat from the chaff , given the extraordinary volume of traffic , is a full-time job . 
One typically overstated entry on a Facebook page Thursday read : `` Live ammunition is being fired at protesters . 
... Innocent protesters who want their basic rights are being massacred . '' 
There is as much misinformation as information . 
But social media can help tip off journalists about developments in places they ca n't get to . 
For example , it 's been difficult -LRB- and risky -RRB- for foreign journalists to report from the city of Suez , which appears to have seen some of the worst violence of the past few days . 
But a steady stream of tweets and blog entries , as well as photos and cell-phone video , has provided at least some guidance on the rapidly evolving situation there . 
In a country the size of Egypt , even large media organizations ca n't be everywhere , especially when the security forces are throwing up roadblocks . 
As the protests have had -LRB- so far -RRB- little formal organization , social media have become a critical tool for arranging rendezvous . 
One Twitter entry , for example , called for a march at 3 p.m. Thursday in Giza , a suburb of Cairo . 
Another on Wednesday called people to Tahrir Square in central Cairo . 
Of course , there is a weakness in such methods -- because the authorities can also read them , and a plethora of such rallying calls can lead to confusion . 
In any case , social media may be overtaken as an organizing tool on Friday -- by Egypt 's mosques . 
The Muslim Brotherhood , which is influential in thousands of mosques throughout the country , has called for protests after Friday prayers . 
But the Brotherhood is playing catch-up with a movement it has done little to influence so far . 
