January 27 , 2011 | By Tarek Osman , Special to CNN This week tens of thousands swamped the heart of Cairo , Alexandria , and other major Egyptian cities , facing down anti-riot police , to demand cheaper food , better services , and substantial changes to the regime 's modus operandi . 
With five dead , more than 100 injured , and the police resorting to tear gas to disperse the demonstrators , most observers are examining whether the Egyptian regime will be able to contain the situation and suppress the protests without even more significant bloodshed . 
Two factors suggest continued tension and further challenges to the regime . 
First , the Egyptian state 's institutional framework is at its weakest point since the coup\/revolution of 1952 that created the Egyptian republic . 
The delicate balance that the regime has nurtured , between the rise of the liberal capitalists within the ruling National Democratic Party -LRB- NDP -RRB- and the traditional power and influence of the military and security establishment , seems to be under strain . 
The center of gravity and decision-making has shifted from the long-established anchors of stability toward inexperienced new economic and financial players . 
The ascent of the new capitalists gave rise to the second factor : an unexpected solidarity between the politically active -- who see the influence of the new capitalists as a blurring of the lines between power and wealth -- and the disenfranchised poor , who as a result of successive financial reform measures , face severe economic pains . 
The situation is made more acute by a youth unemployment rate of more than 15 % -LRB- in an 80 million population , 40 % of whom are under 30 years old -RRB- . 
The politically active and the millions of poor Egyptians blame the Hosni Mubarak regime , which has been in power for three decades . 
This is a tenuous political environment , where anguish and anxiety can quickly turn into anger , and with any catalyst , into action . 
But , so far , the situation in Egypt is not combustible . 
Despite the regime 's overall poor record , its major upgrading of the country 's infrastructure , relative success in installing economic liberalization , and cautious foreign policy have fostered an environment in which a few million middle class families managed to secure economic gains . 
The past decade also witnessed a notable rise in entrepreneurialism with hundreds of thousands of Egyptians able to build small enterprises leveraging the growth in economic sectors ranging from food and beverages , to tourism , to information technology , to entertainment . 
