2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
`` Social media is key to the revolution taking place in North Africa , and this may actually be the first time a government leader has lost power because of social media , '' said Darrell West , the vice president for governance studies at the Brookings Institution , referring to the ousting of former Tunisian president Zine El Abidine Ben Ali . 
However , social media is n't strictly a tool for those with a gripe with their government . 
Governments themselves have shown a willingness to use websites like Twitter for their own means in the wake of unrest , according to James Carafano , a senior research fellow at the Heritage Foundation . 
`` In the Iranian election protests of 2009 , government people would put their own information on Twitter , sometimes disinformation to try and confuse people , saying this person is a government informant and things like that , '' Carafano said . 
Government controls on social media have not been foolproof . 
In Egypt , CNN 's Ben Wedeman said , young people are very internet savvy and have found ways to get around government blocks . 
You can also listen to the CNN Radio Reports podcast on Does this mean that you support this creep Mubarak ? 
I sincerely hope not !!! January 27 , 2011 at 7:59 pm | Report abuse | I do n't believe that the social media played as big of a roll as some people claim . 
The same thing happened in France in 1789 when there was no such thing . 
Are trying to make me look like a complete fool ? 
Of course , anybody with a high school education knows who Hosni Mubarak is !!! January 27 , 2011 at 10:04 pm | Report abuse | Uh ... social unrest is a completly different thing than social media . 
Thought you might understand that the Guillotine is a whole different animal than Twitter and Facebook . 
You are , after all , the Majorityofone . 
He 's just playing Spamalot , and eventually CNN catches up . 
Similar to the celeb411 spammies that show up a lot . 
They ARE annoying as all h3ll , though , are n't they ? 
Banasay ... Sorry i must disagree withyor statement about the majorityofone . 
I believe you shoul have stated majorityofnone . . 
Thank You ... . . 
Hey Cesar , you were a litle hard on the Cesar last night . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
