May 18 : Ships make their way through surface oil near a barge funnelling off oil from the Deepwater Horizon wellhead in this aerial view over the Gulf of Mexico . 
Fears that ocean currents were spreading oil from the Gulf of Mexico spill flared on Tuesday after tar balls turned up in Florida , raising pressure on energy giant BP to capture more of the leaking crude -LRB- Reuters -RRB- . 
American voters think the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico will cause more damage than Hurricane Katrina , according to a Fox News poll . 
As the oil spill enters its fourth week , the poll also finds that support for increasing offshore drilling continues to erode , though a majority still favors it . 
When asked which disaster will cause more damage , 50 percent of voters say the gulf oil spill , while 36 percent say Hurricane Katrina . 
Republicans are evenly split over which disaster will be worse : 43 percent say the oil spill and 43 percent Katrina . 
Democrats -LRB- 56 percent -RRB- and independents -LRB- 50 percent -RRB- are more likely to say oil in the gulf . 
There 's little difference in views regionally , as about half of those living in all areas agree the oil spill will be worse . 
Overall , 54 percent of voters favor increasing offshore drilling for oil and gas in U.S. coastal areas . 
That 's down from 60 percent two weeks ago and a high of 72 percent in 2009 . 
In early April , before the Deep Water Horizon rig exploded on April 20 , fully 70 percent of voters favored increasing offshore drilling . 
A sizable 69 percent majority of voters think the oil spill will hurt the nation 's economy , while 26 percent think it wo n't make much of a difference . 
Approval of the Obama administration 's handling of the spill has dropped 6 percentage points in the last two weeks . 
The new poll finds 44 percent approve , down from 50 percent -LRB- May 4-5 -RRB- . 
The number disapproving increased to 36 percent , up from 29 percent . 
One in five voters remain unable to rate how the administration 's doing on the oil spill -LRB- 20 percent -RRB- . 
Over half of Democrats approve -LRB- 55 percent -RRB- of the administration 's handling of the spill , while a plurality of independents disapprove -LRB- 40 percent -RRB- . 
Republicans are roughly divided : 40 percent approve and 42 percent disapprove . 
By way of comparison , 52 percent of voters approve and 18 percent disapprove of how the administration handled the attempted bombing of Times Square , with nearly a third undecided -LRB- 30 percent -RRB- . 
In general , 45 percent of voters approve and 46 percent disapprove of the overall job President Obama is doing . 
Earlier this month 48 percent approved and 43 percent disapproved . 
And a year ago , 60 percent approved and 30 percent disapproved . 
The national telephone poll was conducted for Fox News by Opinion Dynamics Corp. among 900 registered voters from May 18 to May 19 . 
For the total sample , the poll has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points . 
