LONDON | Thu May 27 , 2010 9:48 am EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP 's -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- deepwater spill in the U.S. Gulf will change the way the industry operates for ever , just as the Piper Alpha rig fire two decades ago rewrote the rule book , oil executives told the Reuters Global Energy Summit . 
After a fatal explosion last month , the Deepwater Horizon rig , leased by the British oil major , is still pumping crude into the water in one of the worst spills in U.S. history . 
In response , the United States is expected to issue new safety rules on Thursday -LRB- ID : nN26238003 -RRB- and other governments have also taken swift action . 
The industry says preventing further accidents is crucial , but it also says regulations will drive up costs and slow down future exploration , with knock-on effects for the oil price . 
`` We are concerned about future underwater oil drilling . 
That may have implications for slower or less drilling offshore . 
Regulation is necessary , but that should not hamper the long-term offshore drilling , '' said Nobuo Tanaka , executive director of the International Energy Agency , which advises industrialized nations . 
Addressing the Reuters summit , he said the IEA expected in response to adjust its future supply expectations in its medium-term outlook . 
The Deepwater Horizon explosion , which left 11 dead , has revived painful memories of the Piper Alpha oil platform explosion and fire in the British North Sea , which killed nearly 170 people in 1988 , making it the world 's worst offshore oil disaster . 
`` I think Piper Alpha had a permanent impact . 
It changed how platforms were designed , '' said Brian O'Cathain , chief executive of Irish oil and gas services company Petroceltic -LRB- PCI . 
`` I think this will change how people do deep water operations . '' 
African independent oil and gas company Afren said it had already experienced a 7-8 percent increase in costs for a project in Ghana following the safety response of Ghanian authorities . 
`` They have imposed some regulations and they are sensible , '' Osman Shahenshah , chief executive of Afren -LRB- AFRE . 
L -RRB- , told the Reuters energy summit . 
He predicted deepwater exploration , which is extensive off western Africa , would be slowed `` a little bit , '' but the industry was more than ready to regulate . 
`` I think the industry will do it voluntarily , even it is not imposed , '' he said . 
`` Nobody wants to go through what BP is going through . '' 
Oil executives were equally sure that whatever the difficulties , deepwater exploration would continue because of the need for oil and the limited opportunities for conventional exploration . 
`` I am sure that there is going to be continued investment in deep offshore , '' Ayman Asfari , the chief executive of UK services company Petrofac , said . 
-LRB- PFC. L -RRB- `` The world ca n't afford not to do that , but I think it may slow down until there are new regulations . '' 
Any slow-down leads oil executives to the possibility of future supply crunches and rising prices once energy demand recovers from economic crisis . 
`` I 'm not an economist , but I can tell you what 's absolutely sure is that all the delays that have happened , all the delays that could potentially happen in the Gulf of Mexico , we 're going to pay one day , '' said Thierry Pilenko , the chief executive of oil services company Technip -LRB- TECF . 
`` I do n't know whether it 's in 18 months or in two years , but at some stage everybody will be screaming for resources . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
