Seals swimming along the Gulf Coast ? 
These creatures normally live in the Arctic Ocean , not the Gulf of Mexico , but they 're listed as `` sensitive biological resources '' that could be affected by an oil spill in the area in a document filed by BP last June with the U.S. Minerals Management Service . 
More than a month after BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig blew out and sank on April 20 , the British oil giant 's regional spill response plan drew some severe criticism from the watchdog group Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility . 
One problem with BP 's nearly 600-page spill response plan ? 
`` It was utterly useless in the event of a spill , '' Jeff Ruch , PEER 's executive director , said by telephone . 
His group , which acts as a kind of safe haven for government whistle-blowers , detailed what it called `` outright inanities '' in BP 's filing and the government 's approval of it . 
PEER noted BP 's plan referred to `` sea lions , seals , sea otters -LRB- and -RRB- walruses '' as wildlife that might be affected in the Gulf of Mexico , and suggested this reference was taken from a previous plan for Arctic exploratory drilling , where these animals could be affected . 
The BP plan lists a Japanese shopping and search website as a link to one of its `` primary equipment providers '' for rapid deployment in the event of a spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
And it directs its media spokespeople never to make `` promises that property , ecology or anything else will be restored to normal . '' 
Ruch said the plan contains no information about tracking sub-surface oil plumes from deepwater blowouts or preventing disease transmission to captured animals in rehab facilities , a serious risk after the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill . 
The section on `` worst case discharge '' estimates a maximum spill of 177,400 barrels in the Gulf of Mexico . 
A panel of U.S. experts estimated that as of May 17 , there were at least 130,000 barrels of oil on the surface of the Gulf of Mexico and a similar amount had been skimmed off the surface or evaporated , making a total of at least 260,000 barrels from the Deepwater Horizon spill . 
As of May 27 , the broken well was still leaking . 
Photo credits : REUTERS\/Stringer -LRB- Walrus swims in the pool at Moscow 's zoo , February 28 , 2001 -RRB- REUTERS\/Hans Deryk -LRB- U.S. veterinarians bathe a brown pelican at Fort Jackson Wildlife Rehabilitation Center in Buras , Louisiana , May 15 , 2010 -RRB- The Obama Administration may not have in-house expertise necessary to take over containment efforts , but the President and his Attorney General , Eric Holder , certainly have a lot of legal expertise . 
Hopefully they will employ that expertise to seek the maximum possible punishments for what appears to be a willful disregard by BP of its legal obligation to develop a legitimate spill response plan . 
Check the relative salaries of environmental professionals employed by oil companies and their consultants and then the salaries of production engineers and accountants . 
It is no mystery why the environmental response plan is a cut and paste job . 
I was an environmental consultant for 15 years and continue to work in the environmental profession . 
There is no excuse for a cut and paste job regardless of salary ; I see it all the time . 
And to think , our oh-so-competent Federal Government approved that response plan . 
I wonder if BP has decided that their ROI for the Obama Campaign in 08 was a huge waste of money . 
THAT 's where the dividend money went . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
I 've covered the Winter Olympics in Calgary and Salt Lake City , a couple wars , the State Department , White House , Pentagon , several long trials and a presidential sex scandal . 
Since 2006 , I 've been reporting on the environment and climate change . 
