President Obama departs the East Room of the White House following his news conference , May 27 , 2010 . 
WASHINGTON | Thu May 27 , 2010 3:54 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - President Barack Obama took responsibility for the U.S. response to the Gulf of Mexico oil spill on Thursday and extended for six months a moratorium on offshore drilling , dealing a potential setback to his own energy policy . 
Obama , who has come under increased pressure to show leadership over the spill , suspended planned exploration off the coast of Alaska , and canceled a pending lease sale in the Gulf of Mexico and a proposed lease sale off Virginia . 
Addressing reporters at the White House , a worn-looking Obama said even his daughter had asked him when the oil would stop leaking . 
`` In case you 're wondering who 's responsible , I take responsibility , '' he said , leaning over his podium . 
`` It is my job to make sure that every thing is done to shut this down , '' he said . 
The president rejected criticism that he and the federal government had not taken charge as BP Plc -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- struggles to stop the gushing deep-sea oil well . 
`` There should n't be any confusion here . 
The federal government is fully engaged , and I 'm fully engaged , '' he said . 
`` From the moment this disaster began , the federal government has been in charge of the response effort . '' 
Offshore oil drilling is a key part of Obama 's efforts to rejig the country 's energy policy and a needed sweetener for gaining Republican support for a bill in the Senate . 
But the spill has forced him and fellow Democrats to rethink their support for such an expansion , which many environmentalists oppose . 
`` Extraction is more expensive and it is going to be inherently more risky , '' Obama said . 
`` That 's part of the reason you never heard me say , ` drill , baby , drill , ' because we ca n't drill our way out of the problem . '' 
The Obama administration ordered a halt in new drilling permits after BP 's oil rig , owned by Transocean -LRB- RIG . 
S , exploded in the Gulf on April 20 . 
Some U.S. lawmakers have called on the administration to lift the permit ban , at least for exploration in the shallow waters of the Gulf while keeping it in place in deeper waters where BP was operating . 
Mike Breard , an analyst at Hodges Capital Management , said the decision would force companies to move rigs to places such as Brazil , forcing the United States to import more and increasing the possibility of tanker accidents . 
`` You 're trading a risk of one type of spill for another type of spill , '' Breard said . 
Obama has established a presidential commission to investigate the causes of the spill , which by government estimates is the country 's largest ever . 
His announcement on Thursday was meant to amplify his administration 's response before that panel draws its own conclusions on what went wrong . 
The moratorium on permits to drill new deepwater wells will continue for a period of six months while the commission does its work . 
Political fallout has not been limited to legislation . 
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said Liz Birnbaum , the head of Minerals Management Service , which oversees U.S. offshore oil drilling , had resigned . 
Obama said he had learned of the resignation on Thursday morning . 
He declared that reforms are needed in the government 's process for approving oil drilling permits and said the MMS suffered from a relationship with the oil industry that was `` scandalously close . '' 
Obama has come under increasing pressure to stop the spill and halt its environmental and economic consequences for Gulf states . 
BP , which has been publicly scolded by the president , was working on Thursday to plug the leaking well in a procedure known as `` top kill . '' 
Obama promised to hold BP accountable in the catastrophic spill and said his administration would do everything necessary to protect and restore the coast . 
`` We 're exploring any reasonable strategies to try and save the Gulf from a spill that may otherwise last until the relief wells are finished and that 's a process that could take months , '' Obama said . 
