KANSAS CITY | Thu May 27 , 2010 3:43 pm EDT KANSAS CITY -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The disastrous oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico illustrates a pressing need for the United States to pass legislative incentives to drive investment dollars into cellulosic and algae-based biofuel facilities , biofuel industry leaders said on Thursday . 
`` This is just a wakeup call for our dependence on petroleum , '' said Harrison Dillon , President of Solazyme Inc , which is building an integrated biorefinery in rural Pennsylvania aiming for commercial-scale production of algae-based fuel . 
Harrison said the BP spill , the largest in U.S. history , highlights the `` ugly side of our dependence on fossil fuels . '' 
`` It just points even more strongly for the need for all these technologies to be developed and encouraged . 
The oil that we make through our process is biodegradable oil . 
It is made on land . 
You do n't have those kinds of risks , '' Dillon said . 
A range of commercial-scale projects to develop cellulosic and algae biofuels are ready to be built , but the economic downturn , uncertainty in global financial markets and the lack of long-term U.S. government support is making it hard to raise capital , company officials said in a conference call . 
A massive jobs bill pending in Congress includes a $ 1-per-gallon tax credit for biodiesel retroactive to January 1 and valid through the end of 2010 . 
The bill also includes a 50-cent credit for fuel produced from biomass . 
More than 30 biofuel companies and trade associations have asked leaders of the House Ways and Means Committee to extend the cellulosic biofuel production tax credit to at least 2016 , and to make algae biofuel producers eligible , creating a renewable investment tax credit option . 
Wes Bolsen , chief marketing officer for Illinois-based Coskata Inc , said the recent move by French oil company Total to take an equity stake in Coskata is part of a growing commitment by oil companies to play a bigger role in advancing biofuels . 
Still , government policy support is critical to move forward to commercial production , he said . 
`` What we have is a technology that is ready today . 
We believe we can economically compete head to head with gasoline . 
We need the policy that is going to show we have the enduring commitment , '' he said . 
Coskata , founded four years ago , has a demonstration facility in Pennsylvania that can produce cellulosic ethanol from grass , trash , wood chips , and various crop residues . 
HR BioPetroleum Chief Operating Officer Martin Sabarsky said his company needs more government support if it is to proceed with a commercial algae-based biofuels facility in Hawaii . 
It has received support from Royal Dutch Shell oil company but is having problems securing needed private capital . 
Sabarsky recent discussions with Shell in light of the BP oil spill tragedy have further underscored the need for alternative fuels . 
`` They -LRB- Shell -RRB- have recognized ... that the age of easy oil is over , '' he said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Carey Gillam ; Editing by Lisa Shumaker -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
