BP faces new fines over second Alaska spill Oil giant BP ` failed to respond to alarms ' and had suffered burst pipelines since 2001 , Anchorage court told Caribou near a BP oil pipeline in Alaska . 
The oil giant was fined and put on probation over a spill from corroded pipes in 2006 . 
Photograph : Al Grillo\/AP BP is facing new fines in connection with its criminal conviction for a huge oil spill on Alaska 's North Slope in 2006 . 
Federal probation officer Mary Frances Barnes argued in an Anchorage federal court yesterday that a second spill in Alaska in November last year constituted a violation of its probation . 
In 2006 , a corroded pipeline leaked 200,000 gallons of oil on to the tundra in the worst leak in the history of the North Slope . 
The company was sentenced to three years ' probation and ordered to pay $ 20m -LRB- # 12.5 m -RRB- in criminal penalties and restitution . 
The leak in 2009 occurred when a pipeline at the BP-operated Lisburne oil field burst , leaking nearly 46,000 gallons of crude and oily water near Prudhoe Bay , Alaska . 
After roughly 165 days of low-temperature warnings , BP found ice in the pipe . 
Fifteen days later , operators discovered the rupture . 
Investigators said BP operators had `` failed to respond to the alarms and failed to investigate or troubleshoot the cause of the alarms '' and argued that BP should have known better , as it had suffered a similar ruptures in other frozen pipelines as far back as 2001 . 
The troubled oil giant disputes the characterisation of its operations . 
`` We 've made measurable improvements in safety and reliability , '' BP spokesman Steve Rinehart told the Anchorage Daily News . 
Among other things , the company argued , it had replaced corroded transit pipelines with new lines at a cost of $ 500m . 
Still , the ruling will only increase scrutiny of the British firm , which recently estimated that the more recent Deepwater Horizon spill in the Gulf of Mexico this summer would end up costing it $ 40bn . 
Earlier this month , the investigative journal ProPublica revealed that BP 's own internal maintenance reports had documented that at least 148 its pipelines on the North Slope received an `` F-rank '' because of corrosion . 
According to one welder , some of BP 's pipes `` have hundreds of patches on them . '' 
After that report was published , a BP spokesman explained that an `` F '' ranking does not imply that an accident is imminent . 
`` It does prompt a higher priority repair plan depending on technical details and engineering review , '' Rinehart said . 
The latest report will add to pressure on the company : in addition to costs relating the Gulf of Mexico spill , it was fined $ 50m in August over a 2005 refinery explosion in Texas City that killed 15 people and injured 170 . 
But the latest ruling is unlikely to affect the firm 's Alaskan operations , which the company plans to sell as part of a $ 30bn program to raise money to meet costs relating to Deepwater Horizon spill . 
BP said it will respond to the government 's legal filings at a hearing on December 20 . 
