2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Monday quarterbacking : Super Bowl 's hits and fumbles : The Packers might have been the official winners of Super Bowl XLV , but if we 're counting Web buzz , there were plenty of other victors Sunday night . 
Cops : Party ejection led to frat shooting : Students and staff somberly returned to class Monday at Youngstown State University , where a prayer service was held for the people shot at an off-campus party over the weekend . 
Jury finds TV executive guilty of beheading : An upstate New York jury on Monday found Muzzammil `` Mo '' Hassan guilty of second-degree murder for beheading his wife . 
Channing Tatum : Yes , I was a stripper : He may wear some seriously skimpy skirts in the upcoming gladiator epic `` The Eagle , '' but that 's nothing compared to the uniform Channing Tatum wore in his pre-acting career as a stripper . 
Mark Kelly , right , posted an upside-down image of his shuttle training to his Twitter account . 
Astronaut Mark Kelly on Monday resumed training as commander of space shuttle Endeavour 's upcoming mission , 30 days after his wife was shot in the head at a political event in Arizona . 
Kelly , husband of U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords , posted an inverted picture of his training Monday on his Twitter account . 
`` Back at work , '' Kelly said in the Twitter post . 
Kelly announced Friday that he would return to his crew and resume training , saying Giffords - among 13 wounded survivors in a January 8 Tucson , Arizona , shooting that killed six people - is making progress in speech , occupational and physical therapy . 
Editor 's note : Nancy Grace 's new show on HLN , `` Nancy Grace : America 's Missing , '' is dedicated to finding 50 people in 50 days . 
As part of the effort , which relies heavily on audience participation , CNN.com 's news blog This Just In will feature the stories of the missing . 
This is the 16th case , and it aired Monday night on HLN . 
Friends and relatives of Margaret Haddican-McEnroe thought she might have just been blowing off steam when she vanished from her Warren Township , New Jersey , home a day after an argument with her husband in October 2006 . 
She actually had left her home on the day of the argument - October 9 , 2006 - to cool off at her parents ' house before returning that night . 
Her husband says that his wife - then a 29-year-old volunteer firefighter , Army veteran and mother of three -- was at home when he left for an errand on October 10 , and she was gone when he returned . 
He said she left behind her cell phone , SUV and their 5-month-old daughter , who was alone in a crib . 
About $ 11,000 was missing from the home , he said . 
The husband did n't call police until two days later . 
When asked why , he said that they 'd had an argument and that she had a history of walking out , disappearing for a few days , and then returning when she 'd calmed down , CNN 's Rupa Mikkilineni reported in 2008 . 
By all accounts , the nation is still in the midst of a foreclosure crisis . 
In 2010 , foreclosure activity increased in 149 of the nation 's 206 metropolitan areas with a population of 200,000 or more , according the foreclosure tracking company RealtyTrac . 
Last year , more than 2.8 million homes in the U.S. had foreclosure filings . 
But one man 's loss is another 's gain . 
Foreclosed homes are often up for sale at bargain prices . 
Some businesses and property owners have used that to their advantage and are finding ways to turn a profit on properties that have depreciated in value and have been repossessed by banks . 
Auction.com held more than 600 auctions of foreclosed properties last year . 
`` It 's truly what we call the perfect storm of opportunity , '' said Trent Ferris , the company 's vice president of auctions . 
On the last Sunday in January , a few hundred people filled a ballroom at a hotel in Midtown Manhattan to bid on more than 140 foreclosed homes in New York , New Jersey , Connecticut and Pennsylvania . 
As an auctioneer called out for bids at a blistering pace , the homes sold for a fraction of their fair market value . 
Each auction took about one minute , and Auction.com received a fee of 5 percent of the sale price on each house . 
`` At this particular point in time , nothing good comes from the empty house that 's sitting there , '' Ferris said . 
`` So by giving people the opportunity to buy at auction price to turn that empty house back into a home is absolutely phenomenal . '' 
Click the audio player to hear the full story : You can also listen to the CNN Radio Reports podcast on Some folks are wondering whether the Super Bowl will be the last NFL game in 2011 . 
The contract between NFL owners and the players ' union is set to expire March 3 . 
Many people are asking whether Sunday 's Super Bowl will be the last NFL game played in 2011 . 
What is at stake for the players , the owners and the fans ? 
Rick Horrow , a sports business analyst , attorney and professor , says the NFL has never been stronger . 
`` If you don t believe me , '' Horrow said , `` take a look at the Super Bowl . 
If a lockout or walkout happens on March 4 , the players stand to lose not only salary and health benefits , but also a good chunk of their playing careers , according to Horrow . 
The average NFL player 's career is between three and four years . 
`` You can t get that back , '' Horrow said . 
For the owners , things are not that tough . 
`` The owners ... get one year of television payments , which they negotiated in good faith , '' Horrow said . 
`` That , by the way , is $ 4 billion . '' 
The fan should know that if a lockout does happen March 4 , the 2011 season still could be saved . 
Owners and the players ' union still will have the spring and summer to get a deal done , Horrow said . 
Click the audio player to hear the full story from CNN Radio 's Jim Roope : You can also listen to the CNN Radio Reports podcast on Muzzammil Hassan was convicted Monday in the 2009 beheading death of his wife , Aasiya Hassan . 
A New York jury on Monday found Muzzammil `` Mo '' Hassan guilty of second-degree murder for the 2009 beheading of his wife . 
His legal adviser , Jeremy Schwartz , said that Hassan , who made closing arguments on his own behalf , may appeal the verdict . 
Hassan , who founded a TV network aimed at countering Muslim stereotypes , went to a police station in February 2009 in the Buffalo , New York , suburb of Orchard Park and told officers his wife was dead , police have said . 
Aasiya Hassan had been decapitated . 
The jury deliberated for an hour before delivering the verdict . 
-LRB- Updated at 4:34 p.m. ET -RRB- Power has been restored to Newark International Airport after a switching problem knocked out power to all three terminals and caused flight restrictions at the airport Monday afternoon , according to a Port Authority spokesperson . 
Flights are resuming with residual delays . 
-LRB- Initial post -RRB- A power outage at three Newark International Airport terminals prompted airport authorities to restrict incoming and outgoing flights Monday , according to the Federal Aviation Administration website . 
Several people were removed from stalled elevators , while others remain stranded in the airport 's monorail trains , according to a spokesman for the Port Authority for New York and New Jersey . 
The chairman of the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission , which organized the vote , said 98.83 % voted for separation , while 1.17 % voted for unity . 
`` It was a peaceful process , '' said chairman Muhammad Ibrahim Khali , in a ceremony in Khartoum attended by Sudanese politicians , international diplomats , U.N. staff , academics and others . 
`` It was a transparent process . '' 
He said `` not a single person showed up to appeal the results . '' 
Demostrators gather Monday in Cairo 's Tahrir Square , which has been the center of protests against President Hosni Mubarak . 
-LRB- Update 8:53 p.m. Cairo , 1:53 p.m. ET -RRB- Google executive Wael Ghonim has been released in Egypt , the company announced . 
`` Huge relief - Wael Ghonim has been released . 
Our love to him and his family , '' the company tweeted shortly after 8 p.m. in Cairo -LRB- 1 p.m. ET -RRB- . 
Ghonim 's Twitter account , which had not had a posting since he went missing January 28 , carried a tweet around the same time . 
`` Freedom is a bless -LRB- sic -RRB- that deserves fighting for it , '' the tweet said , ending with the hashtag '' . 
Jan25 , '' a reference to the Egypt protests . 
-LRB- Update 7:20 p.m. Cairo , 12:20 p.m. ET -RRB- Egypt 's Muslim Brotherhood needs to be treated with caution , former British Prime Minister Tony Blair warned Monday . 
`` It 's not an extremist group in a way that we have seen in other countries ; on the other hand we should n't be complacent about it either , '' he said . 
-LRB- Update 6:13 p.m. Cairo , 11:14 a.m. ET -RRB- The country 's new Cabinet planned to have its first meeting , according to state-run TV . 
-- Tahrir Square , the epicenter of the anti-Mubarak protest , remains peaceful and festive . 
Morale `` is very high , '' CNN 's Frederik Pleitgen said . 
He reports that workers who rent camels to tourists are suffering financially as protests continue . 
-LRB- Update 1:34 p.m. in Cairo , 6:34 am . 
ET -RRB- A group of protesters maintained a human chain at Cairo 's Tahrir Square on Monday morning . 
-- The Egyptian finance minister says the country will auction as much as 15 billion Egyptian pounds -LRB- about $ 2.5 billion -RRB- in treasury bills . 
-LRB- Update 1:48 a.m. Cairo , 6:48 p.m. ET -RRB- President Barack Obama downplays the prospect of the Muslim Brotherhood , which has voiced opposition to the United States , ascending to power in Egypt once President Hosni Mubarak leaves office . 
`` They do n't have majority support in Egypt , but they are well-organized , '' Obama tells Fox News ' Bill O'Reilly on Sunday . 
-LRB- Update 1:25 a.m. Cairo , 6:25 p.m. ET -RRB- Former ABC News journalist Sam Donaldson on Sunday stood by recent compliments he gave to Al-Jazeera regarding its coverage of the Egypt protests , telling CNN 's Howard Kurtz that the network did `` a service in fanning the flames in Egypt . '' 
-LRB- Update 12:37 a.m. Cairo , 5:35 p.m. ET -RRB- The U.S. State Department issues an updated travel warning for Egypt , continuing to recommend U.S. citizens make every effort to leave the North African country . 
It also adds the U.S. government is not planning additional charter trips . 
Read the full advisory here . 
-LRB- Update 12:20 a.m. Cairo , 5:20 p.m. ET -RRB- A U.S. State Department release Sunday says Secretary of State Hillary Clinton spoke Saturday night with Egyptian Prime Minister Ahmed Shafiq . 
During that meeting , Clinton stressed that a `` broad cross-section of political actors and civil society '' should be part of the government 's transformation process . 
-LRB- Update 12:14 a.m. Cairo , 5:14 p.m. ET -RRB- State-run Nile TV reports Shafiq called the network to announce that Google executive Wael Ghonim , missing for more than a week , will be released Monday . 
-LRB- Update 8 p.m. Cairo , 1 p.m. ET -RRB- Multiple bursts of automatic gunfire -- apparently warning shots -- could be heard in Tahrir Square near the Egyptian Museum . 
The incident marked an escalation of tempers between the military and protesters . 
After the army fired the warning shots , hundreds of protesters surrounded the military positions in the square , CNN 's Ivan Watson reported . 
-LRB- Update 6:58 p.m. Cairo , 11:58 a.m. ET -RRB- Shafiq , the prime minister , said authorities have been told `` not to bother '' human rights activists and journalists working at anti-government protests . 
If there have been such problems , they are `` not intended , '' Shafiq told CNN 's Candy Crowley on Sunday . 
Arrests of journalists and human rights activists `` are not allowed at all , '' he said . 
-LRB- Update 5:40 p.m. Cairo , 10:37 a.m. ET -RRB- Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said the United States can not `` micromanage the process '' in Egypt , but that the Obama administration needs to make its goals clear . 
`` Arriving at a democratic solution is important , which is in fact inclusive , democratic , peaceful and rapid , '' Albright said Sunday on CNN 's `` State of the Union . '' 
-LRB- Update 5:10 p.m. Cairo , 10:07 a.m. ET -RRB- Egyptian opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei said that the situation in Egypt remains in a standoff as long as Mubarak refuses to leave . 
`` I hope somebody will send a message , I do n't know in which way , to President Mubarak that for the sake of the country , for his own dignity , to defuse this crisis , he better step down , '' ElBaradei told CNN 's '' Fareed Zakaria GPS . '' 
Watch Zakaria 's take on whether Egypt is a revolution or a revolt . 
`` Everybody is ready to give him the dignified out he is entitled to as a former president of Egypt , '' ElBaradei told Zakaria . 
-- During his CNN interview Sunday , ElBaradei also said he would refuse to meet with the Egyptan government unless Mubarak steps down . 
Other oppositions groups , including the Muslim Brotherhood , have meet with the government . 
ElBaradei said the Egyptian people are getting confusing messages about whether Mubarak should leave office , referring to a U.S. envoy 's comments that Mubarak must stay in place during a transition of power and the Obama administration saying he should leave soon . 
-LRB- Update 3:09 p.m. Cairo , 8:09 a.m. ET -RRB- The mood in Tahrir Square , the site of pro-Mubarak and anti-Mubarak clashes last week , was festive and peaceful as Christians and Muslims held hands and sang . 
The gathering appears to be strong as people continue to push for Mubarak to leave office . 
-LRB- Update 11:46 a.m. Cairo , 4:46 a.m. ET -RRB- It is a `` huge mistake '' for Egypt to shut down the internet or use violence against protesters , British Foreign Secretary William Hague said Sunday . 
Some banks in Egypt were open Sunday , according to the country 's minister of finance . 
Some banks opened as early as 8:30 a.m. local time . 
Banks have been closed in recent days amid anti-government protests . 
-LRB- Update 10 a.m. in Cairo , 3 a.m. ET -RRB- Egyptian Coptic Christians are expected to gather at Tahrir Square to pray for those who have lost their lives since the protests started . 
Muslim protesters said they will form a ring around the Christians to protect them during the service . 
The Muslim Brotherhood said it will meet with the country 's vice president , days after the group said it would not negotiate until Mubarak leaves office . 
Opposition activists formed a human chain outside one of the entrances to Tahrir Square on Saturday to prevent two Egyptian military tanks from crossing through barricades into what has effectively become an anti-Mubarak enclave . 
The death toll from the violent clashes in Tahrir Square has reached 11 , Egypt 's Health Ministry has said . 
Nearly 1,000 people have been injured in clashes in the Cairo square . 
The U.S. Embassy in Egypt issued a statement indicating several embassy vehicles were stolen in Cairo on January 28 . 
The statement was in response to an online video that showed a white diplomatic van running into anti-government protesters near Tahrir Square . 
The award-winning writer-director of Crash has given The New Yorker an interview detailing the inner workings of Scientology . 
A member for 35 years , Haggis broke with the church in 2009 after it refused to condemn Proposition 8 , which made marriage an institution between only man and woman in California . 
In his letter of resignation to spokesman Tommy Davis , Haggis wrote that he could not align himself with an organization that would back `` that hate-filled legislation . '' 
He concluded , Silence is consent , Tommy . 
I refuse to consent . 
A two-day extradition hearing for WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange opened Monday in a London court , where celebrities watched as Assange 's lawyers argued against his transfer to Sweden . 
Assange has not been charged with a crime , but Swedish prosecutors want to question him in connection with sexual misconduct allegations related to separate incidents last August . 
His lawyers argue Assange could ultimately end up at Guantanamo Bay or be executed if he is extradited to Sweden , according to papers they released Monday . 
While the sexual misconduct allegations are apparently unrelated to Assange 's role as head of the WikiLeaks site , his lawyers say Sweden could send him to the United States to face espionage charges related to the site 's disclosure of thousands of secret U.S. military and diplomatic documents . 
The two men accused of shooting into a Youngstown State University fraternity house , killing one and wounding 11 , were apparently angry because they were being thrown out of a party there , police said Monday . 
Police identified the suspects in the Sunday shooting as Columbus E. Jones , 22 , and Braylon L. Rogers , 19 , both Youngstown residents . 
Jamail Johnson , 25 , of Girard , Ohio , died in the shooting . 
He was shot once in the back of the head and several times in the lower body , Dr. Joseph Ohr , a forensic pathologist at the Mahoning County Coroner 's Office , told CNN . 
-LRB- And some losers , but we 'll get to them later . -RRB- 
`` Chrysler 200 '' scored as the top search in Google on Monday morning due largely to a gritty commercial featuring Eminem and his hit `` Lose Yourself . '' 
Against the hard-driving beat of the song , a glistening new Chrysler 200 is seen . 
The vehicle is meant to replace the Chrysler Sebring midsize car , which was lambasted by critics . 
`` What does a town that 's been to hell and back know about the finer things in life ? '' 
a gritty voice asks about Detroit . 
`` Well I 'll tell ya , more than most . 
You see , it 's the hottest fires that make the hardest steel . 
Add hard work and conviction and the know-how that runs generations deep in every last one of us . 
`` That 's who we are , '' the voice says . 
`` That 's our story . '' 
Cue Em , who himself has been in rehab . 
In the video , he walks into a theater where gospel singers are giving it a ton of heart . 
Message : The Motor City 's woes are behind it . 
Another clever ad , for the Volkswagen Passat , has us fawning over `` The Darth Vader Kid , '' 6-year-old Max Page , who was busy Monday doing the rounds on morning shows . 
Max has a congenital heart defect , and has a pacemaker , but his physicians say he 's able to live a relatively normal life . 
He said he was `` thrilled '' to show off his `` special move '' in the ad . 
Speaking of special moves , fans appear to be torn over whether the Black Eyed Peas halftime show was banging or blah . 
The Peas , joined by Slash and Usher , sang their usual family-friendly hits , but Will . 
i. am tossed it up a bit and changed the lyrics to `` Where Is the Love ? '' 
He rapped : `` In America we need to get things straight\/Obama let 's get these kids educated\/Create jobs so the country stays stimulated\/This is dedicated to all the innovators . '' 
There is far less debate over whether Groupon offended with its ad about getting discounts on products and services . 
During the ad , actor Timothy Hutton appears to be served a meal at Himalayan Restaurant in Chicago . 
`` The people of Tibet are in trouble . 
Their very culture is in jeopardy , '' he says , adding , `` But they still whip up an amazing fish curry ! '' 
More viewers were probably munching on simpler dishes during the game ... like ... popcorn ? 
Cameron Diaz was caught on camera feeding Yankees star Alex Rodriguez popcorn while they cozied up in a luxury box at Cowboys Stadium . 
Some people were disturbed , some enough to boo . 
Speaking of booing , you all know by now that Christina Aguilera messed up the national anthem . 
The pop diva has apologized , and here 's proof she does know the words . 
Perhaps forgiveness will come easier after watching these wretched renditions from the past . 
Say what you will about Christina , at least she probably had a good seat . 
That 's more than about 400 Super Bowl fans got . 
They were told they could not take the seats they 'd paid for because their section of Cowboys Stadium was still under construction . 
No doubt those fans upon hearing that news had to dig deep , a theme that resonated during the games faithier moments . 
Even before kick off there was controversy over rejected ads from JesusHatesObama.com , a political novelty t-shirt company that had dueling bobble heads of Jesus and Obama , and the Fixed Point Foundation , a group that promotes Christianity in the public square . 
As Usher would sing `` Oh my God ... '' or `` Oh my gosh ... '' Ongoing coverage - Crisis in Egypt 11:30 am ET - Obama talks to U.S. Chamber of Commerce - President Obama and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce have not always had the best relationship during Obama 's time at the White House . 
That could change today when Obama speaks with business leaders . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
