By Julian E. Zelizer , Special to CNN An anti-government protester chants and gestures in front of soldiers guarding the Egyptian Museum in Tahrir Square . 
Americans have long debated whether to try to achieve democratic ideals overseas Julian Zelizer says `` realists '' argued U.S. should not seek democracy in Mideast He says `` idealists '' say U.S. should promote democracy , human rights overseas Outcome of Egypt revolt likely to shape foreign policy for years , he says Editor 's note : Julian E. Zelizer is a professor of history and public affairs at Princeton University . 
He is the author of `` Jimmy Carter , '' published by Times Books , and editor of a book assessing former President George W. Bush 's administration , published by Princeton University Press . 
Princeton , New Jersey -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- When the Egyptian people took to the streets of Cairo to protest the oppressive government of President Hosni Mubarak , they instantly challenged one of the most powerful strains of U.S. foreign policy thinking . 
In American diplomatic circles , the `` realists '' have long argued that the U.S. must be primarily focused on national self-interest , rather than concentrating on trying to promote democracy and human rights in other countries . 
They object to the style of idealism promoted by President Woodrow Wilson , who envisioned that war and diplomacy could transform international relations by institutionalizing cooperation among nations , allowing for the self-determination of people and ending war for all time . 
In The New York Times , former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger -- one of the most famous proponents of realism -- wrote that his approach to foreign policy respected the importance of values but insisted `` on a careful , even unsentimental , weighing of the balance of material forces . '' 
By contrast , he wrote , trying to promote idealism in foreign policy `` translates it into a call for crusades on behalf of regime change . '' 
One of the classic formulations of these ideas was penned by Georgetown professor -- and future Reagan adviser and U.N. ambassador -- Jeane Kirkpatrick in 1979 . 
In her article , `` Dictatorships and Double Standards , '' Kirkpatrick argued that often the U.S. could not be on the side of democracy if it meant supporting governments that would be hostile to U.S. interests . 
She criticized President Jimmy Carter for being hostile to autocratic governments that were willing to work with the U.S. against communism . 
Kirkpatrick rejected the idea that it was possible to democratize countries in all circumstances . 
Nowhere has the power of realism been stronger than in U.S. Middle East policy . 
For many decades the U.S. has supported Arab governments whose behavior fundamentally contradicts democratic ideals . 
U.S. policymakers concluded that there were no other options . 
ElBaradei - Egyptian opposition demands It is impossible , they said , for democracy to take root in the Middle East given the history of the region . 
To protect strategic interests such as access to oil , they felt it essential to make peace with bad rulers . 
Realism has been challenged on the left and the right . 
During the 1970s , the human rights movement pushed the U.S. to embrace the political and civil rights of others as a legitimate claim in U.S. foreign policy . 
Some neoconservatives , such as Washington Sen. Henry `` Scoop '' Jackson , claimed that the U.S. needed to insist the Soviet Union provide basic human rights , such as allowing Soviet Jews to leave the country . 
Carter institutionalized these concerns with new policies in the State Department , and Ronald Reagan rejected the realism of Presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford . 
He argued that there could be no accommodation with the Soviet Union and believed that ultimately communism would fall . 
Although Reagan ended up pursuing his goal through arms negotiation -- which went against many of his arguments -- the collapse of the Soviet Union that began during his presidency and culminated in 1991 seemed to give legitimacy to the arguments that promoting democracy is a valid goal for the U.S. . 
The loudest push for idealism was heard from President George W. Bush 's administration . 
The Bush Doctrine , announced in 2002 , included a commitment to promote `` freedom '' and the `` development of democratic institutions . '' 
Bush argued that the removal of Saddam Hussein in Iraq offered the opportunity to create a bastion of democracy in the Middle East that would spread the ideal to other countries . 
Last week , the neoconservative Elliot Abrams argued in The Washington Post that events in Egypt showed that Bush was correct . 
`` Arab nations too , '' Abrams wrote , `` yearn to throw off the secret police , to read the newspaper that the Ministry of Information has not censored and to vote in free elections . '' 
But Bush 's legacy created as many problems for idealists as it did sources of support . 
After all , Iraq remains unstable , and the future of civil society there is unclear . 
Bush tried to impose democracy from above and did not invest sufficient resources to remake the country . 
Many conservatives claimed that Bush had gone too far . 
President Obama , who had been idealistic in many ways on foreign policy , drew back from Bush 's rhetoric about democracy and fell more in line with the realists . 
The administration cut the funding for several programs aimed at promoting democracy and civil society in Egypt . 
The realists have been highly skeptical about Egypt . 
They warn that revolution in Egypt could open the door to Islamic fundamentalism , as in Iran in 1979 , and cost the U.S. and Israel one of their most loyal allies . 
Should the Egyptians be able to withstand the response of the Mubarak government and be able to establish a truly democratic and secular government , the results would be dramatic . 
These turbulent weeks could be remembered in the same way the nation remembers the late 1980s and early 1990s , when conditions that seemed inevitable in the Soviet empire suddenly were not . 
However , if Mubarak stifles the revolution , or fundamentalism takes hold , realists will , for a long time , point to Egypt as the prime example of why we can not hope for much better than the status quo when it comes to the Middle East . 
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Julian E. Zelizer . 
