JS in Northeast 's comments echoed the sentiments of many readers : I am so sick and tired of political correctness and people\/companies being vilified for the choices they make . 
We live in the United States where people\/companies have a freedom -LRB- to -RRB- choose who their friends\/business partners are . 
If someone or some group gets offended because of this , tough . 
Get over it and move on . 
We have freedoms here in the U.S. to do as we want . 
Even before opening kick off there were faith-based controversies . 
An ad uploaded in a make-your-own-Super-Bowl-ad competition featured a priest swapping out communion bread for Doritos and wine for Pepsi - which owns Doritos and sponsored the contest -- in hopes of boosting church attendance . 
By Rich Phillips , Senior Producer Jacksonville , Florida -LRB- CNN -RRB- Latisha Bines and Misty Gray cheered like any other parents at a recent middle school soccer game . 
They 're the two soccer moms in 13-year-old Darion Bines life . 
The women and all three of Latisha s children operate as a family . 
And they 've turned to their church for support , suggesting a changing face of the Bible Belt . 
There are more of us coming out , Bines said . 
We re feeling more comfortable about who we are . 
I guess it gives us more of a chance than back in the '80s , when you had to stay in the closet because you were ridiculed . 
Chanting `` never surrender '' and waving signs reading `` No more mosques '' and `` Islam is the devil , '' hundreds of protesters demonstrated Saturday just north of London . 
The protest in Luton was organized by the English Defense League , a far-right British organization that pushes an anti-Islamic message . 
It was formed in the summer of 2009 after a group of radical Muslims protested during a homecoming parade for British troops . 
The crowd at the Luton protest numbered into the thousands , according to some estimates , and the protesters included members from the Swedish , Norwegian , Dutch and Scottish defense leagues . 
They marched to St. George 's Square in central Luton , where speeches were given and protesters chanted . 
Luton has had a renewed focus in Britain after it emerged that Taimour Abdulwahab , an Iraqi-born terrorist who blew himself up on a Stockholm street in December , had lived there over the past few years and studied at a local university . 
The CNN Belief Blog covers the faith angles of the day 's biggest stories , from breaking news to politics to entertainment , fostering a global conversation about the role of religion and belief in readers ' lives . 
It 's edited by CNN 's Eric Marrapodi with daily contributions from CNN 's worldwide newsgathering team and frequent posts from religion scholar and author Stephen Prothero . 
