By Shelley DuBois , reporterFebruary 7 , 2011 : 5:46 AM ET FORTUNE -- As the political unrest in Egypt continues , corporate America is watching and holding its breath . 
Already , many companies with operations in Egypt have had to adjust . 
Procter & Gamble -LRB- PG , Fortune 500 -RRB- , for example , had to close its Cairo facilities and evacuate foreign national employees . 
The protest is affecting the worldwide commodities markets too -- oil prices spiked to $ 100 this week and have stayed high on the assumption that the conflict in Egypt could disrupt crucial oil transit routs . 
While most companies are concerned about the transit routes in and out of the country , several are producing energy in Egypt now . 
They 're exposed to risk right now , since the consequences of political upheaval are unpredictable , and could possibly reach energy assets far from the protest in Cairo . 
Yet , so far , they 're neither overly worried , nor should they be : Things for energy companies working in Egypt are n't bad . 
One independent , Apache Corp -LRB- APA , Fortune 500 -RRB- , has a large stake in Egypt -- about 21 % of the company 's total assets are there , according to an analyst report by HSBC Global Research . 
Apache 's stock took a hit on Thursday dropping by about 4.7 % based on news about the conflict , paired with the company 's decision to shut down its Australian oil fields because of hurricanes there . 
The conflict in Egypt could of course hurt Apache , but it probably wo n't . 
If it does , it 's unlikely to damage the company in any lasting way . 
Apache is still producing from its assets in Egypt , and therefore still raking in a profit from them . 
While that could change , there 's a good chance that the independent oil company will continue production during the upheaval and emerge relatively unscathed . 
In fact , as is typical in equities , one investor 's panic is another 's opportunity : Several analysts claim that the drop in Apache 's stock price due to concern over Apache 's large stake in Egypt created an opportunity to buy newly undervalued Apache stock . 
Apache has over 11 million acres in Egypt that produced over 150,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day during 2009 . 
Most of the Apache 's oil fields are in Egypt 's Western Desert , many , over a hundred miles from the conflict in Cairo . 
While national conflict can spread anywhere , the biggest threat to Apache depends on the government . 
Apache has ties to the government that 's currently getting overthrown , since its partner in Egyptian projects is a company called the Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation , is a national oil company . 
That does create some risk for the company . 
Experts say that Apache 's worst-case scenario would be that the current government gets overthrown and the new regime would nationlize all of Apache 's assets . 
But that probably wo n't happen . 
In times of conflict , `` generally speaking , one of the things most nations want to do is keep the energy flowing , in order to meet its demand , '' says John Kollar , an analyst with HSBC . 
Apache is crucial to Egypt , according to a UBS Investment Research report . 
The company drills half of the wells in the country , employs between 4,000 and 5,000 Egyptians and pays over $ 11 million per day to the national treasury . 
Whoever takes charge of the country probably would n't want to put the brakes on such a key source of energy and income . 
It 's a basic point , but oil , in general , is extremely profitable . 
Right now , Egyptian oil is still coming out of the ground , which means that Apache will profit . 
In fact , Apache would have to shut down all production in Egypt for a full three months before seeing any negative impact on its credit quality , says Kollar , which does n't appear likely . 
He takes a longer-term approach to evaluating a company 's stability . 
`` I 'm not all that worried about the next penny per share , I 'm looking at ten and twenty-year bonds and the company 's ability to pay interest and its level of credit-worthiness . '' 
In that respect , he says , `` Apache is one of the best independent exploration and production companies from credit-worthiness point of view . '' 
Most big oil companies , in fact , are more resilient than the market would reflect . 
Companies such as Apache and certainly the major energy companies have a plethora of assets all over the globe . 
If they need to , they can sell them and spend expend less capital and stay financially solvent . 
`` The market 's reaction is always to shoot first and ask questions later , '' Kollar says . 
But that 's not the best reflection of the health of energy companies with such long-term contracts that encounter may encounter obstacles but ultimately generate a big profit . 
Apache 's stock has started to creep back since it plummeted last week and has kept producing throughout the turmoil . 
Energy plays everywhere are becoming increasingly risky . 
Exploration and production companies are partnering with government-linked oil companies where volatile tax and export rules , if not political conflict , are real possibilities . 
If the market continues to overreact , then recover , it 'll keep providing investors an opportunity to buy shares of certain energy companies with short-term obstacles and long-term profit plans . 
Market indexes are shown in real time , except for the DJIA , which is delayed by two minutes . 
All times are ET . 
Disclaimer LIBOR Warning : Neither BBA Enterprises Limited , nor the BBA LIBOR Contributor Banks , nor Reuters , can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of BBA LIBOR . 
Morningstar : 2013 Morningstar , Inc. . 
Disclaimer The Dow Jones IndexesSM are proprietary to and distributed by Dow Jones & Company , Inc. and have been licensed for use . 
All content of the Dow Jones IndexesSM 2013 is proprietary to Dow Jones & Company , Inc. . 
The market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors . 
FactSet Research Systems Inc. 2013 . 
Most stock quote data provided by BATS . 
