By Seth Weintraub February 7 , 2011 : 10:44 AM ET Wael Ghonim , Google 's executive in Egypt and one of the leaders of the uprising , has been missing for a ten days . 
now Al Arabiya television says he 's been set free . 
Ten days ago , just as things were getting hot in Egypt , Wael Ghonim tweeted , `` Pray for #Egypt . 
Very worried as it seems that government is planning a war crime tomorrow against people . 
We are all ready to die #Jan 25 '' . 
That was the last communications heard from the Google -LRB- GOOG -RRB- executive . 
Mr. Ghonim 's social-media savvy helped spark the massive demonstrations threatening MuBarak 's ruling regime . 
The WSJ reports that Ghonim has seen this day coming for awhile : `` I said one year ago that the Internet will change the political scene in Egypt and some Friends made fun of me , '' Mr. Ghonim wrote on his personal Facebook profile for friends after two days of swelling protests in Cairo . 
The next day , Jan. 28 , he disappeared . 
During his disappearance , Mr. Ghonim , a father of two who is in his 30s , emerged as a central symbol of the anti-government protests , cast as the face of a movement and hero in the cause of democracy . 
Protest organizers in Cairo 's central Tahrir Square adopted him as a symbolic leader . 
Suspecting his arrest -- but having no proof -- they declared in speeches that they would n't leave the square until he was freed . 
Marchers carried homemade signs emblazoned with his name . 
At the same time , some local media suggested the political activities of Mr. Ghonim , who is Google 's head of marketing for the Middle East and North Africa , make him a traitor to his nation . 
The Egyptian protests are a new breed of social unrest with communications fueled by social media sites like Google 's YouTube , Twitter and Facebook . 
Iran 's protests last year were fueled by Twitter . 
So much so that the US State department asked Twitter not to shut down for routine maintenance during the revolt . 
Egyptian protesters charging their cellphones on the streets . 
Are these the 21st century weapons ? 
For Google , they just want to see their employee released back to his family safely . 
Google went from searching the Web to worming its way into nearly every facet of business and government . 
Seth Weintraub unveils where the company is going , who it 's competing with , who it 's about to compete with and how market forces push the company to veer or adhere to its Do n't Be Evil motto . 
For 15 years , Weintraub was a global IT director for a number of companies before becoming a blogger . 
Market indexes are shown in real time , except for the DJIA , which is delayed by two minutes . 
All times are ET . 
Disclaimer LIBOR Warning : Neither BBA Enterprises Limited , nor the BBA LIBOR Contributor Banks , nor Reuters , can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of BBA LIBOR . 
Morningstar : 2013 Morningstar , Inc. . 
Disclaimer The Dow Jones IndexesSM are proprietary to and distributed by Dow Jones & Company , Inc. and have been licensed for use . 
All content of the Dow Jones IndexesSM 2013 is proprietary to Dow Jones & Company , Inc. . 
The market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors . 
FactSet Research Systems Inc. 2013 . 
Most stock quote data provided by BATS . 
