Google executive Wael Ghonim was released Monday in Egypt , the company said , more than a week after he went missing . 
`` Huge relief -- Wael Ghonim has been released . 
Our love to him and his family , '' the company tweeted shortly after 8 p.m. in Cairo -LRB- 1 p.m. ET -RRB- . 
Ghonim 's Twitter account , which had not had a posting since he went missing January 28 , carried a tweet around the same time . 
`` Freedom is a bless -LRB- sic -RRB- that deserves fighting for it , '' the tweet said , ending with the hashtag '' #Jan 25 , '' a reference to the protests in Egypt . 
Minutes later , Ghonim added this tweet : `` Gave my 2 cents to Dr. Hosam Badrawy . 
who was reason why I am out today . 
Asked him resign cause that 's the only way I 'll respect him . '' 
Hossam Badrawi , often described as a relatively liberal politician , was recently elevated to become secretary general of the ruling National Democratic Party . 
Later Monday , Ghonim gave an interview to Egypt 's Dream TV , in which he described his ordeal and involvement in the protests . 
He said he was kidnapped at night as he was trying to get a taxi . 
`` All of a sudden , four people surrounded me . 
They were kidnapping me . 
I yelled , ` Help ! ' 
But of course I knew these were security forces , '' he said . 
Ghonim told Dream TV he was the administrator behind the influential `` We are all Khaled Said '' Facebook page that helped to organize and galvanize the protests . 
The page was dedicated to the memory of a young man allegedly beaten to death by police in Alexandria . 
`` We must bring down this political system that we have , '' he said . 
Toward the end of the interview , Ghonim began to cry as he looked at pictures of people reportedly killed during the demonstrations . 
`` I want to say to every mother and every father that lost his child , I am sorry , but this is not our fault . 
I swear to God , this is not our fault . 
It is the fault of everyone who was holding on to power greedily and would not let it go . 
I want to leave , '' he told Dream TV . 
Ghonim then got up and walked out of the interview . 
Earlier , his family said they were expecting Ghonim 's release Monday , 10 days after his disappearance . 
His brother Hazzem Ghonim told CNN that he received word from Egyptian telecommunications billionaire Naguib Sawiris that authorities would release Ghonim by 4 p.m. -LRB- 9 a.m. ET -RRB- . 
Wael Ghonim is a Dubai-based marketing executive for Google in the Middle East . 
`` Heading to Tahrir square now . 
Sleeping on the streets of Cairo , trying to feel the pain of millions of my fellow Egyptians , '' Ghonim tweeted on January 26 . 
