February 07 , 2011 | By Bruce Rutherford , Special to CNN The demonstrations that erupted on January 25 were driven by Egyptians ' aspirations for greater dignity in their lives . 
Most Egyptians have seen their standard of living deteriorate over the past decade because of rising unemployment , persistent inflation and stagnant wages . 
They have also suffered from a corrupt and brutal police force that subjected the population to arbitrary arrest , torture and myriad indignities large and small . 
These sources of anger have been simmering for some time . 
The events that caused them to boil over were the demonstrations in Tunisia that led to the overthrow of that country 's long-serving dictator , Zine El Abidine Ben Ali , a few weeks ago . 
These events fundamentally altered the way many Egyptians viewed demonstrations . 
Before Ben Ali 's departure , many Egyptians saw little point in going to the streets to express their anger . 
There was little chance things would change , and they would probably be beaten by the security police . 
After Ben Ali 's departure , many thousands of Egyptians decided that demonstrations could actually bring about meaningful change and were worth the risk , so they turned out in droves . 
The situation remains very fluid , and the result is still uncertain . 
As this process of change unfolds , there are three actors who will play particularly important roles : Can they form a leadership that articulates clear demands beyond the removal of Mubarak and that can negotiate with the regime ? 
So far the protesters -- who have been savvy in so many ways , from utilizing social media to creating a minicity in Tahrir Square -- have been remarkably unsavvy about the substance of politics . 
Maybe it 's a reflection of the internet generation 's resentment of hierarchy . 
They had better get over this hesitation quickly and appoint credible and effective leaders or their sacrifices may be for naught . 
Also , will large numbers of demonstrators continue to turn out ? 
It looks like President Hosni Mubarak is determined to hold on for another seven months . 
The only way this will change is if demonstrators continue to come to Tahrir Square en masse , even as life otherwise returns to normal . 
The most likely way for this to unfold is for the Friday of each week to become the `` day of demonstration '' in which average people , who work during the week , come down to Tahrir for a day of protest in ever-larger numbers . 
If these Friday demonstrations steadily grow in size , Mubarak may eventually take the hint and accept an early exit . 
