Even before opening kick off there were faith-based controversies . 
An ad uploaded in a make-your-own-Super-Bowl-ad competition featured a priest swapping out communion bread for Doritos and wine for Pepsi - which owns Doritos and sponsored the contest -- in hopes of boosting church attendance . 
Next came JesusHatesObama.com , a political novelty t-shirt company that had dueling bobble heads of Jesus and Obama . 
The company said Fox rejected its ad . 
Fox did n't comment . 
The Fixed Point Foundation , a group that promotes Christianity in the public square , told CNN that Fox rejected its proposed Super Bowl ad last June . 
In the ad , people watching a football game spy the phrase John 3:16 - a New Testament verse popular among evangelical Christians -- on a player 's eye black . 
A man in the ad says he 's going to look it up , with the ad directing viewers to lookup316 . 
Fixed Point Executive Director Larry Taunton said Fox told him his commercial was rejected because it contained `` religious doctrine , '' though he said the ad avoided featuring the actual words of the verse . 
Everyone we dealt with at Fox couldn t have been more gracious or professional . 
I talked to them the day after last year s Super Bowl , Taunton said . 
Increasingly religion and Christianity is treated like smoking - you can do it but only in designated areas , he said . 
They were saying there s no place for -LRB- faith -RRB- in the public square . 
There s a place for the soft core porn of Go-Daddy , violent movie trailers , and irresponsible drinking , but not for faith . 
As a workaround , the Fixed Point Foundation ran its ad on Fox stations in Birmingham , Alabama and Washington , DC . 
Taunton said his group will try again or a Super Bowl ad next year . 
At the Eatocracy DC Super Bowl party I attended on Sunday night , there was consternation that during the halftime show , Usher appeared to be changing the lyrics to his song OMG from `` Oh my God '' to `` Oh my gosh . '' 
The move was resoundingly denounced by party guests as an overly politically correct move . 
Turns out the song has always been `` Oh My Gosh . '' 
The game itself saw plenty of touchdown end zone kneeling celebrations , including Green Bay wide receiver Greg Jennings kneeling and bowing his head after catching one of his two touchdown catches . 
And there were plenty God shout-outs in post-game coverage . 
A jubilant Jennings repeatedly told Fox 's Pam Oliver , `` To God be the glory . '' 
What 's God got to do with the Super Bowl ? 
Well , the Bible prohibits working on the Sabbath , so the game was subject to divine retribution from the start . 
Also , the Bible prohibits wearing fabric cut from different cloth , as well as shaving , things which many of the fans and players were guilty of . 
Coveting thy neighbor 's wife is also forbidden -LRB- are you listening , Rothlesberger ? -RRB- . 
We can only hope that no shrimp or BBQ pork were being consumed , since they are Biblically verbotten as well . 
In fact , it 's amazing the Lord did n't smite the whole heathen spectacle . 
But He was probably watching the Puppy Bowl anyway . 
John 3:16 ... there seems to be another `` controversial '' commercial that is getting passed around as well . 
it actually comments on the very verse of John 3:16 . 
it does n't look like the christians are liking it too much . 
maybe just a little too much TRUTH for them ?? They are going to have a PRAY OFF game soon apparently . . 
the teams will stand around a ball and pray . . 
when god kicks the ball over the line , that team wins . . 
So my gay and lesbian friends can shout '' we 're gay and proud ... Get used to it '' ... No issue . 
My African American relatives can see to the roof tops `` say it loud , I 'm black and I am proud '' ... No issue . 
Both statement can be proclaimed in the public arena , ... Shamed , as they should be , to those who attempt to say that either groups should not proclaim such . 
But , y ' all athiest think that we people of faith should do so in private and shame . 
Are you guys and girls actually that narrowminded and believing that you can force any group `` into the closet '' , be they Christians or any group . 
The moment you pressure one group back into the closet or the privacy of their own homes you are talking of oppression . 
Once you go down that road goodbye LGBT , any ethinic multiculturalism . 
Do not think it would stop there . 
Possibly because one 's skin color or se-xual orientation are natural , yet have been historically discriminated against . 
Your religion is personal choice . 
@W247 -- If you were offended with the way I said something then I apologize . 
Whether the true age of the earth is known to an exact year is debatable but it can not be said that just because we do not know the exact age that anything is possible . 
With radiometric age dating it clearly can be shown that the age of the earth as referred to in the Bible is incorrect . 
I guess every Christian I have talked to believes in the earth being relatively young but I should not paint you with this broad brush since you may have a different take on this matter . 
Also I have only recently begun studying the bible as I stated above but where does it talk about dinosaurs and what exactly does it say ? 
I have never heard of this before and it interests me a great deal , thank you for pointing it out , cheers . 
@W247 -- maybe you should come talk to those who ring my bell then . 
We have asked repeatedly for them to stop and have a no soliciting sign but that does n't stop them because they say it is their goal to spread the good word . 
Also not all Christians or Christian faith groups have the same beliefs or religious culture . 
I would not ever speak on behalf of all Sikhs of the world because even within the faith there are many different types of people , with different views and beleifs and how they interept what is written , told or passed on to them so how you would possibly know whether someone should be in church or not and at what time is beyond me . 
You tell me that you have been studying the the age of the earth yet you have no response or conclusion except to ask me what I have come up with . 
The Guru Granth Sahib is the Sikhs holy book and speaks of this , pick it up and take a read and broaden your mind , I am in the process of reading the Bible , have read passages of the Koran as well . 
The Sikhs holy book is the only one I know of that speaks about dinosaurs , space and time travel , multipile universes along with being good to others , peaceful living , hardwork , respect and faith that good will prevail . 
@well read -- you are absolutley right , you should just believe what is written in the bible and run with it . 
Maybe i 'm just naive or a product of the teachings my parents passed on to me but I was taught to question everything and constantly learn and grow , this again is also written in the Guru Granth Sahib and to never get stagnant and always expand your mind , body and soul . 
Also notice I did not say how old the earth was I just stated that the Bible is wrong and this obvious mistake or lie has not been acknowledged by those who follow blindly . 
You just assumed that I went with what certain scientists have stated . 
@GSA : since you did not state , and seemed to be reasonably minded , I did ask you what your base was for the age of the Earth . 
And that is a little bit belittling to tell me to go `` broaden my mind '' . 
I did not tell what , where , how , who I have been studying with . 
However I do not expect an apology from you . 
Yes , the bible does talk about dinosaurs and I am glad that are also a student and willing to read it for yourself . 
I hope you do so with an open mind . 
February 8 , 2011 at 4:27 pm | Report abuse | Roger Goldleader writes : `` Americans worship regularly at the TV altar , and the lust of the eyes , the lust of the flesh , and the pride of life are all `` nourished '' by what oozes out of our TV god . 
That is the religion being shoved down our throats actually , we just eat it all up because it feeds our notions of self sufficiency . 
We love everything that enables us to believe that we ourselves are god . 
So to have a player say , `` to God be the glory '' is the EXCEPTION TO THE RULE . '' 
This was an extremely valiant effort to spin it as such , but let 's talk about reality for a moment . 
According to the CIA 's website regarding the demographics of the United States , just under 80 % of the population are Christians while only 4 % have no religion . 
Now with that in mind , it is hilarious to listen to faith-driven people say how our country is in decline because we have left God out of our lives . 
It is PRECISELY that overwhelming Christian majority who are responsible for electing our politicians into office . 
So if you really believe that our country is upside down , guess who is to blame . 
Yep , that 's right . 
So with regard to the `` lustful '' items that are being brought to the `` TV altar , '' guess who is responsible for running those companies , for running those marketing departments , for running those ad agencies and for actually buying those products , etc , etc , etc. . . 
Or do you really think they are spending all of that money to market to only 4 % of the population ? 
@The -LRB- real -RRB- Truth -- so you care about me and my soul and show this to me by shoving a bunch of beliefs down my throat that come from a book that ca n't even get the age of the earth correct ? 
I am spiritual and have my own beliefs , I am not Christian though and there are reasons for that , all personal . 
I am sure that as a Sikh if I was constantly telling you my beliefs , why they are correct and why what you are doing is wrong via tv , magazines , flyers and ringing your doorbell at 8:00 am on a Sunday morning you would definitely be out of your comfort zone and thoroughly annoyed . 
Instead I know the truth and have 100 % confidence in my beliefs so I do not need to push them on anyone , why do you feel the need to push yours onto others ? 
Actually GSA , they would n't be ringing your doorbell at 8am , they would be getting ready to go to service . 
We have a little sign on our door that says `` No Soliciting '' . 
It has helped immensely with people coming to our door that we do n't know . 
However , I can hardly fault anyone for living out their faith regardless if I agree with them or not . 
There are a few things that I do take exception too , groups that willingly desecrate symbols of our freedom -LRB- IE : Burning a flag on the streets of NYC -RRB- , people that use violence or hate speech to get their point across . 
Age of the Earth : I have been studying on that one and looking at both sides of the argument for young earth versus an old earth theory . 
What information have you come up with ? 
February 8 , 2011 at 2:22 pm | Report abuse | Christians and Muslims are required by their respective texts to spread their beliefs . 
If they fail to do so , then can they claim to be true adherants to the faith ? 
No , they would be labeled as hypocrites for not living out those beliefs . 
February 8 , 2011 at 3:55 pm | Report abuse | All reliable scientific evidence supports an Earth that is approximately 4.5 billion years old . 
As far as I am aware there are not `` both sides '' of this data , there is the evidence and there are ideas made up by biblical literalists . 
So you 're okay with inaccuracy as long as it 's consistent . 
Banks must love you . 
I 'm not sure if the scriptures are consistent , to which translation are you referring ? 
And which interpretation of that translation ? 
February 8 , 2011 at 4:43 pm | Report abuse | Alive in Jesus in Atlanta How do you know they werent just taking a breath and enjoying the moment ? 
If people wanted to hear about religion on football Sunday , then they can go to Church . 
This constant need for proselytizing in sports and other areas has gotten worse than the Mormons showing up knocking on someone 's front door . 
What would all of you think if an atheist QB won the SuperBowl and then came out in the post game ceremony and said , `` I 'd like to thank the fact that there is no God and congratulate myself and my hard work for winning this game and being able to perform on the field . '' 
The reality is that the Christian world would have a conniption fit . 
Yet when a Christian does the EXACT same thing -LRB- except including God -RRB- , then it is perfectly fine . 
None of that even begins to address the fact that these men are playing a violent game -LRB- Jesus was n't running around playing violent games -RRB- , living in multi-million dollar mansions -LRB- while Jesus was poor -RRB- , working on Sunday -LRB- when the Bible says to keep the Sabbath holy -RRB- , intentionally abusing and destroying the body and brain that God gave them -LRB- due to the abuse that is the NFL game -RRB- , etc , etc , etc. . 
Good thing there is no hypocrisy there . 
I support people having their own religious preferences , but they do n't need to shove it down everyone 's throat every single time that the opportunity arises . 
May I note that the entire spectacle of professional sports , of which the Super Bowl seems to be the preeminent event , along with the attendant advertisements , glitz , self-worship , and idolotry all loudly proclaim `` there is no God and I congratulate myself and my hard work for winning ! '' 
Americans worship regularly at the TV altar , and the lust of the eyes , the lust of the flesh , and the pride of life are all `` nourished '' by what oozes out of our TV god . 
That is the religion being shoved down our throats -- actually , we just eat it all up because it feeds our notions of self sufficiency . 
We love everything that enables us to believe that we ourselves are god . 
So to have a player say , `` to God be the glory '' is the EXCEPTION TO THE RULE . 
February 8 , 2011 at 8:21 am | Report abuse | dear `` the truth '' Mormons do n't go door to door ... that 's a Jehovah 's Witness ... get your facts straight before you run your mouth . 
February 8 , 2011 at 9:17 am | Report abuse | Do you know why we `` shove Christianity in your face '' ? 
Because we care about your soul . 
Which is more important , your comfort zone , or the Biblical truth of Heaven and Hell ? 
I wonder how many people sports fans , movie stars , politicians , and every-day joes , are in Hell right now , talking about the experience they had at the Superbowl ? 
I wonder still how many of them are saying , `` Why did n't I listen when my co-worker , friend , parent , etc. . . 
told me about the Good News of Jesus Christ . '' 
Your choice , and only you can make it . 
Please consider this the next time someone approaches you and asks you an eternal question . 
February 8 , 2011 at 10:36 am | Report abuse | `` dear `` the truth '' Mormons do n't go door to door ... that 's a Jehovah 's Witness ... get your facts straight before you run your mouth . '' 
Mormons most certainly do the door-to-door shtick . 
It is usually a pair of late-teen young men in black pants , white shirts and neckties ... and they commonly ride bicycles from neighborhood to neighborhood . 
They are all over my town ... and I 'm sure we are not unique . 
February 8 , 2011 at 1:51 pm | Report abuse | p.s. Jehovah 's Witnesses usually come as a pair of more middle-aged people -LRB- but I 've had groups of 4 of them on the doorstep several times -RRB- Then there 's a couple of local Baptist churches , who come by with religious tracts and church bulletins quite often . 
February 8 , 2011 at 1:57 pm | Report abuse | `` I wonder how many people sports fans , movie stars , politicians , and every-day joes , are in Hell right now ... '' Go ahead and wonder - it 's certainly your right ; while you are at it , though , take some time to wonder a bit about if there really IS a ` hell ' . 
If you say that you know this as a fact -LRB- or truth with a capital ` t ' - haha -RRB- , you are either a liar or a fool . 
February 8 , 2011 at 2:08 pm | Report abuse | How is a commercial shoving anything down anyone 's throat is what I do n't understand , how is someone saying `` Thank God '' bothersome if you do n't believe in God ? 
And there are plenty of people -LRB- TO for example -RRB- who mostly just laud themselves , and that 's their right . 
The example of someone thanking the fact that there is no God is obtuse , and not actually the opposite of someone thanking God . 
Thanking God is like thanking anyone else for a gift you received . 
If a person believes there is no God , then it 's like they bought it themselves ... no need to thank anything . 
So thanking `` the fact that there is no God '' would actually have to be them going out of their way to make a dig at those who believe in God . 
I know , you 're going to say that Christian ads , proselytizing , is the same thing but for the most part , it is n't . 
Yes , there are those evangelicals who would have you believe you are a terrible person if you are not Christian , who will hate you and claim you are the scourge of the earth -- those are the people that protest gay soldiers ' funerals and things like that ... and those people are wrong . 
But by and large , those ads are done by Christians who believe they have found a good thing and want to share it ... much the same as I tell every high school student I meet how great the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill was for me . 
It 's up to them to decide if it would be good for them , too , but I feel obligated to share . 
Praise God and Go TarHeels ! 
February 8 , 2011 at 2:32 pm | Report abuse | Roger Goldleader writes : `` Americans worship regularly at the TV altar , and the lust of the eyes , the lust of the flesh , and the pride of life are all `` nourished '' by what oozes out of our TV god . 
That is the religion being shoved down our throats actually , we just eat it all up because it feeds our notions of self sufficiency . 
We love everything that enables us to believe that we ourselves are god . 
So to have a player say , `` to God be the glory '' is the EXCEPTION TO THE RULE . '' 
This was an extremely valiant effort to spin it as such , but let 's talk about reality for a moment . 
According to the CIA 's website regarding the demographics of the United States , just under 80 % of the population are Christians while only 4 % have no religion . 
Now with that in mind , it is hilarious to listen to faith driven people say how our country is in decline because we have left God out of our lives . 
It is PRECISELY that overwhelming Christian majority who are responsible for electing our politicians into office . 
So if you really believe that our country is upside down , guess who is to blame . 
Yep , that 's right . 
So with regard to the `` lustful '' items that are being brought to the `` TV altar , '' guess who is responsible for running those companies , for running those marketing departments , for running those ad agencies and for actually buying those products , etc , etc , etc. . . 
Or do you really think they are spending all of that money to market to only 4 % of the population ? 
\*\*\* Lydia writes : `` how is someone saying `` Thank God '' bothersome if you do n't believe in God ? '' 
\*\*\* People were in an uproar when Cassius Clay became Muhammad Ali and a Muslim . 
Why was that bothersome to people ? 
\*\*\* `` And there are plenty of people -LRB- TO for example -RRB- who mostly just laud themselves , and that 's their right . '' 
\*\*\* TO claims to be a Christian . 
Back when he was with the Eagles -LRB- one of his most disruptive stints -RRB- , he was even quoted as saying , It doesn t matter what the doctor said . 
I have the best doctor in God . '' 
\*\*\* `` The example of someone thanking the fact that there is no God is obtuse , and not actually the opposite of someone thanking God . '' 
\*\*\* Fine , I can play along ... so what if someone after the game thanks Satan for helping them win the game ? 
After all , according to the Bible itself , God killed FAR more people than Satan . 
Most people are shocked to learn about how many people the devil actually killed . 
In the Bible , the number of SPECIFIC references to the number of people that God killed is in excess of 2.3 Million . 
None of that even accounts for abstract events such as `` the flood , '' then that number is likely in excess of 30 Million people . 
And how many people has the devil killed ? 
The answer is 10 . 
Not 10 Million , not 10 Thousand , but rather 10 . 
That 's 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 . 
Even more ironic is that the 10 people that he killed were in a `` bet '' of sorts with God with regard to Job and his family , so God was directly implicated in those as well . 
So looking at the final specific tally that is most favorable to God , it is : Do n't shoot the messenger ... I 'm only reporting what the Bible says . 
\*\*\* `` Thanking God is like thanking anyone else for a gift you received . '' 
\*\*\* If they want to thank God , by all means let them do so as much as they 'd like ... in PRIVATE . 
If they are on the Christian News Network , then let them thank God all they want there as people can then tune it to see it where the format is appropriate . 
In fact , Jesus even speaks about not drawing attention to yourself : From Matthew : `` And when you pray , do not be like the hypocrites , for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and on the street corners to be seen by men . 
I tell you the truth , they have received their reward in full . 
But when you pray , go into your room , close the door and pray to your Father , who is unseen . 
Then your Father , who sees what is done in secret , will reward you . '' 
Why are n't Christians\/Catholics spending that hour out helping the needy instead of wasting that hour trying to look and feel good about themselves in Church ? 
People go to Church for their own reasons , not because of what Jesus tells them to do as evidenced above . 
As an aside , Jackson Browne has a great song called `` The Rebel Jesus . '' 
Check out the lyrics . 
\*\*\* `` If a person believes there is no God , then it 's like they bought it themselves ... no need to thank anything . 
So thanking `` the fact that there is no God '' would actually have to be them going out of their way to make a dig at those who believe in God . '' 
\*\*\* So let 's be blatantly honest here ... the reason why these people are thanking God in droves is to draw attention to themselves and to draw attention to the general population that they believe there is a God . 
Thus , someone saying that to the general population that they believe that there is n't a God really is n't much different . 
\*\*\* `` Yes , there are those evangelicals who would have you believe you are a terrible person if you are not Christian , who will hate you and claim you are the scourge of the earth those are the people that protest gay soldiers ' funerals and things like that ... and those people are wrong . '' 
\*\*\* I can not begin to tell you how refreshing it is to hear a person of faith make a statement like that . 
There need to be a lot more people like yourself speaking out about items such as that . 
Sincere kudos to you ! 
\*\*\* `` But by and large , those ads are done by Christians who believe they have found a good thing and want to share it ... much the same as I tell every high school student I meet how great the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill was for me . 
It 's up to them to decide if it would be good for them , too , but I feel obligated to share . '' 
Take Tim Tebow for a second here . 
I am actually a big Tebow fan . 
His religious stance is obviously well known and it is rather annoying to constantly hear about it when I 'm trying to watch football and not feel like I am in church . 
With that said , I GREATLY admire Tim for standing up for his beliefs . 
And I admire him for that because he is n't a hypocrite about it and actually practices first hand what he preaches . 
Tim 's SuperBowl ad was APPROVED by the NFL last year which was a pro-life ad . 
And he did the ad tastefully without throwing around words like abortion , the Bible and Christianity left and right . 
Well , I can support you 100 % there !!! Your post was a very `` Christian '' type of response on your part , so I commend you for that . 
In an odd way , you remind me of myself at one point in time in my life when I too used to believe . 
Since then I have expanded my horizons and looked at the situation from a logical perspective . 
I am not ruling out the possibility of a Supreme Being , just ruling out that a Supreme Being had anything to do with writing the Bible -LRB- as I 'd then have to believe that the Supreme Being is a simpleton if he had a hand in writing the Bible due to the countless errors contained within -RRB- . 
The Bible is littered with errors , contradictions and prophecies that never came to pass . 
In fact it contradicts itself starting in THE VERY FIRST TWO CHAPTERS of Genesis when the order of creation is mixed up to having only 2 of the 4 Gospel writers bothering to talk about the birth of Jesus -LRB- and those two accounts conflict with each other while also providing timelines which make it impossible for Jesus to have been born based on their accounts -RRB- to 3 of the 4 Gospel writers not agreeing on what the final words of Jesus were . 
If I saw the Son of God die right in front me , I think I 'd remember his last words verbatim ... would n't you ? 
The facts are that a 5th grader today knows more about the world that we live in than did the uneducated people who wrote the Bible . 
It is ironic that everyone here would NEVER let a 5th grader dictate the course of your life , but when it comes to the Bible , then it all of the sudden `` magically '' becomes OK to do so . 
In any event , I 'd encourage you to keep an open mind because I am exponentially MUCH happier being freed from the guilt and constraints of organized religion than I was before . 
Just because I do n't have a `` Christian '' label attached to me does n't mean that I ca n't still do good works on my own . 
In the end , I can simply follow the Golden Rule ... `` Do unto others as you would want them to do unto you . '' 
Interestingly enough , that exists in almost every religion and since God 's people encompass the planet , that makes far more sense than relying on a 2,000 year old book written by uneducated men and a corrupt machine that is organized religion to rule my life : Bah ' Faith : `` And if thine eyes be turned towards justice , choose thou for thy neighbor that which thou choosest for thyself . '' 
Brahmanism : Do naught unto others which would cause you pain if done to you . '' 
Buddhism : `` Hurt not others in ways that you yourself would find hurtful . '' 
Confucianism : `` Do not do to others what you do not want them to do to you . '' 
Egyptian : `` Do for one who may do for you , that you may cause him thus to do . '' 
Hinduism : `` This is the sum of duty : do not do to others what would cause pain if done to you . '' 
Humanism : `` Do n't do things you would n't want to have done to you . '' 
Islam : `` None of you truly believes until he wishes for his brother what he wishes for himself . '' 
Jainism : `` In happiness and suffering , in joy and grief , we should regard all creatures as we regard our own self . '' 
Judaism : `` What is hateful to you , do not to your fellow man . 
This is the law : all the rest is commentary . '' 
Native American : `` Do not wrong or hate your neighbor . 
For it is not he who you wrong , but yourself . '' 
Shinto : `` The heart of the person before you is a mirror . 
See there your own form . '' 
Sikhism : `` No one is my enemy , none a stranger and everyone is my friend . '' 
Taoism : `` Regard your neighbor 's gain as your own gain , and your neighbor 's loss as your own loss . '' 
Yoruba : `` One going to take a pointed stick to pinch a baby bird should first try it on himself to feel how it hurts . '' 
Zoroastrianism : `` Whatever is disagreeable to yourself do not do unto others . '' 
In the end , it is obvious that all religions share this theme . 
That is the rule to follow , not because it is in some book , but because it is shared across religions and humanity . 
If you were born in Tibet or Iran , you 'd still be following that rule . 
Logic dictates this is FAR more sensible . 
In any event , best wishes to you . 
Excellent response by you to @Lydia . 
p.s. I am often leery of screen names with the word `` Truth '' in them , since there is rarely much of it in their posts ; but you have shown lots of it . 
February 8 , 2011 at 4:59 pm | Report abuse | I do n't know about the rest of it , but I really like the section about the Golden Rule . 
February 8 , 2011 at 5:30 pm | Report abuse | To the person who claims to be `` The Real Truth '' Please do n't waste your time praying for the non-existent souls others . 
If you wish to pretend to do the most good , please pray for those who are starving to death , or dying of horrible diseases or being tortured or driven out of there homes by either nature or human activity . 
That 's where your pretend efforts and the pretend efforts of your imaginary friend are most needed . 
February 8 , 2011 at 9:42 pm | Report abuse | Men on their knees in prayer look most honorable . 
The most beautiful , vital heritage of America . 
One has to ask whether they only pray when people are watching them ? 
If one has to publicly display their faith , how strong is it really ? 
February 8 , 2011 at 6:32 am | Report abuse | Alive in Jesus in Atlanta I agree Justina , thanking God is honorable and humbling . 
February 8 , 2011 at 7:16 am | Report abuse | Alive in Jesus in Atlanta Im sure if they didnt have Jesus in their heart , he wouldnt have been first on thier mind when succeeding . 
Having Jesus in your life is a positive , not having him in your heart leaves you lost . 
What they do when they are alone , only they and Jesus knows ... dont worry about it . 
February 8 , 2011 at 7:25 am | Report abuse | You are AS-SUMING they pray nowhere else . 
Does anybody really need to ask that ? 
I could see someone asking if they only want to think the worst . 
I choose not to ! 
February 8 , 2011 at 11:47 am | Report abuse | Here I thought the rights , freedoms and responsibilities laid out by our founding fathers when they created a nation like no other in history of the world was the most beautiful , vital heritage of America . 
After all , it 's one EVERY American can enjoy , not just the christians . 
February 8 , 2011 at 9:16 pm | Report abuse | Justina . . 
young people die on their knees in hunger all over the world . . 
your god is inept at best . . 
I would hope that if he existed . . 
he would worry more about the hungry that a football game . . 
February 9 , 2011 at 1:27 am | Report abuse | Fox has the luxury and the right to reject ads for the Super Bowl for any reason they see fit . 
There are dozens of other companies wanting to get their commercials on during the Super Bowl and I think it was actually nice on the part of Fox to explain why the ad was rejected when they had no obligation to do so . 
Was there a Football Game after the Eminem Chrysler\/Detriot commercial ? 
After that ... I thought all that could be said was said . 
isnt it AMERICAN to have the freedom of your choice of religion just as it is to have the choice to criticize other peoples choice of religion ???? GOD , isnt it great to be AMERICAN ???? and have that freedom ? 
or would you rather it be dictated to you as to what religion you WILL believe or you will be stoned to death ALLAH AKBAR Ok , the lyrics to Usher 's song actually are oh my gosh , so that 's someone being oversensitive and not knowing what they 're talking about -LRB- especially since many Christians would actually consider it oh my God to be taking God 's name in vain -- violating one of the 10 commandments -- and just as bad as saying God damn -RRB- . 
And while I 'm sure god cares very little about who wins or loses the Super Bowl , however , the people who make up those teams and say `` to God be the glory '' are not wrong . 
Christians are supposed to aim for excellence in everything that they do , representing and bringing glory to God . 
So while God may not have forced Troy Polamalu out of coverage , he certainly gave Greg Jennings the strength to train for and play the game at such a high level . 
I do n't think anyone can blame someone for being grateful to God for making good things possible for them . 
I really do not understand why people would get offended by advertisements for churches or with Bible verses , religion is no more being forced on a person by them seeing a commercial than Coors is going to get them drunk through the tv . 
It 's an ad like any other , buy it or do n't . 
VERY WELL PUT LYDIA I am a recovering alky and there hasnt been a Budlight commercial make me drink yet and doubt one ever will I do enjoy the commercials though everyone is so stuck on being politically correct anymore that it has become nonsense t speak in fear of being called something you arent February 7 , 2011 at 11:58 pm | Report abuse | First of all it sounds like your actually just giving those companies more free advertising . 
Second of all what 's God got to do with the SuperBowl . 
Sure did n't list anything about that in the commandments . 
Here 's what God has to do with the superbowl . 
He created each individual player , He gave them abilities , He made the ball they play with and gave them the mind to make the ball and develop the game , He gave them the muscles , arms and legs to endure the physical contact of the game . 
He made the stadium and the fans in it that make the game possible . 
He made the cameras so all the people around the world could see the game . 
Finally , He made you and me to give Him glory and honor and praise and without Him , nothing that you see would exist , including our children . 
So I say THANK YOU GOD , YOU ARE AWESOME . 
Thank God for people who are willing to stand on what they believe . 
The best part of it all is that HE died in our place for the sins we have committed against Him . 
We are undeserving of His grace but He gives it to us anyway . 
Thank God for Jesus Christ . 
February 8 , 2011 at 6:48 am | Report abuse | You said : `` Finally , He made you and me to give Him glory and honor and praise and without Him , nothing that you see would exist , including our children . 
So I say THANK YOU GOD , YOU ARE AWESOME . '' 
For all its beauty and grandeur , the universe is also full horrible things . 
Babies born without brains , good people suffering monstrous tortures such as neurofibromatosis , evil people basking in the sun and enjoying long lives . 
Volcanoes erupting , earthquakes killing thousands , hurricanes and tornadoes blindly wiping out thousands of lives . 
So I say THANK YOU GOD , YOU ARE AWESOME . ? 
God IS an underachiever . 
Look at these bad designs . 
When we study the retina at the back of the eye , we can see that the cell layers are backwards . 
Light has to travel thru seven layers of cells before reaching the light sensing cells . 
Then the signals go back thru these layers to the nerves on the inside surface . 
In addition , the blood vessels are on the inside surface and further block the light . 
A truly intelligent designer could have done better than the human eye . 
Actually , evolution did a better job with the eyes of birds -LRB- which have no blood vessels in the retina -RRB- and the octopus and squid -LRB- which have the light sensing cells on the surface -RRB- . 
In fact , vision is so useful for survival that eyes have evolved independently at least twenty separate times , with at least a dozen different designs . 
Humans and other animals have many more examples of sub-optimal or bad design . 
Here are a few : One of the worst designs in mammals is the nerve for the larynx , called the recurrent laryngeal nerve . 
It is much longer than it needs to be going from the brain into the chest , around the aorta , and back up to the larynx . 
In humans it 's about three feet too long , but in giraffes it 's about fifteen feet longer than needed . 
The human pelvis slopes forward , which was useful for our knuckle-walking ancestors . 
The only reason that we can walk upright is because we have an incredible sharp bend at the base of our spines -LRB- which is the source for so much low back pain -RRB- . 
The human baby 's skull is too big , such that many women painfully die in childbirth if they do n't get modern medicine Evidence of evolutionThe extreme detour of this nerve in giraffes -LRB- fifteen feet farther than the direct route of a designer -RRB- is cited as evidence of evolution as opposed to intelligent design . 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- -LRB- edit -RRB- References1 . 
^ Dawkins , Richard -LRB- 2009 -RRB- . 
History written all over us '' . 
The greatest show on Earth . 
New York : Free Press . 
Retrieved November 21 , 2009 . 
Science need only show lack of intelligence in nature 's designs , the human frame being a prime example . 
One 's frame is certainly close enough to the individual voter and contains obvious design defects easily explained by evolution but embarrassing for IDers . 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- Our pelvis slopes forward for knuckle dragging like all the great apes . 
Only by an extremely sharp bend of our spine can we stand erect : an evolutionary artifact or a design weakness obvious to any first-year engineering student ? 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- Our mouths have too many teeth : either the result of an evolutionarily flattened mammalian muzzle or a design plan that could n't count accurately above twenty ? 
-LRB- 3 -RRB- Our facial bones are squashed by an expanded brain case to produce a sinus drainage system that would embarrass the local plumber : evolution or just plain stupid design ? 
So I say THANK YOU GOD , YOU ARE AWESOME . ? 
A note about the children god `` gives '' us : Psalm 127:3 Children are a gift of the LORD Notice how god does n't check to see if a woman is capable of raising a child , before he gives a baby to them ? 
Women in poor countries bear children , only to have them die , because Mom has no food . 
Women addicted to drugs are given babies , when they are totally incapable of taking care of themselves , much less a child . 
Girls are blessed with a baby they do n't want . 
Why are babies given to women who do n't want them ? 
If god would be more careful with giving out gifts\/children , abortion would n't be needed . 
Your god is not awesome . 
You just use selective observation . 
The reason there are all these bad things in the world is because we disobeyed God . 
God is n't the underacheiver , we are . 
Evil people enjoying long lives ? 
On earth , yes . 
But i do n't think spending eternity in hell is worth spending about 80 years living the good life . 
February 12 , 2011 at 4:42 pm | Report abuse | I missed most of the game , but fortunately , I turned the TV on just in time for the Kitten Half-Time Show . 
I was n't really that interested in the Puppy Bowl , anyway . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
The CNN Belief Blog covers the faith angles of the day 's biggest stories , from breaking news to politics to entertainment , fostering a global conversation about the role of religion and belief in readers ' lives . 
It 's edited by CNN 's Eric Marrapodi with daily contributions from CNN 's worldwide newsgathering team and frequent posts from religion scholar and author Stephen Prothero . 
