Kelli Arena says youth of Egypt were denied economic , social , political opportunities She says the November election added to sense of repression Youth groups , other protesters relied on social networks to organize , she says Arena : The future of a generation is riding on the outcome of showdown Editor 's note : Kelli Arena , a former CNN correspondent , has worked as a communications strategist with youth groups and political and social organizations in Egypt . 
-LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Stunned by the events in Egypt ? 
Anyone who has spent any time there in the past few years could see this coming . 
Egyptian youth have been in a state of paralysis . 
They ca n't find jobs , ca n't afford to get married , and have little hope for real change . 
Anyone under 30 has lived under emergency law their entire life . 
In plain English , it means more powers for the police , fewer constitutional rights , and a whole lot of censorship . 
Thousands of people have been detained , and there are an untold number of political prisoners . 
I have been working with youth , civil society and political organizations in Egypt over the past year . 
The frustration they felt was palpable . 
But this past fall the dynamic changed . 
For the first time , many of them were going to vote . 
They had braved going to the police stations for voter cards , many bringing their parents with them in case they were harassed or detained . 
They had organized Facebook campaigns to rally Egyptian youth to get involved in the political process . 
A quota had been passed to seat more women in parliament . 
There was talk of a better future . 
It seems the Egyptian government sensed it , too . 
A friend of mine who was also working with youth groups was detained in October as he arrived in Cairo . 
A consultant for Emerson Human Capital , Mark Webster has worked in Egypt for years without incident . 
Webster had been doing communication work with youth groups using tools such as Facebook and YouTube . 
But with the November election approaching , he was detained for 15 hours at the Cairo airport . 
His request to call the U.S. embassy was denied . 
He was asked if he knew Hillary Clinton and if Human Capital had anything to do with human rights . 
As Webster put it , `` this surely was odd behavior for an American ally in the region , but not odd behavior for a dictatorship . '' 
The Egyptian government did not allow outside monitors to observe the elections . 
There were reports of rampant fraud and abuse . 
Some young people I had worked with sent me messages complaining that polling places had been closed early . 
Some were not even let in to vote . 
Many female candidates were not given party support or funding . 
It was a devastating blow to those young Egyptians who had worked so hard to try to initiate change . 
It was hard to be encouraging . 
That is , until we saw what happened in Tunisia . 
I got a message the night before the protests from a young woman I had trained in Cairo . 
She wanted me to know that thousands of youth were going to demonstrate to fight corruption . 
She warned that police violence was expected and wanted me to spread the news to support her in her fight for freedom . 
The news spread like wildfire over the huge social networks those groups had built over the years . 
But their only plan was to unseat President Hosni Mubarak . 
It did n't take long for other voices to co-opt their message . 
Mubarak took his time responding , letting protest fatigue set in . 
Lines of communication were shut down . 
Mubarak did not step down . 
My heart broke when I saw the violence erupt in the streets . 
The young people who are in touch with me say many of those `` pro-Mubarak '' supporters were paid thugs , some flashing department of the interior badges . 
Others report that Egyptian state television is broadcasting that Israeli agents and the media are behind the demonstrations in Tahrir Square . 
Journalists were hunted as they continued to shine a light on what is going on there . 
It is not an exaggeration to suggest that the future of a whole generation is riding on the outcome of this showdown . 
Stunned by the news out of Egypt ? 
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Kelli Arena . 
