A day-by-day summary of significant events in Egypt 's upheaval , as compiled by the CNN Wire : As many as 20,000 protesters spill into the streets of Cairo in an unprecedented display of anti-government rage inspired in part by the Tunisian revolt . 
The official Middle East News Agency -LRB- MENA -RRB- reports three people dead and 49 wounded in clashes between protesters and police in Cairo and the port city of Suez . 
Police use water cannons and tear gas against thousands of protesters who returned to the streets of Cairo and other cities . 
MENA reports at least 90 arrests in Cairo , while state-run Nile News reports at least 27 wounded in Suez . 
Mohamed ElBaradei , the Nobel Peace Prize-winning former head of the U.N. nuclear watchdog agency and a possible presidential candidate , returns to Egypt to join demonstrations . 
The Muslim Brotherhood , Egypt 's largest opposition bloc , calls on its supporters to join protests after Friday 's weekly prayers . 
The government responds by arresting a prominent Muslim Brotherhood leader and shutting down internet and text-messaging services . 
Protesters battle police in Cairo , Suez and Alexandria to demand an end to President Hosni Mubarak 's rule . 
The headquarters of Mubarak 's ruling National Democratic Party is ransacked and set ablaze . 
Egyptian troops move onto the streets through clouds of black smoke and tear gas to enforce a curfew , the first time since 1985 that the army has been used to put down domestic unrest . 
In a speech delivered shortly after midnight , Mubarak announces that he has fired his Cabinet and acknowledges the `` legitimate demand '' for political and economic reforms . 
He names Omar Suleiman , his longtime intelligence chief , as vice president -- the first time he has filled that position since taking office in 1981 . 
Protesters are not satisfied : Clashes continue around Cairo 's Tahrir -LRB- Liberation -RRB- Square , and hospital officials in Alexandria tell CNN that at least 31 people have been killed there . 
In Washington , U.S. President Barack Obama says he has told Mubarak that he must take `` concrete steps '' to deliver on his pledge of reform . 
Britain , France and Germany issue a joint statement calling on Mubarak to begin a `` process of transformation , '' including free elections . 
