May 6 : Oil collects just offshore of Freemason Island , La. . 
Oil giant BP PLC 's oil rig exploded April 20 , in the Gulf of Mexico killing 11 workers . 
It sank two days later , and oil is still pouring into the Gulf . 
-LRB- AP -RRB- U.S. officials confirmed Thursday the first oil sheen to reach land from the massive spill in the Gulf of Mexico -- washing up on a beach on an uninhibited Louisiana island . 
There had been reports for the past week that oil had washed ashore , but Coast Guard officials told FoxNews.com that until now , none of those reports had been confirmed by the government agencies responding to the spill . 
The bulk of the oil spill remains off the coast , and what is arriving on shore now is `` largely just sheen , '' Coast Guard Petty Officer Connie Terrell told Reuters . 
`` There is no evidence of medium or heavy oil . '' 
Officials were first notified Wednesday night about the oil on Freemason Island in the Chandeleur chain , and it was confirmed Thursday , a Coast Guard official told FoxNews.com . 
Winds in the Gulf region are expected to pick up Saturday into Sunday causing the spill to be tougher to contain . 
Workers , meanwhile , gathered Thursday to begin lowering a giant concrete-and-steel box over the blown-out oil well at the bottom of the sea in a risky and untested bid to capture most of the gushing crude and avert a wider environmental disaster . 
`` We have n't done this before . 
It 's very complex and we ca n't guarantee it , '' BP spokesman David Nicholas warned . 
The 100-ton containment vessel is designed to collect as much as 85 percent of the oil spewing into the Gulf and funnel it up to a tanker . 
It could take several hours to lower it into place by crane , after which a steel pipe will be installed between the top of the box and the tanker . 
The whole structure could be operating by Sunday . 
The technology has been used a few times in shallow waters , but never at such extreme depths -- 5,000 feet down , where the water pressure is enough to crush a submarine . 
The box -- which looks a lot like a peaked , 40-foot-high outhouse , especially on the inside , with its rough timber framing -- must be accurately positioned over the well , or it could damage the leaking pipe and make the problem worse . 
Other risks include ice clogs in the pipes -- a problem that crews will try to prevent by continuously pumping in warm water and methanol -- and the danger of explosion when separating the mix of oil , gas and water that is brought to the surface . 
`` I 'm worried about every part , as you can imagine , '' said David Clarkson , BP vice president of engineering projects . 
If the box works , a second one now being built may be used to deal with a second , smaller leak from the sea floor . 
`` Hopefully , it will work better than they expect , '' first mate Douglas Peake told The Associated Press aboard the ship that brought the box to the site . 
The well blew open on April 20 when the Deepwater Horizon drilling platform exploded 50 miles out in the Gulf of Mexico , killing 11 workers . 
The well has been spewing an estimated 200,000 gallons a day in the nation 's biggest oil spill since the Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska in 1989 . 
Oil slicks stretched for miles off the Louisiana coast , where desperate efforts were under way to skim , corral and set the petroleum ablaze . 
People in Mississippi , Alabama and Florida watched in despair . 
