By Joe Sterling and Ivan Watson , CNN Details murky on Libya rebel chief death NEW : Younis ' killing is `` more proof that the transitional council of the traitors is not able to lead , '' says Ibrahim The death of the top rebel commander in Libya stokes speculation of a rebel rift An ex-ambassador says `` revenge by Tripoli '' is the `` most likely scenario '' One expert says the death is a reminder of the rebel coalition 's fragility Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The killing on Thursday of the top rebel military commander shows that those forces are in disarray , a spokesman for Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi said Friday . 
Gen. Abdul Fattah Younis and two other rebels were killed after the country 's main rebel organization , the Transitional National Council , sought to question him about military matters and allegations that he or those close to him had ongoing ties to Gadhafi , Younis ' supporters said . 
Younis ' killing represents `` more proof that the transitional council of the traitors is not able to lead any sort of government or have any control of eastern cities of Libya , '' said Musa Ibrahim , the Gadhafi spokesman . 
Ibrahim accused two members of al Qaeda of having arrested Younis with the help of the Transitional National Council and subsequently charging Younis with treason for `` betraying the cause . '' 
But the abductors knew that a fair trial would have been lengthy and that Younis ' tribe would have intervened to help him , so they killed him , Ibrahim said . 
`` He was shot and his body was immediately disfigured , '' he added . 
The killing shows that `` al Qaeda is the real power among the rebels , '' he said , repeating Gadhafi 's assertion that rebel forces are allied with al Qaeda . 
`` They have the most soldiers ; they have the training ; they have the weapons ; they have the faith -- a wicked faith ; they have the strategies . '' 
The killing also sends a powerful message to other tribes : `` Try to exclude us from your settlement , your political settlement , and this is your fate , '' Ibrahim said . 
Younis was killed along with a colonel and a lieutenant colonel , the Transitional National Council said in a prepared statement . 
No further details were immediately released . 
Mohammad Ethish , a member of a rebel military council , released a statement that seemed to imply that Gadhafi loyalists had something to do with the death . 
`` This incident will increase the will and courage of the rebels , and it will even get us close together to reach the home of the tyrant , '' Ethish said . 
`` We promise our brothers in the East that we will do the impossible to avenge the death of Abdul Fattah Younis , and we promise that we will increase our blows and empower our will . 
Until we capture the tyrant Moammar Gadhafi . '' 
The deaths have provoked questions and stirred speculation that they might cause a rift among opposition leaders . 
`` We really do n't know what happened yet , '' said Marina Ottaway , senior associate of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace 's Middle East program . 
`` Politically , it 's a reminder of how tenuous a coalition it is . '' 
Rebels have been battling government troops in a fight to oust Gadhafi , who has ruled the North African nation for nearly 42 years . 
NATO has used air power to enforce a U.N. resolution protecting civilians from the regime , and world powers have announced their support for Libya 's rebel umbrella group . 
This week , the United Kingdom joined the United States and other Western powers in recognizing the TNC as the legitimate governing authority in Libya , a decision that could steer millions of dollars to the opposition . 
Younis had served as interior minister in Gadhafi 's government until February , when he defected to the Benghazi-based rebel movement . 
A onetime general in Gadhafi 's army , Younis told CNN in February that he switched sides after Gadhafi told him he planned to bomb Benghazi -- a move Younis said would have killed thousands . 
A young man in a tan uniform who spoke in Benghazi after Friday Muslim prayers said on rebel TV that Younis `` was assassinated by him like the other martyrs of Libya '' and called for `` revenge for everyone who took part in this crime . '' 
It was n't clear whom he was implicating in Younis ' death . 
The man said that `` knowing the truth of what happened to him and avenging his death is a debt every Libyan man and woman owes . 
My message to Mustafa Abdel Jalil is we will be with you on this path , '' the man said , referring to the leader of the rebels ' government . 
Alistair Burt , the British Foreign Office 's minister for the Middle East and North Africa , said , `` Exactly what happened remains unclear . '' 
He added that the `` killing will be thoroughly investigated . '' 
`` We agreed that it is important that those responsible are held to account through proper judicial processes . '' 
Sir Richard Dalton , a former British ambassador to Libya and associate fellow for the Middle East and North Africa Programme of the London-based Chatham House , said `` one scenario is revenge by Tripoli . '' 
However , Dalton said , the ultimate impact of the killing on the opposition movement will depend on the facts that emerge about the killing . 
`` They 've been promising it for a while , '' he said of the Gadhafi government . 
`` Right from the start , they 've threatened people who 've turned away . 
There are stories that AFY -LRB- Younis -RRB- had rebuffed approaches by Tripoli . '' 
There have been tensions between different parts of the opposition forces , Dalton said . 
So a `` second hypothesis '' is that a quarrel got `` out of hand . 
But he warned not to jump to conclusions about the significance of a `` single episode . '' 
`` We have n't got much to go on , '' he said . 
`` I think our governments will find out soon . '' 
Ottaway , the Carnegie Endowment scholar , said the killing raises questions about the rebel council . 
`` It 's clear there are divisions '' within the Transitional National Council , she said . 
`` There are suspicions of some of the people who went from being close allies -LRB- of Gadhafi -RRB- , as Younis was , to joining '' the rebels . 
The motives of those who switched sides have been questioned by people who were n't sure whether they had truly made the transition or were just pretending to have changed . 
There has been speculation , she said , that Younis might have been dealing somehow with Gadhafi . 
`` The main point perhaps is that the unity at the Transitional National Council is tenuous at best . 
This is a strange coalition at best , '' she said . 
`` They are very aware of the fact that they are not an organization that represents the entire country . '' 
As for how the killing might affect the rebels ' military effort , Ottaway said it 's not clear how much control Younis had . 
She pointed out that the killing occurred on the same day rebels embarked on an offensive in western Libya . 
The fighters said their forces captured five towns and surrounded a sixth in the plains below the Nafusa mountain range , which borders Tunisia . 
Mark Quarterman , a senior adviser and director of the Center for Strategic and InternationalStudies ' Program on Crisis , Conflict and Cooperation , said the `` potential implications '' of the death are `` very worrisome '' and could help the Gadhafi regime in the short run . 
The death has had the effect of `` roiling rebel politics , '' Quarterman said . 
The killing has fomented anger among members of Younis ' Obeidi tribe , according to news reports . 
Quarterman , an expert on the Libyan crisis , said the killing undermines the bet NATO powers have made that , by enforcing the U.N. resolution protecting Libyans , they would give rebels space to defeat Gadhafi forces . 
Quarterman noted that Younis had been engaged in a dispute with another rebel commander , Khalifa Hifter . 
`` They seem unable to take and hold territory . 
This makes things worse , '' Quarterman said . 
`` You ca n't have a lot of faith and confidence in forces saying , ` I 'm the commander , no I 'm the commander . ' 
`` If this disarray does continue , this only benefits Gadhafi . 
And it makes the coming of a post-Gadhafi Libya that much more distant . '' 
There has been talk among world powers about negotiated settlements and scenarios that could include Gadhafi remaining in Libya after the conflict ends , Quarterman said . 
The international sense that the conflict would end quickly with `` capitulation on the part of the Gadhafi regime is fading , '' Quarterman said . 
`` As a result , the end game is seeming much more murky . '' 
Ivan Watson reported from Tripoli and Joe Sterling reported from Atlanta . 
