Credit : Reuters\/Parbul TV via Reuters TV LONDON | Mon Mar 21 , 2011 10:54 pm GMT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Prime Minister David Cameron tried to reassure a war-weary public on Monday that Britain 's military involvement in Libya will not drag it into another Iraq-style conflict . 
After a six-hour debate , parliament voted overwhelmingly to support Cameron 's decision to send British planes and ships to help enforce a no-fly zone to stop attacks on civilians by the forces of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi . 
The vote was 557-13 , although some lawmakers voiced fears of getting dragged deeper into the Libyan conflict and others questioned why Britain had chosen to intervene in Libya but not in other crisis-hit countries . 
Hanging heavy over the debate was the shadow of Iraq , where 179 British soldiers were killed in a long-running conflict after former Prime Minister Tony Blair backed then U.S. President George W. Bush 's decision to invade in March 2003 . 
`` This is different to Iraq . 
This is not going into a country , knocking over its government and then owning and being responsible for everything that happens subsequently , '' Cameron said . 
`` This is about protecting people and giving the Libyan people a chance to shape their own destiny , '' he said . 
Foreign Secretary William Hague said the Libya operation would be funded from a Treasury reserve and not from the defense budget , which faces a real-terms cut of 8 percent over the next four years as part of efforts to curb a big budget deficit . 
In a debate almost exactly eight years ago , the British parliament gave Blair a green light to wage war on Iraq despite a massive revolt within his own party . 
The 10-month-old Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government has stressed that the Libya situation is very different from the Iraq war , which clouded Blair 's premiership . 
Unlike the Iraq invasion , the Libya no-fly zone has been authorised by the United Nations and the U.N. Security Council resolution expressly bars occupation . 
Labor leader Ed Miliband supported Cameron , saying : `` We have seen with our own eyes what the Libyan regime is capable of . 
We 've seen guns being turned on unarmed demonstrators . '' 
But some MPs , particularly left-wing Labor members , voiced doubts about what Britain was getting into . 
`` I 'm far from convinced that the public are behind this , '' Labor legislator Jeremy Corbyn said . 
`` They are very concerned about where it leads to because they 've been through the miserable experience of Iraq and they have deep concerns additionally about Afghanistan , '' he said . 
Britain has 10,000 troops fighting Taliban insurgents in Afghanistan . 
`` We should n't be in there , we 've got enough on our plate in Afghanistan , '' said Neil Wozencroft , a 35-year-old pipe fitter , told Reuters when asked about the Libya campaign . 
`` It 's a civil war and we should n't get involved , plus there are other atrocities in the world -- the Congo and Zimbabwe . 
We ca n't be the world 's peacekeepers . '' 
Conservative MP Edward Leigh called for a rethink of last year 's British defense review which he said had been a `` disaster . '' 
The review has paved the way for sharp cuts in armed forces ' equipment and personnel . 
Cameron said there was no action without risk . 
`` But ... we have to weigh the risks of inaction ... the consequences for Europe of a failed pariah state on its southern border . 
All of these , in my view , are simply too great to ignore , '' he said . 
