TRIPOLI | Mon Mar 21 , 2011 11:00 pm GMT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Attacks on Libya are likely to slow in the coming days , a U.S. general said on Monday , as Western powers consolidate a no-fly zone that some say is unlikely to bring an early end to the country 's civil war . 
Rebels who began a revolt against Muammar Gaddafi a month ago have so far done little to capitalize on a two-day bombardment that halted an advance by government forces on their Benghazi stronghold and targeted Libya 's air defences . 
But Washington , wary of being sucked into another war after long campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan , has ruled out specific action to overthrow Gaddafi , though France said on Monday it hoped the Libyan government would collapse from within . 
`` My sense is that -- that unless something unusual or unexpected happens , we may see a decline in the frequency of attacks , '' General Carter Ham , who is leading U.S. forces in the Libyan operation , told reporters in Washington . 
He added , however , that `` we possess the capability to bring overwhelming combat power to bear , as we have done in the initial stages of this , where it 's been required . '' 
Libyan state television reported that several sites in the capital Tripoli had been subject to new attacks by what it called the `` crusader enemy '' on Monday . 
Reuters reporters heard two big explosions followed by anti-aircraft fire in Tripoli on Monday evening . 
The United States has run into some criticism for the intensity of the firepower used on Libya , which included more than 110 Tomahawk missiles fired on Saturday to take out Libya 's air defences and allow Western planes to patrol the skies . 
Although a U.N. resolution authorised `` all necessary measures '' to protect civilians , Arab League chief Amr Moussa has questioned the methods used , while Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin compared the air campaign to `` medieval crusades . '' 
President Barack Obama said the United States , which has been joined by Britain , France , Canada and Italy among others in the air campaign , planned to transfer the lead military role shortly . 
Britain and France led calls for the intervention . 
`` We anticipate this transition to take place in a matter of days and not in a matter of weeks , '' Obama told a news conference during a visit to Chile . 
Libyan rebels have welcomed the air strikes and at the frontline along the coast from Benghazi have cheered warplanes as they roar overhead . 
Rebel headquarters also say they are coordinating with the Western powers launching air strikes . 
But there was little sign at the vanguard of battle in east Libya that this communication extended to forward rebel units . 
Western powers say they are not providing close air support to rebels or seeking to destroy Gaddafi 's army , but rather only protecting civilians , as their U.N. mandate allows , leaving disorganised rebel fighters struggling to make headway . 
`` If we do n't get more help from the West , Gaddafi 's forces will eat us alive , '' rebel fighter Nouh Musmari told Reuters . 
Leaders of the rebel movement in Benghazi have admitted their forces need more training . 
In the past , they also complained their over-enthusiastic fighters were too quick to race ahead , only to be driven back by Gaddafi 's army . 
Gaddafi 's forces have also tried to push into cities where they would be less vulnerable to attack from the air , while in the capital Tripoli people have rallied to support their leader . 
Security analysts say they are unclear what will happen if the Libyan leader digs in , especially since Western powers have made clear they would be unwilling to see Libya partitioned between a rebel-held east and Gaddafi-controlled west . 
`` Libya will not be a cakewalk , '' said Glen Howard , president of the Jamestown Foundation think tank . 
He added that the conflict 's current phase was reminiscent of the NATO bombing of Serbia in 1999 , which failed to meet expectations it would bring down Slobodan Milosevic within days . 
`` There is still a real risk of a protracted stalemate , with neither side wanting to negotiate . 
So the endgame remains very unclear , '' said Jeremy Binnie , a senior analyst with IHS Jane 's . 
In an appearance on Libyan television on Sunday , Gaddafi promised his enemies a `` long war . '' 
Officials in Tripoli said earlier that one missile in the second wave of attacks , which they said was intended to kill Gaddafi , had destroyed a building in his fortified compound , heavily bombed in 1986 by the Reagan administration . 
`` It was a barbaric bombing , '' said government spokesman Mussa Ibrahim , showing pieces of shrapnel that he said came from the missile . 
`` This contradicts American and Western -LRB- statements -RRB- ... that it is not their target to attack this place . '' 
A Libyan government spokesman also said that foreign attacks had killed many people by bombing ports and Sirte airport . 
`` You saw that place -LRB- Sirte airport -RRB- , '' Mussa Ibrahim told a news conference . 
`` It 's a civilian airport . 
It was bombarded and many people were killed . 
Harbours were also bombarded . '' 
British Prime Minister David Cameron said there were no plans to target Gaddafi . 
`` The U.N. resolution is limited in its scope , it explicitly does not provide legal authority for action to bring about Gaddafi 's removal from power by military means , '' Cameron told parliament . 
`` We will help fulfil the U.N. Security Council -LRB- resolution -RRB- , it is for the Libyan people to determine their government and their destiny , but our view is clear , there is no decent future for Libya with Colonel Gaddafi remaining in power . '' 
French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said he hoped Libyans themselves would topple Gaddafi : `` When will the regime collapse ? 
It is quite possible that , given the weakness of the regime , it will break up from within . '' 
Gaddafi 's government announced a cease-fire on Sunday but this was dismissed by the United States and Britain , who said an earlier cease-fire pledge had been broken . 
The government accused the rebels of breaking the cease-fire . 
In Misrata , the only major rebel-held city in the west , residents said they had again come under attack on Monday . 
`` The people of Misrata went into the streets and to the -LRB- city -RRB- center , unarmed , in an attempt to stop Gaddafi 's forces entering the city , '' a resident told Reuters by telephone . 
`` When they gathered in the center the Gaddafi forces started shooting at them with artillery and guns . 
They committed a massacre . 
The hospital told us at least nine people were killed , '' said the resident , who gave his name as Saadoun . 
The report could not be independently verified because Libyan authorities prevented reporters from reaching Misrata . 
Residents said water supplies had been cut off and government troops had encircled the city . 
-LRB- Reporting by Mohammed Abbas and Angus MacSwan in Benghazi , Maria Golovnina and Michael Georgy in Tripoli , Hamid Ould Ahmed and Christian Lowe in Algiers ; Tom Perry in Cairo , John Irish in Paris , Missy Ryan in Washington , Matt Spetalnick in Rio de Janeiro ; Writing by Myra MacDonald ; Editing by Kevin Liffey -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Ah , Putin should probably busy himself with other concerns . 
Russia 's own history is not that stellar . 
How many people died under Russian tyranny ? 
I 'd list some examples , but there is n't enough space . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
