LONDON | Mon Mar 21 , 2011 8:58 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Only one in three Britons agree with the decision to take military action in Libya , a poll published on Monday showed . 
The ComRes\/ITN poll found that 43 percent disagreed with the action and 22 percent were unsure . 
Just under half of those surveyed felt military action was an unnecessary risk for Britain to take . 
Haunted by the experience of the recent Iraq war and continued losses in Afghanistan , Britons told Reuters they were wary of getting dragged into another lengthy foreign conflict at a time of belt-tightening at home . 
`` We should n't be in there , we 've got enough on our plate in Afghanistan , '' said Neil Wozencroft , a 35-year-old pipe fitter . 
`` It 's a civil war and we should n't get involved , plus there are other atrocities in the world -- the Congo and Mugabe in Zimbabwe . 
We ca n't be the world 's peacekeepers . '' 
Both Britain and France -- who led efforts on a no-fly zone in Libya -- are having to introduce austerity measures to tackle large budget deficits , while at the same time people are having to cope with rising food and fuel prices . 
`` Is it really worth it ? 
I ask myself , '' said widow Roymonde Urien in Paris , concerned the air strikes might lead to a flood of immigrants from Libya . 
All those Londoners quizzed by Reuters agreed they would like to see Gaddafi removed , but not through bombing . 
Despite doubts about the action itself , most praised Prime Minister David Cameron . 
`` He grasped the situation , '' Phil Davis , a 43-year-old civil engineer , said . 
`` He saw it was an issue and reacted to it . '' 
After a six-hour debate , the British parliament voted overwhelmingly on Monday to support Cameron 's decision to send British planes and ships to help enforce a no-fly zone to stop attacks on civilians by Gaddafi 's forces . 
Hanging heavy over the debate was the shadow of Iraq , where 179 British soldiers were killed in a long-running conflict after former Labor Prime Minister Tony Blair backed then U.S. President George W. Bush 's decision to invade in March 2003 . 
`` This is different to Iraq . 
This is not going into a country , knocking over its government and then owning and being responsible for everything that happens subsequently , '' Cameron said . 
`` This is about protecting people and giving the Libyan people a chance to shape their own destiny . '' 
- ComRes interviewed 2028 British adults online between March 18 and 20 , when allies started to enforce a no-fly zone against Libya . 
- Data were weighted to be demographically representative of all GB adults . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
We have already paid trillions of $ $ for Iraq . 
Then at the gas pumps . 
Strange that the Britons disagree with the aggression towards Libya but support Cameron . 
He seems like an immature person who reacts before he thinks of the consequences ... we do n't need another one of those . 
Perhaps political decisions for the UK are made in the same place they are for the USA -- Tel Aviv . 
Are we both colonies ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
