BEIRUT | Fri Jun 3 , 2011 11:11 am EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - President Bashar al-Assad has tried brute force and political concession , often simultaneously , to quell protests in Syria but neither has halted the uprising and his double-edged tactic may alienate a vital support base . 
Since the outbreak of unrest 11 weeks ago , the Syrian president has combined violent repression with efforts to appease demonstrators , a pattern repeated again this week . 
On the day he declared an amnesty for political prisoners , activists said security forces killed dozens of civilians in the central town of Rastan , which had seen protests against Assad . 
Tuesday 's amnesty was followed by steps toward a `` national dialogue '' to address popular grievances , while a dozen more people were reported killed in the military assault on the town . 
Whether the mixed messages are a deliberate strategy or a rushed reaction to Syria 's turmoil , analysts say they risk undermining the argument made by Assad supporters that the only alternative to his rule is civil strife . 
`` Syria 's minorities , middle classes and business establishment -- all three basically fear the alternatives to Assad and were initially receptive to the regime 's message of ` Us or Chaos ' , '' said a Damascus-based analyst . 
`` But the regime has been very inconsistent on all fronts : repression , reform , handling the economic fallout , as well as in terms of dialogue . 
It 's been arresting people at the very moment when it needs interlocutors on the ground . '' 
`` So the formulation of `` us or chaos '' is gradually turning against it , '' said the analyst , who declined to be named . 
Rights groups say 1,000 civilians have been killed in the unrest , which has seen protests sweep from the southern city of Deraa to the Mediterranean coast and eastern Kurdish regions . 
But protests have been most intense in poorer , rural areas while the capital Damascus and second city Aleppo , with wealthier businesses and middle classes , have seen less disturbance , partly because of heavy security . 
Authorities blame the violence on armed groups , Islamists and foreign agitators and say more than 120 police and soldiers have been killed . 
Most international media are prevented from operating in Syria , making it impossible to verify accounts from activists and authorities . 
While the demonstrations show no sign yet of reaching the scale needed to overthrow Bashar , they have continued to spread and analysts say protesters ' anger is growing . 
The death of 13-year-old Hamza al-Khatib focused local and international fury at perceived brutality in Syria . 
Activists say he was tortured horrifically in captivity , a charge denied by authorities who say he died in crossfire at a protest . 
People in the southern towns of Dael and Deraa held posters of the young boy on Friday , witnesses said . 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said this week his death symbolized the `` total collapse '' of any effort to address peoples ' grievances and that Assad 's legitimacy had `` nearly run out . '' 
Despite Clinton 's condemnation , and the fact that the protests have lasted far longer than uprisings which toppled Arab leaders in Tunisia and Egypt , the United States appears reluctant to make a clear call for Assad to go . 
That reluctance stems partly from uncertainty over who might take over in Syria , a mainly Sunni Muslim country ruled for 41 years by Assad 's minority Alawite sect . 
Under Assad and his father , Syria has been allied to Iran and backed militant groups Hezbollah and Hamas , but also held peace talks with Israel . 
A meeting of Syrian opposition figures in Turkey this week called for Assad to step down to pave the way for democracy , but gave little indication of how it might govern in his place . 
`` Although the regime may be losing ground with the silent majority , the opposition are not gaining anything because they are not answering any of the key questions that the crisis raises , '' the Damascus-based analyst said . 
`` In a state which is so fragile , how do you ensure successful transition ? 
What is these people 's agenda ? 
They are focused on the issue of toppling the regime and they have been completely absent on key issues which people want answers on . '' 
As the protests and crackdown continue -- a Syrian human rights group said 27 people were shot dead at a protest in the city of Hama on Friday -- there have been increasing reports of protesters responding with force . 
Analysts say that protest marches have been overwhelmingly peaceful but that since the start of the unrest there were isolated cases of protesters taking up arms in Deraa , Tel Kelakh on the Lebanese border and most recently in Rastan . 
`` For the first time there have been real clashes and people are fighting back , '' said Rime Allaf , Associate Fellow in Chatham House . 
`` It is drastic that it is coming to this ... -LRB- though -RRB- it 's not widespread yet . '' 
A senior Western diplomat in Beirut said Lebanese politicians , allies and foes of Damascus alike , believed `` the situation in Syria is irreversible : `` Nothing like this has happened in modern Syrian history . 
The regime is extraordinarily vulnerable . '' 
Resistance from Russia and China has so far obstructed U.S. and European efforts for a United Nations resolution condemning Syria 's crackdown , and Assad has emerged once before from a period of Western isolation . 
But he has seen two regional allies , Turkey and Qatar , distance themselves from his government in recent weeks , and Syria 's economy will suffer as tourism revenues dry up , investments are put on hold and sanctions against senior officials deter some international firms from doing business . '' 
-LRB- Assad 's rule -RRB- is not disintegrating , '' Allaf said . 
`` But this notion that little bits of so-called reform can be given and things will get back to normal , this is not going to happen . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
