How new is `` New Labor '' ? 
In the heady years after 1997 , the ideologues worked hard to promote an image of youth . 
Labor 's troublesome past , they proclaimed , had been thrown overboard along with its commitment to a socialist economy set down in Clause Four of the 1918 constitution . 
In place of a history , there was a future . 
The party could now adopt or reject slogans and symbols according to the demands of its current branding strategy . 
Hence the appearance of an increasingly bizarre set of stage props starting with `` Cool Britannia '' and climaxing in 2001 with the improbable pink makeover of the British bull-dog . 
But that was all before 9\/11 , before the coupling with Bush and the Iraq war . 
Now New Labor talks little about its former flirtations with the young . 
Better to present itself as the authentic continuation of a social-democratic past . 
This is the point of Patrick Diamond 's New Labor 's Old Roots -LRB- Imprint Academic , # 14.95 -RRB- , a collection of `` revisionist '' Labor texts running from RH Tawney in 1931 to Gordon Brown in 1997 . 
Diamond is a Downing Street adviser and his claim is strongly endorsed by Tony Blair who now depicts New Labor as `` a party which has returned to its roots '' . 
But talk of `` roots '' and continuities can also be misleading . 
It suggests a soft-focus constancy of identity and beliefs that a sharper look at Labor 's history belies . 
What chiefly emerges from the brief biographies and memoirs also noticed here - of Aneurin Bevan , Roy Jenkins and Tony Benn - is the sheer diversity encompassed by Labor and its Whig , liberal and puritan forebears . 
Particularly striking is Tony Benn 's moving childhood memoir , Dare to Be a Daniel -LRB- Hutchinson , # 17.95 -RRB- . 
Benn was brought up in an affluent home , the product of a family publishing empire and two generations of engagement in London progressive politics . 
His father was a Liberal MP who turned to Labor in the 1920s and served in Labor cabinets in 1931 and 1945 . 
The young Benn grew up with a nurse , cook `` and servants to keep house '' ; he came from a family of Lib-Lab political insiders living next door to Sidney and Beatrice Webb on the site of the present Millbank Tower . 
The Benns were authentic Puritans . 
Ever since the writings of George Eliot and Matthew Arnold , Puritanism has been associated with the provinces , with the energy , ambition yet narrowness of the outsider . 
But the metropolitan puritanism of the Benns was no less intense . 
The Benn family were - as Benn still is - teetotal . 
They were not intellectuals . 
His parents showed no interest in whether the young Tony read or what he read : `` All my life I have lived in the oral tradition , learning from listening and watching rather than reading . '' 
This helps to explain why Benn retains such an unruffled belief in a Manichean world in which the forces of good are in perpetual combat with the backsliding and corruption of false friends . 
From the Old Testament stories of his mother , Benn learned to honor prophets , not kings . 
In this picture of politics as a modern day Pilgrim 's Progress , Marx -LRB- despite his atheism -RRB- is honored as `` the last of the Old Testament prophets '' . 
Benn 's parents showed no interest in culture . 
They lived next door to the Tate Gallery , yet never went inside . 
Parsimony was one reason . 
When his father once passed the Tate , what clinched his decision not to enter was `` that it would cost him sixpence '' . 
But what mattered most was not to waste time . 
From the 17th century onwards , Puritans were prone to keep diaries in order to justify to God their use of time . 
Benn 's father kept a daily time chart to set down the number of hours he had worked . 
Benn 's own diary-keeping and the assembling of his political life into a huge domestic archive was clearly inspired by his father . 
If Benn recalls the Puritan inheritance of Labor , Bevan represented the secular revolt against it . 
Although his father was an active Baptist as well as treasurer of the local miners ' lodge , neither religion nor the Puritan ethic left much mark upon Bevan . 
Indeed , in later years he combined his socialism with a taste for high living . 
Bevan 's education was not a product of home , school or chapel , but of the Central Labor College where he learned Marxian economics and the history of Labor 's struggle . 
Like Benn in the 70s , Bevan in the 50s found himself the leader of a leftwing rebellion within the Labor party . 
But as Clare and Francis Beckett point out in their lucid short biography , Bevan -LRB- Haus , # 9.99 -RRB- , he was uninterested in the `` self-righteous sectarianism '' in which the Bennites would later wrap themselves . 
For Bevan the question was `` where was power and which was the road to it '' , a power which he wished to exercise on behalf of `` the working class '' . 
This attitude resulted not only in the foundation of the National Health Service in 1948 , but in his provision of the best of 20th-century public housing through an insistence on high quality standards in the Housing Act of 1946 . 
In Labor mythology Jenkins was often considered the polar opposite of Bevan . 
He was the suave Gaitskellite who split the party and so made possible the triumph of Margaret Thatcher . 
But the young Jenkins himself was once a Bevanite , only switching to Gaitskell once convinced , like Tony Crosland , that socialism should be identified with equality , rather than public ownership . 
Like Bevan unaffected by religion , Jenkins also presided over the dismantling of the puritan moral code which had governed Britain since the triumph of Evangelicalism in Victorian times . 
But unlike Bevan , Jenkins was from the beginning a Labor insider -LRB- his father became Attlee 's political secretary -RRB- and received a good formal education culminating in his time at Balliol College , Oxford , where he mixed easily with the children of the privileged classes . 
In this respect he was an early embodiment of the decline of deference and loosening of social mores which were to become celebrated after 1964 . 
Gaitskell had felt disturbed by this trend in the 50s . 
He associated it with the decline of the old service ethic of the upper middle class : `` Tony -LRB- Crosland -RRB- and Roy are not upper and I sometimes feel they do n't have a proper humility to ordinary working people . '' 
The receding tide of Puritanism on the one hand , and noblesse oblige on the other , also had its grosser side . 
Alan Watkins recalls that as a young reporter , lunch with a politician often involved `` a large aperitif beforehand , sharing a bottle of wine with the meal and ... brandy afterwards with his coffee . '' 
New Labor would probably be as appalled as their Edwardian ancestors . 
The thoughtful accounts found in Roy Jenkins : A Retrospective , edited by Andrew Adonis and Keith Thomas -LRB- OUP , # 18.99 -RRB- , that deal with Jenkins 's detachment from Labor after the electoral defeat of 1970 , read more like a tale of accident and misadventure than of the irresistible rise of a new political force . 
Like Bevan in the 50s , Jenkins was a reluctant rebel . 
But for Europe and his absence from parliament after the move to Brussels in 1977 , the split with Labor might not have occurred . 
The much-flagged Dimbleby Lecture of 1979 was anything but epic . 
Shirley Williams described it as `` a mildly interesting academic lecture '' . 
But electoral defeat and the ferocity of internecine party warfare , spearheaded by an intolerant Bennite left , appeared to offer `` the Gang of Four '' no point of return . 
Already by 1983 , however , after a spirited challenge at the Warrington byelection and victory at Glasgow , Hillhead , Jenkins was suffering from `` battle fatigue '' . 
And things only got worse as he found himself confronted by the deviousness of David Steel and the surliness of David Owen , whose `` tough and tender '' program Jenkins dubbed `` sub-Thatcherite '' . 
It would be easy to point to Jenkins 's personal weaknesses in recounting this unhappy story . 
But in the end , as the invaluable collection of documents assembled in New Labor 's Old Roots reveals , there was in Labor a collective failure of ethos and aim . 
For in the crisis which produced Labor 's defeat , Bennism and the SDP , the hallucinating reversion of an infantile left to nationalisation and Europhobia was only a symptom of a wider inability to come to terms with the breakdown of what David Marquand calls `` Keynesian social democracy '' . 
This was the belief most elegantly encapsulated in Crosland 's 1956 Future of Socialism that increasing equality could be painlessly achieved through a combination of economic growth and high social spending without a fundamental reform of the institutions and assumptions of the existing state . 
This policy left Labor wholly unprepared to deal with it , and in part even fuelled `` the mounting inflation , swelling balance of payments deficits , unprecedented currency depreciation , rising unemployment , bitter industrial conflict and ebbing governability '' for which the Wilson-Callaghan years are remembered . 
By republishing the incisive essays of Mackintosh , Marquand , Radice and others , Diamond rightly emphasises that the revision of Croslandite assumptions about social-democracy was as crucial as the need to revise Clause Four . 
But to get the full measure of this problem which still lurks just beneath the surface of New Labor , we need to set it in a longer time-frame . 
For `` revisionism '' did not begin in 1994 , not even with Gaitskell in 1960 , but at least as far back as 1918 . 
Labor before 1914 did not aspire to power . 
It was a party committed to defend the trade unions ' right to organise and secure parliamentary representation . 
Commitment to public ownership in 1918 was a `` revision '' put forward not by utopians or Marxists , but by sober-minded Fabians and hard-headed trade union leaders , convinced - as was Lenin - by the practical successes of state control of wartime industry . 
During the inter-war years and well into the 40s , there was no Labor intellectual , be it Tawney , Durbin , Dalton or Gaitskell , who did not believe in the superiority of a planned economy with a large measure of public ownership . 
But public ownership was not the defining point of socialism . 
It only became so during the 50s when Bevan equated it with a commitment to Clause Four in contrast to Crosland 's emphasis upon equality . 
If these were the decisive doctrinal turning points in Labor 's history before 1960 , the period between Gaitskell and `` New Labor '' delivered a massive blow to each of these three possible foundations for Labor advance : first , the assumption crucial to Clause Four , that socialist planned economies were superior , widely believed in the 30s and still present in the Labor National Plan of 1964 , disappeared in the following 20 years as the economic inefficiency of Soviet communism became increasingly apparent . 
Second , the privileged legal position of trade unions , first established in the 1870s and reinforced by the foundation of the Labor party in 1900 , was discredited by trade union militancy in `` the winter of discontent '' and dismantled by Thatcher and Norman Tebbit in the bitter aftermath of the 1983 miners ' strike . 
Lastly , Keynesian assumptions about economic management upon which Crosland 's egalitarian strategy depended were destroyed by the economic crises of the 1970s . 
Seen in this way , it becomes clear that `` New Labor '' is not really new ; yet equally clear that `` the roots '' to which the party might wish to return are frail or no longer existent . 
The question that destroyed the coherence and ultimately the existence of the SDP was what to put in place of the defense of the trade unions , Clause Four or Crosland 's vision of equality . 
So far , `` New Labor '' has managed to keep this question at bay , just as Harold Wilson deferred the question of Clause Four for more than a decade . 
It has done so by good economic management , by the wooing of middle England through the black arts of triangulation and spin , and by the modest , but real commitment to the reduction of poverty , both nationally and internationally . 
But should the bad times ever return - Iraq and possible economic downturn suggest they might - `` New Labor '' would do well to start thinking now about an alternative basis for a politics of equality . 
Gareth Stedman Jones 's book An End to Poverty ? 
is published by Profile . 
