BENGHAZI , Libya | Wed Feb 23 , 2011 6:29 pm EST BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyans celebrated the liberation of the east of the country from the rule of Muammar Gaddafi , who has vowed to crush the revolt and on Wednesday was trying to assert his grip on the capital Tripoli , in the west . 
Lying between Egypt and Tunisia , where a wave of Arab unrest has unseated two veteran presidents , the desert nation of six million which Gaddafi has ruled for 41 years seemed split in two , trapping thousands of foreign workers , jeopardizing oil exports and raising fears of tribal conflict and civil war . 
The United States , which once branded Gaddafi a `` mad dog '' but had joined European powers ' reconciliation to exploit Libya 's oil wealth , said it might impose sanctions to help end violence which one European minister said may have cost 1,000 people . 
President Barack Obama , who lacks the influence in Libya that U.S. aid gives him over some other Arab states , called for international unity to end the violence . 
He did not say Gaddafi should go , but said he would be held accountable for any abuses . 
`` It is imperative that the nations and peoples of the world speak with one voice , '' Obama told reporters at the White House in his first public comments on the revolt . 
`` The suffering and bloodshed is outrageous . '' 
Other foreign leaders , who also embraced Gaddafi , and his oil , after decades of isolating a leader who aided militants around the world , also voiced concern at the level of violence , which has included aerial bombing in parts of some cities . 
Differences over how to proceed , some driven by concern not to jeopardize the safety of foreigners caught up in the trouble , appear to limit prospects for immediate , concerted international action , although some analysts have suggested that even military force might be applied to protect the rebel east from Gaddafi . 
France called outright for sanctions . 
Obama said he would look at a `` full range of options . '' 
U.S. officials said sanctions were among those being considered . 
In the eastern city of Benghazi , cradle of the uprising and home to tribes long hostile to the 68-year-old leader , thousands filled the streets , lighting fireworks and waving the red , black and green flag of the king Colonel Gaddafi overthrew in 1969 . 
`` We have been suffering for 41 years , '' said 45-year-old Hamida Muftah . 
`` Gaddafi has killed people ... We are a very rich country , but most of the people are poorer than poor . '' 
A medical official said about 320 had been killed in Benghazi since protests against oppression and poverty began last week . 
Libya 's Quryna newspaper quoted a military source as saying a bomber crew bailed out and left their aircraft to crash rather than bomb Benghazi . 
Earlier in the week , two pilots flew their planes to Malta to avoid , they said , attacking their own people . 
In Tripoli , which remained largely closed to foreign media , local journalists said streets were calm after sporadic violence in recent days . 
Gaddafi 's state television channel showed dozens of loyalists waving his portrait and chanting his praises . 
`` Lots of people are afraid to leave their homes in Tripoli and pro-Gaddafi gunmen are roaming around threatening any people who gather in groups , '' said Tunisian Marwan Mohammed , who was crossing the border home after leaving the Libyan capital . 
Gaddafi 's children spoke up in defense of the man who went on television on Tuesday to fulminate against `` terrorists '' and promise to `` cleanse Libya house by house . '' 
They also sought to tell viewers foreign media were misreporting the week 's events . 
`` Libyans are the victims of the biggest joke , '' his son Saif al-Islam , once seen as a reformer , told state television . 
`` So wake up . 
The truths start today . 
You will see it with your own eyes , tomorrow and after tomorrow . '' 
Another son , former professional footballer Saadi , told the Financial Times that Saif al-Islam was drafting a constitution to `` bring in new blood to govern our country , '' adding : `` My father would stay as the big father who advises . '' 
He acknowledged aircraft bombed areas around Benghazi but said they hit only bases to prevent Islamist radicals seizing arms . 
He said his father would regain control of the east : `` When the people see the army , they will be afraid . '' 
Gaddafi 's daughter Aisha also appeared on state television , denying a report she tried to flee to Malta . 
`` I am steadfastly here , '' she said . 
She added she was unaware of a report she had been dropped by the United Nations as a goodwill ambassador . 
Others have deserted Gaddafi 's side , however . 
Interior Minister Abdel Fattah Younes al Abidi and a senior aide to Saif al-Islam joined them : `` I resigned from the Gaddafi Foundation on Sunday to express dismay against violence , '' Youssef Sawani , executive director of the foundation , told Reuters by SMS . 
Gaddafi has deployed troops to the west of the capital to try to stop the revolt that started in the east from spreading . 
In the east , many soldiers have withdrawn from active service . 
General Soliman Mahmoud al-Obeidy told Reuters in Tobruk in the east that the Libyan leader was no longer trustworthy . 
`` I am sure he will fall in the coming days , '' he said . 
Oil prices climbed above $ 111 a barrel at their highest since mid-2008 amid fears chaos could spread to other oil-producing countries and choke supplies , which could dash hopes of a quick global economic recovery . 
Trade sources said at least three oil cargoes did make it out of Libyan ports over the 24 hours to mid-Wednesday , however . 
Up to a quarter of Libya 's oil production has been closed down , based on calculations from firms in the country , which stretches from the Mediterranean into the Sahara and supplies nearly 2 percent of world oil output . 
Countries with strong business ties to Africa 's third largest oil producer scrambled to evacuate thousands of citizens and a Turkish worker was shot dead at a building site near the capital , Turkish officials said . 
A British oil worker said 300 people were stranded at a camp in the east of Libya , where he said local people had looted oil installations . 
`` We are living every day in fear of our lives as the local people are armed , '' James Coyle told the BBC . 
An estimated 1.5 million foreign nationals are working or traveling in Libya and a third of the population of 7 million are immigrants from sub-Saharan Africa . 
Witnesses described scenes of chaos as people tried to leave . 
`` It 's a biblical exodus , '' said Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini , predicting several hundred thousand would seek refuge in Italy . 
The U.N. Security Council condemned the use of violence and called for those responsible for attacks on civilians to be held to account . 
British Prime Minister David Cameron called for a formal resolution . 
`` The Libyan regime is using appalling levels of force and violence against its own people including using airplanes that are shooting at people , '' he said . 
But in the latest sign of international division over how to deal with Gaddafi , the prime minister of Qatar said he did not want to isolate Libya , where several senior officials have declared their backing for protests that began about a week ago . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tarek Amara , Christian Lowe , Marie-Louise Gumuchian , Souhail Karam , Firouz Sedarat , Tom Pfeiffer ; Brian Love , Daren Butler ; Dina Zayed , Sarah Mikhail and Tom Perry ; Janet Lawrence and Philippa Fletcher ; writing by Alastair Macdonald ; editing by Andrew Dobbie -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Not sure if the man actually knows what the word Martyr means . 
a person who willingly suffers death rather than renounce his or her religion . 
a person who is put to death or endures great suffering on behalf of any belief , principle , or cause : a martyr to the cause of social justice . 
Do n't quite think that a dictator trying to retain power meets either of those definitions . 
Seems the outcome of this one should be known ahead of time . 
The same thing will happen here in the US when Obama loses in 2012 . 
Organizing for America , NPR , Public Unions , and NAACP will fight to the death too claiming `` election fraud '' and `` Democracy '' . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
