U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article Gaddafi son warns of civil war as turmoil spreads Credit : Reuters\/Libyan TV via REUTERS TV TRIPOLI | Mon Feb 21 , 2011 3:51 pm IST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya 's Muammar Gaddafi will fight a popular revolt to `` the last man standing '' , one of his sons said on Monday after protests broke out in the capital for the first time following days of unrest in the city of Benghazi . 
Anti-government protesters rallied in Tripoli 's streets , tribal leaders spoke out against Gaddafi , and army units defected to the opposition as in a revolt that has cost the lives of more than 200 people . 
A major government building in the capital was on fire on Monday morning , a Reuters reporter said . 
The building is where the General People 's Congress , or parliament , meets when it is in session in Tripoli . 
The eastern city of Benghazi , where the protests began last week after the arrest of a human rights lawyer and where scores of people have been killed by security forces , was said by some residents to be effectively in the hands of the protesters . 
Gaddafi 's son Saif al-Islam Gaddafi appeared on national television in an attempt both to threaten and calm people , saying the army would enforce security at any price to put down one of the bloodiest revolts to convulse the Arab world . 
`` Our spirits are high and the leader Muammar Gaddafi is leading the battle in Tripoli , and we are behind him as is the Libyan army , '' he said . 
`` We will keep fighting until the last man standing , even to the last woman standing ... We will not leave Libya to the Italians or the Turks . '' 
Wagging a finger at the camera , he blamed Libyan exiles for fomenting the violence . 
But he also promised dialogue on reforms and wage rises . 
A Tripoli resident , who did not want to be identified , told Reuters the streets of the capital were calm early on Monday morning . 
There was no sign of police , which is unusual for the city . 
He said that late on Sunday night anti-Gaddafi protesters had been replaced by his supporters , who rallied in the center of the city around Green Square until about 5 a.m. -LRB- 0400 GMT -RRB- . 
`` After Saif al-Islam 's speech , the pro-Gaddafi people , especially the youth , were touring the streets , particularly in the center , cheering Gaddafi . 
These people stayed up the whole night , they were marching all night , some driving in cars . 
`` They were in Green Square and along Omar al-Mokthar street . 
I would say there were hundreds , '' he said . 
`` I talked to someone near the square where the clashes were taking place and he told me it was quiet and they -LRB- anti-government demonstrators -RRB- have now departed . 
`` Last night during the rioting there were police around and they were shooting into the air . 
But after that there have been no police around , '' added the Tripoli resident . 
Saif al-Islam 's cajoling may not be enough to douse the anger unleashed after four decades of rule by Gaddafi -- mirroring events in Egypt where a popular revolt overthrew the seemingly impregnable President Hosni Mubarak 10 days ago . 
`` People here in Benghazi are laughing at what he is saying . 
It is the same old story -LRB- on promised reform -RRB- and nobody believes what he says , '' a lawyer in Libya 's second city told the BBC after watching the speech . 
`` He is liar , liar , 42 years we have heard these lies . '' 
In Benghazi , protesters appeared to be largely in control after forcing troops and police to retreat to a compound . 
Government buildings were set ablaze and ransacked . 
`` Security now , it is by the people , '' the lawyer said . 
`` Youths with weapons are in charge of the city . 
There are no security forces anywhere , '' University of Benghazi professor Hanaa Elgallal told Al Jazeera International television . 
Salahuddin Abdullah , a self-described protest organiser , said : `` In Benghazi there is celebration and euphoria . 
People are ecstatic about the situation . 
Right now it is calm . 
The city is no longer under military control . 
It is completely under demonstrators control . '' 
He told the TV network that protesters were trying to establish order by creating self-rule committees to run the city and distribute basic foodstuffs . 
European Union foreign ministers will condemn the repression of anti-government protests in Libya at their meeting later on Monday , according to the draft of a joint statement . 
France said the international community must do everything it can do prevent Libya sinking into civil war . 
The United States said it was weighing `` all appropriate actions '' in response to the unrest . 
`` We are analyzing the speech ... to see what possibilities it contains for meaningful reform , '' a U.S. official said . 
Libya 's ambassador to India told the BBC he was resigning in protest at the violent crackdown that has killed more than 200 . 
Ali al-Essawi also accused the government of deploying foreign mercenaries against the protesters . 
The Turkish Foreign Ministry said that around 3,000 Turkish citizens had applied to be repatriated from Libya since Friday and the first plane was sent to Benghazi on Sunday morning , with more planes to be sent once permission was granted . 
But CNN Turk reported that one Turkish Airlines plane had returned without landing amid reports that the airport had been taken over by opposition protesters . 
It was unclear if this plane was the same as the one mentioned by the foreign ministry . 
In the first sign of serious unrest in the capital , thousands of protesters clashed with Gaddafi supporters . 
Gunfire rang out in the night and police used tear gas to disperse demonstrators , some of whom threw stones at Gaddafi billboards . 
South Korea said hundreds of Libyans , some armed with knives and guns , attacked a South Korean-run construction site in Tripoli , injuring at least 4 foreign workers . 
Human Rights Watch said at least 223 people have been killed in five days of violence . 
Most were in Benghazi , cradle of the uprising and a region where Gaddafi 's grip has always been weaker than elsewhere in the oil-rich desert nation . 
Habib al-Obaidi , a surgeon at the Al-Jalae hospital , said the bodies of 50 people , most of them shot , were brought there on Sunday afternoon . 
Two hundred wounded had arrived , he said . 
Members of an army unit known as the `` Thunderbolt '' squad had brought wounded comrades to the hospital , he said . 
The soldiers said they had defected to the cause of the protesters and had fought and defeated Gaddafi 's elite guards . 
The Libyan uprising is one of series of revolts that have raced like wildfire across the Arab world since December , toppling the long-time rulers of Tunisia and Egypt and threatening entrenched dynasties from Bahrain to Yemen . 
The West has watched with alarm as long-time allies and old foes have come under threat , appealing for reform and urging restraint . 
Support for Gaddafi , the son of a herdsman who seized power in 1969 , among Libya 's desert tribes was also waning . 
The leader of the Al-Zuwayya tribe in the east threatened to cut oil exports unless authorities halted `` oppression of protesters '' . 
Libya is Africa 's fourth biggest oil exporter , producing 1.6 million barrels of oil a day . 
Oil jumped by more than $ 1 a barrel to $ 103.5 a barrel on fears the unrest could disrupt supplies . 
Some foreign oil companies were withdrawing small numbers of expatriate staff . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tarek Amara and Christian Lowe ; additional reporting by Brian Love and Daren Butler ; writing by Angus MacSwan ; editing by Giles Elgood -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
