TRIPOLI | Mon Feb 21 , 2011 11:52 pm GMT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi fought an increasingly bloody battle to hang on to power on Monday when protests against his 41-year rule struck the capital Tripoli after days of violence in the east . 
Residents reported gunfire in parts of Tripoli and one political activist said warplanes had bombed the city . 
But state TV showed government supporters rallying and Gaddafi 's son Saif al-Islam Gaddafi said warplanes had hit only ammunition dumps . 
Forces loyal to Gaddafi had killed dozens of people across the country , human rights groups and witnesses said , prompting widespread condemnation from world leaders . 
No independent verification of the reports was available and communications with Libya from outside were difficult . 
But a picture emerged of a leader who has loomed large on the world stage for decades and controls vast reserves of oil fighting for survival . 
Brent crude prices hit $ 108 a barrel on fears the violence could disrupt supplies from Libya . 
`` What we are witnessing today is unimaginable . 
Warplanes and helicopters are indiscriminately bombing one area after another . 
There are many , many dead , '' Adel Mohamed Saleh said in a live broadcast on al Jazeera television . 
`` Anyone who moves , even if they are in their car , they will hit you . '' 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said it was `` time to stop this unacceptable bloodshed '' in Libya . 
A group of army officers issued a statement urging fellow soldiers to `` join the people '' and help remove Gaddafi . 
The justice minister resigned in protest at the `` excessive use of violence '' against protesters and diplomats at Libya 's mission to the United Nations called on the Libyan army to help overthrow `` the tyrant Muammar Gaddafi . '' 
Both Libya and Venezuela denied reports that Gaddafi had fled to the South American country ruled by his friend and fellow revolutionary President Hugo Chavez . 
Libyan state television said Gaddafi would give a speech shortly . 
Two Libyan fighter jets landed in Malta , their pilots defecting after they said they had been ordered to bomb protesters , Maltese government officials said . 
An analyst for London-based consultancy Control Risks said the reported air strikes indicated the end was near for Gaddafi . 
`` These really seem to be last , desperate acts . 
If you 're bombing your own capital , it 's really hard to see how you can survive , '' its Middle East analyst Julien Barnes-Dacey said . 
The demonstrations spread to Tripoli , on the Mediterranean Sea , after several cities in the east , including Benghazi , appeared to fall to the opposition , according to residents . 
Human Rights Watch said at least 233 people had been killed in five days of violence , but opposition groups put the figure much higher . 
A coalition of Libyan Muslim leaders told all Muslims it was their duty to rebel against the Libyan leadership because of its `` bloody crimes against humanity . '' 
The building where the General People 's Congress , or parliament , meets in Tripoli was on fire on Monday , as was a police station in an eastern suburb , witnesses said . 
Al Jazeera television quoted medical sources as saying 61 people had been killed in the latest protests in Tripoli . 
It said security forces were looting banks and other government institutions in Tripoli , and protesters had broken into several police stations and ransacked them . 
Saif al-Islam said on Sunday his father would fight the revolt until `` the last man standing . '' 
Some analysts suggested Libya was heading for civil war . 
`` I think what 's going to happen is going to be much more chaotic than what we saw in Egypt or Tunisia . 
Gaddafi and his sons do n't have anywhere else to go ... They are going to fight , '' said North Africa analyst Geoff Porter , contributor to political risk consultancy Wikistrat . 
Output at one of Libya 's oil fields was reported to have been stopped by a workers ' strike and some European oil companies withdrew expatriate workers and suspended operations . 
Most of Libya 's oil fields are in the east , south of Benghazi . 
Anti-government protests have also broken out in the central town of Ras Lanuf , the site of an oil refinery and petrochemical complex , Libya 's Quryna newspaper said on its website on Monday . 
Libyan guards have withdrawn from their side of the border with Egypt and people 's committees were now in control of the crossing , the Egyptian army said , without making if clear if the groups now in control of the border were loyal to Gaddafi . 
Gaddafi supporters were in central Tripoli 's Green Square on Monday , waving flags and carrying his portrait , Libyan state TV said . 
The anger unleashed after four decades of rule by Gaddafi mirrors events in Egypt where a popular revolt overthrew the seemingly impregnable President Hosni Mubarak 10 days ago . 
In Benghazi , cradle of the uprising , protesters appeared to be largely in control after clashes with troops and police in which dozens of civilians were killed . 
Salahuddin Abdullah , a self-described protest organiser , said : `` In Benghazi there is celebration and euphoria ... The city is no longer under military control . 
It is completely under demonstrators ' control . '' 
At least nine towns in the east were under the control of protesters loyal to tribal groups , the president of the International Federation for Human Rights in France said . 
Libya is Africa 's fourth biggest oil exporter , producing 1.6 million barrels a day . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tarek Amara and Christian Lowe ; additional reporting by Brian Love and Daren Butler ; Writing by Jon Hemming : Editing by Angus MacSwan -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
