-LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Following are quotes on the unfolding situation in Libya : SHADI HAMID , DIRECTOR OF RESEARCH AT THE BROOKINGS DOHA `` Where is the compromise solution ? 
It was not available in Egypt or Tunisia and it is likely to be the same in Libya . 
`` Libya is the most likely candidate for civil war because the government has lost control over part of its own territory . 
`` Benghazi was lost to the opposition and there are reports of other smaller cities going the same way . 
It is not something the Gaddafi regime is willing to tolerate . '' 
ALASTAIR NEWTON , POLITICAL ANALYST , NOMURA `` We believe that the 11 February ousting of President Mubarak of Egypt is proving to be a pivotal moment in turning turmoil into a tsunami ... The past week has seen unrest spread geographically -- notably to Libya -LRB- where regime collapse may be imminent -RRB- , Bahrain and Iran -- to the point where there does now appear to be a potential threat to oil and gas output . 
`` Further contagion can not be ruled out ; but we think this will likely be limited to the MENA region for the time being . '' 
ITALIAN FOREIGN MINISTER FRANCO FRATTINI `` Libya now is a matter of serious concern because I think Libya urgently needs to start a process of national reconciliation , peaceful reconciliation , stopping violence , while defending the territorial integrity of Libya . 
I am extremely concerned about the self-proclamation of the so-called Islamic Emirate of Benghazi . 
Would you imagine to have an Islamic emirate on the borders of Europe ? 
This would be a really serious threat . 
`` I am very concerned about the idea of dividing Libya in two ... that would be very dangerous . 
We Europeans are very concerned about the migratory flow impact that would be one of the consequences of turbulence in North Africa . 
`` The process of national reconciliation should begin peacefully and lead to the point of a Libyan constitution , that should be a fundamental objective . '' 
FINNISH FOREIGN MINISTER ALEXANDER STUBB `` We 're in a situation in Libya where we can only condemn the violence . 
At the same time it 's not our job to change the leader of Libya , it is the job of the leadership of Libya to listen to its people . 
And to be quite honest , listening to people does n't mean you should be using a machine gun . '' 
GERMANY DEPUTY FOREIGN MINISTER WERNER HOYER On Libyan threat to withdraw cooperation on migrants `` This was unbelievably offtrack , the European Union should not let itself be blackmailed . '' 
LUXEMBOURG FOREIGN MINISTER JEAN ASSELBORN On Libya and migrant threat `` We ca n't return to medieval methods , especially after what has happened in Egypt and Tunisia . 
They -LRB- Libya -RRB- used snipers to shoot at people who are uttering their free opinion and want more democracy . 
`` We ca n't ignore the elementary humanitarian issues and be blackmailed by such a regime . 
It ca n't be that we have to stick with a regime that bumps off its own people . '' 
SWEDISH FOREIGN MINISTER CARL BILDT `` If you look at the demographic development , during the next decades , Egypt will be bigger than Russia and there will be two additional Egypts added from the populations of the south of the Mediterranean . 
`` So the challenges in terms of reforms over the next years and decades are ominous . '' 
`` We are extremely concerned with events . 
We have condemned very clearly the repression that is ongoing . 
But then we are looking beyond what is happening today . 
It is a longer-term challenge of development and reform , of economic growth in that entire part of North Africa and the Middle East . '' 
`` A breakdown scenario in Libya is not at all unthinkable and would have grave consequences in a number of areas . 
In the Mediterranean countries , there are a lot of worries about what this could entail . 
A considerable flow of refugees is clearly a very obvious possibility , and would demand European solidarity . '' 
`` But none of this of course affects our view of the serious violations and the considerable use of violence we are now seeing . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Peter Apps and David Brunnstrom -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
