TRIPOLI\/MANAMA | Mon Feb 21 , 2011 7:47 pm GMT TRIPOLI\/MANAMA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Violent unrest against Libya 's Muammar Gaddafi spread to the capital Tripoli on Sunday and his son vowed to fight until the `` last man standing '' after scores of protesters were killed in the east of the country . 
Gaddafi 's son Saif al-Islam said in an address on state TV the army stood behind his father as a `` leader of the battle in Tripoli '' and would enforce security at any price . 
His comments were the first official reaction from the Libyan authorities since the unrest began . 
As he spoke , police used tear gas to disperse thousands of protesters in Tripoli , where gunfire was heard , vehicles were on fire and protesters threw stones at billboards of Gaddafi , who is facing the most serious challenge to his four-decade rule . 
Revolutions which deposed the presidents of Tunisia and Egypt have shaken the Arab world and inspired protests across the Middle East and North Africa , threatening the grip of long-entrenched autocratic leaders . 
In the Gulf kingdom of Bahrain , thousands of protesters gathered in a square in Manama , calling for political change and awaiting promised talks with the island 's Sunni rulers . 
After days of violence , the mood among the mainly Shi'ite protesters appeared to be more conciliatory . 
Libya , however was witnessing the bloodiest episodes yet in two months of unrest convulsing the Arab world . 
A resident in Tripoli told Reuters by telephone he could hear gunshots . 
`` We 're inside the house and the lights are out . 
There are gunshots in the street , '' he said . 
`` That 's what I hear , gunshots and people . 
I ca n't go outside . '' 
An expatriate worker said : `` Some anti-government demonstrators are gathering in the residential complexes . 
The police are dispersing them . 
I can also see burning cars . '' 
Al Jazeera television said thousands of protesters clashed with supporters of Gaddafi in Tripoli 's Green Square . 
The violence spread to Tripoli after days of protests in Benghazi , Libya 's second largest city , in which at least 233 people have been killed , according to Human Rights Watch . 
Communications are tightly controlled and Benghazi is not accessible to international journalists , but the picture that has emerged is of a city slipping from the grasp of security forces in the biggest challenge to Gaddafi 's rule since the `` brotherly leader '' seized power in a 1969 military coup . 
Habib al-Obaidi , head of the intensive care unit at the main Al-Jalae hospital in Benghazi , said the bodies of 50 people , mostly killed by gunshots , had been brought there on Sunday afternoon . 
The deaths came after scores were killed on Saturday . 
Two hundred people had arrived wounded , 100 of them in serious condition , he said . 
Members of an army unit known as the `` Thunderbolt '' squad had come to the hospital carrying wounded comrades , he said . 
The soldiers said they had defected to the cause of the hundreds of thousands of protesters in the streets and had fought and defeated Gaddafi 's elite guards . 
`` They are now saying that they have overpowered the Praetorian Guard and that they have joined the people 's revolt , '' another man at the hospital who heard the soldiers , lawyer Mohamed al-Mana , told Reuters by telephone . 
A Libyan tribal leader threatened to block oil exports to the West within 24 hours if the government does not stop the `` oppression of protesters . '' 
Another tribal chief told al Jazeera Gaddafi had to leave the country . 
Saif al-Islam , who has in the past pushed a reform agenda in Libya with only limited success , said the protests threatened to sink Libya into civil war and split the country . 
He said reports of hundreds killed were an exaggeration , but acknowledged the police and army made mistakes in dealing with the protests . 
The General People 's Congress , Libya 's equivalent of a parliament , would convene on Monday to discuss a `` clear '' reform agenda , while the government would also raise wages , in an apparent attempt to address some of the protesters ' demands , he said . 
The clamor for reform across a region of huge strategic importance to the West and the source of much of its oil began in Tunisia in December . 
The overthrow of President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali then inspired Egyptians to rise up against strongman Hosni Mubarak , overthrowing him on February 11 . 
The tide has challenged Arab leaders , including many who have long been backed by the West as vital energy suppliers and enemies of Islamist militants . 
While each uprising has its own dynamics , from religion to tribalism , all protesters seem united by frustration over economic hardship and a lack of political freedom under entrenched elites . 
Unrest also hit Yemen , Tunisia , Morocco , Oman , Kuwait , Algeria and Djibouti over the weekend as people took to the streets demanding political and economic change . 
In Iran , thousands of security personnel deployed in the streets of Tehran and other cities to prevent protesters rallying in spite of a ban , opposition websites said . 
The United States said it was `` gravely concerned '' by the situation in Libya and warned its citizens to delay trips there . 
In Bahrain , the main opposition party said it wanted the crown prince to show signs of addressing opposition demands before any formal dialogue could start . 
Crown Prince Sheikh Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa , of the ruling Sunni Muslim dynasty , made conciliatory moves after days of violence in which at least six people died . 
`` All political parties in the country deserve a voice at the table , '' he told CNN . 
`` I think there is a lot of anger , a lot of sadness ... We are terribly sorry and this is a terrible tragedy for our nation , '' said the prince , who is seen as a reformist . 
Ibrahim Mattar , a lawmaker of the main opposition Wefaq party , said protesters , thousands of whom were camping out in Pearl square , wanted more than words . 
`` We are waiting for an initiative from him , with a scope for dialogue , '' he said , adding that the prince should `` send a small signal he is willing to have a constitutional monarchy . '' 
Shi'ites , who make up 70 percent of the population , complain of unfair treatment in Bahrain , an ally of the United States , whose Fifth Fleet is based there . 
The opposition is demanding a constitutional monarchy that gives citizens a greater role in a directly elected government . 
It also wants the release of political prisoners . 
Speculation was growing that Prime Minister Sheikh Khalifa bin Salman al-Khalifa , in office since independence from Britain in 1971 , would be replaced by the crown prince . 
In Tunisia on Sunday , security forces fired into the air as tens of thousands of demonstrators gathered downtown to call for the replacement of the interim government -- a sign that problems are not all swept away with the removal of a dictator . 
In Yemen , shots were fired at a demonstration in the capital Sanaa on the ninth consecutive day of unrest . 
Thousands were demanding the departure of President Ali Abdullah Saleh , who called for dialogue with the opposition . 
But the coalition of main opposition parties said there could be no dialogue with `` bullets and sticks and thuggery , '' or with a government `` which gathers mercenaries to occupy public squares ... and terrorise people . '' 
At least 2,000 protesters gathered in a square in Morocco 's capital on Sunday to demand King Mohammed give up some powers . 
-LRB- Reporting by Reuters bureaux ; Writing by Diana Abdallah ; Editing by Matthew Jones -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
