-LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Following are quotes on the unfolding situation in Libya : JULIEN BARNES-DACEY , MIDDLE EAST ANALYST , CONTROL RISKS `` These really seem to be last , desperate acts . 
If you 're bombing your own capital , it 's really hard to see how you can survive . 
But I think Gaddafi is going to put up a fight . 
I think the rumors of him fleeing to Venezuela are going to prove wide of the mark . 
In Libya , more than any other country in the region , there is the prospect of serious violence and outright conflict . '' 
`` In terms of investment risk , it 's obviously very serious . 
People are just pulling out . 
Even if Gaddafi survives , there will be huge worries and reputational issues about doing business in Libya . 
Libya would be much more isolated after this . '' 
GEOFF PORTER , NORTH AFRICA ANALYST , CONTRIBUTOR TO POLITICAL `` I think what 's going to happen is going to be much more chaotic than what we saw in Egypt or Tunisia . 
Gaddafi and his sons do n't have anywhere else to go . 
They 're not going to go to Jeddah or a resort by the Red Sea . 
They are going to fight . 
`` There 's a lot of weapons in the country and Gaddafi has armed tribes before that have supported him . 
The question is whether it is possible for the center to hold if they have lost Benghazi and other areas of the country . 
What we could see something more along the lines of Lebanon 's civil war -- a prolonged period of violence and bloodshed . '' 
\* SPOKESMAN FOR U.N. SECRETARY GENERAL BAN KI-MOON `` The secretary-general expressed deep concern at the escalating scale of violence and emphasized that it must stop immediately . 
He reiterated his call for respect for basic freedoms and human rights , including peaceful assembly and information , '' the spokesman said after Ban spoke to Gaddafi . '' 
... The secretary-general underlined the need to ensure the protection of the civilian population under any circumstances . 
He urged all parties to exercise restraint and called upon the authorities to engage in broad-based dialogue to address legitimate concerns of the population . '' 
\* ITALIAN PRIME MINISTER SILVIO BERLUSCONI `` Prime Minister Berlusconi is alarmed over the escalation of clashes in Libya and for the unacceptable use of violence on the civilian population , '' the government said in a statement . 
`` The European Union and the international community must do everything to prevent the Libyan crisis from degenerating into a civil war with unpredictable consequences and favor a peaceful solution that protects citizens , the integrity and the stability of the country and the entire region . '' 
\* FRENCH PRESIDENT NICOLAS SARKOZY `` The president of the republic condemns the unacceptable use of force against Libyans who are only exercising their fundamental right to protest and express themselves freely , '' said the statement issued by the presidential palace . 
`` The president calls for an immediate end to the violence and a political solution to respond to the Libyan people 's aspirations for liberty and democracy , '' it said . 
\* SWISS FOREIGN MINISTER MICHELINE CALMY-REY `` The situation is evolving by the hour . 
We have seen the images of live ammunition being fired on people . 
We call for a halt to violence and recognizing people 's right to express themselves , '' she told Swiss television . 
`` History is unfolding before our eyes . 
From the year-long diplomatic crisis we had with Libya , we have a certain knowledge of how this regime functions . 
`` Today we greatly admire the Libyan people for going out in the street and demanding their liberty and democracy . '' 
AUSTRIAN FOREIGN MINISTER MICHAEL SPINDELEGGER `` The violent conduct of the Libyan government is shocking and must be condemned in the strongest of terms . 
Violence against peaceful demonstrators , that are only exercising their right to free assembly and freedom of expression , must be stopped immediately . 
I call on the Libyan leadership to begin immediately a broad dialogue answering to the demands of the Libyan people for reform . 
This is the only way more bloodshed can be avoided . '' 
BRITISH FOREIGN SECRETARY WILLIAM HAGUE `` The UK is gravely concerned about the situation in Libya which is deplorable and unacceptable . '' 
`` We are today summoning the Libyan Ambassador to London to the Foreign Office , to convey in the strongest terms our absolute condemnation of the use of lethal force against demonstrators . '' 
FORMER RUSSIAN PRIME MINISTER YEVGENY PRIMAKOV `` What is happening is a revolutionary outburst organized by non-Islamic groups ; it is social in nature . 
`` This will end differently in different countries . 
But I think there will be no return to stable authoritarian regimes . '' 
CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL 'S SPOKESMAN STEFFEN SEIBERT `` All that -LRB- use of force -RRB- is to be completely condemned ... The chancellor is personally very upset about this development . '' 
SHADI HAMID , DIRECTOR OF RESEARCH AT THE BROOKINGS DOHA `` Where is the compromise solution ? 
It was not available in Egypt or Tunisia and it is likely to be the same in Libya . 
`` Libya is the most likely candidate for civil war because the government has lost control over part of its own territory . 
`` Benghazi was lost to the opposition and there are reports of other smaller cities going the same way . 
It is not something the Gaddafi regime is willing to tolerate . '' 
ALASTAIR NEWTON , POLITICAL ANALYST , NOMURA `` We believe that the 11 February ousting of President Mubarak of Egypt is proving to be a pivotal moment in turning turmoil into a tsunami ... The past week has seen unrest spread geographically -- notably to Libya -LRB- where regime collapse may be imminent -RRB- , Bahrain and Iran -- to the point where there does now appear to be a potential threat to oil and gas output . 
`` Further contagion can not be ruled out ; but we think this will likely be limited to the MENA region for the time being . '' 
FINNISH FOREIGN MINISTER ALEXANDER STUBB `` We 're in a situation in Libya where we can only condemn the violence . 
At the same time it 's not our job to change the leader of Libya , it is the job of the leadership of Libya to listen to its people . 
And to be quite honest , listening to people does n't mean you should be using a machine gun . '' 
GERMANY DEPUTY FOREIGN MINISTER WERNER HOYER On Libyan threat to withdraw cooperation on migrants `` This was unbelievably off track , the European Union should not let itself be blackmailed . '' 
LUXEMBOURG FOREIGN MINISTER JEAN ASSELBORN On Libya and migrant threat `` We ca n't return to medieval methods , especially after what has happened in Egypt and Tunisia . 
They -LRB- Libya -RRB- used snipers to shoot at people who are uttering their free opinion and want more democracy . 
`` We ca n't ignore the elementary humanitarian issues and be blackmailed by such a regime . 
It ca n't be that we have to stick with a regime that bumps off its own people . '' 
SWEDISH FOREIGN MINISTER CARL BILDT `` If you look at the demographic development , during the next decades , Egypt will be bigger than Russia and there will be two additional Egypts added from the populations of the south of the Mediterranean . 
`` So the challenges in terms of reforms over the next years and decades are ominous . '' 
BULGARIAN FOREIGN MINISTER NIKOLAI MLADENOV `` Bulgaria is seriously alarmed by the abrupt worsening of the situation in Libya . 
I call upon the authorities to do everything possible to stop the escalating violence . 
We also call for national dialogue in the country to answer to the just demands for reforms , thus preserving Libya 's territorial integrity . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Reuters bureaus , compiled by London World Desk -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
