Analysis : Libya may face civil war as Gaddafi 's grip loosens DUBAI | Mon Feb 21 , 2011 12:47 pm EST DUBAI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya faces chaos and possible civil war as Muammar Gaddafi fights to maintain his 42-year grip on power in the face of a popular uprising . 
Even if he flees -- assuming he could find a refuge -- Gaddafi would leave a nation with few normal structures for a peaceful transition , after four decades of his idiosyncratic rule . 
`` Any post-Gaddafi period is fraught with uncertainty , '' said Middle East analyst Philip McCrum . 
`` There is no organized opposition , there are no civil institutions around which people could ordinarily gather . 
`` The opposition in exile is small and disparate . 
It will therefore take a long time for a new political order to establish itself and in the meantime , political tensions will run high as various competing groups , such as the tribes , the army , Islamists and liberals vie for power . '' 
Dozens of people were reported killed in Libya overnight as anti-government protests reached the capital , Tripoli , for the first time . 
Several eastern cities appeared to be in opposition hands . 
The revolt has already cost more than 200 lives . 
Saif al-Islam Gaddafi , one of the mercurial leader 's sons , appeared on state TV overnight , mixing threats with appeals for calm , saying the army would enforce security at any price . 
`` We will keep fighting until the last man standing , even the last woman standing , '' he said , waving a finger at the camera . 
McCrum said Saif al-Islam 's speech had probably scotched any hopes among young Libyans that he could be a force for reform . 
The uprising in Libya already looks set to be the bloodiest in a series of popular protests racing across the Middle East from Algeria to Yemen . 
Possibilities for compromise look slim . 
`` Libya is the most likely candidate for civil war because the government has lost control over part of its own territory , '' said Shadi Hamid , of the Brookings Doha Center in Qatar . 
`` Benghazi was lost to the opposition and there are reports of other smaller cities going the same way . 
It is not something the Gaddafi regime is willing to tolerate . '' 
Benghazi , a city in eastern Libya -- the region that is home to most of the country 's oilfields -- is a traditional hotbed of anti-Gaddafi sentiment among tribes hostile to his rule . 
As the protests have snowballed , Islamic leaders and once-loyal tribes have declared for the opposition . 
Saad Djebbar , a London-based Algerian lawyer who for years defended Libya in the Lockerbie airline bombing case , said Gaddafi must go . 
`` I 'm sure he has armed to the teeth his own tribesmen and those tribes linked to him . 
I 'm sure he will be also giving them as much cash as possible , '' Djebbar told Reuters . 
He said Gaddafi had narrowed the circle of his power to his close family and tribe in recent years , alienating allies and tribes who had backed him after he seized power in 1969 . 
`` Gaddafi will go down fighting and Libyans will butcher each other . 
It 's a fight to the bitter end . 
If he activates the tribal card , it will only turn Libya into another Somalia . '' 
Djebbar said Western powers should consider protecting any rebel-held areas such as eastern Libya by using air power to bar Gaddafi from bombing his foes into submission -- similar to the no-fly zone they set up in Iraqi Kurdistan after the 1991 Gulf War to deter Saddam Hussein from reasserting control there . 
`` Gaddafi is like a cornered animal -- when threatened he attacks ferociously , '' said McCrum . 
`` Throughout his rule , he has shown no qualms in brutally suppressing any opposition . 
`` He is highly unlikely to make any concessions and if he goes down , he will take as many people with him as possible , '' he added , predicting that events in Libya `` will only get bloodier . '' 
McCrum said he doubted the army would turn on Gaddafi or emulate the role played by the military in facilitating the departure of long-serving autocrats in Egypt and Tunisia . 
`` The army will not actually effect regime change as in Egypt . 
They will simply perpetuate the status quo to protect their own interests , '' he said , noting that main arms of the security services were controlled by sons of Gaddafi . 
Libya , once a pariah accused of sponsoring international terrorism , rehabilitated itself by paying compensation to victims of the Lockerbie bombing and other attacks , and by renouncing its efforts to acquire weapons of mass destruction . 
`` If ever there was a regime which exposes the West 's hypocrisy , Gaddafi 's is it , '' McCrum said . 
`` The West has fallen over itself to rehabilitate Gaddafi so they can get at his oil and now it will pay the price in political capital -- if it has any left . 
In terms of investment risk , it 's obviously very serious , '' said Julien Barnes-Dace , Middle East analyst at Control Risks . 
`` People are just pulling out . 
Even if Gaddafi survives , there will be huge worries and reputational issues about doing business in Libya . 
Libya would be much more isolated after this . '' 
Analyst Geoff Porter said Gaddafi had `` nowhere to go , '' unlike ousted Arab leaders such as Tunisia 's Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali , who found refuge in Saudi Arabia , or Egypt 's Hosni Mubarak , in internal exile in Sharm el-Sheikh . 
`` Possibly the only place he can go is Zimbabwe , '' he said . 
`` So there is no alternative . 
-LRB- If he is toppled -RRB- , he will be like Saddam Hussein and end up hiding in a hole . '' 
-LRB- Editing by Richard Mably and Mark Trevelyan -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Who in the West has the troops , the money and the will to take over nation-building in Libya once Muammar Cadaver falls ? 
No matter , because the Libyan people wo n't permit such foreign interference anyway . 
Libya is rushing headlong down a path similar to another failed state -- Afghanistan . 
Libya is demonstrating the awful truth that , as horrendously bad and evil as autocratic rulers like Muammar Cadaver are , it can get a hell of a lot worse . 
The huge wave sweeping the Middle East is going to wash over and obliterate Western strategic interests in the entire region , and beyond . 
The West has been caught massively on its heels , and can not hope to ride the crest of this wave . 
Instead , it 's being left to flounder in its wake . 
Nuker -- I am curious what you think SS `` caught massively on its heels '' should have done\/be doing differently ? 
Tough question to answer AFTER you 've fallen in a 20ft hole . 
But the U.S. should have seen this coming when the Soviet Union fell in 1989-1991 . 
That demonstrated the fact that peoples will allow oppression only for just so long . 
So the West should have begun back then to privately put increasing pressure on the oil-rich autocratic regimes to democratize . 
If no progress was evident after several years of effort , then it should have quietly but steadily positioned itself to be able to ride the crest of this wave whenever it inevitably would occur , and thus be looked to by the region 's peoples as the true champion of their freedoms and rights , rather than an interfering power that propped up autocrats perpetually . 
But , having utterly failed to look ahead and plan for this , the U.S. is really without options at present . 
All it can do is play a limited role in trying to limit the bloodshed and hope that the region 's peoples wo n't completely cast it and its strategic interests aside . 
Both Republican and Democratic administrations utterly failed us here -- none looked ahead and planned ahead sufficiently . 
This is scandalous considering the fact that the West is still utterly dependent upon oil , and will be for at least two more decades . 
This is what happens in the medium-to-long term when your words and your actions do n't even come close to matching up . 
The U.S. has proclaimed `` Democracy ! '' 
and `` Freedom ! '' 
and `` Human Rights ! '' 
while at the same time perpetually propping up insane , bloodthirsty dictators . 
The chickens have come home to roost . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
