Aid is urgently needed for victims of the Haiti quake Some online donations to charities helping victims of the Haiti earthquake are being wrongly blocked by banks as fraudulent , financial experts say . 
Some card thieves use charity donations to check if a stolen card will work before using it to illegally buy goods . 
But banks ' automated systems can block unusual first-time payments to charities , leaving donors frustrated . 
Banks say the majority of donations are authorised and customers can contact them to clear any blocked payments . 
Estella Baker , an HSBC customer , told BBC Radio 4 's Money Box program her donation was blocked . 
It is really pressing with the Haiti appeal that the charities get the money as fast as possible with no difficulties Estella Baker , Money Box listener `` They told me they had done this because I had n't used that website before . 
`` But recently I have used a lot of websites and made credit card payments some for larger sums than that and none has been blocked . '' 
Andrew Goodwill , from fraud screening firm 3rd Man , said criminals use charity donations to test whether a card has been stopped . 
`` When a credit card fraudster compromises your card he will want to test that card to see if it works . 
`` So he will make a small donation through a charity website because there are no goods to be delivered and if it does works he can then go on and use it on other sites . '' 
`` Banks are blocking donations to charities and it is absolutely ridiculous because at this time that is what people want to do to show their support . 
`` Ring your card company and tell them that you are really annoyed and make sure they take the block off so you can use the card . '' 
The scale of the problem is not clear but the Red Cross has confirmed that it does occur with a small proportion of online donations . 
the vast majority of our customers ' donations to charities are made successfully Other listeners have also contacted Money Box to say their online donations to a number of charities with various cards have been blocked . 
Ms Baker thinks the banks need to sort out their systems . 
`` It is really pressing with the Haiti appeal that the charities get the money as fast as possible with no difficulties , '' she said . 
HSBC told Money Box : `` The vast majority of our customers ' donations to charities are made successfully , and it is only cards following a suspicious pattern of transactions that may be declined . '' 
Have you had an online donation a charity blocked ? 
Did you complete the donation via another method ? 
Have thieves made a charitable donation in your name ? 
Your personal details will only be used by the BBC for the purpose of publishing your comments . 
Please note that if your comments are published , your name and location may also be published . 
The BBC may edit your comments and not all emails will be published . 
Your comments may be published on any BBC media worldwide . 
The comments we publish are not necessarily the views of the BBC but will reflect the balance of views we have received . 
It is helpful if contributors state if they work for any organization relevant to an issue discussed . 
Readers should form their own views on whether messages published represent undeclared interests , or views prompted by a common source . 
Occasionally Money Box or Inside Money may wish to contact Have Your Say contributors about future programs . 
If you find this acceptable we ask you to include your e-mail address . 
BBC Radio 4 's Money Box is broadcast on Saturdays at 12 noon , and repeated on Sundays at 2100h . 
