Survivors dig with their bare hands , looking for food and water The UN has launched an appeal for $ 562m -LRB- # 346m -RRB- , to help victims of Tuesday 's devastating earthquake in Haiti . 
UN humanitarian chief John Holmes said the funds were intended to help three million people for six months . 
The earthquake has left tens of thousands of people dead , and rescuers are continuing an increasingly desperate search for survivors . 
Meanwhile , US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said she would travel to Haiti on Saturday . 
The BBC 's Matthew Price , outside the ruins of a nursing college in the capital Port-au-Prince , says he has been told by a female member of staff that there could be 260 dead bodies and up to 25 people still alive under the rubble . 
Behind me is what remains of a five-storey building , a college of nursing that is now the size of a one-storey building . 
According to one of the members of management here , inside there were believed to have been more than 200 people who were crushed when that building came down . 
It is also believed that there are possibly 25 people alive in there . 
The reason for believing that is that last night a text message was received from someone who said they were inside , that they were very hungry , that they were very hot indeed and that they needed someone to come and rescue them . 
In the last few hours a Brazilian search and rescue team has been very , very slowly trying to get access inside . 
Their truck has now started moving away . 
A team of Brazilian rescuers is trying to gain access to the victims but progress is painfully slow , our correspondent adds . 
Haitian Interior Minister Paul Antoine Bien-Aime told Reuters news agency that 50,000 bodies had already been collected . 
`` We anticipate there will be between 100,000 and 200,000 dead in total , although we will never know the exact number , '' he said . 
The Pan American Health Organization has estimated that the death toll could be as high as 100,000 , while the UN said about 300,000 had been made homeless . 
The US has announced it will grant leave to remain to thousands of illegal Haitian migrants living there due to the humanitarian crisis in their country . 
The chief of the homeland security department , Janet Napolitano , said they would be allowed to stay and work , initially for 18 months . 
Aid workers have been grappling with logistical problems as they attempt to distribute aid . 
The port is too damaged to use and roads are blocked by debris , although the main route from the Dominican Republic is now clear . 
This is a huge and a horrifying catastrophe , the full consequences of which we do not know Correspondents say survivors seem increasingly desperate and angry as bottlenecks and infrastructure damage delay relief efforts . 
Mr Holmes , who heads the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs -LRB- Ocha -RRB- , said a massive effort was being mounted and officials were `` straining every nerve '' to help . 
`` This is a huge and a horrifying catastrophe , the full consequences of which we do not know , '' he said . 
He said almost half of the appeal money would be for emergency food aid , with amounts of between $ 20m and $ 50m for health , water and sanitation , nutrition , emergency shelter , early recovery and agriculture . 
Mr Holmes earlier told reporters that 30 % of buildings throughout Port-au-Prince had been damaged , with the figure at 50 % in some areas . 
Many there have spent a third day without food and shelter in the ruined capital , though UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon , who is due to visit Haiti on Sunday , said distribution of food and medicine was under way . 
The BBC 's Nick Davis in Port-au-Prince says the only convoys he has seen are people leaving the city , in search of food , water and medicine . 
Correspondents say there is little official presence in Port-au-Prince despite incidents of looting . 
Mrs Clinton said she would visit Haiti on Saturday to assess the damage , meet government officials and convey to the Haitian people `` our long term , unwavering support , solidarity and sympathies '' . 
Earlier US President Barack Obama described the scale of the devastation as extraordinary and the losses suffered as `` heartbreaking '' . 
In a statement at the White House , he said the US would `` do what it takes to save lives and help people get back on their feet '' . 
The US has already sent an aircraft carrier , the USS Carl Vinson , to Haiti and the USS Bataan , carrying a marine expeditionary unit , is on its way . 
A hospital ship and more helicopters are due to be sent in the coming days , carrying more troops and marines , with the total number of US troops to rise to between 9,000 and 10,000 . 
Aid groups say it is a race against time to find trapped survivors . 
Plane-loads of rescuers and relief supplies have arrived or are due from the UK , China , the EU , Canada , Russia and Latin American nations . 
Gen Douglas Fraser , the commander of US Southcom , says around 90 aid flights a day are landing . 
Have you or your family been affected by the earthquake ? 
Are you taking part in the relief effort ? 
If you have any information you wish to share with the BBC you can do so using the form below : You can also send your pictures or videos to yourpics@bbc.co.uk, text them to +447725100100 or if you have a large file you can upload here . 
The BBC may edit your comments and not all emails will be published . 
Your comments may be published on any BBC media worldwide . 
