Rescuers pull a child from the rubble of the Haiti earthquake There are mounting security concerns in Haiti 's earthquake-hit capital as distribution problems continue to hamper getting aid to survivors . 
Days after the quake devastated Port-au-Prince , killing tens of thousands , there are some reports of gangs preying on residents and looting . 
Officials say thousands of prisoners are unaccounted for after the main prison was destroyed . 
Relief has been arriving , but little has moved beyond the jammed airport . 
Damage to the seaport , roads and other infrastructure has prevented the speedy distribution of food , water and medical supplies . 
Matt Frei , BBC News , Port-au-Prince There are quite a few diggers in town moving debris , sometimes even bodies . 
But if you reach a pile of rubble , and there 's any evidence of life , what you have to do is pick that pile of rubble brick by brick , glass shard by glass shard . 
The story that we 've heard time and time again is that of lack of bright lights to continue working through the night . 
A part of the tarmac looked like a hospital ward on Friday with patients on drips waiting to be moved out . 
But that is a tiny proportion . 
At an outdoor hospital in town there was not a single doctor or nurse , and people were dying in front of our eyes unnecessarily . 
If you have lost a leg or foot and you are lying out in the open at these extraordinary temperatures without water , and medicine , often without any shade for four days , you are not going to live very long . 
There is no reason why some of the dozens of doctors who have arrived in the past two days should not go there to treat these people . 
The roads are clear and it 's only a 20-minute drive from the airport . 
On Saturday morning , a magnitude-4 .5 aftershock struck close to Haiti 's capital , the US Geological Survey said , forcing people to flee buildings . 
US President Barack Obama met two of his predecessors in the White House , George W Bush and Bill Clinton , to seek their support . 
After the talks , Mr Obama said the two men would lead the US ' fundraising efforts through the Bush-Clinton Haiti Fund . 
`` America is moving forward with one of the largest relief efforts in its history , '' Mr Obama said , warning that recovery would take a long time . 
President Bush urged Americans to send `` cash '' , and President Clinton said Haitians `` can escape their history and built a better future if we do our part '' . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is traveling to Haiti on Saturday to assess the damage and convey to the Haitian people `` our long term , unwavering support , solidarity and sympathies '' . 
A spokeswoman for the UN Office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian Affairs said aid workers were dealing with a disaster `` like no other '' in UN memory because the country had been `` decapitated '' . 
`` Government buildings have collapsed and we do not even have the support of the local infrastructure , '' Elisabeth Byrs said in Geneva . 
Ms Byrs said the situation was even worse than the devastation wrought by the 2004 tsunami in Indonesia 's Aceh province . 
`` It 's worse than the Indonesian earthquake where at least we could get the support of some local authorities , '' she said . 
`` Men suddenly appeared with machetes to steal money , '' resident Evelyne Buino told AFP news agency . 
Up to 4,000 prisoners are unaccounted for , with many believed to have escaped from the central prison . 
`` There are thieves coming out , '' Haitian police inspector-general Jean-Yonel Trecile told Reuters news agency . 
`` To make sure this does not spread , we have taken a number of these people off the streets . 
We have arrested about 50 people . '' 
There is little police presence in the capital , although some Brazilian UN peacekeepers are patrolling the streets . 
UN Undersecretary General for Peacekeeping Alain Le Roy told the US Public Broadcasting Service -LRB- PBS -RRB- network on Friday : `` There have been some incidents where people were looting or fighting for food . 
They are desperate . '' 
But he added that overall the situation remained under control so far . 
The BBC 's Nick Davis in Port-au-Prince says the only convoys he has seen are people leaving the city , in search of food , water and medicine . 
` Historic effort needed in Haiti ' The UN is reporting a rise in the number of people trying to cross into the neighbouring Dominican Republic , and an influx into Haiti 's northern cities . 
Overnight the crippled port received its first supply ship since the earthquake , a boat carrying bananas and coal , AFP reports . 
Interior Minister Paul Antoine Bien-Aime said 50,000 bodies had been collected , but the total number of dead could be `` between 100,000 and 200,000 '' . 
The UN said about 300,000 people had been made homeless . 
US authorities have taken temporary control of the airport to help distribute aid more quickly . 
Meanwhile , details are emerging about the extent of the damage beyond Port-au-Prince . 
Up to 90 % of the buildings have been damaged in Leogane , a town about 19km -LRB- 18 miles -RRB- to the west , the UN said . 
`` According to the local police , between 5,000 to 10,000 people have been killed and most bodies are still in the collapsed buildings , '' Elisabeth Byrs said . 
The UN has launched an appeal for $ 562m -LRB- # 346m -RRB- intended to help three million people for six months . 
A total of about $ 360m has been pledged so far for the relief effort , but only part of this sum will be included in the emergency appeal . 
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon , who is due to visit Haiti on Sunday , said distribution of food and medicine was under way . 
The US has already sent an aircraft carrier , the USS Carl Vinson , to Haiti and the USS Bataan , carrying a marine expeditionary unit , is on its way . 
A hospital ship and more helicopters are due to be sent in the coming days , carrying more troops and marines , with the total number of US troops to rise to between 9,000 and 10,000 . 
Aid groups say it is a race against time to find any more trapped survivors . 
Plane-loads of rescuers and relief supplies have arrived or are due from the UK , China , the EU , Canada , Russia and Latin American nations . 
