Aid workers are gradually reaching Port-au-Prince With up to 50,000 people feared dead in Haiti , UK charities are scrambling to get aid to the earthquake-stricken Caribbean island . 
But what do agencies do when disaster strikes ? 
There is no doubt that Haiti 's 7.0-magnitude earthquake has been a humanitarian disaster . 
Over three million people are thought to have been displaced in the poorest nation in the Americas , and the death toll keeps rising . 
Charities have been quick to send supplies and emergency response teams . 
The Disasters Emergency Committee -LRB- DEC -RRB- - the umbrella organization which co-ordinates responses to major disasters overseas - launched an emergency appeal within days . 
Britons donated more than # 2m in the space of 36 hours . 
But how do charities and the DEC assess what to do first when a disaster devastates ? 
Richard North , acting head of logistics for the British Red Cross , said the first line of response was to see if a disaster could be handled on a local level . 
`` The Haitian Red Cross was overwhelmed , warehouse buildings damaged , there was a clear requirement for international assistance . 
`` Emergency stocks were distributed pretty much straight away . 
Then we looked at our emergency response unit , we have teams which are on 24\/7 standby , and specialist areas like medicine , '' he said . 
Oxfam is among the charities sending shelter equipment for Haiti 's displaced In Haiti , easing the gridlock at the airport which has blocking aid getting to the victims was now a priority . 
The British Red Cross would dispatch a logistics team from the UK to create another entry point to Haiti , he said . 
`` Port-au-Prince airport is subject to restrictions on fuel and handling equipment , the port is badly damaged , we need some kind of trucking system to transfer goods into Haiti from the -LRB- neighbouring -RRB- Dominican Republic . '' 
The Red Cross was also mobilising stocks of plastic sheets , tarpaulins , hygiene kits , mosquito nets and buckets from Panama , he said . 
Looking further ahead , he said : `` Emergency relief typically takes 6-8 weeks , with recovery 2-4 years . 
`` Normally the response moves from search and rescue and medical needs , to helping those who have lost homes with shelter , to water sanitation and food . 
Then comes more longer-term recovery programs , like re-building homes and offering families micro-loans . '' 
Oxfam , which had a member of staff killed in the earthquake , said its priority was `` always '' water and sanitation . 
The charity is preparing to send up to 10 tonnes of water , sanitation , health and shelter equipment - valued at around # 70,000 - from its Oxford UK warehouse on Saturday afternoon . 
Equipment includes emergency sheeting for shelter and latrines , water tubing to create pipes , water purification chemicals and tablets and buckets to enable people to carry and store water . 
Large parts of the Haitian capital have been devastated The charity said staff already based in Haiti had been providing shovels to clear rubble and search for trapped victims , and 17 international humanitarian experts had arrived in Haiti on Friday . 
Kate Akhtar , senior emergency program officer for Care International , agreed that water and sanitation were `` key '' . 
She said Care was sending 600,000 water purification tablets and it had enough stocks of high protein biscuits to feed 60,000 families . 
But she said assessments needed to be `` ongoing '' . 
Haiti was `` well versed '' in disaster , having had four hurricanes in 2008 , but was in `` urgent need '' of more aid , she said . 
`` Urban areas are always difficult , but there is so much deforestation in Haiti - which has caused landslide problems in the past - that it will be difficult to source items to create shelter . '' 
Communication was also a problem , with text messaging the only way to communicate with their staff , she said . 
ActionAid said aid was `` trickling in '' but the situation was `` chaotic '' . 
It said it had 25 staff in the country , but 20 were `` still trying to dig their families out of the rubble '' . 
A team of international staff from ActionAid , including some from the UK and Brazil , were traveling to Haiti and should be in the country by Sunday . 
As well as delivering shelter , food and sanitary kits for women , the charity would provide psycho-social support , a spokeswoman said . 
Peter Grant , International Director of Tearfund , said the DEC considered three factors when it decided whether to launch an appeal : firstly , the need ; secondly , members ' capacity to respond ; and thirdly , evidence the UK public wanted to help . 
He said the disaster in Haiti was `` clear cut '' because `` all lights were green '' - whereas in other scenarios , like the droughts in east Africa , it was much harder because `` there was little media interest '' . 
He said Tearfund - which works with a range of churches and organizations in 35 countries - was sending a disaster assessment team to Haiti over the weekend with a view to helping in the medium - to long-term , but was already working with partners on the ground . 
`` By appealing in consortium , the DEC is flexible . 
Different agencies have different skills , so we work in a complementary way . 
Some agencies are geared up to send immediate relief - we anticipate a two-year response , '' he said . 
