There are mounting security concerns in Haiti 's earthquake-hit capital as distribution problems continue to hamper getting aid to survivors . 
BBC News website readers have been describing how the earthquake has affected them . 
Survivors say not enough aid is reaching them . 
Photo : Frederic Dupoux I was in the mountains , in a suburb of Port-au-Prince when the earthquake happened . 
Once I realized what the magnitude is , I went straight down to the city . 
The further I got , the worst things got . 
Right now everyone is waiting for help , looking for fuel , food and water . 
We did not expect such a tragedy , so nobody has got any supplies . 
There are no shops open and people do n't know what to do . 
The security situation is becoming a problem too . 
Streets can get very violent and you have to be careful . 
I have n't witnessed any violence , but I have seen people looting houses and shops in their struggle to find food . 
I would like to say to people around world : please bring help , bring hands , send food and water Here 's an example to illustrate the situation - my uncle has a water distribution business . 
Right now he is distributing the water for free , but he ca n't do that on his own , he has a military escort . 
Everybody is looking for food and water . 
Aid is coming through , but you do n't see it everywhere , it 's not on a big scale . 
People are asking for help and they are wondering why so little has arrived . 
Yesterday I witnessed something that shows how desperate people are . 
A rescue team asked a crowd of people to guide them towards places where people might be trapped . 
The crowd insisted that they are the ones who needed the help . 
I spend my days out in the streets , taking photographs of the destruction and people 's struggle to survive . 
Everybody is like me - out in the streets , not by choice , but because there 's no place to go . 
People are camping outside , setting up tents on every little green they can find . 
I would like to say to people around world : please bring help , send food and water . 
The whole city is destroyed and has to be rebuilt . 
It 's really difficult to describe . 
We need to know what to do after that and right now we do n't even know what tomorrow will be like . 
Dixie Bickell , director `` God 's Littlest Angels '' orphanage , Haiti Hospitals in Haiti are ill-equipped to deal with the injured We look after 147 children , ranging from newborns to 12-year-olds . 
We are running low on supplies : I have enough rice to feed the children for a week but we are low on water , sugar , basic foods , diesel and cooking fuel . 
I know there will be many more children coming to the orphanage soon , so we need as many beds as we can get . 
My house is full at the moment but I would like to take on more orphans . 
Even though many have lost their parents , we are praying that their families will come forward for them . 
The atmosphere here is still very tense . 
We had a large aftershock at 1100 which lasted five minutes and we have had several smaller ones since then . 
It 's incredibly unnerving . 
Many of the children are outside , too scared to come in . 
We have seen aid at the airport but it will take some time to get to us We have seen some aid at the airport but I have not seen it being distributed to the people yet . 
In any case it will take some time to get to us . 
As we are 12 miles from the center of Port-au-Prince I do n't think we will get much help . 
Today I have sent two children to their new families in Luxembourg and three children to families in the Netherlands . 
I 'm also hoping we can evacuate more children on Tuesday but that is yet to be confirmed . 
I really have to applaud the Dutch government for putting the needs of the children first and speeding up the adoption process . 
These children were going through the process before the earthquake happened and they have already been approved for adoption by the Haitian authorities . 
