cents BP 's total spill spending so far hits $ 2.65 bn cents TEDxOilSpill conference hears from experts cents Tony Hayward not resigning says BP The total figure is up from Friday 's figure of $ 2.35 bn , and includes the cost of trying to cap the well , clean up the environmental damage caused by the leak and pay compensation to those affected . 
BP has paid out more than $ 128m to fishermen and others . 
Later today in Washington a team of photographers and videographers will meet at the TEDxOilSpill event , to report their findings after they spent a week documenting the oil spill . 
But there is some good news for BP , with the news that tropical storm Alex is not expected to inhibit the cleanup operation . 
There had been fears that the storm could strike the area . 
This is from the TedxOilSpill website , regarding their Washington event later today . 
This is a week-long project to document the current situation in the Gulf of Mexico and bring a first hand report back to the TEDxOilSpill event in Washington DC on June 28th . 
We 'll be working on land , air , and maybe even on boat . 
Our team is composed of several talented photographers and videographers . 
In addition to documentation of oil on the water and on the beach , we 're particularly interested in the human side of the equation and will be talking to some of the people most affected by the catastrophe in the Gulf . 
We 'll also be documenting any and all evidence of media interference by BP , the Coast Guard , or other officials . 
The list of speakers includes prominent environmentalists such as Andrew Sharpless , from Oceana -LRB- `` the largest international organization focused solely on ocean conservation '' -RRB- , marine toxicologist Susan Shaw and the man behind @BPGlobalPR , Leroy Stick . 
Tropical storm Alex , which forecasters from the US national hurricane center -LRB- Nhc -RRB- said `` could become a hurricane '' today or tomorrow , is not expected to affect the clean-up operation . 
Alex , the first named storm of the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season , had sustained winds of about 50 mph this morning , when it was lurking some 75 miles west of Campeche , Mexico . 
The video linked to by @BPGlobalPR in the above tweet appears to show oil being washed onto Destin Beach , Florida , and sticking to a child as she plays in the sand . 
@BPGlobalPR Congrats to BP 's Mother of the Year 2010 ! 
It 's just oil people ! 
Take the kids out and enjoy the beach ! 
`` In the pitch-black waters surrounding the leaking oil well in the Gulf of Mexico , where the pressure would crush a human diver like an empty soda can , a small army of robots wielding industrial-size home improvement tools remained on the job Sunday . '' 
The robots , which can weigh over 10,000 pounds , were used to cut the broken pipe and install a cap to siphon oil to the surface . 
Frustrated by the fallout of the BP disaster , independent owners of local gas stations are fighting to keep customers coming to their pumps . 
Owners across the country have complained to the oil giant , urging them to do more to combat the public relations nightmare after more than 100 million gallons of oil spilled off the Gulf Coast . 
Customers have stayed away in droves and defaced BP stations in protest . 
Owners and some customers say enough is enough . 
If you spot any interesting articles or videos relating to the oil spill , please get in touch - on Twitter @adamgabbatt or email adam.gabbatt@guardian.co.uk The Miami Herald has reported `` that depression and gloom will come along with the dark goo , '' as a suicide is linked to the Gulf oil spill . 
The paper claims the oil spill is having a severe mental toll on people in the area , and that the suicide of a boat captain last week is being seen as `` exhibit A for a problem that experts fear is moving faster than the oil slick : a mental toll that will lead to violence , depression and suicide '' . 
The Herald reports that BP have sent grief counsellors to the area to try and deal with the problem , which it claims is similar to the fallout from the Exxon Valdez spill , when the nearby city of Cordova saw increases in divorces and suicides . 
More than 150 artists , critics and playwrights , including Hans Haacke , John Keane and Matthew Herbert , have written to the Guardian to complain about BP 's sponsorship of the Tate Britain , 20 years of which is being celebrated in a reception at the gallery tonight . 
As crude oil continues to devastate coastlines and communities in the Gulf of Mexico , BP executives will be enjoying a cocktail reception with curators and artists at Tate Britain . 
These relationships enable big oil companies to mask the environmentally destructive nature of their activities with the social legitimacy that is associated with such high-profile cultural associations . 
We represent a cross-section of people from the arts community that believe that the BP logo represents a stain on Tate 's international reputation . 
Many artists are angry that Tate and other national cultural institutions continue to sidestep the issue of oil sponsorship . 
Little more than a decade ago , tobacco companies were seen as respectable partners for public institutions to gain support from that is no longer the case . 
It is our hope that oil and gas will soon be seen in the same light . 
The public is rapidly coming to recognize that the sponsorship programs of BP and Shell are means by which attention can be distracted from their impacts on human rights , the environment and the global climate . 
Thanks to @NnnIqbal on Twitter for the link . 
The Associated Press is reporting that the admiral in charge of the spill response is heading back to the Gulf coast today , after Mississippi 's governor said he would press BP and the federal government for more help . 
Adm Thad Allen was expected to be in New Orleans on Monday and talk to the media about the latest on the spill . 
Allen has received some criticism from local officials who feel he might not be the right man to head the team . 
He has not responded to the criticism . 
Jackson County emergency management director Donald Langham says tar balls and a patch of oil were spotted at the St. Andrews beach and at the Lake Mars pier in Gulf Park Estates . 
There are reports of oil also washing up in Louisiana , Alabama and Florida . 
The Los Angeles Times reports that a `` BP boycott '' is difficult to enforce as it is so deeply entrenched in the US economy . 
The article lists the many business interests of the company , including Arco , Safeway supermarkets and the Southern California Gas Company , as it follows a number of drivers trying unsuccessfully to avoid filling up their tanks with BP fuel . 
The piece also explores the effect a boycott could have on independent businesses , and the moral difficulties of finding a `` good '' oil company . 
Reuters is reporting that Russia 's top energy official , Igor Sechin , has said BP 's chief executive will soon resign . 
`` We know that Tony Hayward is leaving his position and he will introduce his successor , '' Sechin told reporters ahead of a meeting with Hayward on Monday . 
A spokesman for BP said : `` Tony Hayward remains chief executive officer . 
No change to that position is under discussion . '' 
Hayward is in Moscow today on a visit to meet Russian officials , including Sechin . 
I 'll embed the video into the blog when the conference starts . 
gov\/gulfresponse , developed by the US national oceanic and atmospheric administration with the US environment protection agency , national coast guard , and the department of interior provides near-real time information about the response effort . 
You can play with the map to display different information , including the fishery closure area , which is shown above in red . 
My colleague Mark Tran has sent me a link to a Foreign Policy article which points out there could be some winners from the BP oil spill . 
Are you a politically stable country with untapped oil reserves that wo n't soon be trapped behind a daunting web of post-spill moratoriums and regulations ? 
If so , the world 's energy companies would like to have a word with you . 
Expect newfound interest in Australia 's offshore oil reserves , for instance . 
But the big winner here is Canada , whose oil reserves , mainly in the form of Alberta 's gargantuan oil sand deposits , are the second largest in the world behind Saudi Arabia 's . 
The Daily Mail knows what has been going wrong during the BP oil spill Obama has been playing too much golf . 
He has played at least seven times since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on April 20 , creating America 's biggest environmental disaster . 
Having already racked up 39 games since taking office , Mr Obama is approaching the record as the U.S. President spending the most time on the golf course . 
Republican Party chairman Michael Steele has called on the President to stop playing until the oil leak has been curbed . 
Steele said he was outraged ` that President Obama finds himself on yet another golf course as oil continues to spew into the Gulf ' . 
The TEDxOilSpill conference , looking into BP 's handling of the oil spill , has just begun . 
Here 's the live stream . 
The Guardian 's US environment correspondent , Suzanne Goldenberg , is live-tweeting the TEDx event . 
`` Now up : Philippe Cousteau , grandson of Jacques Cousteau , describing his dive into the oil in the Gulf of Mexico #TEDxOilSpill '' You can follow her @suzyji . 
The BBC has an article listing the gaffes of Tony Hayward . 
From taking part in a boat race around the Isle of Wight to describing the environmental impact of the spill as `` very , very modest '' , this list of PR hiccups suggest Hayward would have been better to apply his stonewalling technique used in Congress . 
`` For every bird that is caught -LRB- and cleaned of oil -RRB- , there are ten more that are n't , '' says Philippe Cousteau at the TEDx conference . 
Cousteau , who dived into the spill with a film crew , says the worst aspect of the disaster is what we can not see , beneath the surface . 
`` We have underinvested in our oceans for decades , '' he says . 
Because we do n't understand the ecosystems in place we have struggled to react well to the spill . 
`` Understanding if there is water on Mars is not critical to our life on this planet , looking after our oceans is , '' he says , waiting for applause that is rather slow to come . 
-LRB- To be fair , it is 9am in Washington -RRB- . 
The organization of petroleum exporting countries -LRB- Opec -RRB- has called on the US to reconsider its ban on new deep-water drilling , despite safety concerns in the wake of the oil spill . 
Abdalla Salem El Badri , secretary-general of the organization , says offshore drilling is an important source of oil and any ban would be too hasty when the cause of the Gulf of Mexico spill is still unclear . 
`` We should not really ban it and we should not jump to conclusions , '' he told reporters after meeting European Union officials in Brussels . 
President Barack Obama last month imposed a six-month ban on Gulf of Mexico . 
Over 32,000 people like the BP America Facebook group and receive daily updates on the amount of oil collected , and the overall amount of oil recovered . 
The latest post states from midnight to noon on 27 June nearly 8000 barrels of oil were collected and over 4,000 barrels of oil and 27.4 million cubic feet of natural gas were flared . 
This post received 467 comments . 
The group is updated approximately every hour with links to news footage , environmental websites and BP 's own YouTube channel . 
BP also update their 16,000 followers on Twitter with regular tweets and replies to questions asked , such as the response to @silencematters , which said the 435,600 barrels collected , to date , only reflects the amount of oil and does not include the water . 
BP oil spill gear a different way for people to express their disapproval of company . 
My personal favorite has to be `` real slick , Tony . '' 
Hello , Richard Adams in Washington DC , where the TEDxOilSpill conference is going on all day . 
As mentioned below , you can follow the TEDxOilSpill conference live video stream right here , and check out the list of speakers here to see what 's coming up . 
The Guardian 's US environmental correspodent Suzanne Goldenberg is tweeting TEDxOilSpill via the gift of Twitter here or you can follow her at @suzyj . 
Twitterati may also wish to follow the #TEDxOilSpill hashtage . 
One of the most interesting things to come out of the TEDxOilSpill conference is the crowd-sourcing of possible ideas to tackle the Gulf spill . 
Although not all the ideas being suggested are too bright . 
`` Is it possible to drill a new hole down to the same cavity and start pumping the oil with a new pipe ? '' 
Ah , yes , that would be the relief wells that BP are drilling . 
It 's raining oil , or something , in Louisiana My colleague Matthew Weaver offers this Youtube video , via the excellent Kate Sheppard of Mother Jones , who writes : Can it rain oil ? 
A video shot after a recent storm in River Ridge , Louisiana , which has been making the rounds online in recent days , purports to show exactly that . 
`` You can see that this is oil , '' the narrator says , sweeping a camera over puddles and patches of road bearing a telltale rainbow sheen . 
`` Is n't that crazy dude It 's oil everywhere . 
And it 's thick over there , like we 're seeing in the Gulf . '' 
The video should be viewed with a healthy dose of skepticism . 
But it does raise an interesting question . 
Is such a thing even possible ? 
Sheppard goes on to discuss the possibilities , involving oil dispersants and toxic run-off , and partly concludes : '' -LRB- T -RRB- here are plenty of serious health concerns posed by the spill and the widespread use of dispersants that have nothing to do with oily rain . '' 
Some of the best reporting on the oil industry in the US comes from the Houston Chronicle unsurprising , given the concentration of oil companies in the region . 
Here 's an excellent comment piece by Loren Steffy , who does the sums on how much money BP was trying to save with its ill-fated , cheapskate cost-cutting measures at the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
All of $ 5m . 
Last week , I asked a half-dozen independent oil industry experts with experience in offshore drilling to estimate the costs of using more conservative methods . 
All but one agreed that the added costs would have been between $ 4.75 million and $ 5 million . 
The lone holdout said it might have cost $ 6.5 million . 
What 's that old saying about penny wise , pound foolish ? 
That might just be the most expensive $ 5m `` saved '' in the history of the oil business . 
There 's more details of the `` savings '' that BP made in a related blogpost here . 
Contrary to the news we reported here at 12.46 pm below , BP tells AFP : `` Tony Hayward remains chief executive and is not resigning . '' 
But everyone knows that Tony Hayward wo n't resign until shortly after the day the relief well starts working and stops the gushing oil . 
So , wild guess , about August 30 . 
Sorry Tony , too late for Cowes Week . 
One of the reasons why BP 's disasterous gusher has n't killed more marine life is that the Gulf of Mexico 's oxygen-depleted `` dead zone '' caused by algae blooming thanks to agricultural byproducts flowing out of the Mississippi River has already done that job . 
So here 's unrelated bad news from researchers , forecasting that the Gulf 's dead zone will be unusually large this year . 
It has nothing to do with the oil spill , but the spill may affect the dead zone . 
AP reports : University of Michigan ecologist Donald Scavia says the BP spill could make the dead zone larger because microbes gobble oxygen when consuming oil . 
But the effect could be offset if the oil limits algae growth . 
So it 's a lose-lose scenario , really . 
More talk about BP being broken up , reported by the FT 's useful Alphaville blog , from UniCredit , which thinks BP may have to split off its Gulf and US operations from the company 's operations in the rest of the world . 
That would put a firewall -LRB- or maybe a blowout preventer ? -RRB- 
around the profitable parts of the company : In our opinion , the creation of separate US and RoW -LRB- Rest of World -RRB- entities would increase transparency , thus allowing equity and corporate investors to decide BP 's fate . 
In more details : BP US would define the worst case scenario of asset seizure , ring fence liabilities and vulnerable assets , offer upside potential from leverage to the rump value . 
BP RoW would be able to operate , invest and pay dividends without the uncertainties surrounding the consequences of Macondo . 
This thought has been around for a while , and I 'd be surprised if some at BP are n't running the ruler over that thought to see if it fits . 
The TEDxOilSpill conference reconvenes after lunch you can watch the live video stream -LRB- and there 's really no substitute for watching -RRB- and some over-excitement causes minor embarrassment . 
Time magazine 's Ecocentric blogger , Bryan Walsh , who 's at the conference in Washington DC , writes : The big news came right before the lunch break . 
Francis Beland , a VP at the XPrize Foundation , announced that the group would be offering a $ 10 million XPrize for smart ideas on how to handle the oil spill . 
Except ... sort of not . 
A few minutes later , the X Prize people tweeted : Want to clarify that while at #TEDxOilSpill we have not launched a new $ 10 Million X PRIZE or Challenge for #oilspill clean up However , we are in the process of developing a multi-million dollar competition to help alleviate the effects of the #oilspill in the Gulf The latest speaker at TEDxOilSpill conference is Susan Shaw , a marine toxicologist and director of the Marine Environmental Research Institute . 
She 's a specialist in the effects of man-made chemicals in marine mammals along the Pacific and Atlantic coasts of the US . 
She tells the conference that she visited the Gulf in May , and actually got her feet wet or , as she puts it , was the only toxicologist `` dumb enough '' to go in the Gulf . 
As a result , she says , she got a nasty sore throat . 
In the course of testing herself , Dr Shaw says she discovered she had 113 different compounds and flame retardants in her own blood . 
Her descriptions of the effects of the toxic dispersants , such as Corexit , are highly disturbing . 
According to Dr Shaw , the combination of oil and Corexit creates an even more toxic cocktail . 
Meanwhile , dolphins and other marine life which breathe at surface will also suffer from ingesting chemicals on the surface , and are likely to develop chemical pneumonia , and organ and brain damage . 
One thing it 's worth mentioning is a very interesting piece in the FT , which suggests that even the two relief wells being drilled by BP are not as cut and dried as many assume : While those in the industry believe the relief wells will eventually stop the oil , they note the scale of the challenge . 
In addition to the depth , the original drilling process suffered several setbacks because of the difficult geology and pressures . 
`` Drilling a well thousands of feet into rock to hit a target no more than six inches -LRB- 15cm -RRB- wide is n't exactly a sure thing , '' says Guy LeBas , strategist at Janney Capital Markets . 
`` There remains a risk that the leak could continue past August . '' 
-LRB- Some people may not be able to access the article because of the FT 's paywall . -RRB- 
TEDxOilSpill is running behind schedule , but here 's Leroy Stick , the pseudonym behind the brilliant @BPGlobalPR Twitter account , which has been skewering BP 's lame attempts at public relations since the Gulf spill muscled its way onto the front pages . 
Stick starts off in the persona of `` Terry '' the BP PR guy and he 's heavily disguised , wearing a ski mask , wig , hat and scarf , with a voice modifier on the microphone . 
`` Terry '' says that BP has plenty more rigs in the Gulf to worry about , such as the Atlantis rig , and flashes up on screen the Instant Message from the MMS that granted it drilling permission : -LRB- BP -RRB- hey can we drill atlantis pls ? 
`` Terry '' then describes BP 's PR plan , which he calls `` the ex-wives strategy basically we treat reporters and the media like they are our ex-wives ... The point is , say what you need to say so you can go and enjoy your yacht . '' 
After `` Terry '' has done , Stick appears , still in a mask but without the other props and speaking in his own voice . 
I 'm here today because I started a Twitter account I acknowledge that 's ridiculous ... In terms of why I 'm wearing a mask it 's because my identity does n't matter . 
What most funny about @BPGlobalPr , Sticks says , is that so many people thought it was real to begin with . 
He finishes with some advice real advice for BP : A few words for BP , my dear friends . 
Forget your brand , BP , it 's over . 
Forget about fixing your brand and concentrate on fixing the Gulf . '' 
And that 's a good place to leave it . 
