cents Igor Sechin to meet BP boss today A heavily oiled bird struggles to get on to a boon , designed to hold back the spill from Barataria Bay in Louisiana Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP Russia 's top energy official said he expected BP chief executive Tony Hayward to step down soon , ahead of a meeting with him in Moscow later today . 
`` We know that Tony Hayward is leaving his position and he will introduce his successor , '' Igor Sechin told reporters ahead of his meeting with the embattled BP boss . 
Sechin , Russia 's deputy prime minister and the chairman of the country 's biggest oil company Rosneft , was responding to a question about what would be discussed at the meeting . 
BP denied that Hayward was close to resigning . 
`` Tony Hayward remains the chief executive of BP . 
There are no plans for him to resign , '' a spokeswoman said . 
Sechin is a close ally of Russia 's prime minister Vladimir Putin , and the leader at least unofficially of the Kremlin 's hardline siloviki faction made up of former KGB officers . 
A one-time Soviet military intelligence agent , Sechin presides over an impeccable network of sources , both formal and clandestine , all across the oil industry . 
His comments about Tony Hayward 's imminent departure from BP are unlikely to have been made by accident . 
The reports further boosted BP 's shares , already up this morning on hopes that the oil giant will be able to plug the oil leak in the Gulf of Mexico earlier than thought , to 311.9 p , a gain of 7.3 p or 2.4 % . 
On Friday the shares crashed to a 14-year low of 304p , down over 6 % . 
More than # 60bn has been wiped off the company 's market value since the rig explosion on 20 April . 
Hayward 's visit to Moscow is the first since the oil spill , and comes amid Kremlin worries over BP 's future . 
Its Russian venture TNK-BP is responsible for a quarter of BP 's global oil output . 
The Russian ambassador to Britain has said his government wants guarantees from BP that the venture would not be affected by its growing bill for the oil spill . 
BP said this morning it was now spending $ 100m -LRB- # 66m -RRB- a day on efforts to contain and clean up the massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , bringing its total bill to $ 2.65 bn so far . 
The oil giant spent $ 300m on containing the oil spill in the past three days . 
Its total bill is up from Friday 's figure of $ 2.35 bn . 
That includes the cost of trying to cap the well , clean up the environmental damage caused by the leak and pay compensation to those affected . 
BP has paid out more than $ 128m to fishermen and others . 
BP said today it remained on track to complete its relief well , which is designed to kill the leaking well , within the three months envisaged in May . 
But according to reports , the company is now hoping to seal the well by mid-July , rather than early August . 
There was more good news as the US National Hurricane Centre in Miami said that tropical storm Alex , which has pounded parts of Central America and is heading towards Mexico 's Caribbean coast , was likely to strike well away from the area where BP is trying to stop the oil leak . 
Barack Obama and David Cameron said that the oil giant should `` remain a strong and stable company '' after meeting to discuss the environmental disaster on the sidelines of the G20 summit in Toronto . 
