BAYOU LE BATRE , Alabama | Sat Jul 24 , 2010 12:25 pm EDT BAYOU LE BATRE , Alabama -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - British energy giant BP Plc is holding up payments to economic victims of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , Kenneth Feinberg , administrator of a $ 20 billion compensation fund , said on Saturday . 
`` I have a concern that BP is stalling claims . 
Yes , BP is stalling . 
I doubt they are stalling for money . 
It 's not that . 
I just do n't think they know the answers to the questions -LRB- by claimants -RRB- , '' Feinberg told reporters . 
Feinberg was speaking on the sidelines of a town hall meeting in southern Alabama at which fishermen and other business owners expressed frustration and anger at what they say is a slow and complex claims process that lacks transparency . 
Thousands of businesses in U.S. Gulf Coast states have been crippled by the oil spill , which began with an explosion and fire on a BP deepwater rig in April . 
Saturday 's remarks represented the first time that Feinberg , named last month to administer the fund , had accused BP of holding up compensation payments . 
BP set up the fund in June under pressure from President Barack Obama . 
`` After today there will be no more business as usual . 
I learned today the depth of frustration in people here on the coast , '' Feinberg told the meeting . 
Under the terms of the compensation fund , people have 90 days from when the undersea well is permanently sealed to file claims -- a limitation Alabama 's attorney general has said needs to be changed . 
Feinberg said he was taking the attorney general 's comments `` under advisement '' and said the 90-day deadline only applies to emergency funds . 
`` People are getting confused with the emergency checks , '' Feinberg said . 
There is also confusion about who is qualified to make a claim . 
Feinberg said he is still tweaking the rules for those who are indirectly affected by the oil spill , such as small businesses in the tourism industry . 
Real estate brokers and bankers are also asking to be compensated for lost sales related to the spill . 
Feinberg said he does not yet know whether they will be included . 
Addressing the frustrated crowd in Alabama , Feinberg said when he takes complete control over administering the fund `` we will not do anything behind your back . '' 
BP has been managing compensation so far but Feinberg is due to take full control by August 10 . 
Feinberg , an arbitration lawyer , also oversaw compensation for executives at companies that received federal bailout funds . 
Feinberg also dispensed hundreds of millions of dollars to victims of the September 11 , 2001 attacks on the United States . 
-LRB- Reporting by Leigh Coleman , writing by Matthew Bigg and Rachelle Younglai , editing by Will Dunham -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The US government is gouging a foreign business because it is foreign and like all US governments , they seek to jump start and propell their own eonmony on the back of foreign companies\/countries . 
To put it in Britspeak , `` rubbish '' . 
If BP is , by some miracle , found not be be negligent and responsible , they will have recourse in the courts to recover their money . 
If they did n't think it likely that they were liable , would they have committed to the 20B in the first place ; ME THINKS NOT ! 
To suggest that the US needs to gouge a piss-ant British company like BP to make our great economy hum is laughable . 
In terms of dollars , our competitive and productive companies have ruined far more substantial foreign competitors for meaningful business reasons -LRB- i.e. because they sucked -RRB- . 
We do n't need an excuse like foreign managerial incompetance , swaggering and complete and disregard for life and health of our citizens to beat our competition to a pulp . 
BP \* IS \* responsible , by law . 
They may have a claim against others , and they are free to pursue that claim , but they are on the hook for the cleanup costs , they 've agreed they are on the hook -- and the Republican apologists can lick BPs boots as much as they like . 
They are still going to pay . 
After all , George W Bush is n't there to make the taxpayers pay instead . 
We 've got a government of , by and for the people . 
The law will be adhered to and BP \* will \* pay . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
