\* 4,379 people infected with H1N1 flu in 29 countries \* Big increase in confirmed cases in United States \* First death reported in Costa Rica ZURICH , May 10 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - H1N1 flu has infected 4,379 people in 29 countries , the World Health Organisation -LRB- WHO -RRB- said on Sunday , increasing its count by almost a thousand in a day . 
The WHO tally tends to lag national reports but is considered more definitive . 
The U.N. agency said Mexico has reported 1,626 confirmed cases , up from 1,364 on Saturday , and repeated that 45 people have died there from the new flu strain that is a genetic mixture of swine , bird and human viruses . 
The Mexican government has said the worst is over and eased restrictions on commercial and public activity in the country that has been at the epicentre of the outbreak . 
The WHO 's latest flu tally increased the number of confirmed infections in the United States to 2,254 from 1,639 reported on Saturday , while the number of reported deaths remained at two . 
U.S. officials on Saturday said a man died from the new flu in Washington state last week , bringing the toll in the United States to three . 
WHO increased the number of infections in Canada to 280 , from 242 , and repeated one person had died there . 
It said one person had also died in Costa Rica , which had eight confirmed cases . 
European countries with cases confirmed in WHO laboratories include Spain -LRB- 93 -RRB- , Britain -LRB- 39 -RRB- , Germany -LRB- 11 -RRB- , Italy -LRB- 9 -RRB- , France -LRB- 12 -RRB- , Portugal -LRB- 1 -RRB- , Ireland -LRB- 1 -RRB- , Netherlands -LRB- 3 -RRB- , Austria -LRB- 1 -RRB- , Denmark -LRB- 1 -RRB- , Sweden -LRB- 1 -RRB- , Switzerland -LRB- 1 -RRB- and Poland -LRB- 1 -RRB- . 
The WHO also confirmed the following infections in the rest of the world : Israel -LRB- 7 -RRB- , New Zealand -LRB- 7 -RRB- , Brazil -LRB- 6 -RRB- , Japan -LRB- 4 -RRB- , Panama -LRB- 3 -RRB- . 
South Korea -LRB- 3 -RRB- , El Salvador -LRB- 2 -RRB- , Hong Kong , China -LRB- 1 -RRB- , Guatemala -LRB- 1 -RRB- , Colombia -LRB- 1 -RRB- Argentina -LRB- 1 -RRB- and Australia -LRB- 1 -RRB- . 
Evidence that the disease , popularly known as swine flu , has taken hold in communities outside the Americas would prompt WHO Director-General Margaret Chan to declare a full pandemic . 
Chan raised the global pandemic alert level last week to 5 out of 6 in response to the spread of H1N1 flu . 
Phase 5 means a pandemic is imminent . 
The WHO also repeated its guidance that international travel should not be restricted as a result of the outbreak . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
