Companies involved in the Gulf of Mexico oil spill are hiring a bevy of high-priced Washington lobbyists and consultants to help them weather the crisis , as investigations heat up and calls for policy changes intensify . 
BP , which has garnered the bulk of public attention and contempt for the spill , has assembled a formidable team of Democrats for its Washington lobbying , legal and public-relations offensive . 
There is Tony Podesta , who heads one of the District 's leading lobbying firms ; legal adviser Jamie Gorelick , a top Justice Department official in the Clinton administration now at the law firm WilmerHale ; Hilary Rosen , a former recording-industry lobbyist who heads the Washington office of the Brunswick Group , a public-relations consultancy ; and Michael S. Berman of the Duberstein Group , who was a longtime aide to former vice president Walter F. Mondale before becoming a lobbyist . 
Gorelick , who also served as a member of the 9\/11 Commission , proved critical in coaching the company during tense negotiations with President Obama over the creation of a $ 20 billion escrow fund for spill damages , according to several sources close to the talks . 
White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel said Sunday on ABC 's `` This Week '' that the administration `` forced '' BP to set up the fund and to intensify its efforts to contain the spill . 
But BP has not ignored the GOP , which has been a crucial ally on Capitol Hill in tamping down calls from liberal Democrats to permanently ban drilling or lift liability limits for the company . 
The London-based energy conglomerate recently hired Anne Womack-Kolton , who was a press secretary for former vice president Richard B. Cheney , to head its U.S. public-relations shop . 
And Brunswick has contracted GOP consultants Alex Castellanos and John Feehery to work on behalf of BP , sources familiar with the arrangements said . 
With nine investigations of the disaster underway , nearly every day has brought a new public-relations crisis . 
On Sunday , BP defended embattled chief executive Tony Hayward for taking a day off to watch a yacht race . 
Emanuel , in his remarks to ABC , criticized Hayward for a `` long line of PR gaffes and mistakes . '' 
BP executives , including Hayward , have appeared at nearly a dozen congressional hearings within the past month and faced the launch of civil and criminal inquiries by the Justice Department . 
As the company frantically tries to drill two relief wells to stop the flow , its hired guns are facing BP 's drilling partners in the high-stakes legal battle over who is to blame for the Deepwater Horizon disaster . 
`` This is just an avalanche that almost nobody could keep up with . 
It 's very , very challenging , '' said one BP adviser , who spoke on the condition of anonymity . 
The adviser added that until the well is capped , `` it is very difficult to get ahead of this . '' 
`` Normally , it 's an event that 's over that you 're trying to address , '' the adviser said . 
`` But this event is not over . '' 
Anadarko Petroleum , a Houston-based exploration firm with a 25 percent stake in the Deepwater Horizon well , employs former U.S. senator Don Nickles , the Oklahoma Republican , as its chief external lobbyist , records show . 
The company , which kept a low profile during the early weeks of the crisis , effectively declared war Friday by calling the tragedy `` preventable and the direct result of BP 's reckless decisions and actions . '' 
Nickles , who also represents Exxon Mobil , was traveling outside the country and could not be reached late last week . 
Another key player in the disaster is Transocean , a former U.S. firm now based in Switzerland , which leased the Deepwater rig to BP and ranks as the world 's largest owner of offshore drilling platforms . 
Last month , the company 's Houston affiliate hired lobbyists Bill Brewster , a former Democratic congressman from Oklahoma , and Jack Victory , previously an aide to Tom DeLay , the former House majority leader and Texas Republican . 
Transocean has also retained crisis lawyers John H. Beisner and Ivan A. Schlager of Skadden Arps to cope with the tide of government inquiries . 
Representatives declined to comment or did not respond to requests . 
Engineering giant Halliburton of Houston , which was in charge of cementing the well just before the April 20 explosion , has hired Jeffrey Turner of Patton Boggs to help handle legal and congressional inquiries . 
Other issues will continue to be handled by the firm 's existing stable of lobbyists and public-relations staff , according to spokeswoman Teresa Wong . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
