Sunday 26 April 2009 11.25 BST An electron micrograph of the A H1N1 swine influenza virus . 
Photograph : Centers for Disease Control\/Reuters It is a contagious respiratory disease of pigs caused by type A influenza viruses . 
Pigs are hit by regular outbreaks . 
There are many different types of swine flu and the current cases involve the H1N1 strain of type A influenza virus . 
How do humans catch it ? 
While people do not normally catch it , humans can contract the virus , usually if they have been in close contact with pigs . 
It is also possible for the constantly changing infection to spread from person to person , which has happened in the latest outbreak . 
Experts believe it spreads in the same way as seasonal flu - through coughing and sneezing . 
The symptoms of swine influenza in people are similar to the symptoms of regular human seasonal influenza infection and include fever , fatigue , lack of appetite , coughing and sore throat . 
Some people with swine flu have also reported vomiting and diarrhoea . 
What is the difference between swine flu , avian flu and the flu commonly seen in the UK during the winter ? 
Influenza viruses are commonly circulating in the human and animal environment , with different strains causing illness in humans , bird and pigs . 
Seasonal influenza is caused by viruses that are adapted to spread in humans . 
Humans have some natural immunity to the strains that are in common circulation , and this immunity can be boosted by immunisation with a vaccine . 
Avian influenza is caused by influenza viruses adapted for infection in birds . 
Similarly , swine influenza is caused by influenza viruses adapted for infection in pigs . 
These illnesses all cause the same respiratory symptoms in sufferers and can be passed between one another . 
More than 80 people have died and thousands made ill , in Mexico in particular , although cases have also been reported in the US and New Zealand . 
However , testing has shown that the antiviral drugs oseltamavir -LRB- Tamiflu -RRB- and zanamivir -LRB- Relenza -RRB- appear to be effective against the human swine influenza H1N1 strain , Why should we be worried about it ? 
The World Health Organisation warned the outbreak had `` pandemic potential '' and countries were advised to step up surveillance and preparation in case the infection spreads rapidly . 
Flu viruses have the ability to change and mutate , making it difficult for drugs manufacturers to ensure effective vaccines are available . 
The new version of the H1N1 virus is a mix of different animal and human versions of the disease . 
Mixing can lead to the development of changed viruses to which humans have little immunity . 
If the flu spreads over a wide geographic area and affects a large proportion of the population it goes beyond an epidemic and becomes a pandemic . 
According to the Health Protection Agency , an influenza pandemic is defined as a new or novel influenza virus that spreads easily between humans . 
When new influenza viruses are introduced into the environment , humans do not have any natural immunity to protect against them . 
Therefore , there is a risk that that new influenza viruses could develop into a pandemic if the virus passes easily from human-to-human . 
Will it spread to the UK ? 
It is too early to say whether the cases reported so far will lead to a larger outbreak , the HPA said . 
No cases have been reported in the UK although experts are monitoring the situation closely . 
Anyone who has recently returned from affected countries should consult a doctor if they notice flu-like symptoms . 
What is being done in the UK to prevent the infection ? 
The HPA said it is working with the UK government to review the current incident and any threat it poses to UK public health . 
It advised people to follow general infection control practices and good hygiene to reduce transmission of all viruses . 
This includes covering their nose and mouth when coughing or sneezing , disposing of dirty tissues promptly and carefully , washing hands frequently with soap and water and cleaning surfaces which are regularly touched . 
