This is Mr Obama 's fourth visit to the oil-affected area US President Barack Obama has said the oil disaster in the Gulf of Mexico will have the same impact on the US psyche as 9\/11 . 
The disaster will `` shape how we think about the environment ... for years to come '' , he told US website Politico . 
Mr Obama has arrived in Mississippi on his fourth visit to the affected area . 
He will also visit Alabama and Florida . 
Directors of oil firm BP are meeting to decide whether to suspend dividends as company shares have taken a tumble . 
BP saw its shares fall by some 9 % in afternoon trading in London . 
Earlier , BP said the cost of cleaning up the oil spillage had risen to $ 1.6 bn -LRB- # 1bn -RRB- . 
BP placed a containment cap on its damaged oil well earlier this month ; by last week , it was collecting about 15,000 barrels of oil a day . 
It is estimated that some 40,000 barrels -LRB- 1.7 million gallons -RRB- of oil a day might have been gushing out before the well was capped . 
On Tuesday , Mr Obama will address the US about the oil spill from the White House in a prime-time televised speech . 
A presidential aide said he would outline the next steps his administration would be taking over the spill . 
Mr Obama had previously visited Louisiana on three occasions . 
In his Monday visit , he is going to the other states affected by the crisis - Alabama , Mississippi and Florida . 
Mr Obama said the disaster would have a lasting impact on US environmental policy . 
`` In the same way that our view of our vulnerabilities and our foreign policy was shaped profoundly by 9\/11 , I think this disaster is going to shape how we think about the environment and energy for many years to come , '' he said in the Politico interview . 
Mr Obama vowed to `` move forward in a bold way in a direction that finally gives us the kind of future-oriented visionary energy policy that we so vitally need and has been absent for so long '' . 
`` One of the biggest leadership challenges for me going forward is going to be to make sure that we draw the right lessons from this disaster , '' he said . 
Mr Obama said he could not predict whether the nation would make a complete transition from an oil-based economy within his lifetime , but added that `` now is the time for us to start making that transition and investing in a new way of doing business when it comes to energy '' . 
`` I have no idea what new energy sources are going to be available , what technologies might drive down the price of renewable energies , '' he said . 
`` What we can predict is that the availability of fossil fuel is going to be diminishing ; that it 's going to get more expensive to recover ; that there are going to be environmental costs that our children our grandchildren and our great-grandchildren are going to have to bear . '' 
Attempt to cap oil leak The latest stage in BP 's efforts to contain leaking oil has involved lowering a cap onto the failed blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- valve system on the seabed . 
The cap sits on the BOP 's lower marine riser package -LRB- LMRP -RRB- section . 
First , the damaged riser - the pipe which takes oil from the well - was cut where it nears the seabed using a remotely-operated shear . 
This was completed at 1930 CDT on 1 June -LRB- 0030 GMT 2 June -RRB- . 
The next stage was for a diamond wire cutter to saw through the riser close to the LMRP . 
The blade got stuck and had to be removed but BP eventually cut through the pipe using giant shears manipulated by undersea robots -LRB- ROV -RRB- . 
After removing the pipe , the cap was lowered onto the LMRP enabling the leaking oil and gas to be funnelled to a drill ship on the surface . 
Latest estimates suggest more than half of the leaking oil is now being captured . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT Yahoo ! 
UK and Ireland BP to defend spill as Obama pitches greener U.S. - 1 hr ago CBS News Obama Seeks to Show Control of Oil Spill Crisis - 1 hr ago Channel 4 News BP downgraded as Obama eyes green agenda - 3 hrs ago Houston Chronicle White House : Obama ready to seize claims process - 4 hrs ago Chicago Tribune White House : Obama poised to take claims processing away from BP unless it changes system - 5 hrs ago The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
