BP has seen its shares fall by 9 % - as its directors discussed whether to suspend dividends to shareholders . 
The firm is under intense pressure from the US government , which wants BP to use the money to pay for the Gulf of Mexico clean-up . 
The cost of cleaning up the spillage has risen to $ 1.6 bn -LRB- # 1.1 bn -RRB- . 
Meanwhile , US lawmakers have accused BP of cutting costs and taking short cuts in the run-up to the explosion that led to the oil spill in the Gulf . 
The Democratic leaders of the US House Energy and Commerce Committee , Henry Waxman and Bart Stupak , wrote in a letter to BP boss Tony Hayward that the oil giant took shortcuts that `` increased the danger of a catastrophic well failure '' . 
Mr Hayward is due to appear before the committee on Thursday . 
BP is also facing a raft of lawsuits , some of which have already been filed . 
The latest announcement on costs does not include any estimate of potential legal bills . 
The company 's value has almost halved since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on 20 April and sank off the coast of Louisiana , killing 11 workers . 
Speaking to the House of Commons , Energy Secretary Chris Huhne said that BP `` remains a strong company with exceptionally strong cashflow and has the resources to put the right the damage . '' 
The BP board will discuss the dividend during a teleconference . 
No decision is expected to be announced immediately . 
BP bosses are due to meet President Barack Obama on Wednesday . 
Mr Obama wants BP to pay money into a ring-fenced fund to compensate those with `` legitimate '' damages claims . 
The company said on Monday that its response to the incident has so far cost $ 1.6 bn . 
Much of that is linked to the clean-up operation - but it said it had also paid 26,500 claims totalling $ 62m . 
Last week , President Obama accused the oil firm of `` nickel and diming '' Gulf residents while planning big dividends for investors . 
BP 's meeting comes as the president begins a two-day visit to the Gulf Coast to view the damage from the slick . 
BBC business editor Robert Peston has said it is looking increasingly likely that BP will stop paying dividends to shareholders - worth about # 1.8 bn per quarter - until it can quantify the final bill for the Gulf of Mexico spill and can `` prove to the White House that it can afford those enormous costs '' . 
The National Association of Pension Funds -LRB- NAPF -RRB- estimates that UK pension funds ' exposure to BP was only about 1.5 % of their total assets , which are worth more than # 800bn . 
But it said that the continued withholding of dividends would be a `` real issue '' . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
