Host | 12:20 UK time , Monday , 14 June 2010 Commentators reflect on the implications of the BP oil spill for British pensions , multinational companies and the Obama presidency . 
In the Observer , Ruth Sunderland reflects on BP 's involvement in British pensions and anticipates an increase in shareholder power : `` The average pension fund member is not an expert on finance , oil extraction or fund management . 
The system here , as in the US , relies on large shareholders to police boardroom behavior and risk-taking . 
We now know how utterly they have failed in that duty . 
Most institutions are strangely timid about confrontations with company managements , despite the billions of pounds under their control . '' 
`` That takes a fundamental restructuring of banking and economic outlook which I think neither the Office of Fiscal Responsibility nor the Future of Banking Commission gets , because of their London-centric outlook . '' 
In Bloomberg Businessweek , David Bogoslaw writes that `` the tide has shifted with respect to how much thought mainstream investors are giving to environmental , social , and corporate governance '' : `` The common denominator linking BP with these companies is growing clear : They all failed to anticipate risks that could threaten their business foundations . '' 
, Clive Crook argues that `` British complaints that BP is being ` scapegoated ' will not help reason to prevail '' : `` Imagine that Exxon Mobil had spent weeks dumping 30,000 barrels of oil a day -LRB- the newest estimate , double the previous one : seven Exxon Valdez spills so far and counting -RRB- on the British shoreline , with no end yet in sight . '' 
The New York Times editorial argues that the spill is `` a test of President Obama 's vision of government '' : `` He should have moved a lot faster to begin political and criminal investigations of the spill . 
If BP was withholding information , failing to cooperate or not providing the ships needed to process the oil now flowing to the surface , he should have told the American people and the world . '' 
In the Independent , Stephen Foley says that President Obama 's priority is to convince the nation that he is on top of the situation : `` Even the president 's friends have moved from expressing understanding and sympathy to outright criticism '' . 
See Also is a collection of the best of the web , including comment , newspaper editorials and analysis . 
For the latest updates across BBC blogs , These are some of the popular topics this blog covers . 
