By the CNN Wire Staff Alleged Libyan rape victim Eman al-Obeidy says she is excited and happy to be in the United States . 
Eman al-Obeidy arrives in New York , flies to her final destination She had been in a UN refugee facility in Romania since June 6 She thanks the U.S. government , secretary of state -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Eman al-Obeidy , who caught the world 's attention in March when she publicly accused members of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's forces of gang-raping her , has relocated to the United States . 
After spending 54 days in a U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees facility in Romania , Obeidy arrived in New York late Wednesday night , then boarded a flight to the destination where she will reside . 
She told CNN she is excited and happy to be in the United States , and passed her thanks to the U.S. government and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton , adding that she hopes to meet her someday . 
Other than her brief conversation with a CNN producer , she said she is not ready to speak to the media . 
Alleged Libya rape victim heads to Malta Qatar deports alleged Libyan rape victim Rape suspects accuse woman of slander The relocation is the latest leg in a harrowing odyssey that began March 26 , the day al-Obeidy stormed into the Rixos Hotel in Tripoli , Libya , where international journalists were having breakfast , and shouted that she had been taken from a checkpoint and held against her will for two days while being beaten and raped by 15 of Gadhafi 's militiamen . 
A scuffle ensued , and government officials and hotel staff whisked her outside to a car , and she was driven away . 
She was n't heard from for more than a week . 
In the days afterward , in interviews with CNN and other media , she spoke graphically of her ordeal and said she feared she would never feel safe in Libya . 
In May , she escaped to Tunisia with the help of a defecting military officer and Libyan rebels , and found temporary sanctuary in Qatar before being deported back to Benghazi in Libya in early June . 
She was granted asylum in the United States , and on June 6 arrived at the U.N. refugee facility in Romania . 
