July 29 , 2011 | By Hussein Saddique , CNN Malaak Al-Shami , who arrived in the U.S. on Thursday , was injured when a rocket hit her bedroom wall in Misrata , Libya . 
Five year-old Malaak Al-Shami arrived in the U.S. on Thursday evening to get fitted with a prosthetic leg after suffering injuries in Libya 's raging civil war . 
She landed at New York 's John F. Kennedy International Airport from Germany , the last part in a journey arranged by the Global Medical Relief Fund , a U.S. nonprofit . 
The group aids children who have lost the use of , or are missing , limbs or eyes . 
It says it is funded almost exclusively by donations . 
Malaak and her parents are being housed temporarily at The Ronald McDonald House of Long Island , which shelters families with sick children undergoing treatment at area hospitals . 
`` All the kids that come here , they 're bewildered , reluctant ; and once they 're here , they open up , '' said Elissa Mantonti , founder of the nonprofit . 
Malaak , who arrived in a wheelchair , initially appeared to be tired , but she quickly perked up when the other children housed in the facility came out to greet her . 
She got off her wheelchair and started exploring a toy room and play space with the other children . 
She quickly befriended three Iraqi boys who , like her , speak Arabic . 
They , too , were brought to the U.S. by the nonprofit . 
They suffered their injuries in Iraq 's continuing violence , according to Mantonti . 
Malaak 's rebel-controlled neighborhood in the western Libyan city of Misrata was attacked by pro-government forces on May 13 . 
A Grad rocket , which looks like an overgrown bullet about 9 feet long and 15 inches around , slammed into her bedroom wall and exploded , causing a gaping hole . 
Her 3-year-old brother and 1-year-old sister died in the attack . 
Malaak 's right leg was severed below the knee in the attack . 
According to Mantonti , her organization helped arrange for the family to be ferried by boat from Misrata , which is still under siege from pro-government forces despite recent rebel advances . 
From there , the family boarded a flight to Frankfurt , Germany , and continued onward to New York . 
The girl 's father expressed a mixture of hope and sadness upon his arrival in the U.S. `` I feel joy that my daughter will get treatment for her leg , '' Mustafa Al-Shami said . 
`` At the same time , I feel grief for the loss of my two other children . 
And , even though I feel that Malaak may never be the same after the attack , I 'm so happy that she will be able to walk and run again one day . '' 
She is scheduled for an initial fitting for a prosthetic leg at Shriners Hospitals in Philadelphia , with the fitting process taking up to seven weeks , Mantonti said . 
The family plans to return to Libya once the treatment is complete . 
