Two years on , the echoes of Vietnam are getting louder As the Iraq insurgency grows , so do the similarities with Indochina Friday 24 June 2005 00.02 BST A year after the Iraq insurgency began in 2003 , sceptics asked : `` Is this the new Vietnam ? '' 
At the time , many of us who pontificate about these things answered no. . 
Simplistic historical comparisons are almost always mistaken . 
It seemed premature to pass any melodramatic judgment about Iraq . 
Today , another year on , important differences persist . 
The US commitment in Iraq is much smaller than in Vietnam , and so is the casualty rate . 
Half a million Americans spent five years pursuing victory in Indochina , and five more disengaging . 
`` Only '' 140,000 US soldiers are deployed in Iraq . 
George Bush is likely to declare victory and start getting out , rather than escalate his war as Lyndon Johnson so disastrously did . 
Yet in significant respects Vietnam comparisons have become unavoidable . 
First , it is hard to believe that Washington 's objective - the creation of a viable local government and institutions to run Iraq as a unitary state - is achievable within an acceptable time-frame . 
Second , intelligence is proving a critical weakness . 
Recently , I heard an American commander deplore the extraordinary paucity of information on the ground : `` We spend all these billions of dollars on the CIA and your SIS , and we know next to nothing about what the other side is doing . 
We need less technology and more spies . '' 
Third , and most important , whatever military successes American forces achieve against the insurgents , there is no sign that they are winning the critical battle , for hearts and minds . 
The experience of ordinary Iraqis with the US military is at best alienating , at worst terrifying . 
There is no hint of shared purpose , mutual sympathy and respect between the armored columns rolling along the roads , intermittently belching fire , and the hapless mass of local people , caring only for survival . 
Last month , BBC4 screened an uncommonly vivid documentary , A Company of Soldiers , about a unit of the US 8th Cavalry fighting in Iraq . 
It brought all the old memories of Vietnam flooding back . 
These shaven-headed young philistines , fearful and even sometimes tearful , wore on their arms the horse 's head badge of a formation I knew in Indochina as the 1st Air Cavalry Division . 
As the 8th Cavalry 's armored vehicles roared forth on patrol , their occupants seemed infused with the same bewilderment about an unknown enemy that one remembered so well in the boondocks of Indochina . 
These soldiers ' view of Iraq was determined by what they could glimpse through their weapon slits , or at night on their infra-red screens . 
`` We 're trying to save their lives , '' said an exasperated officer about the Iraqis , `` but they 're not helping us by getting in our way . '' 
Soldiers quizzing local people through interpreters on a house search are young men from Ohio or Wyoming , Georgia or New Jersey . 
Yet cocooned in helmets and sunglasses , body armor and weapons that conceal almost every inch of flesh , they do not seem human at all . 
They resemble the robot legionaries of Darth Vader . 
The doctrine of `` force protection '' - making preservation of American lives the first mission priority - has made US forces unconvincing peacekeepers in Somalia and the Balkans , Vietnam and Lebanon . 
So , too , has insensitivity about the interests of the people they are allegedly fighting to help . 
There was a powerful scene in the TV film , in which a bored and jumpy soldier impulsively put a bullet into a dog . 
Its owner emerged from his house , bent over his pet 's corpse for a moment , then walked away , throwing up his hands in impotent misery . 
Whatever commanded that man 's loyalty six months ago , who can doubt which side he is on today . 
`` This is Indian territory ... If we meet the enemy , we shall overwhelm him with combat power , '' said the unit 's colonel , briefing his officers for an operation . 
After an emotional episode in which the whole regiment learned live on the radio about the death on patrol of one of its men , the colonel warned : `` I do n't want to hear anyone say anyone 's dead on the net , right ? '' 
The key imperative for every counter-insurgency campaign is to engage sympathetically with the population . 
`` The only time most Iraqis converse with Americans is when a civil affairs officer comes to pay out compensation for killing somebody in the family , '' a reporter who has spent several months in Iraq observed recently . 
American forces bring nothing in their wake that Iraqis can perceive as good or helpful , only a cacophony of military noise , spasmodic death and destruction . 
In all this , of course , the resemblance to Vietnam is striking . 
US commanders would say more emollient tactics are impossible in the face of an increasingly violent insurgency . 
The suicide bombers , rocket firers and snipers oblige US units tooperate as they do . 
If men went forth on foot , bare-headed , they would pay with their lives . 
This may be true . 
Yet the aim of all insurgencies is to provoke the ruling power to inflict such pain on the civilian population that it forfeits support . 
This is what happened so spectacularly in Vietnam , and what also seems to be happening in Iraq . 
For each of the 1,600 US soldiers killed since Bush declared `` significant combat operations '' at an end more than two years ago , some 20 Iraqis are estimated to have died . 
The warrior culture and firepower of the US army make it almost irresistible in a conventional war , yet disastrously ill-orientated for the sort of the struggle it faces today . 
The more domestic pressure Bush faces , the less inclined will be his commanders in the field to risk exposing their men in human contact with Iraqis . 
I wrote here a few weeks ago that it seemed premature to write off Iraq , even if the omens are grim . 
It remains the case that , however disastrously misconceived was the original decision to invade , to quit precipitately promises anarchy . 
In the US , disillusionment with the war has not - yet , anyway - developed into the sort of national rage that , during Vietnam , destroyed Lyndon Johnson . 
Yet the rival timetables , of rising anti-war feeling at home and lack of progress on the ground are plainly working against the Bush administration . 
Most experts suggest it will take five years , if not more , before Iraqi security forces can conceivably take over from the coalition . 
Who can believe that US opinion will tolerate a commitment on the present scale , a continuing drain of American casualties , for that long ? 
Sir Jeremy Greenstock , the former British senior representative in Iraq , thinks it somewhere between difficult and impossible to remedy US policy failures in the immediate aftermath of the war . 
He is probably right . 
Bush is still many months off being ready to quit and leave the country to resolve its own fate . 
But this is coming to seem the likeliest outcome . 
The most notable irony of a comparison between Indochina and Iraq is that American defeat in 1975 brought about Vietnamese unification , while American failure in Iraq will almost certainly precipitate that country 's fragmentation . 
Max Hastings 's book Warriors : Exceptional Tales from the Battlefield is available in hardback . 
