A history in the life of Karol Wojtyla 1920 : The Bolsheviks win civil war in Russia ; League of Nations is established 1931 : Gandhi leads Salt March in India 1939 : Germany invades Poland , Second World War begins 1946 : Winston Churchill makes ` Iron Curtain ' speech 1949 : Israel admitted to the new United Nations Karol Jozef Wojtyla , the second son of a retired army officer and tailor , and a schoolteacher , was born in Wadowice , a town of 8,000 Catholics and 2,000 Jews 35 miles south west of Krakow , in 1920 . 
Europe was still reeling from the First World War and the cataclysmic changes that the conflict had wrought . 
Poland was at war with a Russia that was racked by civil war . 
The forces that were to plague the twentieth century - chaos , totalitarian mass politics , ideology , racial hatred , violence - were in full cry . 
As a schoolboy , Wojtyla was largely oblivious to the tensions around him . 
In 1938 , he and his father moved to Krakow where he studied literature and philosophy . 
It was a time of cultural ferment as modernist art broadened from merely being the preserve of the avant garde and Wojtyla joined an experimental theater group . 
But no young Pole could remain oblivious to outside events . 
Over the next six years , Poland would suffer more than most nations from the mass ideologies gripping millions in Europe . 
Wojtyla escaped deportation and imprisonment by the German invaders by taking a job as a stone cutter in a quarry . 
In late 1942 , he began studying at an underground seminary in Krakow . 
Around him all was chaos . 
When the Germans began rounding up Polish men , Wojtyla fled to the archbishop of Krakow 's residence , where he remained until the end of the war . 
The future Pope was ordained in 1946 and the experience of war would mark him deeply . 
Both fascism and communism seemed products of the modern industrialised world , a world stripped of tradition , faith and the mystery of the church . 
Post-war , the Iron Curtain descended on Europe . 
To Wojtyla neither American-style capitalism nor communism could answer to the existential questions posed by the events of the previous decade . 
Only religion could preserve the world from a repeat of the nightmare of the Forties . 
The questions were about strategy , not conviction . 
In 1962 , the year Vatican Council II began the debates that would spark widespread reform of the church , Wojtyla was named Bishop of Krakow . 
He was an enthusiast for the changes , made an important intellectual contribution to the debate and , with his firsthand experience of repression in his native land , took special interest in religious freedom . 
The task he would pursue throughout his life , reconciling modernity with tradition , preserving the core message of the church without letting it become out of touch in a new , increasingly globalised world was taking shape . 
His appointment as cardinal in 1967 was welcomed by the communist Polish government who saw him as a useful moderate . 
He continued quiet , subtly subversive activities such as ordaining priests to work underground in Czechoslovakia , without angering the authorities . 
1985 : Mikhail Gorbachev calls for Glasnost and Perestroika , Ethiopian Famine On 16 October 1978 Wojtyla was elected the first non-Italian Pope since Adrian VI , a Dutchman , in 1523 . 
He took the name of his predecessor , John Paul , to symbolise his desire to consolidate the innovation of Pope John XXIII , who had presided over the Second Vatican Council , and the caution of Pope Paul VI . 
The years of physical and spiritual survival in testing circumstances had shown him the value of conservatism , yet his intellectual curiosity and his understanding of the huge resources now offered the church by modern communications , technology and travel convinced him that the church could not stand still . 
From the start the Pope was almost frenzied . 
In his first year as pontiff , he visited Mexico , Poland , the US and Ireland . 
In Poland , he received an ecstatic welcome from huge crowds , giving a massive boost to the trade union , Solidarity . 
His appointment came at a critical time . 
With the invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union and the election of Ronald Reagan in the US . 
the Cold War suddenly got much colder . 
Though lauded as a modernist because of his informal style and his willingness to intervene to influence current affairs , his conservatism was often evident too . 
In 1985 the Vatican declared that homosexuality was an ` intrinsic moral evil ' and must be seen as an ` objective disorder ' . 
In 1988 the Pope ruled out women becoming priests . 
His aim was to preserve the Catholic church by making it fitter for the modern world , not to change the church itself . 
And when in 1989 nearly 300 theologians signed The Cologne Declaration criticising the Vatican for its authoritarianism , Rome imposed an oath of obedience on anyone in authority in the church to the teachings laid down by the Pope and the college of bishops . 
1989 : The means of transmitting Aids is discovered , Berlin Wall falls . 
In his last years , the Pope again showed his extraordinary capacity to respond to world events . 
Shortly after the fall of the Berlin Wall , he held a historic meeting with the Soviet President , Mikhail Gorbachev , in the Vatican . 
In 1998 he made an astonishing trip to Cuba - continuing his lifelong work of subverting Communism in particular and totalitarianism in general - after which Fidel Castro agreed to allow Catholics to celebrate Christmas . 
He visited Jerusalem and made an unprecedented apology for the role the Catholic church had played in the persecution of the Jews , became the first Pope to enter a mosque , reached out to Orthodox Christians on trips to Greece and Armenia , and even publicly rebuked President Bush over the invasion of Iraq . 
Yet , though resolutely modern in style , the Pope continued to remain largely conservative in substance . 
His Veritatis Splendor encyclical claims there is a ` culture of death ' in which abortion , in-vitro fertilisation and embryology have become widely accepted . 
He condemned birth control as an ` intrinsic evil ' and condemned gay marriage . 
