` Crazy ' Iraqi spy was full of misinformation , says report Sunday 3 April 2005 02.26 BST An alcoholic cousin of an aide to Ahmed Chalabi has emerged as the key source in the US rationale for going to war in Iraq . 
According to a US presidential commission looking into pre-war intelligence failures , the basis for pivotal intelligence on Iraq 's alleged biological weapons programs and fleet of mobile labs was a spy described as ` crazy ' by his intelligence handlers and a ` congenital liar ' by his friends . 
The defector , given the code-name Curveball by the CIA , has emerged as the central figure in the corruption of US intelligence estimates on Iraq . 
Despite considerable doubts over Curveball 's credibility , his claims were included in the administration 's case for war without caveat . 
According to the report , the failure of US spy agencies to scrutinise his claims are the ` primary reason ' that they ` fundamentally misjudged the status of Iraq 's -LRB- biological weapons -RRB- programs ' . 
The catalogue of failures and the gullibility of US intelligence make for darkly comic reading , even by the standards of failure detailed in previous investigations . 
Of all the disproven pre-war weapons claims , from aluminium centrifuge tubes to yellow cake uranium from Niger , none points to greater levels of incompetence than those found within the misadventures of Curveball . 
The Americans never had direct access to Curveball - he was controlled by the German intelligence services who passed his reports on to the Defense Intelligence Agency , the Pentagon 's spy agency . 
Between January 2000 and September 2001 , Curveball offered 100 reports , among them the claims of mobile biological weapons labs that were central in the US evidence of an illicit weapons program , but subsequently turned out to be trucks equipped with machinery to make helium for weather balloons . 
The commission concluded that Curveball 's information was worse than none at all . 
` Worse than having no human sources , ' it said , ` is being seduced by a human source who is telling lies . ' 
Although the defector has never been formally identified , it appears he was an Iraqi chemical engineer who defected after UN inspectors left the country in 1998 . 
In the aftermath of the US-led invasion , Iraqis whom Curveball claimed were co-workers in Saddam 's alleged biological weapons program did not know who he was . 
He claimed he 'd witnessed a deadly biological weapons accident when he was not even in Iraq when it was meant to have happened . 
After September 2001 , his claims were given greater credibility despite the fact that he was not in Iraq at the time he claimed to have taken part in illicit weapons work . 
His information was central to an October 2002 National Intelligence Estimate that concluded Iraq ` has ' biological weapons , and was widely used by President Bush and Dick Cheney to make their case for war . 
It now appears there were problems with Curveball from the start , but the intelligence community was willing to believe him ` because the tales he told were consistent with what they already believed . ' 
In May 2000 doubts about his credibility surfaced when he was examined for signs that he had been exposed to biological agents . 
While the results were inconclusive , a US official was surprised to find Curveball had a hangover and said he ` might be an alcoholic . ' 
By early 2001 , the Germans were having doubts of their own , telling the CIA their spy was ` out of control ' . 
But warnings were dismissed . 
Intelligence analysts who voiced concern were ` forced to leave ' the unit mainly responsible for analyzing his claims , the commission found . 
At every turn analysts were blocked by spy chiefs and their warning never passed on to policy-makers . 
The commission 's report is unlikely to renew confidence in America 's intelligence network as it attempts to uncover evidence of WMDs in Iran and elsewhere . 
The report concludes that US intelligence agencies remain poorly coordinated , have resisted reform and produce ` irrelevant ' work . 
Dozens of insurgents attacked Abu Ghraib prison outside Baghdad yesterday , detonating two suicide car bombs and firing rocket-propelled grenades at US forces before the assault was repelled . 
At least 20 US soldiers and 12 detainees were wounded in the fighting , which lasted around an hour . 
