Fury at ` shoot for fun ' memo Outburst by US security firm in Iraq is attacked by human rights groups Sunday 3 April 2005 02.26 BST One of the biggest private security firms in Iraq has created outrage after a memo to staff claimed it is ` fun ' to shoot people . 
Emails seen by The Observer reveal that employees of Blackwater Security were recently sent a message stating that ` actually it is `` fun '' to shoot some people . ' 
Dated 7 March and bearing the name of Blackwater 's president , Gary Jackson , the electronic newsletter adds that terrorists ` need to get creamed , and it 's fun , meaning satisfying , to do the shooting of such folk . ' 
Human rights groups said yesterday that the comments raised fresh questions over the role of civilian contractors operating in Iraq and other world flashpoints . 
` We are very concerned about the increased use of security companies , there needs to be more inspection and regulation of these companies , ' said a spokesman for Amnesty International . 
Blackwater has already been the subject of lobbying efforts to introduce tighter regulations on private military operations in Iraq . 
It is one of the fastest growing private security firms in the world , and achieved global prominence last year when four of its men were ambushed by a crowd of Iraqis and their bodies mutilated and dragged around the Iraqi city of Falluja . 
The controversial wording of the Blackwater bulletin appears to be an attempt to criticise the ` righteous outcry ' that followed a recent statement from a senior US Marine general who , on returning home from Iraq , claimed it was ` fun to shoot some people ' . 
While the views of Lieutenant-General James Mattis drew a frosty response from the Pentagon , others said his observations reflected the harsh realities of war . 
Blackwater 's entry to the debate appears to suggest that satisfaction can be drawn from combat if ` the bad guys ' get what they deserve . 
` All of us who have ever waited through an hour and a half movie , or read some 300 pages of a thriller , to the point when the bad guys finally get their comeuppance know this perfectly well , ' says the opening address of the six-page bulletin , which The Observer believes to be authentic . 
Called Blackwater Tactical Weekly , the newsletter was sent to environmental activist Frank Hewetson as well as the firm 's staff . 
Last year Hewetson was offered a job by Blackwater with a salary of up to # 85,000 plus health benefits to work with its ` military crisis operations support team . ' 
Although he declined , Hewetson remains on the firm 's database . 
The 7 March bulletin also features a plug for Blackwater 's training academy which offers potential recruits an eight-week course that includes training in various firearms , close quarter protection , physical security as well as ` ground fighting . ' 
Among its various roles in post-war Iraq , Blackwater has guarded provincial outposts for the Iraqi coalition provisional authority and had the contract to keep former chief US envoy Paul Bremer alive . 
The company has been praised for its role in the rescue of a wounded soldier in Najaf . 
Defense experts have described Blackwater as a major player in the field of private arms with an important role to play in aiding American security in the war on terror . 
Other Blackwater emails seen by The Observer , from last year , indicate the large market for civilian contractors in war zones . 
` We will probably require at least 3000-4000 professionals above and beyond what we have in the Blackwater employment and resource system , ' states one . 
There are thought to be as many as 20,000 private enterprise soldiers in Iraq , with the US military an advocate of their use . 
This system allows governments to save money on paying permanent soldiers , and offers the political bonus that it is unlikely to attract as much media attention as conventional troops . 
The Observer made numerous attempts to contact Blackwater 's head office in North Carolina , but no calls were returned . 
There is , however , no evidence that company staff have ever shot people for fun . 
The firm is understood to have disciplined and well-trained recruits . 
A number are thought to be elite soldiers who have retired from military special-operations units . 
Blackwater also offers extensive psychological counselling programs to combat potentially traumatic battlefield stress . 
