BEIJING\/KHARTOUM | Fri Jun 24 , 2011 12:48 pm BST BEIJING\/KHARTOUM -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Sudan 's war crime-indicted president will seek to soothe his most powerful ally 's worries about its investments when he visits China next week , days before Sudan 's oil-rich south splits from the north . 
That July 9 secession is the outcome of a January referendum that will see President Omar Hassan al-Bashir and his government in the northern capital Khartoum lose three-quarters of the country 's current oil output , roughly 500,000 barrels per day . 
Sudan is one of China 's largest foreign supplier of crude oil , making Beijing all the more keen to ensure a smooth transition along the volatile north-south border and that supplies are not interrupted . 
`` Everyone knows the elephant in the room is China 's investment in Sudan . 
The security of its interests is a big concern for China , '' said He Wenping , an Africa expert at top government think tank the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences . 
Khartoum seized the main town in the north-south border region of Abyei on May 21 , raising fears the two sides could return to conflict . 
But Sudan 's military and the south 's Sudan People 's Liberation Army agreed this week to withdraw forces in favor of Ethiopian peacekeepers . 
China has made a general policy of not getting involved in other countries ' domestic affairs , but with the security of its oil imports on the line , China says it has already been a force for stability in Sudan . 
China 's special envoy for Africa Affairs and former envoy to Sudan 's conflict-torn Darfur region , Liu Guijin , told reporters on Thursday that China had `` done a lot of work to persuade '' the north to implement the peace agreement and referendum . 
Issues concerning Sudan 's security would certainly be on the agenda during Bashir 's trip , which begins on Monday , he added . 
`` But no matter how strong the outside pressure , no one can replace the Sudanese parties in making a decision , '' Liu said . 
Fouad Hikmat , a Sudan analyst with the International Crisis Group , said Khartoum was eager to ensure that its relations with China were solid after the split and would likely seek to reassure Beijing that its investments were safe . 
`` He 's going to have to go and tell China that these investments are not going to be thrown out . 
They need to maintain friends at the international level , and therefore China is extremely important , '' Hikmat said . 
The north and south have yet to come to terms on how to manage the oil industry after the split , but China has been increasingly engaging with leaders from south Sudan , where it has opened a consulate and jumped into several projects . 
Much of the oil comes from the south , but most of the refineries , pipelines and ports are in the north . 
`` China has a half a dozen projects in the south of Sudan , and as it is fully capable of playing on both sides of the street , '' said Barry Sautman , a professor at Hong Kong University of Science & Technology and an expert on China 's role in Africa . 
China -- Khartoum 's top arms supplier -- has been criticised by human rights groups ahead of the visit , who have called on Beijing to arrest Bashir for outstanding war crimes charges against him . 
China has shrugged off these concerns , saying it has every right to invite the head of a state with which it has diplomatic relations . 
China is in any case not a signatory of the International Criminal Court 's -LRB- ICC -RRB- Rome Statute under which Bashir faces an arrest warrant for crimes against humanity and war crimes in Darfur . 
Roger Middleton , a researcher at London 's Chatham House think tank , said Bashir 's connections with major powers like China were all the more important because of the charges . 
`` Politically , it 's very important for Bashir to go abroad to visit a major power . 
This is certainly more important for Bashir than it is for the Chinese , '' he said of the trip when Bashir will meet his counterpart , President Hu Jintao . 
Middleton said there was evidence China had in the past pressed Khartoum to `` behave differently , '' but it was unlikely Bashir would get a dressing-down by Chinese officials . 
The charges against Bashir have not stopped him from crossing borders in the past and other counties , such as India , have oil interests in Sudan , making him far from a pariah . 
Still , China is an obvious ally for Sudan as a buffer against international pressure because of its U.N. Security Council veto power and its role as Sudan 's top trade partner . 
Western powers may be less inclined to look the other way over the ICC arrest warrant , but analysts say the United States , also not party to the Rome Statute , and other countries have eased pressure in hopes the secession will go peacefully . 
`` China is not a member of the ICC and has no legal obligation to implement an ICC decision , '' envoy Liu said . 
-LRB- This story corrects June 23 story to include missed word in headline -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
