KATHMANDU | Fri Jun 24 , 2011 10:17 am BST KATHMANDU -LRB- Reuters Life ! -RRB- 
- The first ever shelter for ostracized gays has opened in Nepal -- a growing sign , say activists , that the impoverished , conservative Himalayan nation is becoming more aware of the rights of its gay population . 
Homosexuality is taboo in this majority-Hindu country and while there are no specific laws against gays or same-sex marriages , `` unnatural sex '' can result in up to one year in jail . 
Run by Nepal 's leading gay rights group , the Blue Diamond Society -LRB- BDS -RRB- , the home and adjoining hospice open to gays , lesbians , bisexuals and transgenders provides shelter to people who have HIV\/Aids and have been abused and abandoned by their families . 
`` These people need care and are very late with the treatment . 
They need to be looked after in their last days of life and even to perform their last rites after death , '' said Sunil Babu Pant , BDS 's founder . 
`` The families do n't even -LRB- want to -RRB- receive their dead bodies . 
So the BDS organizes their burial or cremation . '' 
The shelter , tucked away in a quiet residential area in the outskirts of the Nepali capital , Kathmandu , can accommodate up to 30 people who receive free medical care from doctors , as well as a place to stay . 
There is no sign board outside the brick-walled compound -- a deliberate attempt , say caretakers , to avoid local attention in a country where many will not even rent their premises to homosexuals . 
People who visit the shelter are reluctant to talk about their problems , but happy for the support . 
`` It is a good place for people like us and we get good treatment here , '' said 27-year-old Raju Baral , who tested positive for HIV in 2007 and left home then so he would n't be an embarrassment for his family . 
Since coming to the shelter , he has gained weight and his health has improved , he added . 
Nepal , famous for being the home of Mount Everest , is emerging from a decade-long civil war which ended in 2006 and has become more gay-friendly in recent years . 
In 2007 , the Supreme Court ordered the government to end discrimination against gays and guarantee sexual minorities the same rights as other citizens . 
Gay beauty contests are held and same-sex marriages are now taking place . 
Earlier this week , two American women tied the knot as a Hindu priest chanted Vedic hymns in a public religious ceremony outside a major shrine near Kathmandu . 
There is even a travel agency run by gay men in Nepal , which offers same-sex wedding packages to the world 's tallest peak , as well as to Lumbini , the birthplace of Buddha . 
A specially elected assembly is now currently drafting the country 's first constitution since the abolition of its monarchy in 2008 , which is expected to guarantee the rights of marginalized groups , including gays and lesbians . 
`` I think after the restoration of democracy there is a big demand for inclusion of various groups , including the sexual minority , '' said lawyer Sabin Shrestha , who works on gay rights issues . 
`` Existence of sexual minorities is a reality and we are more and more positive toward their issues compared to earlier days . '' 
