Mr Erdogan has become increasingly critical of Syria in recent months Turkey has stepped up its pressure on neighbouring Syria over the crackdown on protests by the Damascus government . 
Turkish PM Recep Tayyip Erdogan said the future could not be built on `` the blood of the oppressed '' , and condemned attacks on Turkish missions in Syria . 
Meanwhile , Turkey 's energy minister announced that joint oil exploration projects with Syria had been halted . 
Damascus is also facing increasing pressure from the Arab League , which has suspended its membership . 
On Monday , King Abdullah of Jordan became the first Arab leader to openly urge Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to stand down . 
The UN says more than 3,500 people have died since the start of the protests against President Assad in March . 
The Syrian authorities blame the violence on armed gangs and militants . 
In an apparent show of goodwill on Tuesday , the authorities freed 1,180 people who had been arrested during protests , Syrian state media reported . 
The state news agency said those released had no `` blood on their hands '' . 
The release of prisoners is among the demands of the Arab League , which is due to meet again on Wednesday . 
Jonathan Head BBC News , Istanbul The Turkish prime minister is habitually outspoken . 
Even so , his latest rebuke of President Assad - a man he considered a personal friend until a few months ago - was dramatic . 
Relations between the two countries fell further over the weekend , when pro-Assad crowds attacked Turkish diplomatic missions in Syria . 
Turkey has now stopped co-operation on energy projects , and says it is considering further sanctions which would not hurt ordinary people . 
Turkish business leaders say trade , which was worth about $ 2.5 bn last year , has all but stopped . 
Along with the Arab League , Turkey is now trying to plan for a transition to a post-Assad era , through discussions with Syrian opposition figures in exile . 
That transition , though , is proving hard to predict , with clashes increasing between the government and opposition groups inside the country . 
On Monday , Mr Erdogan - who once cultivated close ties with Syria - said Ankara had abandoned hope that Bashar al-Assad would respond to international demands to stop using violence . 
`` Bashar Assad should see the tragic ends of the ones who declared war against their own people , '' Mr Erdogan told MPs of his AK Party . 
`` I want to remind him that future can not be built on the blood of the oppressed . '' 
History , Mr Erdogan added , would `` will mark these leaders as the leaders who feed on blood '' . 
Turkish Energy Minister Taner Yildiz announced that Ankara had shelved plans for Turkey 's TPAO petroleum company to explore oil with Syria 's state oil company . 
Mr Yildiz also threatened to stop Turkey 's electricity exports to Syria . 
`` Right now , we are providing electricity '' to Syria , Mr Yildiz said . 
`` If -LRB- Syria -RRB- continues on this course , then we might have to reconsider these decisions . '' 
The White House said it welcomed the `` strong stance Turkey has taken '' . 
`` Turkey 's comments today further point to the fact that President Assad is isolated , '' President Obama 's deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes told reporters . 
The moves follow attacks on Turkish diplomatic missions in Damascus and the Syrian cities of Aleppo and Latakia by supporters of Mr Assad at the weekend . 
The attackers expressed anger at Turkey 's decision to support the Arab League 's decision to suspend Syria . 
Turkey is not a member of the league , but its foreign minister is to meet his Arab League counterparts during Wednesday 's meeting in Morocco . 
The Syrian government condemned its suspension as `` shameful and malicious '' , and accused other Arab countries of conspiring with the West to undermine the regime . 
In his interview with the BBC on Monday , King Abdullah said that if he were in Mr Assad 's position , he would make sure that `` whoever comes behind me has the ability to change the status quo '' . 
He urged President Assad to begin talks on an orderly transfer of power . 
The call came on one of the bloodiest days since the unrest began . 
Activists said at least 70 people were killed in fighting that reportedly included a gun battle between security forces and army defectors in the restive southern province of Deraa . 
Many Western powers have urged President Assad to stand down . 
However Russia has so far refused to do so . 
On Tuesday , Syrian opposition leader Burhan Ghalioun had talks with officials in Moscow but said he had failed to convince them to change their position . 
Are you in Syria ? 
Do you have friends or family there ? 
You can send your comments to the BBC using the form below : If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
