In recent weeks , my family and I have carefully observed the bailouts that have been provided to , or requested by , various companies since the financial crisis began . 
After much deliberation with our accountants and financial advisers , we have concluded that , in order to prevent a deeper recession and turn around the U.S. economy , the federal government needs to give the next bailout package directly to us . 
The U.S. government is currently considering a variety of economic rescue strategies , including some that would ultimately cost as much as $ 1.2 trillion , or approximately $ 4,000 for every man , woman and child in the United States . 
Accordingly , for a family of 10 such as ours -LRB- three sons , three grandchildren and two daughters-in-law -RRB- , this means a $ 40,000 bailout . 
To reduce administrative costs , instead of writing 10 separate checks , the Treasury can send it all to me . 
As head of the household , I can be trusted to make sure every member of our family gets his or her fair share . 
Officials and taxpayers alike can rest assured that my family members will monitor me much more directly than any government oversight committee would ever monitor J.P. Morgan Chase , Citibank , Bank of America and the other big winners of the recent bailout lottery . 
We deserve these funds for the same reasons that the big Wall Street firms and the giant automakers do . 
First , we do not believe in government handouts . 
-LRB- Evidently , this is the first requirement for any entity that intends to receive a government handout . -RRB- 
Like the previous recipients of bailout funds , we have made a living in the marketplace and never received federal money . 
In fact , we have argued for years that government should not meddle in the economy but should leave us alone . 
So , now that the economy is in crisis , we therefore deserve to be first in line . 
Second , money for our family will have a positive ripple effect throughout the economy . 
If we received a generous bailout package , we would certainly purchase a new and more fuel-efficient car . 
We would also commit to spending the entire amount on other much-needed consumer and service items that will sustain many other businesses . 
For example , we would act on our plans to remodel our backyard patio . 
Dollar for dollar , the economic stimulus provided to our family would have far-reaching effects . 
Third , offering our family a generous financial package would restore confidence in the economy . 
We have lived in our community for many years and have a large and influential circle of friends and professional colleagues . 
We recently asked many of these upstanding people how they would respond if our family declared bankruptcy . 
Without exception , our personal friends and business associates stated that they would be very upset . 
Conversely , if we received a bailout , they affirmed that their faith in the economy would be strengthened , and that they , too , would seek bailout money to maintain their current levels of spending . 
Fourth , supporting our family would please a significant number of Democrats and Republicans . 
We have friends in both parties and have contributed to candidates on both sides of the aisle . 
So an early and generous response to our financial hardship would trigger bipartisan support . 
In closing , I want to stress that our family would expect to be held accountable for every dollar . 
Once we receive a U.S. Treasury check , we promise to spend it quickly and efficiently in 2009 and will account for those expenditures on our 2010 tax forms . 
We firmly believe that an upturn in the economy will follow within 12 to 18 months . 
Note to the Obama administration : If the economy does n't respond , it does not mean that the decision to bail out our family was wrong . 
It simply means the amount was too small . 
But we patriotically pledge not to request additional financial support until 2010 . 
Mark Gerzon , a distinguished fellow at the EastWest Institute , is the author of `` Leading Through Conflict . '' 
