By Larry Shaughnessy , Pentagon Producer Maj. Kenneth Harney is welcomed home at RAF Lakenheath , England , on March 26 . 
Two Air Force fliers went down over Libya on March 21 Both were rescued , with the military keeping quiet on details Now , an Air Force video from their welcome-home ceremony provides some of the story `` You feel the weight of ... the entire military ... making sure you get home , '' says one Washington -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- For hours on March 21 , U.S. Air Force Maj. Kenneth Harney of Lexington , Kentucky , and Capt. Tyler Stark of Littleton , Colorado , were the focus of nearly every U.S. service member in the Mediterranean Sea region . 
Nearly a dozen aircraft , a platoon of Marines and even Libyan civilians worked to rescue Harney and Stark after their F-15 crashed in eastern Libya . 
Most details about the mission , including their names , were a closely held secret by the military . 
But earlier this month , with little notice , their identities and details of their rescue came out during a welcome-home ceremony at their air base . 
For the first time , the men spoke publicly to a small group of friends , family and Air Force personnel . 
The Air Force public affairs office posted pictures and video of the event on its official website , even after U.S. military public affairs officers involved in Operation Odyssey Dawn in Libya told CNN their names would never be made public . 
`` You feel the weight of not only the Air Force , but the entire military , focusing on you , making sure you get home , '' Stark said recently in a video prepared by the Air Force . 
At some point they ran into trouble . 
U.S. F-15 fighter jet crashes in Libya After the ejection , Harney -- `` Meso '' to his fellow fliers -- and `` Mask '' Stark became separated . 
`` When you find yourself alone , and you 're isolated , in a country where there 's hostiles , you are scared , '' said Harney , a veteran of both the Afghan and Iraq wars . 
Stark was found by Libyan civilians who protected him from possible retaliation by forces loyal to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi , and eventually he was taken safely back to Europe . 
Details of how he was taken out of Libya have yet to be disclosed . 
Harney 's rescue came more quickly . 
He stayed in communications with another F-15 pilot still in the air over Libya . 
Eventually an MV-22 Osprey carrying Marines who were part of a Tactical Recovery of Aircraft and Personnel , or TRAP , team landed near his position . 
`` As that back door opened , I see a group of young Marine recon units jump out , and that was probably the best feeling I 've ever felt in my entire life , '' Harney said . 
He was flown to the USS Kearsarge for a quick medical check then a short time later sent home with Stark to RAF Lakenheath , where friends and family welcomed them with hugs and a rendition of `` God Bless America . '' 
