BP fights to stop the Gulf of Mexico spill and salvage its reputation With millions of gallons of oil a day still polluting the sea , the company faces an # 18bn bill and a tarnished image Floating booms are prepared for launch to protect vulnerable marshlands . 
Photograph : John Moore\/Getty Images Late last Saturday afternoon , the helicopter reeled around for one last low sweep over the wetlands in the Mississippi delta . 
That was when Melanie Bell , normally a manager for BP 's North American gas business in Houston , spotted a small oily sheen on the water . 
It was approaching a narrow stretch of beach at the end of a spit at South Point , near where the Mississippi river meets the Gulf of Mexico . 
Oil from the Deepwater Horizon disaster had finally hit land . 
On Monday , BP 's staging post at the nearby tiny port of Venice swung into action . 
Volunteers wearing chemical protection suits waded into the water and combed the beach to begin the clean-up . 
Not much was found that day , but on each of the following two days , they collected about 450 large sacks of oil , which had emulsified mostly into dime-sized tar balls , and of oily debris . 
Flying over the same spot again a few days later , Commander Jason Tieman , a reservist in the National Coastguard , explains over the thudding din of the 19-seater Sikorsky helicopter that the big problem was spotting the oil : `` It 's very hard to see from the air . 
You really need to be on the ground or in a boat . 
Even then , sometimes you might walk right on top of it , thinking it was seaweed . '' 
The former tug boat driver was working for a software firm in Houston when he was drafted into the operation . 
He adds that the staging post had ordered binoculars because there were n't enough to go around : `` They would be useful to spot wildlife . '' 
On the ground , relief workers are erecting miles of yellow inflatable booms which snake around the edge of the maze of waterways and tiny islands stretching inland as far as the eye can see . 
Nearby are two wildlife refuges where flamingos and pelican nest . 
Some 400 miles to the west , at BP 's US headquarters in Houston , Texas , the third floor is a makeshift crisis center . 
Five hundred staff from BP and other companies are directing efforts to stem the estimated 5,000 barrels of oil spewing each day from the stricken pipeline on the seabed . 
The atmosphere on Wednesday night in the dimly lit `` mission control room '' a reference to Nasa , which is also based in Houston is tense . 
Half a dozen engineers huddle in front of one of eight video screens on the wall . 
It is beaming live images taken by one of the 12 robots trying to fix the leaks on the seabed . 
A metal claw is grabbing at a mess of wires around a yellow pipe on the blow-out preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- , the vital piece of kit which is designed to shut down a dangerous well , but inexplicably failed . 
An engineer explains that the robot is attempting to reinstall the `` brain '' of the BOP so that it can reactivate the locked valves to cut off the flow of oil . 
Suddenly , a voice comes on the line . 
An engineer identified only as Geoff , on a ship directly above the pipeline and operating the robot remotely , asks : `` Do you want to try it again ? '' 
The lead engineer speaks into the microphone in front of the screen : `` A couple of experts are saying here it will not fit . '' 
Geoff replies : `` We can just spin it . '' 
mission control : `` Roger that . 
OK , that 's what we 'll do . '' 
It 's painfully slow and complex work which has never been attempted before in these conditions : the small box-shaped robots , equipped with two claws , are operating in almost freezing water 5,000 ft below the surface , in pitch black and strong currents . 
Reactivating the BOP in this way could take 10 days and there 's no guarantee it will work . 
BP , which was showing off its oil spill efforts to journalists and US politicians last week , wants the world to know the lengths to which it is going to tackle the spill . 
The statistics , which the company updates most days , are certainly impressive : 2,500 BP staff from around the world have been drafted in , 200 government , fishing and environmental organizations are also involved in the effort , along with 160 different companies . 
The terms BP uses are deliberately militaristic , to signal its serious intent : an `` armada '' of 200 vessels is skimming the water near the source of the spill , then processing and removing the oil . 
Hercules transporters and dozens of other planes are also `` bombing the hell out of it -LRB- the spill -RRB- with dispersant '' . 
BP has 15,000 `` armed '' fishermen and other volunteers closer to shore on its payroll . 
BP chief executive Tony Hayward admits to resorting to Churchillian language : he describes a battle on three fronts the subsea -LRB- at the source of the spill -RRB- , the surface and the `` enormous defense of the beaches operation '' . 
BP 's US headquarters are on the `` energy corridor '' , a freeway on the edge of Houston where the corporate headquarters of Shell , ExxonMobil and ConocoPhilips , among others , are based . 
The spill is n't just bad news for BP : it is likely to result in tougher regulations on deepwater drilling in the Gulf of Mexico for everyone . 
BP faces an onslaught from the media and US politicians ; last week senators mauled the company , along with its contractors on the Deepwater Horizon rig Transocean and Halliburton during hearings into the disaster . 
Big Oil is pulling together to help out BP , according to Kent Wells , head of the communications effort at the crisis center . 
`` It 's unbelievable teamwork between companies which are normally competitors but are now working together , '' he says . 
`` We all know there is finger-pointing going on in Washington , but there 's no finger-pointing going on here . '' 
Friends from more unlikely quarters have also emerged . 
Members of the public have been emailing US journalists covering the story offering their help . 
James Cameron , the director of movies Avatar and Titanic , also called BP 's press office , offering to lend the company his fleet of manned submarines . 
He used the submarines to take 3D images of the Titanic shipwreck to help him research his film possibly an ominous sign for BP , which politely declined the offer . 
Hayward claims not to have read any newspapers or watched the news since he flew out to the US two days after the accident to oversee the operation : `` I do not want my judgment to be clouded by what is being written about me . '' 
He ca n't be blamed for wanting to stay focused . 
He needs to : some estimate that the spill could cost BP $ 23bn -LRB- # 18bn -RRB- and tarnish its reputation for years . 
He flew out to the US two days after the accident , and has only been back to the UK for 36 hours to pack more bags . 
He promises to remain in the US until the spill is fixed . 
The Observer met him on Wednesday evening , at the end of a typically long day . 
His first meeting had taken place at 6am , when he led a tour of the Houston crisis center for US interior secretary Ken Salazar and energy secretary Steven Chu . 
Most days he also tours the dozen or so staging posts and command centres dotted around the coast . 
Hayward , who stays in a nearby hotel , said most nights he slept five or six hours each night , but added : `` Some nights I 've not slept very well . 
Not -LRB- because I was -RRB- worrying but thinking how we can stay ahead of it -LRB- the spill -RRB- . '' 
One BP colleague said : `` He has balls of steel . '' 
Hayward , who has a degree in geology , mounted a robust defense of BP 's recent safety record . 
While conceding that , with hindsight , BP should have had a contingency plan in place for dealing with such an accident , he insisted : `` Our safety track record in the Gulf of Mexico is the best in the industry . '' 
He was also surprisingly confident that BP would be able to control the spill and limit the damage : `` The containment exercise on the surface is proving to be extraordinarily successful . 
Through a combination of dispersant , booming , skimming and burning , we are containing the spill . '' 
Asked how BP could ever quantify the damage caused by the spill , he just says `` we will measure it '' , without saying how . 
Jacqueline Savitz , a scientist specialising in marine biology and environmental toxicology at campaign group Oceana , says the long-term effects of the spill may never be known . 
For example , Atlantic Blue Fin tuna are currently spawning in the Gulf of Mexico only one of two places in the world where this happens and the larvae are very sensitive to higher levels of toxins . 
The effects are long term , affecting the reproductive abilities of the fish , she says . 
To date , the recorded impact on wildlife has been tiny , which BP attributes to the fact that it has prevented most of the oil hitting land . 
According to the US Fish and Wildlife Service , which is working with BP across its command centres , only 20 `` oiled '' birds have been found . 
Ten were dead , one died in the rehabilitation facility and another was `` euthanised '' . 
But Savitz says that most of the birds and fish die from the spill out to sea and will not wash ashore , never to be seen , let alone counted . 
Often they are eaten by other animals , passing on the toxicity . 
`` You obviously ca n't count how many zooplankton are being impacted , '' she says . 
While using an estimated 400,000 gallons of dispersant so far is helping to keep the oil from reaching the shore and killing birds , the higher levels of toxicity will be more damaging to fish , she says . 
`` But it certainly helps BP 's public relations story if oil is not hitting the shore , '' she adds . 
Back at the staging post at Venice , the makeshift camp of trailers and pre-fabricated buildings which have sprung up in the past fortnight are taking on a more permanent feel . 
Slade Brockett , the staging area manager , has ordered two giant plasma screens and board games to help the workers and volunteers unwind . 
Rotas are being rearranged to schedule days off as the strain of working 16 - or 17-hour days starts to tell . 
The enthusiasm and can-do attitude of those involved is genuine . 
Brockett , a project engineer drafted in from BP 's Cherry Point refinery near Washington , told journalists : `` I called my wife on mother 's day . 
I know it 's not something you 're supposed to say , but I told her how much fun I was having . '' 
Perhaps mindful of BP 's watching public relations team , he also added more cautiously : `` I have been pleasantly surprised by how little oil has landed . 
We know we have been relatively blessed so far , but we have to be prepared for weather changes . '' 
For all the undoubtedly impressive efforts of BP and everyone else involved , a vast amount of oil continues to spew into the Gulf of Mexico every day . 
Hayward said he was `` increasingly confident '' that steps to reactivate the BOP and shut down the well would work . 
If they do n't and other methods also fail oil will keep leaking for at least another three months , when the first of two relief wells is expected to be in place to plug the existing well . 
But the crisis for BP does n't end there . 
It faces years of litigation from affected communities and over liability for the accident , which killed 11 workers . 
Politicians are also clamouring for tighter regulations on the industry . 
BP , directing a military-style clean-up operation with its army of volunteers , wants to show that it , and the industry , can be trusted to operate safely . 
Whether its undoubtedly impressive efforts to turn a disastrous situation into merely a terrible one will convince its critics remains to be seen . 
