WRAPUP 9-Libyan forces fight for town in west , rebels in east \* Gaddafi forces recapture much of Zawiyah near Tripoli \* Rebels say take Ras Lanuf \* Government forces bomb Benghazi arms depot , rebels say -LRB- Recasts with fighting in Zawiyah , Ras Lanuf , Benghazi bombing -RRB- AJDABIYAH , Libya , March 4 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Muammar Gaddafi 's forces fought their way into a rebel-held western town on Friday , but rebels said they had captured the eastern oil town of Ras Lanuf , extending their hold on eastern Libya . 
The fighting appeared to confirm the division of the vast desert oil-producing state between a western area round the capital Tripoli held by forces loyal to Gaddafi and an eastern region held by those rebelling against his four-decade rule . 
In Zawiyah , a town 50 km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- west of Tripoli whose control by the rebels had embarrassed the government , `` dozens were killed and more were wounded , '' by pro-Gaddafi forces , said Mohamed , a resident . 
`` We have counted 30 dead civilians . '' 
The loyalist forces used grenade-launchers , heavy machineguns and snipers on the roof of a new hotel to fire at protesters when they marched after Friday prayers to demand the fall of the regime , Mohamed said . 
An improvised rebel force had withdrawn to the central Martyrs Square , and government troops were 4-5 kilometres away , a rebel spokesman said . 
A Libyan government official said of the town : `` It 's been liberated , maybe there are still some pockets -LRB- under rebel control -RRB- but otherwise it 's been liberated . '' 
In the east , rebels said their forces had taken the oil town of Ras Lanuf , which lies on a strategic coastal road , hours after saying they had captured the town 's airport . 
Rebels have already seized control of much of the rest of eastern Libya , the main oil-producing part of the country , in a popular uprising centred on Benghazi , Libya 's second city . 
A rebel spokesman said pro-Gaddafi forces bombed an arms depot -- one of the biggest weapons depots in the region -- on the outskirts of Benghazi on Friday . 
`` A lot of people have been killed . 
There are many people in the hospital . 
No one can approach , it 's still very dangerous , '' said a resident who would only identify himself as Saleh . 
Security forces had cordoned off the area , and a Reuters witness said at least eight ambulances were seen ferrying casualties from the scene . 
Windows were shattered in suburbs several kilometres from the scene , residents said . 
The uprising against Gaddafi is the bloodiest yet against a long-serving ruler in the Arab world , and follows the ousting in the past weeks of the long-time presidents of both Tunisia and Egypt -- Libya 's western and eastern neighbors . 
The cut in Libya 's 1.6 million barrel per day oil output -- caused partly by the flight of thousands of key foreign oil workers -- is a major blow to its economy . 
News of the fighting pushed up U.S. crude prices to their highest levels since September 2008 , and Brent crude futures for April delivery LCOc1 rose $ 1.36 to $ 116.17 a barrel . 
The International Energy Agency said one million barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- of Libya 's oil output was shut , the top of the range it had estimated on Wednesday . 
-LRB- ID : nWEB3662 -RRB- The upheaval has caused a humanitarian emergency on the Tunisian border where tens of thousands of foreign workers have fled to safety . 
An international airlift is under way , reducing the number of refugees stranded in tented camps . 
The rebels earlier told Reuters they were open to talks only about Gaddafi 's exile or resignation , following attacks on civilians that have provoked international condemnation , arms and economic sanctions and a war crimes probe . 
`` Victory or death ... We will not stop until we liberate all this country , '' Mustafa Abdel Jalil , head of the rebel National Libyan Council told supporters of the two-week-old uprising . 
Western nations have called on Gaddafi to go and are considering various options including the imposition of a no-fly zone , but are wary about any offensive military involvement . 
In Tripoli , shooting rang out across Tajoura district as Gaddafi loyalists broke up a crowd of protesters seeking an end to his long rule and shouting `` Gaddafi is the enemy of God ! '' 
The demonstrators spilled out of the Murat Adha mosque after Friday prayers , and several hundred began chanting for an end to Gaddafi 's four decades in power . 
Up to 100 people in Tripoli had been arrested , accused of helping the rebels , Al Jazeera said . 
Earlier on Friday , rebel volunteers said a rocket attack by a government warplane just missed a rebel-held military base which houses an arsenal in the eastern town of Ajdabiyah . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Some Libyan bloggers are wondering if the Central banks will be able to cover withdrawals by citizens now that Libyan overseas assets have been frozen . 
And this question is on the minds of many who are more concerned about the humanitarian crisis developing there rather than the eventual political outcome , oil prices or power play . 
Can someone enlighten this uninformed reader ? 
I am appalled at the lack of action by the West . 
Is it not possible to at least provide shoulder-held anti-aircraft missiles , and other weapons . 
We encourage the Libyans to further democracy , and then do nothing to support them . 
U.N. Go to Libya today , as you are invited ! 
If you do n't you are abusing Human Rights . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
