Eight cases of swine flu have emerged in the UK Two more people in London have been diagnosed with the swine flu virus , the Department of Health -LRB- DH -RRB- confirmed . 
The 23-year-old man from Islington , north London , and 29-year-old man from Westminster , central London , have mild symptoms , the DH said . 
They are being treated at their homes and are among eight people in the UK known to have caught the H1N1 virus . 
Doctors said a 22-year-old man from Barnet , north London , was responding well to treatment for the virus . 
The Health Protection Agency -LRB- HPA -RRB- said it was investigating 230 possible cases , all of which were associated with travel to Mexico . 
It added that people exposed to a `` probable or confirmed '' case of swine flu in the past seven days , for more than one hour and within a distance of 1m -LRB- 3.2 ft -RRB- have been offered anti-viral drugs `` as a precautionary measure '' . 
A DH spokesman said : `` The preparations we have in place and are continuing to make will help to ensure we respond well in the event of a pandemic . '' 
Transport warning over swine flu Swine flu is a respiratory disease , caused by influenza type A , which infects pigs . 
Until now it has not normally infected humans , but the latest form of the virus can . 
The man from Barnet caught the virus during a recent visit to Mexico and was admitted to the Royal Free Hospital in Hampstead on Wednesday . 
A spokesman for the Royal Free Hampstead NHS Trust said he was `` brought to the trust in a secure , specialist ambulance '' . 
`` Staff are scrupulously following infection control procedures to ensure no other patient or member of staff is at risk , '' he added . 
London authorities said they were working closely with other agencies to monitor and deal with any issues from the outbreak . 
London Councils ' Chairman Councillor Merrick Cockell said : `` London 's local authorities have been preparing for the possible outbreak of a flu pandemic for the last five years so are primed to respond to any issues arising as a result of swine flu in the capital . '' 
