One relieved Syrian family crosses into Turkey at Cilvegozu Turkey 's long border with its neighbor Syria is deceptively quiet . 
On the Turkish side of the Cilvegozu crossing , truck drivers , border officials and an increasing number of journalists wilt in the midday sun . 
For those not fortunate enough to have access to air-conditioned buildings inside the border complex , finding any available bit of shade is a priority in the stifling heat . 
Just 3km -LRB- 1.9 miles -RRB- away , across a sizeable stretch of no-man 's land , is the Syrian border post of Bab al-Hawa . 
The situation there , apparently , is very different . 
A lorry driver told reporters that both sides had armed checkpoints along the road out of Syria At the end of a week of fierce fighting in north-western Syria at least two border crossings fell into rebel hands . 
As important as cities such as Aleppo , Latakia and Idlib are to the regime of President Bashar al-Assad , outside intelligence services say he has had to withdraw some army units from peripheral areas to combat rebel uprisings in Damascus and other cities . 
That has , in turn , allowed the increasingly confident rebel Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- to occupy some villages and key installations , including the border post at Bab al-Hawa . 
Although the UN says tens , even hundreds of thousands of refugees are fleeing across Syria 's borders to all points of the compass , at this particular Turkish crossing they only come across now in dribs and drabs . 
Nonetheless the stories they tell of the destruction in their homeland are just as dramatic . 
In one small van , an extended family arrived on the Turkish side this weekend , having taken the extraordinarily brave decision to travel through the chaos that is north-western Syria - a region where it is often difficult to say if any one side or armed group is in overall control . 
On the Syrian side of the border at Bab al-Hawa , rebels posed for photographs Understandably , given what has happened before , everyone is reluctant to be filmed or to give their real names for fear of reprisals . 
`` They were firing shells , rockets - really big stuff '' , one animated woman told me as she sat in the front passenger seat - squeezed against at least two other women . 
When I saw a neighbor who 's lost five members of his family in the shelling , we knew we had no choice but to go '' `` We 've come from the town of Saraqeb '' , said the woman 's husband . 
`` We had to leave . 
When I saw a neighbor who 's lost five members of his family in the shelling , we knew we had no choice but to go . '' 
According to the main opposition coalition , the Syrian National Council -LRB- SNC -RRB- - 1.5 million people have been displaced , internally or externally , by the fighting . 
A lorry driver , who had just got out of Syria , spoke to a group of journalists before heading through to his destination in Turkey . 
`` Both sides have armed checkpoints along the road out of Syria , '' the driver told us . 
`` Some places are under the control of the rebels but government forces are always trying to take positions back . '' 
Turkey , Lebanon , Jordan and Iraq are absorbing huge numbers of people fleeing the fighting in Syria . 
Thus far , it has been with relatively open arms and good grace . 
But Syria 's neighbors are increasingly concerned that the longer President Assad clings to power and the more force he is prepared to use against his own people , the greater the destabilising effect will be on the entire region . 
There are some 40,000 Syrian refugees living in camps on the Turkish side of the border Regional politicians and security chiefs from the Turkish province of Hatay held a long meeting at the border on Saturday to discuss the crisis and the stark realities on the other side of the frontier - where no-one really knows who , if anyone , is in charge from one day to the next . 
At the end of the meeting a spokesman came out to say that the crossing was now , in effect , closed . 
This is an important trade route not just between the two countries but for goods and produce heading into Iraq and beyond , so it was not a decision taken lightly , the spokesman said . 
The problem , he said , was that the customs post and border offices on the Syrian side had been abandoned and subsequently looted - either by rebel fighters or the smuggling gangs who proliferate in this mountainous region and make their living by less legal means . 
Unlike the situation last year in Libya where Muammar Gaddafi 's regime and the capital , Tripoli , collapsed in the space of just a few days following weeks of heavy Nato air strikes , the regime in Damascus is still militarily strong . 
Most observers in Turkey do expect the Assad regime to fall eventually but it will , they suggest , take some time . 
Perhaps the best that the opposition and Syria 's anxious neighbors can hope for at this point is for a significantly large and geographically defined part of the country to `` open up '' and fall into rebel hands . 
That would give them a platform within Syria itself to launch a final , perhaps decisive , phase of the campaign to force Bashar al-Assad from power . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
