Wednesday 11 May 2005 00.00 BST OK , I 'm paranoid and depressed . 
My new government of troglodytes , murderers and spivs barely elongates the customary scream I give upon waking . 
What troubles me more is our rulers ' inevitable recommencement of the war on terror bollocks . 
To begin at what we 're told is the beginning , we have 9\/11 - the one in the US , not the earlier one in Chile when covert US government intervention killed thousands of innocents and handed the country to a commerce-friendly , torture-loving , far-right junta . 
Now if 9\/11\/2001 is so important , why is it so hard to find out what happened ? 
The FBI , as we know , blocked all manner of investigations into the plot in the run up to its execution , whether these involved highly specific warnings from its own agents or from government sources in Afghanistan , Argentina , Britain , the Cayman Islands , Egypt , France , Germany , Israel , Italy , Jordan , Morocco and Russia . 
Meanwhile , I worry why the nearest military aircraft were n't scrambled to intercept any of the hijacked flights when this is standard procedure and why , when more distant jets were finally aloft , they flew at less than half speed , thus failing to prevent the impacts at the twin towers and then , it would seem , managing to shoot down Flight 93 when its passengers may already have overcome its hijackers . 
It would , of course , be easier to know what happened to Flight 93 if there were n't - according to educated estimates - three minutes of the cockpit recording missing . 
It would , equally , be handy to have access to the black boxes from the other crashes . 
Firefighters at Ground Zero have repeatedly stated that three of the four possible black boxes there were found and taken away by government agents . 
And these worries are maybe less important than the ones about clear links between the Pakistani ISI , the CIA and the men named as the 9\/11 hijackers . 
Or the mysterious inability of anyone to capture Osama bin Laden , who fled from Tora Bora , possibly being evacuated by helicopter , and then escaped to Pakistan unhindered . 
So while Chinese paperclips are now made out of vital 9\/11 evidence and almost every implicated party goes free , we and our controlling US interests continue fearlessly to terrorise countries unconnected with the attacks , to place permanent military bases near oil reserves and pipeline routes , to harass and murder Muslims anywhere we can , and to foment terrorist resistance at every opportunity . 
The UK unmasks non-existent ricin plots and threatens us with ID cards , but we ca n't supply our troops in Iraq with working radios or a legal causus belli . 
But you 'd never want to think that on 9\/11\/2001 covert US government intervention killed thousands of innocents and handed the country , if not the world , to a commerce-friendly , torture-loving , far-right junta . 
That would make you a paranoid , depressed conspiracy theorist . 
And , take it from me , that just would n't be comfortable . 
