After what has been described as the most foolish war in over 2,000 years , is there a way out of Iraq for President Bush , asks Brian Whitaker Tuesday 29 November 2005 13.54 GMT There is a remarkable article in the latest issue of the American Jewish weekly , Forward . 
It calls for President Bush to be impeached and put on trial `` for misleading the American people , and launching the most foolish war since Emperor Augustus in 9 BC sent his legions into Germany and lost them '' . 
To describe Iraq as the most foolish war of the last 2,014 years is a sweeping statement , but the writer is well qualified to know . 
He is Martin van Creveld , a professor at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem and one of the world 's foremost military historians . 
Several of his books have influenced modern military theory and he is the only non-American author on the US Army 's list of required reading for officers . 
Professor van Creveld has previously drawn parallels between Iraq and Vietnam , and pointed out that almost all countries that have tried to fight similar wars during the last 60 years or so have ended up losing . 
Why President Bush `` nevertheless decided to go to war escapes me and will no doubt preoccupy historians to come , '' he told one interviewer . 
The professor 's puzzlement is understandable . 
More than two years after the war began , and despite the huge financial and human cost , it is difficult to see any real benefits . 
The weapons of mass destruction that provided the excuse for the invasion turned out not to exist and the idea that Iraq could become a beacon of democracy for the Middle East has proved equally far-fetched . 
True , there is now a multi-party electoral system , but it has institutionalised and consolidated the country 's ethnic , sectarian and tribal divisions - exactly the sort of thing that should be avoided when attempting to democratise . 
In the absence of anything more positive , Tony Blair has fallen back on the claim that at least we 're better off now without Saddam Hussein . 
That , too , sounds increasingly hollow . 
The fall of Saddam has brought the rise of Zarqawi and his ilk , levels of corruption in Iraq seem as bad as ever , and at the weekend former prime minister Iyad Allawi caused a stir by asserting that the human rights are no better protected now than under the rule of Saddam . 
Noting that some two-thirds of Americans believe the war was a mistake , van Creveld says in his article that the US should forget about saving face and pull its troops out : `` What had to come , has come . 
The question is no longer if American forces will be withdrawn , but how soon - and at what cost . '' 
Welcome as a pullout might be to many Americans , it would be a hugely complex operation . 
Van Creveld says it would probably take several months and result in sizeable casualties . 
More significantly , though , it would not end the conflict . 
`` As the pullout proceeds , '' he warns , `` Iraq almost certainly will sink into an all-out civil war from which it will take the country a long time to emerge - if , indeed , it can do so at all . 
All this is inevitable and will take place whether George W Bush , Dick Cheney , Donald Rumsfeld and Condoleezza Rice like it or not . '' 
This is one of the major differences between Iraq and the withdrawal from Vietnam . 
In Vietnam , it took place under a smokescreen of `` Vietnamisation '' in which US troops handed control to local forces in the south . 
Of course , it was a fairly thin smokescreen ; many people were aware at the time that these southern forces could not hold out and in due course the North Vietnamese overran the south , finally bringing the war to an end . 
Officially , a similar process is under way in Iraq , with the Americans saying they will eventually hand over to the new Iraqi army - though the chances of that succeeding look even bleaker than they did in Vietnam . 
`` The new Iraqi army is by all accounts much weaker , less skilled , less cohesive and less loyal to its government than even the South Vietnamese army was , '' van Creveld writes . 
Worse still , in Iraq there is no equivalent of the North Vietnamese regime poised to take power . 
What will happen once the Americans have gone is anyone 's guess , but a sudden outbreak of peace seems the remotest of all the possibilities . 
Not surprisingly , many who in principle would argue that the Americans had no right to invade Iraq in the first place are apprehensive about what might happen once they leave . 
The conference organised by the Arab League in Cairo last week was one example : it called for `` the withdrawal of foreign forces according to a timetable '' but did n't venture to suggest what that timetable might be . 
With or without American troops , the war in Iraq has acquired a momentum of its own and threatens to spill over into other parts of the region . 
There are four major issues : terrorism , Sunni-Shia rivalries , Kurdish aspirations , and the question of Iraq 's territorial integrity - all of which pose dangers internationally . 
Back in July 2003 , terrorism in Iraq seemed a manageable problem and President Bush boldly challenged the militants to `` bring 'em on '' . 
American forces , he said , were `` plenty tough '' and would deal with anyone who attacked them . 
There were others in the US who talked of the `` flypaper theory '' - an idea that terrorists from around the world could be attracted to Iraq and then eliminated . 
Well , the first part of the flypaper theory seems to work , but not the second . 
As with the Afghan war in the 1980s that spawned al-Qaida , there is every reason to suppose that the Iraq war will create a new generation of terrorists with expertise that can be used to plague other parts of the world for decades to come . 
The recent hotel bombings in Jordan are one indication of the way it 's heading . 
Contrary to American intentions , the war has also greatly increased the influence of Iran - a founder-member of Bush 's `` Axis of Evil '' - and opened up long-suppressed rivalries between Sunni and Shia Muslims . 
The impact of this can not be confined to Iraq and will eventually be felt in the oil-rich Sunni Gulf states -LRB- including Saudi Arabia -RRB- that have sizeable but marginalised Shia communities . 
Kurdish aspirations have been awakened too - which has implications for Turkey , Syria and Iran , especially if Iraq is eventually dismembered . 
With a fragile central government in Baghdad constantly undermined by the activities of militants and weakened by the conflicting demands of Sunnis , Shias and Kurds , the demise of Iraq as a nation-state sometime during the next few years has become a distinct possibility . 
The effect of that on the regional power balance is difficult to predict , but at the very least it would bring a period of increased instability . 
No one can claim that any of this was unexpected . 
The dangers had been foreseen by numerous analysts and commentators long before the war started but they were ignored in Washington , mainly for ideological reasons . 
There were , of course , some in the neoconservative lobby who foresaw it too and thought it would be a good thing - shaking up the entire Middle East in a wave of `` creative destruction '' . 
The result is that even if the US tries to leave Iraq now , in purely practical terms it is unlikely to be able to do so . 
Professor van Creveld 's plan for withdrawal of ground troops is not so much a disengagement as a strategic readjustment . 
An American military presence will still be needed in the region , he says . 
`` Tehran is certain to emerge as the biggest winner from the war ... Now that Iraq is gone , it is hard to see how anybody except the United States can keep the Gulf states , and their oil , out of the mullahs ' clutches . 
`` A divided , chaotic , government-less Iraq is very likely to become a hornets ' nest . 
From it , a hundred mini-Zarqawis will spread all over the Middle East , conducting acts of sabotage and seeking to overthrow governments in Allah 's name . 
`` The Gulf States apart , the most vulnerable country is Jordan , as evidenced by the recent attacks in Amman . 
However , Turkey , Egypt and , to a lesser extent , Israel are also likely to feel the impact . 
Some of these countries , Jordan in particular , are going to require American assistance . '' 
As described in the article , van Creveld 's plan seems to imply that the US should abandon Iraq to its fate and concentrate instead on protecting American allies in the region from adverse consequences . 
A slightly different idea - pulling out ground troops from Iraq but continuing to use air power there - is already being considered in Washington , according to Seymour Hersh in the latest issue of the New Yorker magazine . 
The military are reportedly unhappy about this , fearing it could make them dependent on untrustworthy Iraqi forces for pinpointing targets . 
One military planner quoted by the magazine asked : `` Will the Iraqis call in air strikes in order to snuff rivals , or other warlords , or to snuff members of your own sect and blame it on someone else ? '' 
Focusing on air power has obvious political attractions for the Bush administration , since it is the safety of US ground troops that American voters are most concerned about . 
But , again , that would not amount to a real disengagement and would do little or nothing to improve America 's image in the region - especially if reliance on air strikes increased the number of civilian casualties . 
The inescapable fact is that the processes Mr Bush unleashed on March 20 2003 -LRB- and imagined he had ended with his `` mission accomplished '' speech six weeks later -RRB- will take a decade or more to run their course and there is little that anyone , even the US , can do now to halt them . 
In his eagerness for regime change in Iraq , Mr Bush blundered into a trap from which in the short term there is no way out : the Americans will be damned if they stay and damned if they leave . 
This series is no longer updated 
