\* Follows Britain 's recognition of rebels \* Gaddafi planning legal challenge-The Times \* Opposition flag to be hoisted on Tuesday -LRB- Adds quote , report of Gaddafi legal challenge -RRB- LONDON , Aug 9 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Diplomats named by Libya 's rebel administration , the National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- , took over the London embassy previously staffed by appointees of Muammar Gaddafi 's government on Tuesday , the British Foreign office said . 
Britain recognized the NTC as Libya 's sole legitimate government in late July and said it would invite a new Libyan diplomatic mission made up of opponents of Gaddafi . 
`` The National Transitional Council is the sole legitimate governmental authority in Libya . 
It is therefore right that their representatives are now staffing the Libyan Embassy , '' Foreign Secretary William Hague said in a statement . 
The Times newspaper reported that Gaddafi 's government was planning to use anti-squatter laws to try to evict the embassy 's new occupants . 
It said Gaddafi 's lawyers were also seeking to challenge Britain 's recognition of the opposition and to prevent Britain from using frozen Libyan state assets . 
A Foreign Office spokesman said he was not aware of any such legal proceedings against the British government . 
The NTC had said families of rebel civil war victims would hoist the red , black and green flag representing the Libyan rebel movement over the embassy in the Belgravia district . 
The green Libyan flag of the Gaddafi government flew above the building until this weekend . 
It has since been removed . 
`` The reopening of the Embassy symbolises how far we have come . 
The Embassy represents the legitimate government of Libya and in line with this , will serve all the Libyan community irrespective of their political allegiances , '' the new charge d'affaires , Mahmud Nacua , said in a statement . 
-LRB- Reporting by Emma Farge and Adrian Croft ; Editing by Alistair Lyon -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
