Amateur video shows the continued shelling of Homs President Barack Obama has described the Syrian army 's mortar and rocket attacks in the city of Homs , as `` outrageous bloodshed '' . 
One activist network said 110 people were killed in Homs on Thursday as the government continued a push aimed at crushing rebel forces . 
Hundreds have been reported killed in the offensive over the past week . 
Germany has meanwhile welcomed the possibility of the return of the Arab League mission to the country . 
The international community is struggling to find a way to resolve the crisis after Russia and China blocked a UN resolution drafted by Arab and European countries on Saturday calling on President Bashar al-Assad to hand over power to his deputy . 
EU foreign affairs chief Catherine Ashton called on Russia to `` recognize the reality of the situation on the ground '' . 
Restarting the Arab League mission in partnership with the UN `` would serve peace and balance , '' German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said , according to AFP . 
The mission `` would be a clear signal by the international community to the Assad regime , '' as would the appointment of a UN special representative , he added . 
Homs , Syria 's third-largest city , has been a leading focus of unrest in the 11-month uprising against President Bashar al-Assad 's rule . 
The assault on Homs is focused on districts that are controlled by rebel forces , in particular the Baba Amr district . 
The BBC 's Jim Muir , in neighbouring Lebanon , says there are armed rebels in the area , but also many civilians . 
During lulls in the onslaught , Syrians are using loudhailers to appeal for blood donations and medical supplies , the Associated Press news agency reports . 
The Human Rights Watch group said the blockade of the city by government forces meant victims of the shelling were being denied adequate medical treatment , saying makeshift hospitals were being overwhelmed with the dead and wounded . 
The army says it is fighting foreign-backed armed groups . 
Army defectors have joined rebel forces in Homs and other parts of Syria in recent months . 
Government troops have stepped up operations at Syria 's borders in an effort to stop arms reaching the rebels , reports say . 
Continuing army operations against rebels are also being reported in the northern city of Idlib , the southern province of Deraa , and the town of Zabadani , north of Damascus . 
The Local Co-ordination Committees , a network of anti-government activists monitoring the violence , say a total of 137 people were killed around the country on Thursday , including 110 in Homs . 
Syria restricts access to foreign media and casualty figures can not be independently verified . 
UK Foreign Secretary William Hague : Efforts to `` tighten the stranglehold '' on Syrian regime intensifying British Foreign Secretary William Hague said efforts were focused on tightening the `` diplomatic and economic stranglehold on this murdering regime '' , but said there were no plans for Britain to arm Syrian rebels . 
And in a blog post the British ambassador to Syria Simon Collis - who has been recalled to London for consultations - said `` time and again '' he had witnessed peacefully protesting Syrian civilians being beaten by `` regime thugs '' . 
Germany had earlier announced it was expelling four diplomats from the Syrian embassy in Berlin , following the recent arrest of two people suspected of spying on Syrian opposition figures in Germany . 
Libya said it was giving Syria 's charge d'affaires and staff in Tripoli 72 hours to leave the country , months after it recognized the Syrian opposition as the legitimate authority . 
Human rights groups and activists say more than 7,000 people have been killed by Syrian security forces since the uprising began last March . 
The UN stopped estimating the death toll in Syria after it passed 5,400 in January , saying it was too difficult to confirm . 
Mr Assad 's government says at least 2,000 members of the security forces have been killed . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
