09 February 12 07:00 GMT UN chief Ban Ki-moon says the Arab League plans to revive its mission to Syria , and has sought help from the UN . 
Mr Ban said the `` disastrous '' failure to agree a UN resolution on Syria had encouraged Damascus `` to step up its war on its own people '' . 
The international community is struggling to find a way forward in the crisis after Russia and China blocked the resolution last week . 
Syrian forces are continuing to attack opposition strongholds in the country . 
Activists say shelling resumed early on Thursday in the central city of Homs - where the army launched an assault last week . 
With several districts controlled by rebel forces - including many army defectors - Syria 's third-largest city has become a major focus of unrest against President Bashar al-Assad . 
More than 50 people were killed there on Wednesday alone , according to the UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights . 
Speaking at the UN , Mr Ban said : `` I fear that the appalling brutality we are witnessing in Homs , with heavy weapons firing into civilian neighborhoods , is a grim harbinger of worse to come . '' 
He said Arab League chief Nabil el-Arabi had told him he intended to revive a monitoring mission in Syria , which collapsed last month amid escalating violence . 
Mr Ban said Mr Arabi had asked for UN help with the project and proposed a joint UN-Arab League observer mission , including a joint special envoy . 
`` In the coming days we will further consult with the council before fleshing out details , '' Mr Ban said . 
`` We stand ready to assist in any way that will contribute toward improvement on the ground . '' 
Earlier , the US rejected Russian calls for talks between the Syrian government and the opposition . 
White House spokesman Jay Carney said President Bashar al-Assad had missed the `` opportunity '' for dialogue . 
`` From the -LRB- earliest -RRB- days of this situation in Syria , there was an opportunity for the Assad regime to engage in dialogue with the opposition , '' White House spokesman Jay Carney said . 
`` Rather than take that opportunity , Assad brutally cracked down on his own people . 
We do n't think that that opportunity is available any more . 
`` It is clear that Assad has chosen a path and that choice has resulted in the deaths of many Syrians , including innocent children . '' 
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov , who visited Damascus on Tuesday , had said that President Assad was ready to talk with `` all political forces '' to end the violence . 
But his comments were dismissed by opposition leaders and violence across Syria has continued unabated . 
Mr Carney said the US planned to meet soon with its international partners to discuss ways to stop the violence in Syria and provide humanitarian aid . 
In a day of intense diplomatic activity , Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said on Wednesday that if the UN Security Council could n't protect Syrian civilians , then like-minded countries should find ways to do so . 
He is due in Washington for talks with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton early next week . 
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev , in a phone conversation with French President Nicolas Sarkozy on Wednesday , urged the West `` to avoid hasty unilateral steps '' in Syria , Russian news agency Interfax reported . 
On Wednesday witnesses in Homs ' Baba Amr district reported intense shelling by tanks , mortars , artillery and heavy machine guns . 
`` The situation is dire . 
We are short of food , water and medical aid . 
Doctors have collapsed after treating the wounded without rest for five days , '' said activist Omar Shaker in Homs . 
`` We want Lavrov to come and spend a night in Homs to see what we have been passing through . '' 
The Observatory also reported at least another eight civilians killed around the country on Wednesday . 
Syria restricts access to foreign media and casualty figures can not be independently verified . 
The UN resolution backed an Arab League peace plan that would have seen President Assad hand power to a deputy to oversee a transition . 
Russia , a strong ally of Syria , said that amounted to regime change . 
The Syrian government blames the violence on foreign-backed groups and insists the Homs offensive will continue until `` order '' is restored in the city . 
