09 February 12 16:07 GMT Associate Fellow , Royal United Services Institute Pressure is building on the Syrian army with a deepening armed uprising and growing defections . 
Shashank Joshi of the Royal United Services Institute considers how the military , the foundation of Bashar al-Assad 's rule , is coping . 
Last year , late Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi ordered his army to forcibly crush a burgeoning protest movement . 
The eastern part of his army melted away immediately , and over eight months the rest progressively disintegrated to leave a rump of loyal , family-led units . 
Thirty years ago to this month , President Hafez al-Assad of Syria ordered his elite forces to level the city of Hama in response to a surging Islamist rebellion . 
Only one brigade defected . 
Thomas Friedman - in his book From Beirut to Jerusalem - called this decisive brutality `` Hama rules '' . 
Hafez 's successor and son , President Bashar al-Assad , is operating under `` Homs rules '' - neither those of Libya last year , nor Hama a generation ago . 
Mr Assad 's security forces have been predictably resilient . 
A regime built around the Alawite sect has stacked its officer corps with co-religionists , fellow tribesmen , and family members . 
The 4th Mechanised Division , which recently scrambled to regain control of Damascus ' suburbs , is drawn entirely from that sect . 
So too is the Republican Guard and influential air force intelligence . 
The Shabiha , an Alawite militia , has also been a useful auxiliary . 
In short , Syria 's military has been turned into a ruthless confessional militia that is likely to see little future in a post-Assad Syria . 
At the same time , no army can withstand stresses of this intensity and duration without suffering problems of morale , integrity and loyalty . 
The country 's demography means that only Sunni conscripts can fill up the rank-and-file . 
Although the regime has sought to limit their role in combat , a steady trickle of defections has been unavoidable . 
The military opposition 's commander Col Riad al-Assad , based in southern Turkey , claims to command 40,000 soldiers in his Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- . 
Gen Mustafa al-Sheikh , the highest-ranking defector so far , has estimated the regime 's combat readiness as having fallen to `` 40 % for hardware and 32 % for personnel '' . 
He argues that there is a grave shortage of manpower , that Sunni officers have fled or been removed , and that large parts of the army are secretly reaching out the FSA to defect . 
Gen Sheikh , who has formed his own Higher Revolutionary Council to supersede the FSA , boldly predicts that `` the army will collapse during February '' . 
That timeline is highly improbable . 
It is as much an effort to garner international support and induce further defections , as it is an objective assessment of regime capabilities . 
Even if defections are as numerous as the opposition claims , that would still leave the ratio of government-to-rebel forces as more than four-to-one - a margin of superiority exceeding that seen in Libya , supplemented by militias , and with airpower held largely in reserve . 
At the same time , President Assad 's force long ago passed the point at which they could hope for a final , decisive assault like that of Assad senior at Hama in 1982 . 
The most important factor is the deepening and widening of the uprising over recent months . 
Those once wedded to peaceful protest now judge that taking up arms is the only viable option . 
One important milestone has been the outbreak of violence this month in Syria 's second city , Aleppo . 
The army is increasingly stretched across fronts that it did not have to worry about last year . 
It took days to regain control of suburbs around Damascus , and the town of Zabadani - scarcely 20 miles -LRB- 32km -RRB- north-west of Damascus - was entirely seized by rebels last month . 
These growing commitments thin out , and increase the strain on , loyal units . 
The paradox is that more fighting means more defections , but failing to do so risks conceding territory on which the armed parts of the opposition can regroup and consolidate . 
Mr Assad 's security forces do retain some advantages . 
Libya taught us that rebel control of territory can be tenuous and easily reversible . 
Indeed , Zabadani is falling back into regime hands . 
Moreover , the external support to Damascus outstrips anything that might be flowing to the FSA from Turkey , Saudi Arabia or Qatar . 
Russia has already sent tons of ammunition , and this lifeline is expected to remain open . 
Gen Qassem Suleimani , commander of the elite Quds Force of Iran 's Revolutionary Guard Corps -LRB- IRGC -RRB- , has reportedly served as `` chief regime adviser and strategist '' . 
The Guardian reports that he `` has taken up a spot in the war room '' alongside President Assad and his ruling clique . 
There is also diplomatic succor . 
Regimes can hold together or fall apart based on perceptions . 
Russia 's angry veto of the modest UN resolution last week sent a powerful signal to those Syrian senior officers of wavering loyalty - Moscow is committed to preserving the regime in some form . 
It is rational for officials and groups hitherto sitting on the fence to adjust their loyalty in line with Russia 's apparent commitment . 
One hope is that even if President Assad is squeezed out , a Yemen-style stage-managed transition keeps the `` guts '' of the regime in place . 
Some vulnerable minorities who see Assad as guarantor of their safety , have compelling reasons to take a gamble on this outcome . 
A secret US diplomatic cable from Damascus in 2006 observed `` tremendous fear in the Alawite community about retribution if the Sunni majority ever regains power '' . 
Assad 's `` Homs rules '' mean that he has no strategy , only tactics : indiscriminate bombardment of a fragmented opposition , the sharpening of sectarian loyalty to force minority communities to pick sides , and outreach to foreign patrons with a stake in his survival . 
It is hard to see how this can do anything but accelerate the militarisation of the opposition , induce greater countervailing help to the rebels from frustrated outsiders , and make it very hard for any pluralistic , democratic settlement to emerge from the wreckage . 
