Even after BP oil spill , fundraising events were hopping Lobbyists for BP hosted at least 53 fundraising parties for lawmakers and candidates in recent years -- four of them since the explosion and oil spill at a BP-run oil drilling rig in the Gulf of Mexico , according to a watchdog group 's analysis . 
Lobbyists typically represent multiple clients , and it is unknown how many of the events were intended to advance BP 's interests . 
The numbers are based on fundraiser data compiled by the Sunlight Foundation , which collects information from anonymous donors and lobbyist reports . 
The list is incomplete , and it is possible the lobbyists held other fundraisers as well . 
Nine of the 11 known fundraisers this year were hosted by lobbyist Tony Podesta or other lobbyists for his firm , the Podesta Group , who represent the company as well as many other interests . 
Since the Deepwater Horizon rig 's explosion in the gulf on April 20 , here are the fundraisers by lobbyists who represent BP : -- Paul Brathwaite and Cristina Antelo , who both lobby for the Podesta Group , were among numerous hosts for a May 26 party benefiting CHC-BOLD PAC , a PAC for the Congressional Hispanic Caucus . 
-- Tim Glassco , also a lobbyist for the Podesta Group , was a host of a `` young professionals '' happy hour on May 25 for Rep. Glenn Nye -LRB- D-Va . -RRB- . 
-- Dan Meyer , a lobbyist for the Duberstein Group , was a host of an April 29 event for Carly Fiorina , who was seeking the GOP nomination for a California U.S. Senate seat . 
-- Podesta and his wife , Heather , hosted an April 28 breakfast for Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz -LRB- D-Fla -RRB- . 
Other oil and gas concerns have raised cash for lawmakers , too , sometimes with uncomfortable timing . 
On May 12 , executives including BP 's chairman , Lamar McKay , Transocean chief executive Steve Newman and Halliburton 's Timothy Probert appeared before a hearing in the House Energy and Commerce Committee to discuss responsibility for their respective roles in the Deepwater Horizon spill . 
About an hour earlier , House Republicans had gathered a few blocks away for an `` oil and gas breakfast '' fundraiser with industry members to benefit Rep. Kevin Brady -LRB- R-Tex -RRB- . 
David Donnelly , of the Campaign for Fair Elections , said he was n't surprised that fundraisers were held by the lobbyists of BP and other oil firms . 
`` The fundraising season in Washington never ends , even when there are disasters like in the Gulf Coast and when the economy crashes . 
Members of Congress still have to look for money , '' Donnelly said . 
Donnelly also expressed concern about campaign contributions to Rep. Joe Barton -LRB- R-Tex . -RRB- 
, who apologized to the company Thursday for what he said was a White House `` shakedown '' in pressing BP to set aside $ 20 billion to compensate victims of the spill . 
Later in the day , GOP leaders demanded that Barton retract his apology and stress BP 's responsibility for the spill . 
Barton , who was elected to Congress in 1984 , has received $ 27,000 in campaign contributions from BP and its affiliates and $ 1.4 million from the oil and gas industry as a whole , according to campaign finance records . 
`` It 's amazing that Rep. Barton would stand up for a multinational corporation that has wrecked the livelihoods of so many people along the Gulf Coast , '' Donnelly said . 
`` Comments like this make all Americans question whether Congress represents them or the special interests funding their campaigns . '' '' 
