LEEVILLE , LA. -- Their eyes are bloodshot . 
Their scraggy skin glows reddish-brown . 
They clutch cans of beer . 
On the wooden deck of Griffin 's Marina and Ice , they recoil when approached , like a nest of vipers . 
`` We used to be fishermen , '' one sneers , drunk , seething with wounded pride . 
`` But now we work for BP . '' 
They wo n't say more than that . 
From their perch , they glare across the silent street at the gorgeous marshland now closed to fishing . 
At dusk they screech away in pickup trucks , barely pausing at the town 's one blinking traffic light . 
They surrender Leeville to shadow , to the mosquitoes , to what used to be and now is n't , to a solemn reality captured in two words that embody the collapse of a way of life . 
At the blinking traffic light , most drivers turn right and glide over the bayou to Port Fourchon , which services 90 percent of deep-water drilling structures in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Then it 's on to Grand Isle , a paradise for sunbathers and beachfront property owners . 
Confused drivers proceed through the light , past the sign that says `` NO OUTLET , '' past two gas stations , four RV parks , a half-dozen bait-and-tackle shops , two motels and one bar , then run smack into a `` ROAD CLOSED '' sign just before pavement halts at the marsh . 
About a mile long , hugged by bayou , full-time home to a handful of people . 
No more than 60 . 
Maybe not even 30 . 
Right now there should be hundreds of visiting fishermen leasing their own heavenly corner of the town 's bayou front , but with waters closed by the Deepwater Horizon leak , there 's no reason to come , no reason to stay . 
For decades , storm surges have swallowed 14 square miles every year in the basins of Terrebonne and Lafourche parishes . 
Last year the state redirected Highway 1 around Leeville to elevate the hurricane evacuation route . 
The town 's only thoroughfare became a dead end . 
Now residents worry that a hurricane will drench the area with oil this summer , killing the root structure that keeps the very earth together . 
`` To me , Leeville was gone 20 years ago , '' says Windell Curole , general manager of the South Lafourche Levee District , who says the town was 90 percent marsh in the '60s and is now 90 percent underwater . 
`` When we did not take the action to protect the marshes around Leeville , that was the beginning of the end . 
The communities in southern Louisiana remain here despite floodwaters because this place produces tremendous amounts of biomass . 
A 7-year-old can go fish in back and catch enough food to feed his family . '' 
