By Ivan Watson , Raja Razek and Jomana Karadsheh , CNN Gadhafi backers rally in Zawiyah A boat with Libyan asylum-seekers is rescued off Lampedusa coast Warplanes launch sustained bombardgment of Tripoli suburb Libyan leader condemns foes in fiery speech Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Fighting between Libyan rebels and government troops raged around the eastern Libyan oil town of Brega throughout the weekend as NATO warplanes launched a sustained pre-dawn raid on Tripoli 's eastern suburbs . 
Distant explosions shook windows in central Tripoli for more than an hour during the raid , launched about 1 a.m. Sunday . 
NATO said later that the targets were warehouses full of Libyan tanks , troop carriers and ammunition in Tajoura , about 16 kilometers -LRB- 10 miles -RRB- from the city 's center . 
The Western alliance has been bombarding Libya since late March a U.N. mandate to protect civilians from forces loyal to longtime strongman Moammar Gadhafi , who is attempting to put down a revolt against his nearly 42-year rule . 
The strike on Tajoura followed `` extensive intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance '' of the target , the allied command reported Sunday . 
According to NATO , `` the military equipment deployed from this facility was used to resupply pro-Gadhafi forces launching attacks on civilians . '' 
A surface-to-air missile launcher and radar sites were also hit during the strike , which began shortly after midnight Sunday . 
It was the first time in several days that the alliance targeted Tripoli and its immediate surroundings . 
Food shortages in Western Libya Sunday 's events followed a rally by mounted by pro-Gadhafi rallies in Zawiyah , west of Tripoli , where more than 10,000 portrait-waving demonstrators gathered amid a sea of green flags in the city 's cratered and pock-marked central square . 
Zawiyah was the scene of intense fighting last winter , in the early days of the anti-Gadhafi uprising that has left this country bitterly divided . 
Gadhafi 's forces eventually succeeded in capturing the city , but recovery appears to have barely begun in its war-torn heart . 
Municipal buildings and a hotel overlooking the central square still stand gutted , windows broken and facades still singed by fires . 
A vacant lot filled with sand marks the spot where a government minder said a mosque once stood . 
The mosque was apparently completely bulldozed in the months since Zawiyah was re-captured . 
The rooftop of a conference center was still littered with sandbags , bullet casings , several military helmets and bottles stuffed with rags apparently for use as petrol bombs -- evidence that rebels fought from this roof before their defeat last winter . 
The demonstration in Zawiyah , less than a half-hour 's drive from the Libyan capital , was the third pro-Gadhafi rally in as many days . 
But unlike the previous rallies in the towns of Zlitan and Ajilat , there was a much larger security presence -- and members of the crowd were much more aggressive toward foreign journalists who were bused into the city by government minders . 
The men , women and children who attended the rally , many of whom traveled by bus and car from nearby Tripoli , appeared fanatically devoted to Gadhafi . 
`` Allah , Moammar -LRB- Gadhafi -RRB- , Libya only , '' chanted many men and women , some of whom beat their chests in devotion as they repeated the slogan . 
As he had in previous rallies , Gadhafi addressed his supporters with an audio message that denounced the rebel-held enclaves in the west , center and east of the country . 
He also denounced the foreign governments that recently declared the rebel Transitional National Council , based in the eastern city of Benghazi , as the sole legitimate government in Libya . 
`` You agents , you traitors , start looking for survival , '' Gadhafi said , in comments that were simulcasted on Libyan state TV . 
`` There will be no survival anywhere , get out of Benghazi , you traitors . '' 
Saturday 's rally looked like a victory celebration as well as a declaration to Libya and the rest of the world that Zawiyah was now firmly in Gadhafi 's hands . 
But there were signs Gadhafi 's forces still had concerns about security in Zawiyah . 
A CNN journalist driving through the city hours before the rally officially took place saw security forces lining up three men who had apparently been detained against a wall . 
And the reinforced presence included soldiers and police who used their vehicles to block off side roads leading to the main road running through the city . 
