ORANGE BEACH , Ala. -- Before the BP oil spill , the Gulf Coast was a place of abundant shrimping , tourist-filled beaches and a happy if humble lifestyle . 
Now , it 's home to depression , worry and sadness for many . 
A Gallup survey released Tuesday of almost 2,600 coastal residents showed that depression cases are up more than 25 percent since an explosion killed 11 people and unleashed a three-month gusher of crude into the Gulf in April that ruined many livelihoods . 
The conclusions were consistent with trends seen in smaller studies and witnessed by mental health workers . 
People just are n't as happy as they used to be despite palm trees and warm weather . 
A `` well-being index '' included in the Gallup study said many coastal residents are stressed out , worried and sad more often than people living inland , an indication that the spill 's emotional toll lingers even if most of the oil has vanished from view . 
Margaret Carruth is among those fighting to hang on . 
Her hairstyling business dried up after tourists stopped coming to the beach and locals cut back on nonessentials like haircuts . 
All but broke and unable to afford rent , Carruth packed her belongings into her truck and a storage shed and now depends on friends for shelter . 
`` I 'm a strong person and always have been , but I 'm almost to the breaking point , '' says Carruth . 
The Gallup survey was conducted in 25 Gulf-front counties from Texas east to Florida over eight months before and after the spill , ending Aug. 6 . 
The survey found that 19.6 percent of people reported receiving a clinical diagnosis of depression after the spill compared with 15.6 percent before , an increase of 25.6 percent . 
The study did n't conclude the additional cases were tied directly to the oil , however . 
The survey said people along the Gulf reported feeling sad , worried and stressed after the spill , while people living inland reported less over the same period . 
Another survey found that more than 40 percent of people in coastal Mississippi reported feeling stress after the BP geyser blew , a 15 percent increase from before . 
The survey is part of an ongoing health index survey sponsored by Healthways , a wellness and alternative health care company based in Nashville , Tenn. . 
Respondents were randomly selected and interviewed by telephone , and the survey of coastal residents has a margin of error of 3 percentage points . 
The oil spill followed waves of hard luck for the Gulf region , including hurricanes and recession . 
Experts say it 's impossible to determine how much of the current mental health downturn could have roots in problems other than crude washing into marshes and beaches , damaging the seafood and tourist industries . 
But an earlier study conducted in 13 counties and parishes with a total population of 1.9 million showed that 13 percent of coastal adults from Louisiana to Florida suffered probable serious mental illnesses after the spill . 
The level of mental illness was similar to that seen six months after Hurricane Katrina decimated the coast five years ago , and experts are n't yet seeing any improvement in mental health five months after the oil crisis began . 
Before Katrina , a study by the National Institute of Mental Health said only 6 percent of area residents had likely mental illnesses . 
`` From the types of patients we are seeing in our emergency departments , clinics and hospitals , the problems are persisting , '' said William Pinsky of the New Orleans-based Ochsner Health System , which conducted the random telephone survey of 406 people in four states during the summer . 
Sleeplessness , anxiety , depression , anger , substance abuse and domestic violence are among the most common problems reported by mental health agencies . 
BP has provided $ 52 million for mental health care in the Gulf region , with $ 15 million going to the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals ; $ 12 million each to the states of Alabama and Mississippi ; $ 3 million to Florida ; and $ 10 million to the federal Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration . 
Even though the oil stopped flowing in July and the BP well was finally killed this month , some officials say the toll on mental health may get worse as the financial strains of summer persist into the fall . 
`` It 's like a virus that 's spreading , '' said Tonya Fistein , one of four counselors hired by AltaPointe Health Systems specifically to help people deal emotionally with the spill in Bayou La Batre , a tiny Alabama fishing community hard hit by the disaster . 
AltaPointe 's clinic is seeing twice as many new patients as in 2009 , an increase it blames on the spill . 
In Gulfport , Miss. , 42 percent of the patients surveyed at the Gulf Coast Mental Health Center said they were sad or depressed because of the spill . 
Steve Barrileaux , a psychologist at the Gulfport center , said some of the problems leading to mental health issues are obvious , like the loss of work by a person who rented chairs on the beach . 
Others are more subtle . 
Many people are deeply worried about the environment , for instance , or lament the lost moments they would have spent fishing recreationally with loved ones . 
Others are still afraid to eat seafood , even on the coast where livelihoods depend on it . 
`` What 's scary is the long-term damage that can be done , and we just do n't know about that , '' Barrileaux said . 
Chanthy Prak frets constantly about how to make ends meet in the post-spill world . 
Prak worked in crab houses around Bayou La Batre before the oil hit . 
She and her husband , another seafood worker displaced by the spill , have received only $ 5,000 in claims payments since May to support them and their seven children . 
There 's money going out but no money coming in , '' said the Cambodia native . 
In some areas , higher rates of mental problems appear to have little to do with the oil . 
At Lakeview Center , which provides mental health services in Pensacola , Fla. , calls have increased to a crisis intervention line compared to 2009 , but relatively few people have mentioned the oil spill as the reason they need help , said spokeswoman Karen Smith . 
Psychologists believe the uptick is most likely linked to the recession , she said . 
More oil came ashore just to the west of Pensacola in Baldwin County , Ala. , however , and a survey conducted for the state by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found significant mental health problems that people blamed on the spill . 
Twenty-three percent of households in the area reported having at least one person who blamed sleep troubles on the spill , and 11 percent had at least one person with appetite loss . 
Perhaps most tellingly , 32 percent reported a decrease in income linked to the oil spill , which could lead to additional strain , said Dr. Charles Woernle , the state epidemiologist with the Alabama Department of Public Health . 
Officials along the Gulf Coast worry that many of the hardest-hit groups -- shrimpers , Asian seafood workers and low-wage tourism employees -- wo n't seek help for mental problems because of cultural taboos . 
At AltaPointe , officials hope to use a share of the BP money to pay for additional oil-spill counselors . 
Tejuania Nelson , who runs a day-care center in fishing-dependent Grand Bay , Ala. , said preschoolers whose parents were left jobless because of the spill are lashing out in unsettling ways . 
`` They 're throwing desks , kicking chairs , '' she said . 
`` It 's sad . 
With this , people do not have hope . 
They can not see a better time . '' 
