Gulf oil spill at Deepwater Horizon threatens $ 8bn clean-up and an ecological oil slick disaster for the US This was the catastrophe that BP insisted could never happen . 
Now they call it ` unprecedented ' Twelve months ago BP dismissed the possibility that a catastrophic accident could happen at its offshore rig Deepwater Horizon , it emerged yesterday . 
An exploration plan and environmental impact analysis for the well , produced by the company in 2009 , concluded that it was virtually impossible for there to be a giant crude oil spill from it . 
Now City experts say that the accident could cost the company up to $ 8bn -LRB- # 5.23 bn -RRB- to clear up the slick . 
The US Coast Guard has estimated that 6m litres of oil has already spilled into the waters of the Gulf of Mexico since an explosion destroyed the rig on 20 April , killing 11 workers . 
A further 800,000 litres is thought to be pouring from the stricken well every day , threatening to turn the accident into the worst US oil disaster since the Exxon Valdez in Alaska in 1989 . 
Yesterday , a slick 130 miles long and 70 miles wide was being swept towards the ecologically vulnerable coastlines of Louisiana and Mississippi . 
Yet BP 's plan for the Deepwater Horizon well , filed with the federal Minerals Management Service , repeatedly said that it was `` unlikely that an accidental surface or subsurface oil spill would occur from the proposed activities '' . 
The company conceded that a spill would have an impact on beaches , wildlife refuges and wilderness areas , but argued that `` due to the distance to shore -LRB- 48 miles -RRB- and the response capabilities that would be implemented , no significant adverse impacts are expected '' . 
The revelation that BP had apparently underestimated the dangers posed by the rig brought outraged responses from local activists . 
`` If you 're going to be drilling in 5,000 ft of water for oil , you should have the ability to control what you 're doing , '' said Robert Wiygul , an Ocean Springs , Mississippi-based environmental lawyer . 
This point was backed by Chris Frid , professor of marine biology at Liverpool University . 
`` The way to deal with an accident like this is to hit the oil with dispersants as soon as it starts bubbling up to the surface , '' he said . 
`` Once it has been in the sea for a few days , it becomes more difficult to break up into small particles that can then be degraded by bacteria . 
`` But that has not happened . 
Either insufficient dispersants were available or there was a lack of co-ordination among those dealing with the spillage . 
Either way , there has been a ludicrous delay . '' 
For its part , BP has claimed that the events leading to the rig 's destruction had no parallel . 
`` The sort of occurrence a blowout at this depth is clearly unprecedented , '' said a spokesman . 
Crews have struggled for days without success to activate the well 's underwater shut-off valve using remotely operated vehicles . 
They also are drilling a relief well in hopes of injecting mud and concrete to seal off the leak , but that could take three months . 
The prospect of oil pouring into the gulf for such a period could have horrifying effects on wildlife , added Frid . 
`` That part of the gulf 's coastline consists of a sedimentary shore with lots of muddy inlets . 
The oil will penetrate into the mud , and because it contains no oxygen the oil will not biodegrade . 
For generations , any disturbance of the sediment will bring oil back to the surface and that will happen over a very large area . '' 
Similar fears were also stressed by Jane Lubchenco , head of the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , after she took part in a conference call with the governors of the gulf states on Friday . 
`` There is very deep concern about what is happening , '' she added . 
To date , most efforts to deal with the growing slick have failed . 
Rough seas and strong winds have blocked efforts to burn off the oil or hold it in check with inflatable booms strung along the coast . 
Louisiana officials have opened gates in the Mississippi river in the hope that a flood of fresh water would drive oil away from the coast , but the high winds also thwarted that plan . 
Meanwhile the Pentagon has deployed two C-130 cargo planes to spray chemicals on the oil , while the Louisiana National Guard has been deployed to help local communities . 
The cost of dealing with the Deepwater Horizon oil spill could reach up to $ 12.5 bn , according to City analysts , with BP 's share totalling $ 8bn . 
Neil McMahon of Bernstein Research estimated a total of $ 7.5 bn for the clean-up and subsequent damages , with another $ 5bn for losses suffered by the fishing and tourist industries in the area . 
BP owns 65 % of the licence , so would pay the bulk of this figure . 
BP is currently spending $ 6m a day on the clean-up but this is likely to rise to at least $ 10m a day , according to Bank of America\/Merrill Lynch analysts , and could go on for six months . 
On top of that , the company is drilling two intervention wells at a total cost of about $ 300m . 
Find out more and buy the ebook on Kindle from Amazon UK and US or iTunes UK or US Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
