BP is one of the most powerful corporations operating in the United States . 
Its 2009 revenues of $ 239bn are enough to rank BP as the third-largest corporation in the country . 
It spends aggressively to influence US policy and regulatory oversight . 
In 2009 , the company spent nearly $ 16m on lobbying the federal government , ranking it among the 20 highest spenders that year , and shattering its own previous record of $ 10.4 m set in 2008 . 
In 2008 , it also spent more than $ 530,000 on federal elections , placing it among the oil industry 's top 10 political spenders . 
This money has bought BP great access and , many would argue , leniency . 
`` I personally believe that BP , with its corporate culture of greed over profits , murdered my parents , '' Eva Rowe testified before Congress in 2007 . 
The Congress was investigating the worst workplace accident in the US in more than 15 years , a massive explosion at BP 's Texas City Refinery in March 2005 that killed 15 workers , including Rowe 's parents , and injured 180 . 
The US Chemical Safety Board , an independent federal agency , investigated the blast and released a devastating indictment of BP . 
`` The Texas City disaster was caused by organisational and safety deficiencies at all levels of the BP corporation , '' the 2007 report found . 
`` The combination of cost-cutting , production pressures and failure to invest caused a progressive deterioration of safety at the refinery . '' 
While experiencing its highest profits in its corporate history , BP implemented budget cuts of 25 % in 1999 and 2005 at each of its five US refineries . 
The safety board found a pervasive `` complacency towards serious safety risks '' at all of them . 
When the next great explosion at a US oil workplace occurred , it was of little surprise to learn that it was , again , BP at fault . 
It also came as little surprise that the location was the deep offshore waters of the Gulf of Mexico . 
BP and the entire oil industry have lobbied aggressively to open new US waters to offshore drilling and expand the access they already had . 
For decades , the vast majority of drilling from the US Gulf took place on simple scaffolds in 30ft to 200ft of water . 
In the past 10 years , the number of rigs drilling in depths of greater than 1,000 ft -LRB- deep wells -RRB- has risen dramatically , as have ultra-deep wells , those greater than 5,000 ft. . 
The trend is problematic for many reasons , including that drilling of water depths greater than 500ft releases methane , a greenhouse gas 20 times more potent than carbon dioxide in the contribution to global warming . 
Many of the shallower fields have dried up , and the industry has become ever more flush with cash -LRB- in 2009 , for the first time in history , seven of the 10 largest corporations in the world were oil companies -RRB- and more desperate for oil . 
As a result , the companies led by BP , the largest producer of oil in the US Gulf are breaking all records , pushing ever deeper and well past the point of technological know-how and safety . 
In September 2009 , BP drilled the deepest well ever at its Tiber field in the US Gulf at a depth of more than 35,000 ft -LRB- farther down than Mount Everest is up -RRB- . 
When it exploded , BP 's Deepwater Horizon Drilling rig was drilling at just over 18,000 ft deep . 
Anyone in the business will tell you that drilling at such depths is incredibly risky , even with the most conscientious oversight . 
As the Chevron Corporation writes on its website , `` Navigating uncertain weather conditions , freezing water and crushing pressure , deepwater drilling is one of the most technologically challenging ways of finding and extracting oil . '' 
In the words of Micky Driver , a Chevron spokesman : `` It 's lots of money , it 's lots of equipment , and it 's a total crapshoot . '' 
The entire oil industry , will continue to use its vast wealth unequalled by any global industry to escape regulation , restriction , oversight and enforcement . 
BP , now the source of the last two great deadly US oil industry explosions , has shown us that this simply can not be permitted . 
cents This article was amended on 8 May 2010 to correct the figure given for BP 's total revenues in 2009 from $ 327bn to $ 239bn . 
