The new Weee man sculpture in London - making people think about electronic waste . 
Photograph : Getty Images Meet Weee man , a 23ft high sculpture that was unveiled outside London 's city hall on the south bank today . 
Weee stands for `` waste electrical and electronic equipment '' and the sculpture has been created to illustrate the total amount of electronic waste that an average person in the UK is likely to create in their lifetime . 
Continue reading ... Shaun Murphy lines up a shot during his semi-final encounter with Peter Ebdon at the Embassy world snooker championship in Sheffield . 
Photograph : Chris Rose\/Getty Images For a long time now , the roll call of Embassy world snooker champions has hardly been a hotbed of surprises : Ronnie O'Sullivan , Stephen Hendry , Mark Williams the kind of players you would expect to succeed at a tournament in which the matches are longer and more gruelling than any other . 
But it could be different this year . 
When the first round of the Embassy began at the Crucible theater in Sheffield earlier this month , few eyes would have been on qualifier Shaun Murphy as he took on Chris Small . 
Murphy , a 150-1 outsider at the start , won that match 10-5 to earn himself a second-round tie against former world title winner John Higgins . 
Continue reading ... US soldiers are dropped off by helicopter to join South Vietnamese ground troops in an attack on Viet Cong northwest of Saigon in March 1965 . 
Photograph : Horst Faas\/AP The 30th anniversary of the fall of Saigon , captured by photos of the last US helicopter clattering from the roof of the US embassy , gets top billing in Nhan Dan , the newspaper of the ruling Communist party . 
But a trawl of English language sites from Vietnam reveals that , Nhan Dan apart , the anniversary has received precious little coverage . 
On Vietnam Network , which features official news , business and culture , the top story is about a lorry manufacturing deal . 
There is no mention of the anniversary at all on the front of the site . 
Continue reading ... Sivaram Vaishnavi , the daughter of murdered journalist Dharmeratnam Sivaram , weeps by her father 's body in Talangama , Sri Lanka . 
Photograph : Gemunu Amarasinghe\/AP In its last annual report , the international press freedom organistion Reporters Without Borders revealed that 2004 had been the deadliest year for journalists in a decade . 
Part was a consequence of journalists working in more dangerous places -LRB- 31 died in Iraq -RRB- but others are killed for exposing corruption , investigating organised crime or the topic of their reporting . 
Dharmeratnam Sivaram a Sri Lankan web journalist found dead today in Colombo appears to be in the last category . 
His TamilNet website was popular for its reporting on the Sri Lankan civil war and the continuing peace process , but through his writing he found himself on the wrong side of split in the Tamil Tiger guerrillas . 
Reporters Without Borders last year warned he had enough enemies for `` vengeful groups to target a journalist known to have condemned them and for his stance in support of the Norwegian-sponsored peace process '' . 
He was not the first to die . 
In a TamilNet article on life in government-controlled Batticaloa , a journalist tells how `` fear rules '' in the city . 
The man does not give his name and has not used it in print since gunmen shot dead columnist Ayiathurai Nadesan in May last year . 
He was one of the 53 journalists killed in 2004 . 
After Tony Blair was caught on the hop on Question Time by a question about GP appointments , SocietyGuardian . 
co. uk will be finding out from doctors how the appointments system really works . 
You can find Tom Happold 's view here on which of the three party leaders came out best from last night 's grilling by a TV audience . 
Coming up shortly on our World Dispatch section , Luke Harding 's report on his stay at the five-star hotel that now stands on the site of Hitler 's Alpine villa . 
Germans are deeply divided on whether the Fhrer 's holiday home is an appropriate site for luxury tourism . 
We 're also following the Abigail Witchalls case , yet more killings in Iraq , and the Pentagon 's release of previously withheld photographs of the coffins of US soldiers killed in service . 
Here on Newsblog Mark Tran will gauge Vietnamese reaction to the 30th anniversary of the end of the Vietnam war , and Simon Jeffery reports on the life and death of a prominent Tamil journalist . 
Tony Blair has insisted the 2003 Iraq war was legal after the Guardian revealed exclusively that he was advised by the attorney general less than two weeks before the war that British participation in the invasion could be illegal . 
We 'll have full coverage on our election site from this morning 's election press conferences . 
On our election blog , Simon Jeffery will be looking at reaction from the US press and Emily Bell examines how bloggers reacted to the news . 
In other news : a man is being questioned in connection with the knife attack on Abigail Witchalls ; Michael Jackson 's ex-wife gives more evidence at his trial ; and Vladimir Putin becomes the first Russian leader to visit Israel . 
We 'll also keep you updated on the fate of some wild goats in Devon , where pressure is mounting for a cull . 
Liverpool fans cheer during the Carling Cup final against Chelsea at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff - the last encounter between the two teams . 
Photograph : Clive Brunskill\/Getty Images `` We will all be Liverpool fans tonight , '' suggests the trail for Stephen Moss 's among the natives piece in today 's G2 . 
I beg to differ . 
There will be more than a few people out there rooting for Jose Mourinho 's mercenaries as they take on the Rafa Benitez 's Reds in the first leg of their Champions League semi-final tonight and they wo n't all be new laddish mockney types with `` loadsamoney '' sensibilities or housewives in lust with the smouldering Portuguese . 
Continue reading ... The Airbus A380 makes its maiden flight . 
Photograph : Pascal Parrot\/Getty The Airbus A380 , the world 's biggest airliner , soared into the blue Mediterranean sky today for its maiden flight . 
This big bird weighing 308 tonnes , designed to carry 550 passengers - although it can carry 800 - is undoubtedly an engineering marvel as well as a triumph of international cooperation . 
The UK makes the wings and engines , France the central fuselage , Spain the tailplane and Germany the rest of the fuselage . 
But will it fly - not literally but financially ? 
Continue reading ... In the esteemed pages of Online , Ben Hammersley claimed that Yahoo ! 
was the new Google . 
Maybe that 's why Yahoo ! 
were so keen to tell me about their latest service . 
`` We 've definitely been launching a lot of new products , '' Salim Mitha , the director of Yahoo ! 
Search UK and Ireland , said with a chuckle when I spoke to him yesterday about the company 's latest innovation , MyWeb . 
In effect , the MyWeb personal search matches Google 's My Search History . 
It then ups the bells and whistles quota by allowing users to save what Mitha called an `` electronic photocopy '' of a web page rather than a link or cache version , which could change over time . 
Continue reading ... The world 's largest passenger aircraft , the European-built Airbus A380 , has taken off from Toulouse on its maiden flight . 
Our interactive guide gives you a glimpse inside this flying behemoth , and we 'll be updating our gallery of images too . 
Back on terra firma , Labor and the Lib Dems are campaigning on education today ; we 'll also be looking at the personalisation of the campaign , and getting a view from the crucial marginal seats . 
Here on Newsblog Jane Perrone looks at Yahoo ! 
's newly launched personal search engine , while Ian J Griffiths responds to Stephen Moss 's call for Britain to get behind Liverpool in tonight 's Champions ' League semi-final . 
And you can follow the match live from 7.45 pm with Barry Glendenning on Guardian Unlimited Football . 
Negative campaigning can take many forms but there appears to be a real penchant at the moment for the vote-for-us-or-suffer approach . 
He has his followers in the most unlikely places . 
Romano Prodi , former European commission president and leader of the centre-left challenge to Silvio Berlusconi in Italy , told French voters at the weekend that a no vote on the EU constitution referendum would result in the `` fall of Europe '' . 
Tony Blair 's fondness for talking up the link between a few hundred Liberal Democrat votes and a return to the Tory era is just another point on the spectrum . 
Clearly some focus group somewhere is saying it pays to make the stakes higher . 
The galling thing here is that the big choices approach obscures other the big choices in an election and minimises such items as a policy program . 
Martin Samuels , writing in today 's Times , observes that it is only swing voters in the most marginal constituencies who are being campaigned to in the British general election , something Peter Oborne 's Channel 4 documentary last night -LRB- blogged here -RRB- blamed on the use of databases such as Karl Rove 's Voter Vault to pinpoint the voters and narrow policies needed for victory . 
No wonder there are only big choices for the rest of us . 
The Newsblog 's open invitation for you to send us your favorite blogs is a source of constant delight . 
Here are a few of my favorite recent finds , which have no common denominator except they are all rather good : ? 
A videoblog that shows the silliness that can ensue when nepotism lands you a job in the family firm that 's too boring for words ? 
Darth Vader Blog : naysayers out there may question whether this blog is actually written by the Lord of the Sith . 
I think it 's safer not to question the dark side of the Force . ? 
High Notes : a blog from opera singer Geraldine McGreevy ? 
Desperate in DC : billed as `` a subversive exchange of emails between two DC moms covering sex , lives & politics in Washington DC '' . 
The back-and-forth element works surprisingly well ? 
Mimi New York : a blonde 26-year-old Cambridge graduate melds with New York 's immigrant community -LRB- is she the next Belle de Jour , asks journalism . 
Er , no -RRB- With the final addendum to its final report now published , the work of the Iraq Survey Group -LRB- ISG -RRB- is over . 
It was clear beyond reasonable doubt where all this was heading when David Kay , the US-led group 's first chief inspector , resigned in January 2004 and told the US Senate `` we were almost all wrong '' . 
A year later , his successor , Charles Duelfer , gave up the hunt and returned to America . 
The 92 pages of new material do n't reveal much that is new -LRB- still no weapons , in case you were wondering -RRB- but there are a couple of interesting areas . 
First , that while the ISG can not `` rule out '' the suggestion that Saddam moved his stockpiles to Syria `` no information from the debriefing of Iraqis in custody supports this possibility '' . 
Second , that the ISG admits to `` shortcomings '' in its debriefings and staff management . 
The constant rotation of ISG personnel had negative consequences . 
Many detainees had as many as four different debriefers and were debriefed dozens of times , often by new , inexperienced and uninformed debriefers -LRB- ... -RRB- This had two unfortunate results . 
First , the detainees became quite familiar with the information we wanted and , as a result , developed a `` party line '' . 
Second , they failed to develop , or lost , respect for the debriefers . 
You can almost feel the frustration . 
While not a whitewashing of the Saddam regime -LRB- the main ISG report said the former Iraqi leader intended to re-start weapons programs when sanctions were lifted -RRB- , it , once again , affirms just how far off western governments and intelligence agencies were in their assessment of the danger from Iraq . 
The ISG expects some chemical weapons to be found , but degraded shells Iraq `` mislaid or improperly destroyed prior to 1991 '' rather than a modern WMD-tipped arsenal . 
A local shopkeeper arranges silk products at a textile market in Shanghai . 
Photograph : Liu Jin\/AFP\/Getty Images Trade tension between the EU and China is rising over a surge in Chinese textiles into Europe . 
Jacques Chirac , the French president , has said France can not let imports of Chinese textiles Experts are apparently baffled why at least 1,000 amphibians have perished after their bodies swelled to bursting point and their entrails were propelled for up to a metre . 
Witnesses said they had seen toads swell to almost four times their normal size before they exploded . 
Polly Curtis , Guardian Unlimited education correspondent The row over the academic boycott of Israeli rumbles on . 
Yesterday saw increasing questions over its legality and a handful of resignations from the union behind it in protest . 
Some students are now worried that they will get caught up in it ; like the Olive Tree scholars , a group of a dozen Israeli and Palestinian students living and studying together at City University . 
The idea is to build bridges , break down prejudices and , when they graduate , to go back home and work on joint Israeli-Palestinian projects for a year . 
The boycott is only against two universities , not individual students , so they should n't be affected . 
But there are nerves about the boycott , nevertheless . 
Two of the students , Yael Litmanovitz , an Israeli Jew , Firas Khalil , a Palestinian , have been keeping an online diary throughout their year in London at EducationGuardian . 
Tonight Jo Frost - that annoying woman with the stern uniform and the toy confiscation plan - will be back on our tellies , explaining to clueless parents how to stop their out of control offspring running riot . 
But one school in Florida has found a better way to deal with tantrums : call the cops . 
Yes - three -LRB- three ! -RRB- 
police officers in St Petersburg arrested a five-year-old girl -LRB- five ! -RRB- 
who went on a bender of a tantrum . 
Continue reading ... With veteran Labor MP Brian Sedgemore 's defection to the Lib Dems today , this morning 's party press conferences were lively . 
Matthew Tempest was there - find out more on his election blog posts . 
We 'll also have an audio report from Simon Hoggart , who 's spending the day following William Hague on the campaign trail . 
We 'll also be reporting on the Michael Jackson case , the murder retrial of Sion Jenkins , and the police inquiry into the knife attack on pregnant mother Abigail Witchalls . 
Simon Jeffery will be blogging here on the French referendum on the EU constitution and on the Iraqi weapons of mass destruction - or lack of them - in Syria . 
Oh , and we 'll be finding out more about the mystery of Hamburg 's exploding toads . 
I have reason to hate poker , or at least the online poker comment spam that plagues this -LRB- any many other -RRB- blogs . 
Yet despite being someone whose cardplaying sophistication halts abruptly at cribbage , the world of Texas hold 'em is utterly alien yet completely fascinating to me . 
Poker expert Lou Krieger , author of Poker for Dummies , has started a blog . 
Up until now , everything I know about poker has been learned from reading keen poker player Wil Wheaton 's blog : his excitement for the game is infectious . 
There 's another excellent introduction to European poker scene by Nicholas Fearn in the Observer . 
Six years ago the first plans were put forward for a European Union . 
eu domain name suffix . 
While it is not , for example , as drawn out a process as the creation of the euro , six years is a long time , considering we are talking two letters . 
The final deal was signed last week , and the countdown to a late 2005\/early 2006 launch has begun . 
Much of the wait will be taken up with a `` sunrise '' period to allow registered companies and trademark holders to get in ahead of cybersquatters . 
But the European commission has warned this may create a further problem : scammers who will use interest in the pre-launch phase to take cash to `` pre-register '' or `` reserve '' domain names they have no rights to . 
There are numerous spin offs here : whether voters in the French constitution referendum should take the EU word order above their own UE as further proof of growing Anglo-Saxon influence being perhaps the least worthy of further discussion . 
What we are really interested in is whether anyone will adopt the minimally punning use of `` eu '' for `` you '' in a series of increasingly dubious domain names . 
This post 's title is the first suggestion . 
Photographs : Hubble Space Telescope via Getty Both these images - the Eagle Nebula , left , and the spiral galaxy M51 , also known as the Whirlpool Galaxy , right - have been released by Nasa as the Hubble space telescope marks its 15th anniversary . 
Hubble has taken more than 700,000 images of the universe , but Nasa says these images are among the sharpest it has produced . 
A Russian woman named Elena has created a blog containing photographs taken of the areas around Chernobyl , which she says are like ghost towns . 
The Independent did a feature on her last year and I was reminded of it while reading our feature today on the eve of the 19th anniversary of the nuclear reactor disaster . 
Some bloggers believe Elena 's blog was a hoax , but if so , it 's a pretty elaborate one . ? 
Imogen Tilden , Guardian Unlimited arts editor `` William Blake is far and away the greatest artist Britain has ever produced , '' writes Jonathan Jones in today 's Guardian . 
`` He has become one of those monuments whom it is considered timely to knock off their pedestal , '' he continues , citing Andrew Graham-Dixon 's influential television history of British art in the early 1990s , which gave the visionary artist and poet short shrift . 
Continue reading ... This is neither big or clever . 
What it is , however , is six penguins clearing airport security in Denver . 
Posters on the Schneier on Security blog -LRB- which must have seen something of a traffic increase -RRB- comment that it seems like the beginning of a joke : `` A priest , a rabbi and two penguins walk into a bar '' At least 49 people have been killed in a commuter train crash in Japan . 
We 'll be updating the story through the day and receiving an audio report from our Tokyo correspondent Justin McCurry on the country 's worst train crash for 40 years . 
Ninety years ago today Australian and New Zealand troops landed at Gallipoli at the start of an eight-month first world war campaign aimed at capturing Istanbul . 
Commemorations are being held today in Turkey for the 100,000 on all sides who died ; we 'll have a report shortly . 
In the election campaign , Tony Blair has defended his decision to go to war in Iraq after the Lib Dems called for a public inquiry into the war , while Michael Howard is insisting that the business community backs the Conservatives after 63 commercial leaders wrote to the Financial Times endorsing Mr Blair . 
Here on Newsblog Mark Tran finds signs that the Bush presidency is starting to be viewed as something of a lame duck , while on the eve of the anniversary of the Chernobyl nuclear explosion Mark Oliver examines the blog of a Russian woman who says she has ridden around the disaster area on a motorbike . 
Western Australia 's last surviving first world war soldier , Peter Casserly , 107 , takes part in the 90th anniversary Anzac Day service in Perth . 
Photograph : Paul Kane\/Getty It is 90 years since Australian and New Zealand troops landed near Ari Burnu on the Gallipoli Peninsula , Turkey , in the early stages of the first world war . 
It is estimated that as many as 2000 Australians and 600 New Zealanders died in the first day of fighting at ` Anzac Cove ' , as it is now known . 
The battle is famously depicted in the Mel Gibson film Gallipoli . 
Official reports at the time claimed the offensive had been a success and understated the casualties . 
Newspaper reports were also heavily censored . 
However , first hand accounts paint a different picture . 
Continue reading ... Most of the weblogging events I 've been to over the last few years and I 've done my share do well to be in a chain hotel ballroom . 
Most , especially in Britain , seem to end up in bar basements , where shouted conversations `` What 's your weblog ? 
are had over remarkably loud music . 
Today is slightly different . 
I 'm in Paris , at the rather grand Palais du Luxembourg , home to the French Senat and some rather fine gardens . 
The event is called Les Blogs and 300 of the world 's best known bloggers and interested observers have converged on the luxuriously appointed palace to talk about the future of blogging and the broader world of social software , of which blogging is a subset . 
French media is hailing this as the day the world of blogs comes to Paris . 
I 'll be updating on events here through the day . 
