2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Diplomats warned that action was needed to halt Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's rapid advances against rebel positions in his country . 
The broadly worded resolution would seem to leave open the possibility that air forces implementing the no-fly zone may not only prevent Libyan military aircraft from flying , but also target Gadhafi s wider ability to wage war . 
We ve been told by diplomats this could certainly indeed move the door so that you have a more of a robust military approach by the West , by Arab countries to help the rebels and stop Col. Gadhafi from reaching Benghazi , said CNN s senior U.N. correspondent , Richard Roth . 
The authorization establishes a ban on all flights in Libyan airspace to help protect civilians . 
The exceptions are : -- Flights by U.N. member states for the purpose of enforcing the flight ban -- Humanitarian flights -LRB- such as those delivering medical supplies , food and humanitarian workers -RRB- -- Any flights which are deemed necessary by nations enforcing the no-fly zone . 
U.S. military officials have said that a no-fly zone would typically be enforced by fighter jets . 
A no-fly zone could cost up to $ 300 million a week , according to data obtained by CNN s Barbara Starr . 
Protect civilians and civilian populated areas In addition to the no-fly zone , the resolution authorizes member states to take all necessary measures to protect civilians and civilian populated areas under threat of attack in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya , including Benghazi . 
However , the resolution prohibits `` a foreign occupation force of any form on any part of Libyan territory . '' 
Roth , reporting on CNN and CNN International , said that the exact composition of the nations that would participate wasn t immediately clear . 
The Arab League 's U.N. ambassador , Yahya Mahmassani , said two Arab countries would take part in a no-fly zone operation , but he was not sure which two . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said the United States would not act without a U.N. resolution . 
The United States has said it wants Arab nations to take part in no-fly zone . 
Asked whether France will be involved in strikes against Libya if a resolution was passed , French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said Thursday at the United Nations that `` France is available with others to put the resolution in action , including in this domain . '' 
Germany , one of five nations on the Security Council to abstain from Thursday s vote , said it would not contribute any forces . 
The other nations that abstained from Thursday 's vote were Russia , China , Brazil and India . 
China and Russia are the usual suspects among the abstainers , but the presence of democratic nations like Germany , India and Brazil in that group somehow bothers me . 
$ 300 million per week just for no fly zone . 
You will b poorer than last year for sure . 
lol Hope America wins the oil in Libya soon otherwise all Americans will suffer more deficits and of cause you will lost your job , house and perhaps your wives will run away to China and marry rich Chinese men over there . 
lol It is really stupid to have war in time of huge deficit . 
It seems that America is hunger for foreign oil and money . 
Win the war and create more American contract to cover the expenses of Libya war . 
China , you are smart . 
Save every single cent and let America borrows from you . 
Eventually you will control America 's economy and politic someday . 
lol Here is my direct question to Prez Obama of USA Leaders of UK Canada France others ? 
Are you human being ? 
Are you competentenough to kill and steal with a half dozen who have unilaterally super imposed UN charter replacing Quran Islam . 
While China Russia India Germany and Brazil objects and men women children have made human shield outside residence of Col Qadaffi France UK Italy UK Canada flattening Libya with its citizen ? 
Half a dozen anti islamic none Christian members of security council have qualified from going from Hajab ban to Prophet 's caricature to virtually ordering closure of islam replacing Quran with UN charter bringing old Zoarastrian Roman Empire of zeus and Old Judaism -LRB- pre christianity PreIslamic -RRB- revived . 
Not only it is an order to flatten Libya empty six million Modern Libya with six refineries oil gas field destroyed with Italian Control of Libya -LRB- pre 3000 bc old ruins of Libya . 
what kind of leaders are YOU ? 
My family 8 -LRB- dead and alive -RRB- were dependent uopon me unpto 1973 -LRB- appropriately UN resolution 1973 to finish off Islam and people of Libya -RRB- despite col Qadaffi 's own Green Book in lieu of Red Book of Mao se Tung setting aside Quran ! 
I was number one employee with seven babies children and mother with $ 43m with other relatives dependent by 1973 . 
suddenly during 1973 - 2011 my entire family have been imprisoned with atrocities of worst kind -LRB- on going even today -- with some of us from 8 and few from relatives during 1973-2011 -RRB- . 
If you Mr Prez President Obama Pm D Cameron PM Stephen Harper -- if you have any decency explain these and I will explain that without adequate room to have had access to democracy job own family asset we are like in movie terminal 1973-2011 at airport or at home without electricity power without basic access to any one . 
Col Qadaffi had arrived in 1969 as Islamic : `` Brother Gamal abdul Nasser I have arrived to avenge Israel for 1967 Six day War '' ? 
Unfortunately I had mailed him a letter of reminder with my job address and tel Phone as best skilled best eductaed person of G8 . 
My photo and address is in http : www . 
islamic socialclub.wordpress.com Another war adventure costing billions and we do n't know when it will end despite the GFC and the hardships of some nations on the brink of total bankruptcy . 
Such wasted resources to make a point against someone we dislike has become history revisited . 
Change regime doctrine is still stuck with US troops in Iraq and the millions of death and destruction . 
But this time will be different . 
Watch what will happen to Paris and London next . 
Do n't blame the Colonel . 
He will be gone likely but his ghost will freeze EU capitals for decades . 
Libyans are tribal and will sort their stuff out amongst themselves but the ` culprits ' who set them up against each other will pay . 
Well put , Marinari . 
This country 's being run by a bunch of guys who were bullies in their high school days ! 
That seems to be all they know . 
We 'll let Egypt and Saudi handle it . 
But , I DO find it interesting how you threatened EUROPE , when it is pretty much certain that the US would handle it . 
Cute , but anyone with more than a week 's experience in the REAL world of military action and diplomacy KNOWS who you are . 
So , I 'll give you a hint , say hello to Iblis for us . 
I 'm in agreement with Cesar on Personny . 
I ` lm gonna go hug my toilet and regurgitate what you wrote and I read . 
Your ignorance is all too telling . 
You do n't have a clue about anything . 
What are you ... 12 ? 
Yes I think this will be the last time France intervenes for a LONG time . 
Their president had better start packing his bags now , because he 's headed the way of Tony Blair . 
Barba , so you want Gadaffi to kill all his people so as to be able to hang on to power , and you want the whole world to turn their head away . 
What has he being doing in his 40 + years of ruling . 
He has nothing more to offer , if he had ever had any . 
Point Godwin reached immediately by you ... And the point is certainly not there . 
If this was just for oil , those nations would have treated with Khadaffi regime , like before , because they already have commercial contracts wih Libya -LRB- those commercial contracts will be honored , there 's not been any seizure of equipement or oil , only a freeze on assets that will return to Libyan people as soon as possible -RRB- . 
The faxt is that Khaddafi has not only threatened his own people , but also renewed his terrorist threats . 
And that can not be tolerated . 
What happens in Libya was initially a street protest , it is Khadaffi that has forced the evolution into civil war by buying the services of lots of foreign terrorists to attack its opposition . 
And that 's why there 's not just a no-fly zone , but more importantly a decision to close the borders of Lybia to avoid invasions of mercenaries paid by Khadaffi , notably in Chad . 
The most important decision will be to enforce the absence of troup movements from the Southern borders of Libya . 
, and stopping the planes coming from there to South Libya where they are given firearms and heavy equipments to attack the North where most Libyan population lives . 
Those mercenaries must be arrested . 
They are since the begining the ONLY invaders and foreign forces that have occupied the Libyan territory . 
In other words , Khaddafi is the main treator of his own country , deliberately acting to threaten his own population that he is normally deemed to protect . 
For this reason , The no-fly zone will be implemented not just from Mediterranean sea , but also from the South . 
We can hope the collaboration by Egypt to offer its airports in Southern Egypt to control the Chadian border . 
And now the resolution can also help the poor Chadian country to get involved in the alliance and receive help to avoid the damaging action there by current Lybian leaders -LRB- and notably by the Libyan `` ambassador '' in Chad that is no longer acting as a diplomat but as an recruiter -RRB- . 
And the money for the Libyan oil or gas must not be used by Khadaffi to pay foreign mercenaries against its people . 
In fact Khadaffi has lost the opposition to the resolution as soon as he has renewed its terrorist threats , and directly threatened European countries -LRB- including civils -RRB- . 
It 's clearly unacceptable . 
And you 'll immediately note that , in France , despite of the strong political opposition to Sarkhozy -LRB- and the ongoing local elections currently occuring this week -RRB- , even the opposition has supported the no-fly zone and immediate implementation of it . 
There 's a consensus that the Libyan democratic spring must not be stopped and that the terrorist threats of Khadaffi are completely unacceptable . 
We have learned from Tunisia and Egypt . 
And we already know that we have support from most Arabic populations of the Middle-East . 
Clearly the Libyan spring is definitely not a threat for us . 
And the Libyan people was the first demander of the no-fly zone . 
If only Khadaffi had spent its money to help develop Chad instead of buying mercenaries against its own people , the situation would have been radically different . 
Khadaffi resists only to keep power by force . 
No legitimate country can reject the opinion of its people . 
When the situation is so critical that thrre are protests and a new opposition forming , the only legitimate thing that can be done is to organize elections , not war against his oppponents . 
And accept to resign and loose . 
But before this happens , the country leader must still protect his people . 
Khadaffi , by sending mercenaries against his people has clearly acted as a war criminal . 
He is no longer trustable : he lied in the past , we have given him a limited trust that he woruld fight terrorism and act reasonnably . 
We can not given him a second chance . 
And that 's why France decided to recognize the Parliament of Benghazzi -LRB- even if its still very informal , and still needs to organize itself and prepare its move to organize a new civilian society and regime , with elections -RRB- as the only legitimate representant of the Libyan people because it is the only one that has not threatened any one , inside or outside the country , and offered assistance to help protect humanitarian assistance , or to protect hospitals . 
You really need to study your history better . 
It is quite easy to play war if the war zone is away from yr . 
, country !!!! UK ; France , USA , if the playyard would be closer to yr home , you would think twice before entering into a war game . 
We in Italy are closest to Libya and North-African countries , nobody is helping us dealing with all refugees that arrived lately in Sicily , and our government is playing hard with northern african main-gas-oil-supplier . 
Offering our military basis is not THE SOLUTION ... ... ... ... WE STUPID ITALIANS !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! We have many arab people in our country and I am sure this will be the beginning of the 3rd world war . 
We are all CRAZY to get into this . 
Already many years ago -LRB- who knows who did it ?? -RRB- did ` nt succeed in hitting Geddaf 's plane and the CIVILIAN PLANE in Ustica wash hit -LRB- by mistake ?????? -RRB- not even able to distinguish a civilian plane from another plane ... -RRB- . 
So many INNOCENT people died . 
ABSURD !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Just let them decide their future and destiny . 
This country of ours founded upon slavery has been since its origination , a complete hypocriscy . 
When we get some politicians in their that realize this we will end the blood shed . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival in Merida , Mexico seems like they favor throwing candy instead of beads ! 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
