Credit : Reuters\/American Museum of Natural History\/Handout WASHINGTON | Thu Jul 8 , 2010 6:49 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Researchers have discovered two previously unknown species of bottom-dwelling fish in the Gulf of Mexico , living right in the area affected by the BP oil spill . 
Researchers identified new species of pancake batfishes , a flat fish rarely seen because of the dark depths they favor . 
They are named for the clumsy way they `` walk '' along the sea bottom , like a bat crawling . 
`` One of the fishes that we describe is completely restricted to the oil spill area , '' John Sparks of the American Museum of Natural History in New York , said in a statement released on Thursday . 
`` If we are still finding new species of fishes in the Gulf , imagine how much diversity , especially microdiversity , is out there that we do not know about . '' 
Writing in the Journal of Fish Biology , Sparks and his colleagues named the species as Halieutichthys intermedius and H. bispinosus . 
A third already known species called H. aculeatus also only lives in waters affected by the spill , they said . 
Pancake batfishes have round , flat bodies with giant heads and mouths they can thrust forward . 
They use arm-like fins to drag themselves along the bottom and a modified dorsal fin excretes fluid to lure prey . 
Sparks said the three species had been considered just one species , but his team found distinct differences . 
`` These discoveries underscore the potential loss of undocumented biodiversity that a disaster of this scale may portend , '' he said . 
BP aims to plug the well late this month or in August . 
The well has pumped millions of gallons -LRB- liters -RRB- of oil into the Gulf , coating shorelines and animals and having as yet unknown effects on creatures living in deep waters . 
It threatens to devastate the Gulf region 's multibillion-dollar fishing and tourist industries . 
-LRB- Reporting by Maggie Fox , editing by Vicki Allen -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
