BP aims to fix leaking oil well by July 27 : report Thu Jul 8 , 2010 1:29 am EDT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Besieged energy giant BP Plc aims to fix its leaking Gulf oil well by July 27 , ahead of its earlier target of mid-August , to show investors it has limited its burgeoning oil spill liabilities , the Wall Street Journal said , citing company officials . 
The July 27 target date is the day the company is due to report second-quarter earnings and will speak to investors , the Journal said . 
`` In a perfect world with no interruptions , it is possible to be ready to stop the well between July 20 and July 27 , '' the head of BP 's Gulf Coast restoration unit Bob Dudley told the newspaper in an interview . 
However , Dudley said this `` perfect case '' is threatened by the hurricane season and is `` unlikely . '' 
BP could not immediately be reached for comment by Reuters outside regular U.S. business hours . 
BP shares have fallen by half since its well blew out in April , spewing crude oil into the Gulf of Mexico and soiling the shores of every U.S. Gulf Coast state . 
The Journal said BP is also preparing a series of backup plans in case its current operations go awry . 
Citing company and administration officials , the paper said BP 's plan include connecting the rogue well to existing pipelines in two nearby underwater gas and oil fields . 
BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward met with an Abu Dhabi state investment fund on Wednesday , part of a quest for cash to ward off takeovers and help pay for the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
BP 's shares closed up nearly 4 percent on the New York Stock Exchange , buoyed by investor relief the company had said it does not plan to issue new equity , and speculation the worst is behind for what they see as an underpriced energy giant . 
-LRB- Reporting by Sakthi Prasad in Bangalore ; Editing by Anshuman Daga -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Therefore no fix appears possible . 
Therefore they will have to build a phony double wellhead to fool everyone that it is fixed . 
`` Not possible ? '' 
OK I 'm just crazy . 
Mark and confirm the GPS coordinates of the actual existing broken BOP\/wellhead now . 
US govt will block access to site . 
Quote : `` I am doubtful there is a technology to install any sort of a blocking tap fitting into the Y connection at the shaft junction once the second hole is completed . '' 
No , there just gone pump some ` mud ' in it . 
Just like the ` Top Kill ' operation , only now they inject it from the bottom . 
If it sticks or stay there , then they will pump concrete in it . 
So , the weight of the ` mud ' and the water column must be ` MORE ' than the force of the oil . 
But i 'm no oil expert . 
But i have seen more than 10 EVA 's -LRB- Extravehicular Activity -RRB- from NASA . 
And they look a lot more professional than these guys with there ROV 's . 
But they also have the biggest swimming pool of the world to test EVA 's . 
BP only has the swimming pool of the ceo 's to swim in ! 
And NASA uses CANADARM robotic arm 's and not floating devices in space like a ROV . 
A ROV ca n't turn a bolt , it only will turn it self . 
A robotic arm can turn a bolt beqause the use of ` Power Data Grapple Fixture ' -LRB- PDGF -RRB- . 
I think these ` oil guys ' are not very smart or educated , like the people from nasa or cern . 
BP is bankrupt bound !!! There are generations of families who are devastated by the oil spill and the ravages it is having on the eco system . 
Is it realistic that BP can support such families over the many years it will take before it is safe to harvest fish in the area ??? Can BP support these families for 15 plus years ? 
NO is the answer . 
BP can NOT survive !!! This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
