Fergus Walsh | 08:17 UK time , Tuesday , 30 June 2009 I 've been investigating news emerging from Denmark of a case of resistance to the antiviral Tamiflu - the main weapon against H1N1 swine flu . 
If a resistant strain of H1N1 swine flu starts circulating it would be a concern . 
Britain has invested a huge amount in its stockpile of Tamiflu and will eventually have enough to treat eight in 10 of the population . 
If it does n't work in many people that would be a setback , but remember that the vast majority of people who 've been infected with H1N1 swine flu have had a self-limiting illness and have overcome it without antivirals . 
If resistance emerges it would also mean that the virus is mutating -LRB- as all flu viruses do -RRB- and there may be questions about what other surprises it might have in store in the months ahead . 
So what actually happened in Denmark ? 
David Reddy , Roche 's pandemic taskforce leader , said although Tamiflu-resistant isolates had been obtained from a patient it looks as though this was drug-induced . 
This means that the virus developed resistance while the patient was taking Tamiflu . 
There were other patients in the same cluster outbreak and no resistance to Tamiflu was found in any of them . 
The phenomenon of drug-induced resistance is quite different from having a Tamiflu-resistant strain in circulation . 
By contrast there has been a Tamiflu-resistant strain of H1N1 seasonal flu in circulation since 2008 . 
`` There is no sign yet of a Tamiflu resistant strain -LRB- of H1N1 swine flu -RRB- circulating '' said Mr Reddy . 
`` We fully expect to see more cases where the virus may begin to develop resistance while people are taking the drug . '' 
This is the statement that Roche has put out : Roche is providing comment on the report of an oseltamivir resistant isolate of an influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- obtained from a single patient in Denmark . 
Roche reiterates that such resistant isolates in people on the drug is to be expected , as resistance at a rate of 0.4 % and 4 % was observed in adult and paediatric populations respectively in the phase III studies . 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- It is therefore expected that in some patients receiving antiviral medication , resistant virus will emerge . 
However , it is important to note that this does not mean that the currently circulating pandemic influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- virus is resistant . 
Ongoing testing shows that other currently circulating pandemic virus remains susceptible to Tamiflu . 
Communications from Denmark indicated that this was not unexpected and was not a reason to change recommendations on the use of Tamiflu . 
WHO recommendations remain unaltered . 
In addition to monitoring by government agencies , WHO and other public institutions , Roche recently initiated the global Influenza Resistance Information Study -LRB- IRIS -RRB- , which will include 1,200 patients per influenza season from 2008-2011 and will assess the clinical impact of naturally-occurring and drug-induced resistance to antiviral drugs . 
Roche also continues to support the activities of the Neuraminidase Inhibitor Susceptibility Network . 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- Aoki FY , Boyvin G and Roberts N. Influenza virus susceptibility and resistance to oseltamivir . 
Antivir Ther 2007 ; 12:603 -616 At 08:55 am on 30 Jun 2009 , sensiblegrannie wrote : Up until now we have been the dominant species on this planet . 
As weapons get bigger , more powerful and more damaging to environments , is n't it ironic that something so tiny as a virus could ultimately dominate our lives . 
The virus is an organism that has a much quicker replication time than us and therefore is able to adjust itself to what we throw at it , over a rapid period of time . 
If we go all out to destroy the mechanism for virus replication we may inadvertently cause our own ability to replicate , to diminish . 
Last night I watched the film , Children of Men , and the follow up discussion , and have come to the conclusion that we as a species , are long overdue for a change of attitude . 
Whilst I can think of many possible ways that our human existance -LRB- at least as we currently understand it -RRB- may be under threat - e.g. global warming , peak oil , abuse of political powers , abuse of financial powers , revolution , war , terrorism and a whole raft of differing health risks , including some that we thought we had dealt with once and for all -LRB- e.g. TB -RRB- - I 'm just not putting this particular flu variant that near the top of the list . 
Rightly or wrongly , my guess is that humans will , in some way or other , remain the ` dominant species ' for a long time to come . 
Having said that with all this dry weather , as a hay fever sufferer , I 'm beginning to wonder if grass might turn out to be the dominant species ! 
At 12:13 pm on 30 Jun 2009 , sensiblegrannie wrote : Sutara , check out a google search for ` understanding viruses ' and learn about these amazing life forms . 
By the way , viruses ca n't be destroyed by freezing them , but cooking them at over seventy degrees works . 
At 12:18 pm on 30 Jun 2009 , sensiblegrannie wrote : A google search of ` understanding viruses ' tells you all about them in video animation . 
Viruses ca n't be killed by freezing , they will still be active when defrosted , but cooking them thoroughly stops them replicating and so does pickling them . 
At 3:21 pm on 30 Jun 2009 , peterosbornuk wrote : Alongside publicity about Tamiflu there should be publicity about the track record of side effects , notably psychological difficulties linked to suicide . 
This would balance the information presented publicly , and avoid a bias . 
It 's worth recording that the UK is the country with the world 's fastest growing large base of H1N1 infections , with cases having tripled in the last ten days . 
At 12:18 pm on 30 Jun 2009 , sensibleoldgrannie wrote : `` Viruses ca n't be killed by freezing , they will still be active when defrosted , but cooking them thoroughly stops them replicating and so does pickling them . '' 
They can also be killed by soap and water - thus the ` official ' advice about washing hands . 
Oh , and by a lot of the commonly available household cleaners . 
At 4:39 pm on 30 Jun 2009 , ghostofsichuan wrote : Most antivirals are specific to a virus and Tamiflu is more like a generic for H1N1 . 
I think the West has been in an information overload about this . 
The virus that is baking somewhere in an underdeveloped country will be the problem as it will be well on its way before ever being identified . 
As mosquitoes interact with birds and horses and other animal life the transfers are only known upon arrival , West Nile , dengue and other known virus ' are also becoming more frequent in some countries . 
It may not be just one virus , it may be a couple or more that become active . 
The same people who were watching the banks are watching out for your health , so educate yourself . 
I think your comments might be somewhat more relevant to those traveling abroad , especially to parts of the globe where there are mosquitoes . 
The nearest problems to those that I have - without , as far as I know , any great risk of viral infection with a serious prognosis for humans - are the world-renowned Highland midges . 
-LRB- Yes , I do know midges can spread Blue Tongue and African Horse Sickness - but being neither a cow or a horse , I 'm not overly concerned at the risk -RRB- . 
At 1:27 pm on 01 Jul 2009 , sensiblegrannie wrote : There is something we have not discussed and I feel that it is time to do so . 
In the fight against viral infections , new drugs have to be tried . 
Some drugs have side effects , which one has to weigh up against the risk of the effects of the disease itself . 
There is also a growing consensus that we , the population , need to educate ourselves and not be so dependent on governments etc. , to spell it out for us . 
I recommend you all investigate these words to help inform your decision making . 
Other words which will be used in techno-bug language are vector and fomite . 
I am prepared to tell you what these words mean : Fomite means an object of transmission of bugs , eg . 
nit comb , Vector means a means by which a disease organism infects you eg . 
the nit itself I am NOT suggesting that nits carry HINI , I am using it as an example to help explain these two new words . 
Check the words out for yourself and become informed . 
Vectors can be animals , insects , bacteria , rats , mice , birds , insects , mosquito , blow flies , badgers , bats etc. . 
There appears to be certain vectors that are known to spread certain diseases . 
If there are new words being used , that you do n't understand , check them out because they may be used as avoidance words . 
The migration routes of birds overlap in many places and therfore virus ' can spread great distances in short periods of time . 
The Black Plague came from Asia and apparently came to Europe through Italy and in the end killed a quater of the population , transported mainly by animals . 
History records these events and each generation has felt safe and yet it tends to repeat , so far with less devastation . 
I only suggest that people be aware of the possibilities . 
What we do know is that there could be a new virus or an existing virus can mutate into a more dangerous form . 
There really is n't much that can be done but wait and see . 
May we all die of old age . 
At 11:13 pm on 05 Jul 2009 , heckle-yea-not wrote : How naive to assume that we could have any real affect on the way this virus was going spread . 
It will move amongst us as many have done in years gone by and will unfortunately kill a few of us . 
In this respect it is nothing new . 
All previous viruses have done the same . 
What we have as a group is generally good health good food and compared with previous generations drugs that can reduce the severity of symptoms and deal with the secondary infections that previously added to the misery . 
What we seem to have lost is a sense of proportion as far as risk is concerned . 
The media have contributed to this immensely The responsibility to the public to balance the information they provide seems to have fallen by the way side . 
Bad news sells copy . 
Compared to previous generations in almost every aspect of our lives we are so very , very safe At 06:56 am on 12 Jul 2009 , geoffreygrs wrote : What exactly is meant by `` underlying health problems '' , in the contect of the Swine Flu epidemic ? 
All news reports of people dying of swine flu when they had underlying health problems seem , without exception . 
not to divulge details because next of kin have requested no info be divulged . 
I 'm Fergus Walsh , the BBC 's medical correspondent . 
This is my blog for discussion of medical and health issues , especially research and ethics . 
Please get involved and leave a comment . 
For the latest updates across BBC blogs , You can stay up to date with Fergus 's Medical Files via these feeds . 
