Imran Ahmad said his daughter had `` been through a lot '' A six-year-old girl who died after contracting swine flu had `` been through a lot '' with other illnesses , her father has told an inquest . 
Sameerah Ahmad died at Birmingham Children 's Hospital on Friday evening after contracting the virus . 
Her father Imran Ahmad , from Edgbaston , attended the opening of the inquest at Birmingham Coroner 's Court . 
The hospital 's Dr Gale Pearson told the court that Sameerah had a condition which had weakened her immune system . 
Her death is the third swine-flu related fatality in the UK . 
The other two were in Scotland . 
There must be a lot of parents who are worried and are very aware of your grief The Health Protection Agency confirmed on Tuesday there are now 6,538 cases in the UK . 
Aiden Cotter , Birmingham and Solihull 's coroner , confirmed Sameerah had been infected with the H1N1 virus when she died and gave details of other serious health problems . 
She was born with a rare genetic disorder affecting the small intestine called microvillus inclusion disease , which causes severe and often life-threatening diarrhoea , the inquest heard . 
A post-mortem examination was due to be carried out on Tuesday and the inquest was adjourned . 
Sameerah 's body was released to her family on Tuesday afternoon and her coffin was taken to the family home where relatives and teachers from her school paid their respects . 
A rare genetic disorder of the small intestine Causes chronic , severe diarrhoea in newborn babies , which can lead to serious dehydration and a condition called metabolic acidosis Nearly always fatal , but can sometimes be treated by intravenous feeding or an intestinal transplant The six-year-old attended Mayfield School , a school for children with special needs in Lozells , Birmingham , which has been closed until Monday . 
Mr Ahmad told the court his daughter had suffered during her lifetime . 
Asked if he wanted a post-mortem examination to be carried out , he replied : `` Obviously I do not , because she has been through a lot already in her life . '' 
However , he said he accepted it , if it was `` the law '' . 
Mr Cotter told him a post-mortem examination was necessary to find out how his daughter had died , but was not strict law . 
`` It may be that , when we have all the evidence in , we still wo n't know but it 's important we try and find out , '' the coroner said . 
Mr Cotter said he was releasing more information about Sameerah 's death than was usual at the opening of an inquest . 
`` I think it 's very important that the public have this information . 
`` There must be a lot of parents who are worried and are very aware of your grief . '' 
Mayfield School head teacher Paul Jenkins said pupils and staff were being offered support over the death of Sameerah . 
`` She was a wonderful , happy , child and her death is a great loss to the school community . 
She will be sadly missed by everyone here . '' 
