ZURICH | Thu Apr 30 , 2009 6:12 am EDT ZURICH -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Swiss drugmaker Novartis AG will use data from a study on its pre-pandemic bird flu vaccine Aflunov and adjuvant MF59 to help develop a vaccine against the swine flu virus , it said on Thursday . 
Adjuvants are additives that help boost the effectiveness of vaccines . 
A study showed that when MF59 was added to Aflunov it can provide a broadly-cross reactive immune response covering all known H5N1 antigenic variants , even when that booster dose is administered six years after the initial dose . 
Manufacturers have started to take the first preparatory steps in developing a vaccine against the H1N1 swine flu virus that is being linked to the deaths of as many as 176 people in Mexico . 
Ten countries have reported cases of the H1N1 strain . 
`` These data reinforce the potentially broad applicability of the MF59 adjuvant and the role it can play in pandemic preparedness efforts around the world , '' said Andrin Oswald , chief executive of Novartis Vaccines and Diagnostics . 
`` We will use these new insights , as well as our strong leadership position in cell based flu manufacturing , as part of our efforts to develop a vaccine against the current swine flu outbreak , '' Oswald said . 
By 0718 GMT , shares in the group had risen 1.3 percent to 43.28 , largely in line with the European pharmaceuticals sector . 
Novartis said earlier this week it had received the genetic code of the new virus strain , meaning that it could start work on evaluating production and it hoped to get the actual virus in its laboratories in the near future . 
The group also said on Thursday a Phase II study had shown that Aflunov provided a protective immune response in children from 6 months to 17 years , making it the first and only pre-pandemic avian vaccine with a good safety profile and which is effective in building an immune response as early as 6 months . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
