MEXICO CITY | Thu Apr 30 , 2009 7:30 pm EDT MEXICO CITY -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Mexico began shutting down parts of its economy on Thursday to slow the spread of a new flu strain as officials urged increased worldwide precautions against an imminent pandemic . 
The World Health Organization said it would remain for now at its current alert level -- one step below full pandemic -- and that it would no longer refer to the H1N1 virus as `` swine flu '' to appease beleaguered meat producers . 
New confirmed flu cases were reported in the United States , Canada and Europe , although a case in Peru , which would have been the first confirmed case in Latin America outside of Mexico , was later discounted . 
Almost all cases outside of Mexico have been mild , only a handful of patients have required hospital treatment , and most global markets have shrugged off concerns . 
But the case count continues to rise , and officials say there are many unanswered questions about the outbreak . 
U.S. officials said new infections were occurring and at least 298 U.S. schools closed around the country because of possible infections . 
Canada recorded its first case of person-to person transmission of the virus . 
In Mexico , the worst hit country with up to 176 deaths , President Felipe Calderon told government offices and private businesses not crucial to the economy to stop work beginning on Friday to avoid further spreading a virus that is striking across age and class lines . 
`` There is no safer place than your own home to avoid being infected with the flu virus , '' Calderon said in his first televised address since the outbreak started . 
In Mexico City , where the virus has already brought public life to a standstill , some were skeptical while others vowed not to take part in the shutdown . 
`` Closing businesses is not right and not fair . 
What are we going to live on ? 
said Andres Garcia , who works in a tailor shop in the old colonial center of the capital . 
Mexico 's assembly for export factories known as maquiladoras , a pillar of the economy , said it would defy the shutdown call while some of the country 's mines also vowed to stay in operation . 
`` We have commitments that we have to meet , and if we do n't meet them , the cure will end up being worse than the disease , '' council head Cesar Castro told reporters . 
With its tourism industry savaged , shoppers staying home and exports to the United States in steep decline , Mexico could find itself in the longest , deepest recession it has seen in years , according to analysts . 
Mexico 's peso was hammered by flu fears on Thursday and its stock market slid . 
But most global markets were taking the flu news in stride as traders focused on hopes that a deep U.S. recession may be nearing its end . 
`` The information that we have at this stage is it is a relatively minor -LRB- economic -RRB- event , '' International Monetary Fund chief economist Olivier Blanchard said , although he added that some countries and sectors could see `` quite dramatic '' fallout from the outbreak . 
Previous studies at the World Bank have said a severe flu pandemic which triggers a clampdown on trade could cost the global economy trillions of dollars . 
The WHO and flu experts say they do not yet know enough about this new strain to say how deadly it actually is , how far it might spread and how long any potential pandemic may last . 
Flu epidemics generally last a few weeks or months in any single community , and can pass around the world in one or two waves over 18 months to two years before fading out . 
U.S. officials have reported 109 confirmed swine flu infections in at least 11 states and the only death recorded outside of Mexico -- a Mexican toddler visiting Texas . 
The White House said on Thursday that a member of the advance team that went with Obama to Mexico had also come down with flu-like symptoms and passed them to his family , although all of them had recovered . 
U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius told a public webcast there were still many unanswered questions . 
`` We know what happens year in , year out with seasonal flu . 
What we do n't know is if this is going to be more virulent or milder , '' she said . 
Normal seasonal flu kills between 250,000 and 500,000 people around the globe in an average year , including about 36,000 in the United States . 
Worldwide , 11 countries have reported confirmed cases of the H1N1 strain , with the Netherlands the latest to join the list . 
It said a 3-year-old who had recently returned from Mexico had contracted the virus . 
Switzerland also confirmed its first case on Thursday in a man returning from Mexico . 
Peru 's health minister Oscar Ugarte told Reuters that further tests on a suspected case there had determined it was not the new flu strain . 
Flu preparations were intensified after the WHO raised its alert level to phase 5 , the last step before a pandemic . 
The WHO recommended all countries track any suspect cases and ensure medical workers dealing with them wear protective masks and gloves . 
But it stopped short of recommending travel restrictions , border closures or any limitation on the movement of people , goods or services . 
Keiji Fukuda , acting WHO assistant director-general , told reporters there was no new evidence to prompt the agency to move to its top alert level which would signal a global pandemic was under way . 
Fukuda said Swiss drugmaker Roche was stepping up production of Tamiflu to deal with the infection at that the WHO had released some of its own stockpiles of the drug -- known generically as oseltamivir and proven effective against the new strain -- to developing countries deemed most at need , including Mexico . 
The World Bank also announced it was beginning to transfer flu emergency funds to Mexico and Argentina . 
