CAIRO | Thu Apr 30 , 2009 9:44 am EDT CAIRO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Egypt started seizing and slaughtering herds of pigs on Thursday as a precaution against swine flu , officials and farmers said , despite resistance by farmers and criticism from the United Nations . 
Egypt , already hit hard by bird flu , fears another flu virus could spread quickly in a country where most of the roughly 80 million population live in the densely packed Nile Valley , many in crowded slums around Cairo . 
But the United Nations said the mass cull of up to 400,000 pigs was `` a real mistake '' because the new strain -- a mix of swine , avian and human viruses -- has not been found in pigs . 
Farmers in the most populous Arab country said the state had begun confiscating animals . 
State news agency MENA said Egypt had also culled thousands of birds as a precaution . 
`` They have destroyed us . 
The pigs were our livelihood , '' said 21-year-old Hanan Ahmed , whose family runs a small farm with around 25 pigs in Cairo . 
`` They took them . 
And they beat them and us . 
They said they will take them to the slaughterhouse and kill them there , '' she added , saying she had received no compensation . 
The H1N1 swine flu virus is spread by people , not pigs . 
But culling swine , largely viewed as unclean in Muslim Egypt , could help quell any public panic . 
Pigs are mainly raised by the country 's Christian minority . 
Dozens of pigs were killed in the early phase of the cull . 
In the southern village of Deir Abu Hennes , workers suffocated 25 piglets in plastic sacks and killed dozens of adult pigs and gave the meat to their owners , a local official said . 
Some farmers there took their pigs to a graveyard to try to hide them from authorities , but the animals were found and killed on the spot , the official and residents said . 
Swine flu has killed up to 176 people in Mexico and one in the United States , and cases have also been reported in Peru , Canada , Europe , Israel and New Zealand . 
Egypt has not reported any cases , but has stepped up monitoring at airports . 
Agriculture Minister Amin Abaza said authorities had already confiscated more than 1,000 pigs despite efforts by some farmers to hide the animals . 
He said the pigs would be slaughtered and their meat would be frozen . 
Abaza said he was seeking the army 's help with the slaughter , which Egyptian state media reported could take up to a month to complete . 
In one slaughterhouse near Cairo , workers wearing masks used their boot-clad feet to hold down the snouts of pigs while they tested them for illness prior to slaughter . 
`` The issue of slaughtering more than 300,000 heads of pig is a difficult one , especially since private pig slaughterhouses are not enough . 
We will seek the help of armed forces slaughterhouses , '' Abaza told Reuters . 
`` The meat will be preserved in freezers after it is removed from the bones and will be offered for sale to consumers , '' he said . 
Egyptian officials have stressed that while they believed there was a need for a cull , the meat was safe . 
An official from the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization said on Wednesday his group had been trying unsuccessfully to reach Egyptian officials to correct any confusion about the virus . 
The Paris-based Organization for Animal Health said states should focus efforts on `` appropriate disease surveillance '' and strengthening biosecurity measures at premises where pigs are handled and slaughtered , rather than culling them . 
`` The culling of pigs will not help to guard against public or animal health risks presented by this novel A\/H1N1 influenza virus and such action is inappropriate , '' the organization said in a statement . 
Egypt 's state-run al-Ahram newspaper has said pig owners could receive 1,000 Egyptian pounds -LRB- $ 177 -RRB- per animal in compensation , but an independent newspaper reported on Thursday no compensation would be paid . 
