CAPE CANAVERAL , Florida | Thu Apr 30 , 2009 10:18 pm EDT CAPE CANAVERAL , Florida -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The U.S. space agency NASA plans to eliminate 900 manufacturing jobs over the next five months as it prepares to retire its space shuttle fleet in 2010 , NASA officials said on Thursday . 
The first 160 layoff notices go out on Friday , primarily to contractors producing the space shuttle fuel tanks outside New Orleans and the shuttle solid rocket boosters in Utah . 
The prime contractors for those components are Lockheed Martin Corp and ATK Thiokol . 
`` This is the first significant loss of manufacturing capability , '' shuttle program manager John Shannon told reporters . 
The three-ship shuttle fleet is due to be retired after eight more flights to finish building and equipping the International Space Station and a final servicing call to the Hubble Space Telescope . 
Managers on Thursday settled on a May 11 launch date for shuttle Atlantis ' 11-day mission to Hubble . 
Liftoff is set for 2:01 p.m. EDT -LRB- 1801 GMT -RRB- from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida . 
NASA officials said that they were monitoring the nationwide alert over the new swine flu , or influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- flu virus , but so far the disease was not affecting any of its operations . 
`` We 're not doing anything special at this point , '' said NASA 's associate administrator for space operations Bill Gerstenmaier . 
NASA plans to replace the shuttles with Apollo-style capsules that in addition to traveling to the space station will be able to fly astronauts to the moon 's surface . 
Hoping to keep the new spaceships , named Orion , on track for a 2015 debut , NASA said earlier this week it had decided to produce only one version of the capsule with room for four astronauts , rather than the six-seater version that had been planned for flights to the station . 
Money for developing Orion and its launcher , called Ares , is coming from funds that previously went toward shuttle operations and station construction . 
The shuttle is the only vehicle that can service orbiting satellites , such as the Hubble telescope , as well as handle massive construction efforts , like assembly of the space station . 
NASA has made four previous servicing calls to Hubble to repair equipment and install new science instruments . 
The observatory , which was launched in 1990 , has been instrumental in reshaping scientists ' understanding of the universe and expanding public knowledge of astronomy . 
Its observations have been used by astronomers to determine that space is expanding at an increasingly faster rate , that massive black holes live in the hearts of most galaxies and that new planets likely are born in flat disks of gas and dust that circle stars . 
The final visit to Hubble features five spacewalks to install a new camera , resuscitate two failed instruments and other work . 
NASA hopes the mission will leave Hubble in good enough shape to continue working until at least 2014 when an more sensitive replacement telescope is put into orbit . 
-LRB- Editing by Pascal Fletcher and Eric Walsh -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
