UAE says no ban on pork , but shops clear shelves -LRB- Updates to make clear no pork ban , adds supermarket comments -RRB- DUBAI , April 30 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The United Arab Emirates has not banned pork imports , a senior official said , but some supermarkets have pulled pig meat from their shelves as a precautionary measure against swine flu . 
Several countries have banned pork imports although the World Health Organisation has said swine flu is not spread by eating pork . 
`` There is no decision to ban pork meat products , '' said Majid al-Mansouri , secretary-general of the Environment Agency and member of a higher committee responsible for combating the flu . 
The market for pig meat in the UAE is small , since it is a Muslim country where restrictions on the sale of pork products already apply . 
Official figures were not available but two local food traders estimated the value of such imports to the UAE in 2008 at around $ 11 million . 
The UAE does not import live pigs . 
Although there was no official federal ban , some supermarkets and local authorities had begun to take precautions . 
Earlier on Thursday , a spokesperson for the Abu Dhabi Food Control Authority said there was a ban on `` all imports of pork products as a precautionary measure to protect consumers '' . 
Supermarkets in Abu Dhabi said they had stopped selling pork and those in Dubai did not expect to receive fresh supplies . 
`` We are not selling any pork products in Abu Dhabi , '' said Omar Khan , Spinneys supermarket store manager in the capital . 
Gulf states are preparing to hold an emergency meeting in the next few days to coordinate efforts to combat swine flu , which has caused jitters on Gulf Arab stock markets . 
The new H1N1 strain first emerged in Mexico and has killed up to 176 people there , according to Mexican authorities . 
So far , no Gulf country has reported any cases of the flu . 
The UAE is the Middle East 's main air travel hub but the country 's health ministry said this week there were no restrictions on travel as yet . 
The Gulf Cooperation Council includes Saudi Arabia , Qatar , Kuwait , the UAE , Bahrain and Oman . 
Israel on Tuesday confirmed one case of swine flu , the closest the virus has come to the Arabian Peninsula . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tamara Walid , Amena Bakr , Luke Pachymuthu , Stanley Carvalho , John Irish , Daliah Merzaban and Lin Noueihed ; editing by Keiron Henderson\/Richard Hubbard -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
