Mexican transit policewoman wears a surgical face mask in Mexico City April 27 , 2009 . 
GENEVA | Thu Apr 30 , 2009 11:39 am EDT GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Swine flu will carry the name `` pandemic '' even if the new virus turns out to cause mainly mild symptoms as it sweeps the world , raising questions about how serious the global alert actually is . 
Although it has been deadly in the disease epicenter , Mexico , and caused the death of one Mexican infant in the United States , in other countries people infected with swine flu have fared well , with diarrhea the biggest complaint . 
The World Health Organization is expected to move quickly to designate a full pandemic -- at level 6 of its 6-point scale -- within days to reflect the continuing spread of swine flu among people who have not been to Mexico , including in Europe . 
Margaret Chan , the WHO 's director-general , on Wednesday night raised the world flu alert level from 4 to 5 and said : `` It is really all of humanity that is under threat during a pandemic . '' 
Echoing other infectious disease experts , and drawing on her experience fighting SARS and bird flu outbreaks as health director of Hong Kong , she said viruses such as the H1N1 swine strain needed to be closely watched in case they worsen . 
`` We learn from previous pandemics . 
Pandemic virus is precarious , unpredictable , and will take us by surprise , '' she told reporters at the WHO 's headquarters . 
But Chan acknowledged that the disease may well cause more discomfort than death , noting that many patients infected in the United States have recovered on their own and without medicine . 
`` It is possible that the full clinical spectrum of this disease goes from mild illness to severe disease . 
We need to continue to monitor the evolution of the situation to get the specific information and data we need to answer this , '' she said . 
`` There may be a possibility that the virus will die out and stop , and that would be the best for us . 
But it can turn the other way . '' 
Several theories are circulating about why swine flu has killed as many as 176 people in Mexico while having mild and more manageable effects elsewhere . 
Some experts speculate that the Mexican victims did not receive appropriate medical care or suffered other health complications that made them vulnerable to the flu . 
For the time being , the WHO 's own guidance to people who suspect they have been infected with swine flu is essentially the same as advice for seasonal flu care . 
Its website 's `` frequently asked questions '' about the virus tell people who have a high fever , cough or sore throat to rest and take plenty of fluids , wash hands frequently , and avoid work , school or crowds as much as possible . 
-LRB- www.who.int\/csr\/disease\/swineflu\/faq\/en\/index.html #q 11 -RRB- Keiji Fukuda , the WHO 's acting assistant director-general , said that swine flu appeared very similar to normal seasonal flu , a disease that is rarely fatal for healthy adults but can kill the elderly and infirm . 
Between 3 and 5 million people experience severe illness due to regular , seasonal flu around the world each year , and between 250,000 and 500,000 die as a result . 
Fukuda said it was not yet clear whether swine flu would turn into a mild or severe pandemic , raising the possibility that the virus could have more serious effects as it continues to permeate new communities or as climate conditions change . 
There were three pandemic flu outbreaks in the 20th century -- in 1918 , 1957 and 1968 -- known respectively as Spanish , Asian , and Hong Kong influenza . 
An estimated 50 million people died in the first outbreak , about 2 million in the second and between 1 and 3 million in the third . 
`` In the 1918 pandemic , the first wave was mild , but by fall , the second wave killed many people . 
So whichever way this virus swings , we ca n't possibly know , '' said Guan Yi , a microbiologist at the University of Hong Kong . 
`` At this point , chances are it will be mild , but we ca n't rule out it will turn virulent . 
And even if it turns milder , it can still kill , depending on the kind of person it infects . '' 
Health experts fear swine flu could be especially dangerous for the old and infirm , especially those with immune-system suppressing diseases such as HIV\/AIDS . 
Its spread to poor countries that lack medical staff , drug stockpiles , and diagnostic tests -- and where tropical and other diseases are also prevalent -- is another serious concern . 
Guan Yi said that if it spread to Egypt or Indonesia , where H5N1 bird flu is endemic , it might combine with that virus . 
`` It could turn into a very powerful H5N1 that is very transmissible among people . 
Then we will be in trouble , it will be a tragedy . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
