US BP executive Bob Dudley to manage oil spill crisis Tony Hayward steps aside as Dudley is appointed head of new unit to manage response and clean-up operation Wednesday 23 June 2010 17.00 BST BP chief executive Tony Hayward , managing director Bob Dudley and BP America chairman and president Lamar McKay after a meeting with Barack Obama . 
Photograph : Mandel Ngan\/AFP\/Getty Images Bob Dudley , an American BP executive , today became the new man in charge of handling the company 's oil spill crisis , taking over from the embattled chief executive Tony Hayward . 
Dudley will report to Hayward as the head of the newly created Gulf Coast Restoration Organisation , and will be responsible for managing the cleanup and evaluation of environmental damage in the Gulf of Mexico , the company said . 
`` In the near term , my focus will be on listening to stakeholders , so we can address concerns and remove obstacles that get in the way of our effectiveness , '' Dudley said . 
`` And we 'll build an organization that , over the longer term , fulfills BP 's commitment to restore the livelihoods and the environment of the Gulf coast . '' 
BP said that the newly formed organization will manage all aspects of its response to the Deepwater Horizon incident and the oil and gas spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
That includes clean-up operations , co-ordinating with the US government and local officials , and managing the $ 20bn -LRB- # 13.4 bn -RRB- escrow account . 
`` Having grown up in Mississippi , Bob has a deep appreciation and affinity for the Gulf coast , and believes deeply in BP 's commitment to restore the region , '' Hayward said . 
Dudley , 54 , lost out to Hayward when BP chose a new chief executive three years ago . 
His oil industry career began in 1979 with Amoco Corp , which merged with BP in 1998 . 
Between 1994 and 1997 Dudley was based in Moscow , working on developing Amoco 's business in Russia . 
From 2003 to 2008 , he was president and chief executive of TNK-BP , a joint venture in Russia . 
A version appeared on p23 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 17.35 BST on Wednesday 23 June 2010 Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
