2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
The police said they want higher pay , shorter hours , better benefits and more respect ; bank staff said they wanted better pay and the resignation of some top executives . 
-LRB- Update 7:00 p.m. in Cairo , 12:00 p.m. ET -RRB- - Egyptian banks will be closed for two days , state television announced Sunday after protests by workers at the country 's National Bank . 
-LRB- Update 2:45 p.m. in Cairo , 9:45 a.m. ET -RRB- - Egypt 's parliament is dissolved , Egypt 's ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces said in a statement Sunday . 
-LRB- Update 2:15 p.m. in Cairo , 7:15 a.m. ET -RRB- -- After throngs of Egyptians put their lives on hold for more than two weeks , Egypt began its first regular work day Sunday without longtime ruler Hosni Mubarak as president . 
-- For the first time since demonstrators took control of Cairo 's Tahrir Square - the epicenter of mass protests that brought down Mubarak 's nearly 30-year regime - traffic was flowing freely through the area Sunday morning . 
-- At least 17 artifacts from the Egyptian Museum of Cairo are missing following a break-in , the country 's minister of antiquities said Sunday . 
It was unclear whether the anquities chief was referring to a previously reported break-in on January 28 , or another incident at the museum . 
-- Uniformed police officers joined demonstrations in Cairo on Sunday morning . 
Demonstrators carried officers on their shoulders amid cheers of `` police and people are one . '' 
-- Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Sunday that his country 's government welcomes the Egyptian military 's pledge to continue to honor its peace agreement with Israel . 
`` We believe that it is the cornerstone of peace and stability , not only between the two countries , but in the entire Middle East as well , '' Netanyahu said , speaking at the start of Israel 's weekly Cabinet meeting . 
-- In Yemen , a group of anti-government protesters marched toward a presidential palace and chanted , `` First Mubarak , now Ali , '' referring to Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh . 
FREEDOM BABY , SWEET FREEDOM ! 
A MAN WHO TAKE ANOTHER MAN 'S IS A DISGRACE TO HIS PARENTS AND THE WORLD . 
IT 'S PROFITABLE IF HE HAD NEVER BEEN GIVEN A CHANCE TO LIFE ! 
Keep the fight til pure liberation is vividly experienced . 
Anyone seeking freedom , justice , equality , love , peace , unity ; i stand with u both in spirit and in prayers . 
God is just and he will not let u down . 
You days of oppression are number . 
I thought everything was going to be chocolate rivers and candy cane palm trees when Mubarak stepped down . 
So I live and work in the Red Sea in Egypt . 
While i am pleased the country has achieved ridding themselves of a dictator -LRB- as far as we have been told -RRB- , I am now tired of the ongoing ` protesting ' that is affecting all of us . 
Things will not magically change overnight and yes you suceeded by protest the first time but that doesnt mean you can do it for everything . 
The sad fact is that these people now think that if they protest as they did to overhaul Mubarak , they will get everything they ask for . 
Quite simply democracy doesnt work this way . 
I am fortunate to be from New Zealand where we have freedom , choice and a quality of life . 
The Red Sea has been severly affected from the revolution fallout-Egypt if you want the money to roll back in , get back to normal life-tourists are your number one contributor to the economy and right now they are extremely few and far between . 
The lack of education and knowledge in this country is creating instability and unpredictability . 
This place barely functioned before the revolution , so whats next ???????? By the way banks are closed again for 3 days plus the weekend ... . . 
nice one-you want tourists to come back yet you cant assure them that there are the necessary services available ... wake up ! 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
