2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Maksim Gelman -LRB- pictured -RRB- was arraigned in Brooklyn Criminal Court on four counts of murder , one count of attempted murder , one count of assault , two counts of robbery and two counts of criminal possession of a weapon , Brooklyn District Attorney 's office spokesman Jonah Bruno said . 
He will be back in court Monday , at which point he 'll have a lawyer appointed for him , according to Bruno . 
As he was led away from Brooklyn 's 61st precinct to an awaiting police cruiser earlier Sunday , Gelman was deluged with questions from gathered media and hostile shouts from the crowd . 
After uttering an expletive , he said , `` This Authorities said Saturday that Gelman allegedly stabbed three people to death , hit and killed a man with a car , slashed at least five other people and carjacked two vehicles before he was wrestled to the ground early Saturday while attempting to break into the cab of a subway car . 
Thousands of Italians took to the streets in some 200 cities across the country Sunday in protest of Prime Minister 's Silvio Berlusconi 's alleged behavior toward women . 
The largest gathering was in Rome , where organizers said 100,000 people gathered , under the slogan , `` If not now , when ? '' 
In Milan , organizers estimated that 60,000 people gathered . 
Protests also took place outside Italy , including marches in Tokyo and Geneva . 
Sunday 's demonstrations were the biggest anti-Berlusconi rallies since the most recent sex scandal broke in January , when Milan prosecutors said they were investigating whether the prime minister abused his power by helping an underaged female , who he had allegedly paid for sex , get out of jail on a theft charge . 
Berlusconi has denied that he had sex with the underaged female . 
A string of sex scandals have dogged him . 
Japan : Economy slips to third in world , behind U.S. and China Japan has slipped to the world 's third largest economy , falling behind the blistering speed of China 's manufacturing growth , according to Japanese figures released Monday . 
Japan 's cabinet office released its nominal gross domestic product figures for 2010 . 
Japan 's economy was valued at US $ 5.4742 trillion while China was at US $ 5.8786 trillion . 
Japan 's economy did grow in 2010 , but only by 3.9 % , according to the government . 
China 's is expected to grow more than 10 % . 
At the speed China is growing , Japan 's government predicts China will overtake the United States as the world 's largest economy in less than 20 years . 
China has expanded domestic industries and infrastructure , driven by a surge in exports . 
Multinational corporations have expanded in China , taking advantage of low labor costs . 
Egypt takes its first steps in 30 years without Mubarak A council of generals has taken over the most populous Arab nation , and it now has to grapple with the economic problems that fueled the revolt , including massive youth unemployment and underdevelopment . 
It also has to deal with activists who are pushing for a swift transition to a representative government . 
Some protesters remain in Cairo 's Tahrir Square - the epicenter of mass protests that began January 25 and led to Mubarak 's ouster last week -- vowing to keep protesting until Egypt is under civilian rule , though the military on Sunday tried to move people out . 
Developments , as confirmed by CNN , on the revolution in Egypt : -LRB- Update 9:29 p.m. in Cairo , 2:29 p.m. ET -RRB- -- Hundreds of Egyptian police officers and National Bank staff protested on Sunday . 
The police said they want higher pay , shorter hours , better benefits and more respect ; bank staff said they wanted better pay and the resignation of some top executives . 
-LRB- Update 7:00 p.m. in Cairo , 12:00 p.m. ET -RRB- - Egyptian banks will be closed for two days , state television announced Sunday after protests by workers at the country 's National Bank . 
-LRB- Update 2:45 p.m. in Cairo , 9:45 a.m. ET -RRB- - Egypt 's parliament is dissolved , Egypt 's ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces said in a statement Sunday . 
-LRB- Update 2:15 p.m. in Cairo , 7:15 a.m. ET -RRB- -- After throngs of Egyptians put their lives on hold for more than two weeks , Egypt began its first regular work day Sunday without longtime ruler Hosni Mubarak as president . 
-- For the first time since demonstrators took control of Cairo 's Tahrir Square - the epicenter of mass protests that brought down Mubarak 's nearly 30-year regime - traffic was flowing freely through the area Sunday morning . 
-- At least 17 artifacts from the Egyptian Museum of Cairo are missing following a break-in , the country 's minister of antiquities said Sunday . 
It was unclear whether the anquities chief was referring to a previously reported break-in on January 28 , or another incident at the museum . 
-- Uniformed police officers joined demonstrations in Cairo on Sunday morning . 
Demonstrators carried officers on their shoulders amid cheers of `` police and people are one . '' 
-- Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Sunday that his country 's government welcomes the Egyptian military 's pledge to continue to honor its peace agreement with Israel . 
`` We believe that it is the cornerstone of peace and stability , not only between the two countries , but in the entire Middle East as well , '' Netanyahu said , speaking at the start of Israel 's weekly Cabinet meeting . 
-- In Yemen , a group of anti-government protesters marched toward a presidential palace and chanted , `` First Mubarak , now Ali , '' referring to Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
