Mr Obama has made three visits to Louisiana since the spill US President Barack Obama has pledged to use `` every resource '' available to clean shores and help those affected by the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
In his weekly address , Mr Obama said that BP appeared to be `` making progress '' in containing the leak after placing a cap over the well . 
But the company 's latest effort , even if successful , will only stop some of the leak . 
Mr Obama has faced mounting criticism for his handling of the crisis . 
Correspondents say that , as the political fall-out has increased , the president 's tone has become stronger , saying earlier in the week that he was `` furious '' with how the issue has been managed . 
In his address , broadcast from Grand Isle , Louisiana , Mr Obama said he had spoken to local residents who were angry not only about the money lost , but also about the potential loss of their entire livelihoods . 
`` We will continue to leverage every resource at our disposal to protect coastlines , to clean up the oil , to hold BP and other companies accountable for damages , to begin to restore the bounty and beauty of this region - and to aid the hardworking people of the Gulf as they rebuild their businesses and communities , '' he said . 
Four states have so far been affected by the spill - Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama and Florida . 
The oil spill has become a major political issue for Mr Obama Mr Obama pledged to stand with the residents of Louisiana unitil they are `` made whole '' . 
`` They meet their responsibilities . 
But now because of a manmade catastrophe - one that 's not their fault and that 's beyond their control - their lives have been thrown into turmoil , '' he said . 
After a procedure known as `` top kill '' failed a week ago , BP has began a new attempt to stem the oil , which involves a lower marine riser package -LRB- LRMP -RRB- cap being put over the well to contain the leak . 
Mr Obama also reiterated a commitment to ensure that BP was financially accountable for the damaged caused . 
`` We will make sure they pay every single dime owed to the people along the Gulf coast , '' he said . 
The latest stage in BP 's efforts to contain leaking oil has involved lowering a cap onto the failed blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- valve system on the seabed . 
The cap sits on the BOP 's lower marine riser package -LRB- LMRP -RRB- section . 
First , the damaged riser - the pipe which takes oil from the well - was cut where it nears the seabed using a remotely-operated shear . 
This was completed at 1930 CDT on 1 June -LRB- 0030 GMT 2 June -RRB- . 
The next stage was for a diamond wire cutter to saw through the riser close to the LMRP . 
The blade got stuck and had to be removed but BP eventually cut through the pipe using giant shears manipulated by undersea robots -LRB- ROV -RRB- . 
After removing the pipe , the cap was lowered onto the LMRP enabling the leaking oil and gas to be funnelled to a drill ship on the surface . 
Latest estimates suggest more than half of the leaking oil is now being captured . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT The oil company , whose share price has dropped by a third since the accident , has been coming under fire for spending a reported $ 50m on TV advertising to improve its image while the crisis was still going on . 
On Friday , Mr Obama also criticised BP for failing to rule out paying a quarterly shareholder dividend . 
BP says it has spent more than $ 1bn so far on clean-up and containment efforts since the Deepwater horizon rig exploded and sank in April with the loss of 11 workers . 
Speaking on Friday , Adm Allen said rough estimates showed that 1,000 barrels a day were being captured through the containment cap . 
Estimated cost of sand barrier project : $ 360m BP scheduled to make a first-quarter dividend payment to shareholders on 21 June At its worst , BP saw 34 % wiped off its value This is only a small part of the 12,000-19 ,000 barrels a day believed to be leaking . 
Adm Allen has said the amount should increase as BP shut off vents to capture more of the oil , but added that it was too early to be over-optimistic . 
But BP chief operating officer Doug Suttles said he was confident the cap would work and capture up to 90 % the spill . 
The estimates for the amount of oil that has already leaked vary widely from 20 million to 45 million gallons . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
