Amateur video shows rebels preparing to kill men , apparently Assad loyalists The conflict between rebels and government forces across Syria will decide the fate of the nation , President Bashar al-Assad has warned . 
In a written statement marking armed forces day , he praised soldiers for confronting `` armed terrorist gangs '' . 
The anti-regime uprising has in recent weeks seen fighting on the streets of the capital , Damascus , and in the second city , Aleppo . 
Activists estimate some 20,000 people have died since March last year . 
A video has been circulated online showing the execution by rebel gunmen in Aleppo of four men said to be Assad loyalists from the Berri clan . 
The act was condemned from human rights activists . 
In Aleppo , state media said government troops had inflicted heavy losses on the rebels and were mopping up remnants of terrorist groups . 
The UN confirmed that their observers had seen fighter jets firing on rebels in Aleppo on Tuesday . 
However , activists and reporters on the ground said rebels appeared to still have control over large parts of the city . 
A spokesman for the rebels has denied a report on the US channel NBC that they have acquired surface-to-air -LRB- Sam -RRB- missiles from Turkey . 
Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut It was not surprising that President Assad 's latest public pronouncement did not take the form of a television appearance . 
But his remarks appeared to reflect a continuing belief that the challenge he is facing is a multifaceted external conspiracy by `` the enemy '' . 
That traditionally means Israel but was probably broadened to include the Western powers , using `` internal agents as a bridge and a tool to strike the stability of the homeland and shake the security of the citizen '' . 
He also appeared still to believe that the `` fateful battle '' now being fought will be won , not just by the `` heroic steadfastness '' of the army but by the awareness of `` this proud people , who astonished them by confronting their plots and inflicting defeats on them '' . 
Mr Assad has not spoken in public for two weeks , but in his written statement , he said : `` The fate of our people and our nation , past , present and future , depends on this battle . '' 
He praised the armed forces as `` heroic '' and described them as the defender of `` just causes '' . 
The statement was published in an army magazine and reported by state news agency Sana . 
Amnesty International says that government forces committed crimes against humanity this month in Aleppo . 
In the report , based on research carried out in May , the rights group appealed to the UN Security Council to refer Syria to the International Criminal Court and impose an arms embargo on the country . 
Amnesty accuses security forces and pro-government militiamen , known as shabiha , of firing on peaceful protesters and bystanders , including children . 
It also says medical teams were targeted and those arrested were often tortured . 
UK Prime Minister David Cameron : `` What is happening in Aleppo and Damascus is a stain on our world '' In the video which appeared on YouTube , gunmen lead a number of men in their underwear , some of them bruised or bloodied , into a yard crowded with men shouting religious slogans . 
After the half-naked men are put up against a wall , the camera moves back behind the crowd , losing sight of them . 
Heavy , sustained gunfire from Kalashnikov assault rifles erupts after which the camera shows a pile of bodies by the wall . 
Rami Abdel Rahman , head of the UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights , said of the footage : `` This is criminal . 
This is revenge . '' 
In another development , reports suggested fighting had broken out for the first time near a Christian area of the Old City of Damascus . 
Activists reported an outbreak of shooting early on Wednesday morning near the Damascus Christian district of Bab Tuma . 
There were no immediate further details . 
According to the NBC report from northern Syria , the rebel Free Syria Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- in Aleppo has obtained nearly two dozen shoulder-launched Sam missiles . 
However , FSA political adviser Bassam al-Dada told pan-Arabic TV channel al-Arabiya they had `` not obtained any such weapons at all '' . 
`` Had we acquired such weapons , we would have seen the difference on the ground , '' he added , speaking by phone from Istanbul . 
Are you in Syria ? 
Send us your comments and experiences using the form below . 
Send your pictures and videos to yourpics@bbc.co.uk or text them to 61124 -LRB- UK -RRB- or +447624800100 -LRB- International -RRB- . 
If you have a large file you can upload here . 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
