WASHINGTON -- BP is mounting a new challenge to the U.S. government 's estimates of how much oil flowed from the runaway well deep below the Gulf of Mexico , an argument that could reduce by billions of dollars the federal pollution fines it faces for the largest offshore oil spill in history . 
BP 's lawyers are arguing that the government overstated the spill by 20 to 50 percent , staffers working for the presidential oil spill commission said Friday . 
In a 10-page document obtained by The Associated Press , BP says the government 's spill estimate of 206 million gallons is `` overstated by a significant amount '' and the company said any consensus around that number is premature and inaccurate . 
The company submitted the document to the commission , the Justice Department and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . 
`` They rely on incomplete or inaccurate information , rest in large part on assumptions that have not been validated , and are subject to far greater uncertainties than have been acknowledged , '' BP wrote . 
`` BP fully intends to present its own estimate as soon as the information is available to get the science right . '' 
In a statement Friday , the company said the government 's estimates failed to account for equipment that could obstruct the flow of oil and gas , such as the blowout preventer , making its numbers `` highly unreliable . '' 
BP 's request could save it as much as $ 10.5 billion or as little as $ 1.1 billion , depending on factors such as whether the government concludes that BP acted negligently . 
For context , the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 's entire federal budget for 2010 was $ 10.3 billion . 
President Barack Obama has said he wants Congress to set aside some of the money BP pays for fines for the Gulf 's coastal restoration . 
Louisiana lawmakers are pushing legislation that would require at least 80 percent of the civil and criminal penalties charged to BP , and possibly other companies , to be returned to the Gulf Coast . 
William K. Reilly , co-chairman of the presidential commission , expressed amazement at BP 's case Friday . 
Reilly headed the Environmental Protection Agency under President George H.W. Bush . 
`` They are going to argue that it is 50 percent less '' than the government 's total ? 
Under the Clean Water Act , the oil giant -- which owned and operated the well -- faces fines of up to $ 1,100 for each barrel of oil spilled . 
If BP were found to have committed gross negligence or willful misconduct , the fine could be up to $ 4,300 per barrel . 
That means that based on the government 's estimate of 206 million gallons , BP could face civil fines alone of between $ 5.4 billion and $ 21.1 billion . 
`` They are going to argue it was less , '' said Priya Aiyar , the commission 's deputy chief counsel . 
`` BP has not offered its own numbers yet , but BP has told us that it thinks the government 's numbers are too high and thinks the actual flow rate can be actually 20 to 50 percent lower . '' 
Rep. Edward J. Markey , D-Mass . 
, a member of the House energy panel that is investigating the spill , said in a statement Friday to the AP that BP has done whatever it could to avoid revealing the true flow rate of the spill . 
`` With billions of dollars at stake , it is no surprise that they are now litigating the very numbers which they sought to impede , '' Markey said . 
`` The government engaged independent scientists and multiple techniques to arrive at their estimate . 
Additional independent peer-reviewed studies have corroborated their estimate . 
BP has a high bar to meet to overturn this estimate . '' 
BP 's argument could be bolstered by the federal government 's missteps in coming up with a final estimate for the spill 's volume . 
The Obama administration has offered nearly 10 estimates of how much oil flowed from the BP well , coming up with a refined conclusion late last month of 206 million gallons , which is likely its last . 
Internal documents released late Friday under the Freedom of Information Act show that the White House was intimately involved in deciding how scientific information was portrayed to the public , particularly when it came to the August 4 release of a document that showed where the spilled oil had gone . 
The five-page report , which was touted by Carol Browner , the president 's energy adviser , on morning talk shows and at White House press briefing showed that half the oil was gone -- either from evaporation , burning , skimming or recovery at the well head . 
The 3,500 pages of documents reveal that the administration wanted the oil budget to show its efforts to respond to the disaster were working , despite objections from top EPA officials , including Administrator Lisa Jackson , over how some of the data was presented . 
An earlier version of the press release issued with the paper said that 33 percent of the oil released was captured or mitigated by recovery efforts . 
A final version , changed hours before its release , said `` the vast majority '' of the spilled oil was addressed by recovery efforts or had naturally dispersed or evaporated . 
That morning , Browner appeared on national television saying that an initial assessment by federal scientists showed `` more than three-quarters of the oil is gone . '' 
In an e-mail sent later that morning addressed to Browner 's assistant , Heather Zichal , NOAA chief Jane Lubchenco finds fault with the White House 's interpretation of the report 's numbers and attribution of the report solely to NOAA . 
The report was drafted by several agencies . 
`` I 'm concerned to hear the oil budget report is being portrayed as saying that 75 percent of the oil is gone and that this is a NOAA report , '' Lubchenco writes . 
`` Please help make sure that both errors are corrected . '' 
The White House acknowledged Browner had misspoke . 
