As the US army faces what `` may be the toughest recruiting environment ever '' is it is upping its spending on recruitment next year to $ 320m up from $ 240m . 
This amounts to $ 4,000 per recruit if the army signs up 80,000 next year . 
July proved to a good month for the US army 's recruitment target . 
This branch of the US armed forces has struggled to meet its recruitment targets but last month it signed up 8,085 new recruits , beating its target of 7,450 . 
Still , when the army finishes its financial year on 30 September it is expected to be 7,000 short of its 80,000 recruiting goal . 
With public support for the war in Iraq steadily dropping , the army chief of staff , General Peter Schoomaker , tells the San Francisco Chronicle that next year `` may be the toughest recruiting environment ever . '' 
That 's no surprise when the army is up against the likes of Cindy Sheehan , who is camped outside George Bush 's Texas ranch in protest at the death of her son in Iraq . 
Media coverage of returning casualties from Iraq , such as this powerful piece in the Washington Post does the US army no favors either . 
Given this unpromising context , Business Week reports that the army will spend more money on recruitment ads next year , about $ 320m up from $ 240m this year . 
As it helpfully points out this amounts to $ 4,000 per recruit if the army signs up 80,000 next year - more than twice what Toyota spends to woo a new customer . 
As part of this marketing drive , the army has plans for 15 televised town hall meetings in which carefully selected soldiers will put a positive spin on the US presence in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
Meanwhile TV ads will target parents with one featuring a mother 's voice-over : `` Thanks for bringing the best out the best in my child . '' 
For those keeping tabs on the Pentagon 's recruitment efforts , the CounterRecruiter website , a project of the Indypendent , the newspaper of the New York City Independent Media Center , provides useful information , including the army 's controversial attempts to recruit from schools and universities . 
Yet while the army struggles to fill its ranks , this appears not to be the case with the navy , air force and Marines . 
According to Strategy Page , a site specialising on military issues as its name indicates , the army seems to be having trouble attracting those applicants who were unable to get into the other services . 
James Dunnigan , the editor in chief of Strategy Page , also notes that the army is having no trouble getting people who have served in Iraq to re-enlist . 
By the end of the year , the army expects to get 4,000 more re-enlistments than it expected , he writes . 
Yet even he does not deny that the army is having trouble getting new recruits . 
Given the situation , any idea of sending US troops to Iran must fill the army with dread . 
