Hanoi Jane takes on Iraq war with US bus tour Hollywood star accused of using stance to boost book sales , but applauded by some veterans groups Tuesday 26 July 2005 10.10 BST Jane Fonda visits an anti-aircraft position in North Vietnam in July 1972 . 
Photograph : AP Hollywood star and activist Jane Fonda is planning to take a bus tour across America to call for an end to US military operations in Iraq in a move that has already drawn sharp reactions from both the pro- and anti-war camps . 
Ms Fonda , who earned the nickname Hanoi Jane after she was photographed sitting on a north Vietnamese anti-aircraft gun at the height of the Vietnam war , said she would be joined by families of Iraq war veterans and her daughter on the tour . 
`` I 've decided I 'm coming out , '' she told a cheering audience during an appearance in New Mexico to promote her autobiography , explaining that Iraq veterans had encouraged her to break her silence . 
`` I have not taken a stand on any war since Vietnam , '' she added . 
`` I carry a lot of baggage from that . '' 
Ms Fonda said her anti-war tour in March would use a bus that runs on vegetable oil . 
`` I ca n't go into any detail except to say that it 's going to be pretty exciting , '' she said . 
Ms Fonda is still reviled by many Vietnam veterans for her stance and actions during the Vietnam war . 
In her autobiography , My Life So Far , she said she was not thinking about what she was doing when she sat on the aircraft gun , and the impression it gave that she was the enemy of American soldiers and veterans was something she still carried `` heavy in my heart '' . 
But Ted Sampley , vice president of Rolling Thunder , one of the largest Vietnam Veterans organizations , said it was a case of deja vu . 
`` She has no credibility ; she is going to make a lot of people mad , me being one of them , '' he said . 
Jim Phillips , a Middle East analyst at the Heritage Foundation , a right-wing Washington think-tank , said : `` Her book sales are not going too well so I guess she has latched on to the Iraq war as a way of staying in the news . 
`` She is irrelevant , and I just see her the same as Tom Cruise , spouting off about things they know nothing about . '' 
But anti-war groups were generally supportive of the Hollywood star . 
Wes Hamilton , 57 , a former Vietnam soldier and a member of United States Veterans for Peace , said : `` I 'm excited about it frankly and I really applaud her for what she is doing . 
It is critical to keep the war in the public attention . 
`` I was just back from Vietnam when she made her controversial journey . 
There was a tremendous division in the US ... I was still in the Marines or recently discharged and my point was that whatever it takes to get the conversation in the media is important . '' 
`` The people from my generation are the ones who did stand up and bring the Vietnam war to its conclusion . 
If it means bringing that generation back together again and getting a new generation to stand up to stop this war then so be it . '' 
Judy Linehan , a spokeswoman for Military Families Speak Out , said : `` She was maligned and there was an over-reaction to what she did . 
She is a mature woman and has evolved in her politics but is the same passionate woman who believes in justice and I hope that is what comes across . '' 
Mrs Linehan , whose son , Colin , served as a doctor in Iraq between November 2003 and October 2004 , said the main problem for Ms Fonda would be the American press . 
`` The danger will be that they just pick up on the surface layer , but I would hope people will welcome anybody who can stir a discussion on Iraq and draws attention to the real issues . '' 
