MELBOURNE -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Melbourne , Australia 's second-largest city , is a vibrant metropolis packed with cultural attractions , historical sites and charming back lane cafes . 
This southern city of many faces , some 970 km from Sydney , also plays host to major sporting events , including the Australian Open tennis tournament every January . 
For a truly local sports experience , take in an Australian Football League game where passions run high . 
Reuters correspondents with local knowledge help visitors get the most out of their stay . 
5 p.m. - A taxi ride to the heart of the city from Tullamarine Airport costs about A$ 60 and will take 30 minutes . 
There are plenty of great places to stay , but if you check into the Rialto Intercontinental Hotel at 495 Collins Street you 'll be staying in a unique building which began life as a wool shed . 
The heritage listed property is made up of two buildings with a generous open space running between , housing a restaurant and bar on the ground floor . 
While the rooms are modern , the exterior of the building and foyer are from a bygone era . 
6 p.m. - Enjoy an evening drink in the hotel bar and savor the historic ambiance . 
Follow this with dinner at `` The Press Club , '' a restaurant just five minutes walk from the hotel known for its modern Greek cuisine . 
8 p.m. - Whatever time of the year you visit Melbourne , there 's always an opportunity to take in an evening performance at the Comedy Theatre Melbourne . 
Currently showing is ` Rock of Ages ' set in Los Angeles in 1987 . 
11 p.m. - Stop by the Loft bar , at 117 Lonsdale Street in the heart of the theater district . 
Floor to ceiling windows provide great views over the city skyline , making the climb up two flights of stairs worthwhile . 
9 a.m. - Take a stroll down Collins Street to Southgate , and pop into Le Camera Southbank for a breakfast of seasonal fruits , bacon and eggs , and fresh coffee and juices . 
It 's easy to while away an hour or more overlooking life on the banks of the Yarra River , with a constant stream of joggers , cyclists as well as oarsmen and women training in skiffs on the river . 
10:30 a.m. - Take a sightseeing river cruise along the Yarra . 
Melbourne River Cruises offer several options including a 2.5 hour Melbourne Highlights Cruise . 
This voyage gives views of the landings of the early settlers , the 19th Century sailing ship `` Polly Woodside '' , Westgate Bridge , the Governor 's residence , and much more . 
The Victoria Docks provides a snapshot of the rich maritime heritage and boom of the gold rush area . 
2 p.m. - Take a tram to Black Ruby 's restaurant at 344 Rathdown Street , Carlton North . 
This country-like cottage offers a great selection of food and a 100 percent gluten-free menu . 
Mains range between A$ 19 - A$ 28 , deserts about A$ 11 and a set three course menu can be enjoyed for a modest A$ 40 Jump on another tram to nearby Brunswick Street in Fitzroy . 
Walk off your lunch and enjoy the eclectic mix of shops that line this street . 
Brunswick Street has something to offer every style of visitor in particular the vintage shopper . 
If shopping proves tiring , take the time to check out some of the great selection of bohemian cafes and the colorful array of laneway murals which enhance the northern end of the street . 
7 p.m. - Enjoy a pre-dinner drink at the Gin Palace , 190 Little Collins Street . 
This quirky little wine bar tucked away in a laneway provides an intimate setting for cocktails . 
8 p.m. Vue de monde at 430 Little Collins Street allows visitors to experience French cuisine in the hub of the city 's laneways . 
The exposed beams on the ceiling and live piano and accordion music transport diners to the French countryside . 
Entrees range from A$ 12-A $ 30 , Mains A$ 25-A $ 80 and deserts A$ 12 . 
9 a.m. - Enjoy a breakfast at Tropicana Juice Food Bar at 213 Elizabeth Street , Melbourne . 
This colorful cafe is easy to find , as it has hundreds of oranges hanging from net bags on the outside of the cafe . 
Tables are parked on the main foot path close to the road with pedestrians wandering past as you enjoy the fresh fruit juices and an array of delicious food . 
10 a.m - Use the free City Circle tram , which operates daily until about 6 p.m and takes about an hour to complete , providing a guided tour of the city landmarks . 
Jump on and off the tram to savor the delights of the city at your own pace . 
2 p.m. - Pop by the Melbourne Museum , located at Nicholson Street , Carlton Gardens and enjoy an afternoon exhibition . 
`` Tutankhamun and the Golden Age of the Pharaohs '' is on until October . 
Enjoy afternoon tea at the Museum cafe before heading back to your hotel to check out and return to the airport . 
-LRB- Reporting by Pauline Askin ; editing by Elaine Lies -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
