BEIRUT | Wed May 25 , 2011 2:55 pm EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Lebanon 's Hezbollah leader Sayyed Hassan Nasrallah said on Wednesday most Syrians still backed President Bashar al-Assad and the removal of his regime on the back of mass unrest would serve U.S. and Israeli interests . 
The Syrian and Iranian-backed ally said he believed Assad was serious about making reforms , in response to pro-democracy protests that have gripped the country for nine weeks and which have presented the gravest challenge to Assad 's 11-year rule . 
`` All indications and information until now still affirm that the majority of the Syrian people support this regime and have faith in President Bashar al-Assad and are betting on his steps toward reforms , '' Nasrallah said in his first comments on Syria since protests broke out in March . 
Iran 's Revolutionary Guards set up Hezbollah in 1982 to fight Israeli forces that had invaded Lebanon . 
The group enjoys strong political and military support from Tehran and Damascus . 
The United States lists the group as a terrorist organization . 
`` I personally believe ... based on discussions and directly listening to President Bashar al-Assad that he believes in reforms and is serious and committed ... and is ready to take very big steps toward reforms , '' he told a crowd in the southern Lebanese town of Nabi Sheet by video link , on the 11th anniversary of Israel 's withdrawal from south Lebanon . 
Syrian protesters , inspired by popular uprisings in other parts of the Arab world , initially took to the streets to call for greater freedoms and an end to corruption . 
Assad made some gestures toward reforms , including lifting a hated decades-old emergency law , while also sending in tanks to crush revolts in flashpoints across the country . 
Met with a violent crackdown by Syrian security forces -- human rights group Sawasiah says at least 1,100 civilians have been killed -- demonstrators have demanded Assad 's overthrow . 
Nasrallah , who had praised popular uprisings that overthrew the leaders of Tunisia and Egypt earlier this year , said the fall of the Syrian government would serve American and Israeli interests since it would be replaced by a regime `` ready to sign any peace , meaning surrender , with Israel . '' 
Nasrallah praised Assad 's strong support for the guerrilla group and said he preserved the unity of Lebanon . 
Syria 's role in Lebanon has long been in a contentious issue in Lebanese politics . 
Syria ended a 29-year military presence in its smaller neighbor after an international outcry over the assassination of former statesman Rafik al-Hariri in 2005 . 
Nasrallah , whose guerrilla fighters fought Israel in an inconclusive war in 2006 , called on Syrians to `` choose the path of dialogue and not confrontation . '' 
Human rights activists and witnesses say Syrian security forces , the army and irregular Assad loyalists , have opened fire on peaceful protesters . 
Syrian authorities blame the violence on armed groups backed by Islamists and outside powers . 
