TUNIS | Sat Jul 2 , 2011 5:40 am EDT TUNIS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A protracted struggle for Libya could leave it in the hands of extremists instead of the liberal economic technocrats who now lead its rebel movement , the World Bank 's representative for Libya said on Thursday . 
`` If this civil war goes on , it would be a new Somalia , which I do n't say lightly , '' said Marouane Abassi , World Bank country manager for Libya who has been in Tunisia since February . 
`` In three months we could be dealing with extremists . 
That 's why time is very important in this conflict , before we face problems in managing it . '' 
Abassi , who is Tunisian , said the World Bank had been working with Libya since 2006 on plans for economic reforms led by leader Muammar Gaddafi 's son Saif al-Islam , although many of those reform plans were scuppered by Gaddafi . 
He described some of the leaders of the rebel Transitional National Council as among those most strongly associated with economic reform plans . '' 
... We know them , we did good work with them , '' Abassi said , citing Ali Issawi , a former economy minister and ambassador , and Mahmoud Jebril , who resigned from a state economic think-tank after Gaddafi overruled his suggestions for liberalising the economy . 
`` These guys tried inside -LRB- Gaddafi 's government -RRB- . 
In 2009 Gaddafi stopped the connection between us and them , '' said Abassi . 
Nevertheless , parts of Gaddafi 's government and local councils were still seeking World Bank advice up to February , when pro-democracy protests broke out , he said . 
`` In the last two years it was a battle between reformists and the old guard . 
But even the last minister of economy who was against us ... accepted the rules of the game , '' he said . 
The rebellion , which began with an uprising in February and has been backed by Western air strikes since March , has so far failed to dislodge Gaddafi , raising pressure on Western countries to take more decisive action . 
France said on Wednesday it had sent arms to the rebels , which some countries believe violates an arms embargo . 
Gaddafi says the Western intervention is a plot to steal Libya 's oil . 
Abassi said he left the World Bank 's Tripoli office on February 20 after government forces began suppressing protesters . 
`` Now we are trying to understand how we can help Libya after the conflict , '' he said . 
Tunisia , where he is now based , is also suffering financially , losing some $ 200 million a month in remittances and other revenue from Tunisian expatriates who have returned . 
`` Over 65,000 Tunisians have returned out of 125,000 who were living in Libya . 
They are like refugees in Tunisia without revenue . 
Tunisia gave them some cash handouts and we are trying to provide funds and grants , '' Abassi said . 
`` Over 1.7 million Libyans come each year to Tunisia and for the Tunisian economy it 's very important . 
They spend a lot of money on health -- maybe 50 percent of the revenue in clinics in the south is from Libyans , '' Abassi said . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
