Time to go , U.S. tells Gaddafi , as revolt closes in TRIPOLI | Sat Feb 26 , 2011 6:49 pm EST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Muammar Gaddafi 's grip on Libya looked ever more tenuous on Saturday , as his police abandoned parts of the capital Tripoli to a popular revolt that has swept the country and the United States bluntly told him he must go . 
In the oil-rich east around the second city of Benghazi , freed a week ago by a disparate coalition of people power and defecting military units , a former minister of Gaddafi announced the formation of an `` interim government '' to reunite the country . 
At Tripoli in the west , the 68-year-old Brother Leader 's redoubt was shrinking . 
Reuters correspondents found residents in some neighborhoods of the capital barricading their streets and proclaiming open defiance after security forces melted away . 
Western leaders , their rhetoric emboldened by evacuations that have sharply reduced the number of their citizens stranded in the oilfields and cities of the sprawling desert state , spoke out more clearly to say Gaddafi 's 41-year rule must now end . 
`` When a leader 's only means of staying in power is to use mass violence against his own people , he has lost the legitimacy to rule and needs to do what is right for his country by leaving now , '' aides to U.S. President Barack Obama said in describing a call on Libya he had with German Chancellor Angela Merkel . 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton also showed a harder tone from Washington , which had warmed to Gaddafi in recent years after decades of sanctions : '' -LRB- He -RRB- has lost the confidence of his people and he should go without further bloodshed and violence . '' 
A vote in the United Nations Security Council was imminent . 
It may impose sanctions and say Gaddafi should face war crimes charges over deaths , estimated by diplomats at some 2,000 , during his 10 days of efforts to stem the tide of revolution . 
Talk of possible military action by foreign governments remained vague , however . 
It was unclear how long Gaddafi , with some thousands of loyalists , some his tribesmen , others military units commanded by his sons , might hold out against rebel forces comprised of youthful gunmen and mutinous soldiers . 
Correspondents in Tripoli reported occasional gunfire after dark but could not assess the balance of forces in the city . 
London-based Algerian lawyer Saad Djebbar , who knows a large number of Gaddafi 's top officials , says that for Gaddafi staying in power had become impossible . 
`` It 's about staying alive . '' '' 
-LRB- Gaddafi 's -RRB- time is over , '' he added . 
`` But how much damage he will cause before leaving is the question . '' 
One key element in the opposition 's efforts to unseat him may be tribal loyalties , always a factor in the desert nation of six million and one which Gaddafi , despite official rhetoric to the contrary , tended to reinforce down the years . 
His former justice minister Mustafa Mohamed Abud Ajleil , now gone over to the opposition in Benghazi , was quoted by the online edition of the Quryna newspaper as saying that an interim government , whose status remained unclear , would `` forgive '' his large Gaddadfa tribe for `` crimes '' committed by the leader . 
Such declarations may be intended to erode Gaddafi 's efforts to rally supporters into a do-or-die defense of the old guard . 
One of his sons , the London-educated Saif al-Islam , again appeared on television on Saturday to deny that much of Libya was in revolt . 
But he also warned : `` What the Libyan nation is going through has opened the door to all options , and now the signs of civil war and foreign interference have started . '' 
Gaddafi , once branded a `` mad dog '' by Washington for his support of militant groups worldwide , has been embraced by the West in recent years in return for renouncing some weapons programs and , critically , for opening up Libya 's oilfields . 
While money has flowed into Libya , many people , especially in the long-restive and oil-rich east , have seen little benefit and , inspired by the popular overthrow of veteran strongmen in Tunisia and Egypt , on either side of their country , they rose up to demand better conditions and political freedoms last week . 
Particular condemnation has been reserved for aerial bombing by government forces and for reported indiscriminate attacks by Gaddafi loyalists and mercenaries on unarmed protesters . 
`` Gaddafi is the enemy of God ! '' 
a crowd chanted on Saturday in Tajoura , a poor neighborhood of Tripoli , at the funeral of a man they said was shot down by Gaddafi loyalists the day before . 
Now , residents said , those security forces had disappeared . 
Locals had erected barricades of rocks and palm trees across rubbish-strewn streets , and graffiti covered many walls . 
Gaddafi 's forces were nowhere to be seen but bullet holes in the walls of the tightly packed houses bore testimony to violence . 
The residents , still unwilling to be identified for fear of reprisals , said troops fired on demonstrators who tried to march from Tajoura to central Green Square overnight , killing at least five people . 
The number could not be independently confirmed . 
A funeral on Saturday morning for one of the victims turned into another show of defiance . 
`` We will demonstrate again and again , today , tomorrow , the day after tomorrow until they change , '' a man who called himself Ali , aged 25 , told Reuters . 
Libyan state television again showed a crowd chanting their loyalty to Gaddafi in Tripoli 's Green Square on Saturday . 
But journalists estimated their number at scarcely 200 . 
From Misrata , a major city 200 km -LRB- 120 miles -RRB- east of Tripoli , residents and exile groups said by telephone that a thrust by forces loyal to Gaddafi , operating from the local airport , had been rebuffed with bloodshed by the opposition . 
`` There were violent clashes last night and in the early hours of the morning near the airport , '' one resident , Mohammed , told Reuters . 
`` An extreme state of alert prevails in the city . '' 
He said several mercenaries from Chad had been detained by rebels in Misrata . 
The report could not be verified but was similar to accounts elsewhere of Gaddafi deploying fighters brought in from African states where has long had allies . 
Protesters in Zawiyah , an oil refining town on the main coastal highway 50 km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- west of Tripoli , have fought off government forces for several nights , according to witnesses who fled across the nearby Tunisian border at Ras Jdir . 
At Tripoli 's international airport , thousands of desperate foreign workers besieged the main gate trying to leave the country as police used batons and whips to keep them out . 
Outside the main terminal was a sprawling camp of makeshift tents and people huddled together in the cold , wrapped in blankets and surrounded by heaps of clothes , food and garbage . 
Britain and France followed the United States in closing their embassies . 
Britain sent in air force troop carriers to take some 150 oil workers out of camps in the desert . 
Libya supplies 2 percent of the world 's oil , the bulk of it from wells and supply terminals in the east . 
The prospect of it being shut off -- as well as speculation that the unrest in the Arab world could spread to the major exporters of the Gulf -- has pushed oil prices up to highs not seen in over two years . 
In recent days , the flamboyant Gaddafi has made several appearances railing against his enemies as rats and cockroaches and blaming the unrest on a range of foes from the United States and Israel to al Qaeda militants and youths high on drugs . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It will be not long now . 
The only question is will he fall on his sword or be hung high by his people . 
Obama SERIOUSLY needs to order a CIA team to pinpoint him and call in a few Cruise Missiles . 
Only problem is , I do n't thing Obama has even ordered the a @ # $ # ! 
carrier to the area yet to launch the damn things . -RRB- 
: -LRB- `` The ultimate end of all revolutionary social change is to establish the sanctity of human life . '' 
Emma Goldman This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
