LONDON | Thu Apr 7 , 2011 6:14 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Manchester United striker Wayne Rooney will miss the FA Cup semi-final against Manchester City on April 16 after he lost an appeal against a two-match ban imposed by the English FA for swearing into a TV camera . 
Rooney , who will also miss the home Premier League match against Fulham on Saturday , has been punished for his four-letter rant into a live camera during United 's 4-2 league win at West Ham United last weekend . 
`` I am gutted to miss two matches , I am not the first player to have sworn on TV and I wo n't be the last , '' Rooney said on the Man United website -LRB- www.manutd.com -RRB- . 
`` Unlike others who have been caught swearing on camera , I apologised immediately . 
And yet I am the only person banned for swearing . 
That does n't seem right . '' 
Rooney ran to the camera after completing his hat-trick from the penalty spot with his obscenities clearly heard by millions of viewers worldwide . 
While United accepted the charge against Rooney of using abusive language they felt the suspension was excessive and appealed . 
In a statement the FA said : '' `` Rooney had admitted a charge for the use of offensive , insulting and\/or abusive language , but claimed that the automatic penalty of two games was clearly excessive . 
`` The commission did not accept the claim and Rooney will begin the standard two-match suspension with immediate effect . '' 
He added to Saturday 's hat-trick when he scored the only goal in United 's 1-0 win over Chelsea at Stamford Bridge in the first leg of their Champions League quarter-final on Wednesday . 
The England striker is free to play in the return leg next Tuesday as that game is under UEFA 's control and not the FA 's . 
`` Manchester United is clearly very disappointed with the Regulatory Commission 's decision , '' the club added . 
`` Wayne Rooney apologised immediately after the match and the club now wishes to move to on to what hopefully will be a very exciting conclusion to the season . '' 
-LRB- Editing by Justin Palmer and Tom Pilcher -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
