What do you think is best ? 
April 3 , 2011 at 7:03 pm | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 3:23 am | Reply What do mean '' they ca n't use the guns '' !!!! it would n't take a few minutes for any one to learn how to use a gun . 
seriously April 4 , 2011 at 1:58 pm | April 4 , 2011 at 2:15 pm | You are funny Ahmed . 
Have you been with them to know that ? 
Or just listening to what news say ? 
April 5 , 2011 at 9:18 am | To arm the rebels ! 
The Americans were better armed than the Vietcongs in Vietnam and so were the Russians , who fought the Taliban in Afghanistan . 
But in both cases they lost . 
One does not necessarily need sophisticated weaponry to win a war . 
Even one is well equipped and has a good strategy , victory is sometimes fortuitous . 
April 4 , 2011 at 3:44 am | Reply I agree with u but how come you can face a tank by AK47 or a hand gun ? 
it is really just the weapons what will make a difference I mean we totally out gunned but not out numbered , most weapons that u see with the rebels are old since 1960s , Yet they managed to free most of the eastern cities and other western cities . 
so if they can get their hands on new weapons and equipment guess what ! 
it would n't take more than few days or weeks before they can liberate the entire Libya . 
April 4 , 2011 at 2:12 pm | please stop saying rebels we are Libyan fighting a crazy man who want to kills us cos we said NO to him April 5 , 2011 at 11:58 am | Is there anything that do not impact you ? 
And America 's national interests ? 
Where is and of tahat particular interest ? 
Freedomfighters !? Like KLA ? 
Druglords and organ snatchers . 
These `` freedomfighters '' acts like KKK in Libya , killing negroes ... Colonel keep it up dont give your country to this vultures . 
Serbia will always love you and be with you , we know how is it feels . 
Ajmo Srbi svi vote NO April 4 , 2011 at 7:51 am | Reply I too am with Gaddafi . 
I 'm afraid of another pro-Western , right-wing cronie taking over in Libya . 
NATO seeks to get it 's rotten claws on Libya 's oil and that 's definately wrong !!! April 4 , 2011 at 9:03 am | ur sucha heartless creature that doesnt derve to be in this entire eorld . 
cz if u have a blod in ur vains u wudv said yes after seeing all those civillians and children getting killed evrywhere . 
but seems that u got Paid . . 
or mybe brainwashed u and all serbians who thinks alike . 
April 4 , 2011 at 10:17 am | Why ? 
do you want Gaddafi to kill more libyans . 
Do you want him to kill my family , my mum , my brothers , my friends , and my relatives . 
You will share him in the blood shed of the Libyans . 
you will be killer too . 
April 4 , 2011 at 12:04 pm | Gaddafi might spend some money to support other countries and to build few things around the world which I am sure that these things did carry his name cos that we he care about . 
and he did support many conflicts around the world , and for this you might love him . 
Regarding Libya there is no infrastructure , poor education and poor health care . 
Poverty and not respecting human rights and I think it was enough that waste the country money for 42 years . 
He hates Libyan and he likes to wear anything except our traditional costume . 
So , if you do like Gaddafi , please invite him into your country to spend the rest of his life there and we will be more than happy for that . 
April 4 , 2011 at 12:45 pm | wats init for you to support gaddafi , i assume personal interest in the form of cash flow !!! how bout the massacre in serbia that happened along time ago do you support that !??? u probably do !! April 4 , 2011 at 2:09 pm | Exactly well said . 
The SERBS is as brutal as Qaddafi they also used the same methods to elminate the Bosnaians and croatians . 
The serbs are as criminals as Qaddaffi . 
But you know the Serbs will never be allowed to do business in Libya ever again after we get rid of Qaddaffi and so start backing and leave Libya you punch of criminals . 
April 4 , 2011 at 2:21 pm | Wow ! 
Just from reading your comments here , I can see what a friendly little bunch you are . 
Never giving facts , just insulting other people who do n't share your opinions ... In the NATO bombing , as in any air bombing , it 's impossible for there to be no civilians killed . 
So how does it help civilians to be in even more danger than they already are ? 
You who support this armed rebellion and NATO bombing , do n't care for those people , you do n't want peace ! 
You do n't want reforms ! 
I never once heard you say , lets find a peaceful solution , people are dying on both sides , you never provide facts to support your statements . 
People of America may be badly informed and misguided but i would like to believe even they should like some evidence of your statements , before they put even more tax money into this venture , since they already own about 40.000 US dollars per capita , while Libyan is only about 13.000 US dollars . 
April 4 , 2011 at 5:14 pm | April 4 , 2011 at 7:34 pm | help the Libyan , Libya is bleeding , help them : ' -LRB- , Libya crying for life , at least 10,000 died since 17\/2 , are n't they human beings ? 
... let them live in Peace , Qaddafi the people has chosen to change you , why do n't you just leave ?!!!! April 6 , 2011 at 3:27 pm | Publication analyst Daya Gamadzh Asia Tribune wrote : `` According to the report , West Point , the largest number of fighters -- 52 arrived in Iraq from the city of Derna in eastern Libya . 
In second place after him -- the Saudi capital Riyadh , which sent 51 fighter , whose population exceeds 4 million . 
Dern live in 80000 . 
21 people in Iraq had been sent from Benghazi , and this is a disproportionately high number too . 
From Derna and Benghazi is the largest number of militants of Al Qaeda , per capita 1 to 1500 population . 
The report 's authors point to West Point : `` The vast majority of Libyan fighters -- come from the coastal cities of Benghazi and Derna on the north-east of the country . 
Both cities have long characterized the dominant ideology of militant Islam , both served as the center of the uprising of radical Islamists against Gaddafi in the mid-90 years . 
Benghazi and Derna is a base Libyan Islamic Fighting Group -LRB- LIFG -RRB- , which in 2007 formally merged with al-Qaeda . 
Benghazi -- the center of the region Serenaika , over the past two centuries , successfully fought against the influence of the central government in Libya . 
Ethnic differences of Arabs living in Tripolitania , and Arabs living in Serenaiku have their roots in the 11 st century . 
Real power in Serenaike for decades belonged to the representatives of the Sufi Order Sanussi , founded in 1842 in Al-Bayda . 
The Order is exceptionally rigid , conservative and anti-Western interpretation of Islam . 
The first king of independent Libya , Idriss , Qaddafi deposed in 1969 , was head of the Order . 
That is why the banner of the current `` rebellion '' , which you can see an infinite number of times in the reports of Al-Jazeera became the royal flag . 
In the mid-90 's in Benghazi and Derna Islamist uprising broke out against the `` heretics '' Qaddafi . 
Benghazi was blocked , the telephone was cut . 
The uprising was suppressed -- perhaps because in the 90 's , there were no Al-Jazeera and the Internet . 
April 4 , 2011 at 9:57 am | Reply When ignorance over powers reason and logic that s a dangerous situation . 
I don t find any difference between the Florida pastor who by burning a book wanted to make a point and those Muslims who by killing some innocent human beings who have nothing to do with this Koran burning incident . 
Since 9\/11 Islam has lost all credibility in the non Muslim world , including me who a Muslim too . 
Hypocrisy has taken over the Muslim world that has lost all pragmatic sense . 
The wall of ignorance impregnable and any one tries to do it must be ready to face the wrath of the Muslims . 
Anything critical about a 1500 years old book or its long dead author can bring millions of Muslims on the street but when Muslim suicide bombers kills thousands of their own co religionists and other innocent human beings that does not create any commotion in their mind . 
By doing so Muslims only prove that they have turned their faith a cult not a religion they claim as peaceful and compassionate . 
@Akbar Hussain , I agree with the rest of your comment but you say this : `` I don t find any difference between the Florida pastor who by burning a book wanted to make a point and those Muslims who by killing some innocent human beings who have nothing to do with this Koran burning incident . '' 
You do n't see a difference between a guy exercising his constitutional right to be offensive and a mob of religious nutjobs murdering innocent people ?? Although burning a religious book might be seen as distasteful , is it really equivalent to and as bad as MURDER ? 
C'mon , it 's just paper and ink , and no amount of paper and ink is worth a life . 
The pastor might have been distasteful or a bigot or whatever you want to call him , but he did n't hurt anyone . 
There 's just no equivalency hear . 
April 3 , 2011 at 10:19 pm | Reply You are totally right , when you say both acts are not equally vilain . 
But think about the impact . 
There are here two sides of this sad confrontation : rational moderate people -LRB- religious and not religous -RRB- and on the other side radical extremists . 
If the extremists kill innocent people , the impact is a huge feeling of hatered towards them , which leads to more confrontation and more killing in both sides . 
but at the same time , burning the Quran will produce hatered from muslims that pushes them towars extremism and this will be translated in killing , sadly , innocent people . 
So eventually : burning the Quran - -RRB- generates hatered , even from moderate muslims - -RRB- sadly , acts of terrorism . 
But it does NOT mean that both acts are equally wrong , but they sure have the same impact on the relations between muslims and non muslims April 4 , 2011 at 1:50 am | I think you got it wrong Stephanie ... He was wrong at the beginning but you made a mistake by saying that burning a holy book do n't hurt anyone . . 
you know that by doing so . . 
that fully shit pastor is hurting millions of muslims . . 
and that will make people hate U.S more & more April 4 , 2011 at 4:26 am | The USA and the UK want to arm Libyan rebels ? 
Just as they armed the Mujahidin during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan ? 
After the Soviet withdrawal , the USA and the UK invaded Afghanistan , bombing the very people they d trained and equipped in the first place the Taliban , Osama Bin Laden and al-Qa ida . 
Ten years later , the USA and UK remain there , with young soldiers dying in a pointless war ; the only beneficiary being the Western military-industrial complex . 
`` Revolution '' in Libya : the armed by UK USA and Europe and druged by Afghan grass terrorists-liberals USA and EU haters run in desert screaming , `` Destroy our country ! 
kill our children ! '' 
Set a traitor to the throne and take our oil ! 
And Nobel Prise winner for Peace bombs for the freedom ! 
`` The circus the most cruel circus in the world ! 
DEAR LIBYAN TERRORISTS COME TO USA FASTER ! 
WHY OTHER COUNTRIES MUST SUFFER ? 
GIVE USA YOUR ATTANTION ! 
WE WILL WAIT COME TO THEIR DOORS ! 
THEY WANT VERY MUCH ! 
cOME DIRECTLY TO STEPHANIE ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 5:55 am | April 3 , 2011 at 7:23 pm | Reply If you are not an expert in political science or international relations , dont post a stupid post based on Western Mass Media opinion , be literate plz . 
Western countries stop being ignorant April 4 , 2011 at 4:23 am | Reply The first stage of the informational war is to wash brains and then USA and UK with France made what they want ! 
`` Revolution '' in Libya : the armed by UK USA and Europe and druged by Afghan grass terrorists-liberals USA and EU haters run in desert screaming , `` Destroy our country ! 
kill our children ! '' 
Set a traitor to the throne and take our oil ! 
And Nobel Prise winner for Peace bombs for the freedom ! 
`` The circus -- the most cruel circus in the world ! 
Arm the drugged terrorists that are from Al-Queda and you will get them infront of your doors ! 
Dear terrorists come faster to USA !!!! April 4 , 2011 at 5:47 am | Stop crying and lying please , and tell me : if you have support in people of Libya why you ask help from NATO , US , UN ... If Libyan people are supporting this Al Qaeeda bastards they could win without crying for world 's help . 
The simple truth is that Libyan people are supporting Gaddafi and you , rebels , are fighting for USA to take Libyan oil . 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:38 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 6:42 am | Except for a few European Countries -LRB- ex . 
Germany , Italy , Spain -RRB- Libya is not that major of an exporter of oil . 
Over 75 % France 's power is nuclear so oil should not be that big of a factor . 
If you also recall , the countries that had a major stake in Libya 's oil market such as China , Italy , and Germany were very reluctant to help the Libyan people . 
The main drawback of arming the rebels is also training them which will probably take weeks or months . 
Factor in that the US involvement needs to be limited and the Obama administration is faced with an FP problem never faced before by an American president . 
But he should follow through with the implicit goal of getting rid of Gaddafi using all available options apart from sending in US armed forces . 
April 4 , 2011 at 10:53 am | Do you support the killer , Did n't you know that in 1996 he has killed 1200 opinion prisoners in just two or three hours ? 
and he is ready to do it more and more as he did it several times during the 42 years he rolled Libya . 
He was killing people in streets in front of other people and the world would not know because the media is not there . 
Only today the people was able to tell the world because the internet and international media is reachable . 
April 4 , 2011 at 12:15 pm | Top 6 importers of Libyan oil -LRB- in terms of volume -RRB- : Italy , Germany , France , China , UK , Greece April 4 , 2011 at 1:43 pm | 4 out of these 6 did not support the UN resolution . 
April 4 , 2011 at 1:45 pm | if you do n't arm the rebels what is the 2nd option ? 
give Gaddafi the possibility to come back and kill everybody , helped with his billions that pays for mercenaries ? 
I found the 2nd option ridiculous . 
April 3 , 2011 at 7:23 pm | Reply I am not Gaddafi supoporter but If there is no weapons for both side the war will stop and he can not kill anybody , lots of cities in Libya are not carrying weapons and they live safe , also the rebels are protecting themselves by entering to civilian buldings and thats why when the Gaddaffi forces attack them it affect some of the civilians , I hope there will be a diplomatic conversation and I hope the Libyan people be more civilized and flexible to find a solution . 
April 4 , 2011 at 4:20 am | Reply IMAGINE FERNANDO YOUR PARENTS HAVE PROBLEMS . 
CALL YOUR NEIGHBOUR TO KILL ONE OF THEM AND PROMISE YOUR HOUSE FOR THAT . 
-LRB- THE LOGIC OF THIS WAR -RRB- Publication analyst Daya Gamadzh Asia Tribune wrote : `` According to the report , West Point , the largest number of fighters -- 52 arrived in Iraq from the city of Derna in eastern Libya . 
In second place after him -- the Saudi capital Riyadh , which sent 51 fighter , whose population exceeds 4 million . 
Dern live in 80000 . 
21 people in Iraq had been sent from Benghazi , and this is a disproportionately high number too . 
From Derna and Benghazi is the largest number of militants of Al Qaeda , per capita 1 to 1500 population . 
The report 's authors point to West Point : `` The vast majority of Libyan fighters -- come from the coastal cities of Benghazi and Derna on the north-east of the country . 
Both cities have long characterized the dominant ideology of militant Islam , both served as the center of the uprising of radical Islamists against Gaddafi in the mid-90 years . 
Benghazi and Derna is a base Libyan Islamic Fighting Group -LRB- LIFG -RRB- , which in 2007 formally merged with al-Qaeda . 
Benghazi -- the center of the region Serenaika , over the past two centuries , successfully fought against the influence of the central government in Libya . 
Ethnic differences of Arabs living in Tripolitania , and Arabs living in Serenaiku have their roots in the 11 st century . 
Real power in Serenaike for decades belonged to the representatives of the Sufi Order Sanussi , founded in 1842 in Al-Bayda . 
The Order is exceptionally rigid , conservative and anti-Western interpretation of Islam . 
The first king of independent Libya , Idriss , Qaddafi deposed in 1969 , was head of the Order . 
That is why the banner of the current `` rebellion '' , which you can see an infinite number of times in the reports of Al-Jazeera became the royal flag . 
In the mid-90 's in Benghazi and Derna Islamist uprising broke out against the `` heretics '' Qaddafi . 
Benghazi was blocked , the telephone was cut . 
The uprising was suppressed -- perhaps because in the 90 's , there were no Al-Jazeera and the Internet . 
April 4 , 2011 at 9:56 am | Reply The US should not only arm the Libyan rebels but should assist them in other direct ways to remove Gaddafi . 
The gamble is worthwhile . 
Libya will not be like the case of Afghanistan . 
April 3 , 2011 at 7:31 pm | Reply I totally agree with you they are not rebels they 're freedom fighters April 4 , 2011 at 12:20 am | Reply i totally agree with you , if the us dosent do it , i will finance the war of the freedomfigthers myself . . ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 4:25 am | Yes the U.S. should arm the Libyan Free Fighter , They Are not Libyan rebels As You name them , We Are Fighting The Dictator Gaddafi April 3 , 2011 at 7:34 pm | Reply Yes the U.S. should arm the Libyan Free Fighter , They Are not Libyan rebels As You name them , We Are Fighting The Dictator Gaddafi To Be Free April 3 , 2011 at 7:35 pm | Reply A better approach is to arm Libyan Army under the National Transitional Council 's supervision , through available frozen funds belonging to the Libyan people abroad . 
The rebels are individuals whose ideologies may be questioned by many , although I have no doubt about their aspiration for freedom and democracy , I suggest to arm the national army instead of arming the rebels . 
April 3 , 2011 at 7:40 pm | Reply Good idea . . 
although can not emphasize enough that there are NO suspicious elements amongst the opposition . 
There is no evidence of that nor it is acceptable by those fighting for freedom . 
It is Gaddafi who bluntly threatened the west of terrorism . 
April 3 , 2011 at 8:19 pm | Reply No suspicious elements inside the opposition ? 
Here is an article about that , with sources like the 2007 West Point Study and numerous others , all stated at the end of the article which you can read fully on the link below the excerpt `` Rebel Leaders Jalil and Younis , Plus Most of Rebel Council are Members of the al Qaeda-linked Harabi Tribe The result of the present inquiry is that the Libyan branch of Al Qaeda represents a continuum with the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group centered in Darnah and Benghazi . 
The ethnic base of the Libyan Islamic fighting group is apparently to be found in the anti-Qaddafi Harabi tribe , the tribe which makes up the vast majority of the rebel council including the two dominant rebel leaders , Abdul Fatah Younis and Mustafa Abdul Jalil . 
The evidence thus suggests that the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group , the elite of the Harabi tribe , and the rebel council supported by Obama all overlap for all practical purposes . 
As the late Foreign Minister of Guyana Fred Wills , a real fighter against imperialism and neo-colonialism , taught me many years ago , political formations in developing countries -LRB- and not just there -RRB- are often a mask for ethnic and religious rivalries ; so it is in Libya . 
The rebellion against Qaddafi is a toxic brew compounded of fanatical hatred of Qaddafi , Islamism , tribalism , and localism . 
From this point of view , Obama has foolishly chosen to take sides in a tribal war . 
When Hillary Clinton went to Paris to be introduced to the Libyan rebels by French President Sarkozy , she met the US-educated Libyan opposition leader Mahmoud Jibril , already known to readers of Wikileaks document dumps as a favorite of the US .16 While Jibril might be considered presentable in Paris , the real leaders of the Libyan insurrection would appear to be Jalil and Younis , both former ministers under Qaddafi . 
Jalil seems to be the primus inter pares , at least for the moment : Mustafa Abdul Jalil or Abdul-Jalil -LRB- Arabic : , also transcribed Abdul-Jelil , Abd-al-Jalil , Abdel-Jalil or Abdeljalil ; and frequently but erroneously as Abud Al Jeleil -RRB- -LRB- born 1952 -RRB- is a Libyan politician . 
He was the Minister of Justice -LRB- unofficially , the Secretary of the General People s Committee -RRB- under Colonel Muammar al-Gaddafi . 
Abdul Jalil has been identified as the Chairman of the National Transitional Council based in Benghazi although this position is contested by others in the uprising due to his past connections to Gaddafi s regime . 
17 As for Younis , he has been closely associated with Qaddafi since the 1968-9 seizure of power : Abdul Fatah Younis -LRB- Arabic : -RRB- is a senior military officer in Libya . 
He held the rank of General and the post of Minister of Interior , but resigned on 22 February 2011 . 
18 What should concern us most is that both Jalil and Younis come from the Haribi tribe , the dominant one in northeast Libya , and the one that overlaps with al Qaeda . 
According to Stratfor , the Harabi tribe is a historically powerful umbrella tribe in eastern Libya that saw their influence wane under Col. Gadhafi . 
The Libyan leader confiscated swaths of tribal members land and redistributed it to weaker and more loyal tribes . 
Many of the leaders now emerging in eastern Libya hail from the Harabi tribe , including the head of the provisional government set up in Benghazi , Abdel Mustafa Jalil , and Abdel Fatah Younis , who assumed a key leadership role over the defected military ranks early in the uprising . 
19 This is like a presidential ticket where both candidates are from the same state , except that Libya s ferocious tribal rivalries make the problem infinitely worse . 
The Rebel Council : Half the Names Are Kept Secret ; Why ? 
This picture of a narrow , sectarian tribal and regional base does not improve when we look at the rebel council as a whole . 
According to one recent version , the rebel council is chaired by the well-spoken former justice minister for Libya , Mustafa Abdul Jalil , -LRB- and -RRB- consists of 31 members , ostensibly representatives from across Libya , of whom many can not be named for security reasons . 
The key players on the council , at least those who we know about , all hail from the north-eastern Harabi confederation of tribes . 
These tribes have strong affiliations with Benghazi that date back to before the 1969 revolution which brought Gaddafi to power . 
20 Other accounts agree about the number of representatives : The council has 31 members ; the identities of several members has not been made public to protect their own safety . 
21 Given what we know about the extraordinary density of LIFG and all Qaeda fanatics in northeast Libya , we are authorized to wonder as to whether so many members of the council are being kept secret in order to protect them from Qaddafi , or whether the goal is to prevent them from being recognized in the west as al Qaeda terrorists or sympathizers . 
The latter seems to be a more accurate summary of the real state of affairs . 
Names released so far include : Mustafa Abduljaleel ; Ashour Hamed Bourashed of Darna city ; Othman Suleiman El-Megyrahi of the Batnan area ; Al Butnan of the Egypt border and Tobruk ; Ahmed Abduraba Al-Abaar of Benghazi city ; Fathi Mohamed Baja of Benghazi city ; Abdelhafed Abdelkader Ghoga of Benghazi city ; Mr. Omar El-Hariri for Military Affairs ; and Dr. Mahmoud Jibril , Ibrahim El-Werfali and Dr. Ali Aziz Al-Eisawi for foreign affairs .22 The State Department needs to interrogate these figures , starting perhaps with Ashour Hamed Bourashed , the delegate from the terrorist and suicide bomber stronghold of Darnah . 
How Many al Qaeda Members , Veterans , or Sympathizers are on the Rebel Council ? 
Seeing as clearly as we can in the fog of war , it looks like slightly more than a dozen of the members of the rebel council have had their names officially published in any case , not more than half of the reported 31 members . 
The US and European media have not taken the lead in identifying for us the names that are now known , and they above all have not called attention to the majority of the rebel council who are still lurking in the shadows of total secrecy . 
We must therefore demand to know how many LIFG and\/or al Qaeda members , veterans , or sympathizers currently hold seats on the rebel council . 
We are thus witnessing an attempt by the Harabi tribe to seize dominance over the 140 tribes of Libya . 
The Harabi are already practically hegemonic among the tribes of Cyrenaica . 
At the center of the Harabi Confederation is the Obeidat tribe , which is divided into 15 sub-tribes .23 All of this might be of purely academic ethnographic interest , were it not for the fact of the striking overlap between the Harabi tribe and the LIFG and al Qaeda . '' 
Of course the rebels should be helped . 
How else will they manage to withstand the might of th libyan army ? 
Th U.S. Nd Nato ca n't stop now . 
help to th end April 3 , 2011 at 7:40 pm | Reply US and NATO is the evil of XXI century . 
you are just a simple person without any knowledge in geopolitics and political science . 
Surface knowledge is dangerous . 
Western involvement made the situation so much worse . 
I dont think the fighting would have escalated to where it has if the West didnt push forward with violence . 
Gaddafi was giving the Rebels a few days to put there arms down before they would enter Bengazy . 
Those few days were shortened when the country was under the treat of UN bombings . 
If a more diplomatic approach was taken by the UN , this coild have been solved already , assuming the sides were reasonable and willing to talk . 
April 4 , 2011 at 4:32 am | Reply You obviously clueless of Gaddafi 's tricks and what he would have done had he been allowed to enter Benghazi , even if the rebels were to put down their arms . 
April 4 , 2011 at 5:50 am | April 3 , 2011 at 7:55 pm | Reply Yes , and it is overdue . 
The alternative will be more massacres and Gaddafi 's wrath and revenge against civilians for speaking out . 
April 3 , 2011 at 7:56 pm | Reply Certainly yes . 
If we are serious about winning the war on terror Gadhafi must be removed . 
The libyans will remove him with a little help from the US April 3 , 2011 at 7:58 pm | Reply Absolutely . 
At least the U.S. can officially recognize the TNC and help them by giving positioning information of Gaddafis troops in the battle field using satellites and ofcourse giving them modern communication equipment . 
The U.S. should recognize the freedom fighters as official allies and simply help them by giving them precious info about Gaddafis troops and build a straight communication line between them and the fighters . 
Gaddafi is trying to whipe out the remaining resistance in western part -LRB- The whole mountain area from Nalut to Yefren and Misrata -RRB- so he can have the whole western part for himself and so he can something to negotiate with . 
Or maybe even rule the remaining half of the country . 
Sadly NATO has n't done anything for the western part and this is giving a clear message to Gaddafi to continue . 
April 3 , 2011 at 8:05 pm | Reply No my dear , you have to pay bilions from your money and your soul , and it dose n't matter for how long it will take , year two , or even ten , at that time Libya will be the top poorest country in the world . . 
April 4 , 2011 at 3:52 am | Reply Do not worry about the Libyans to be the poorest . 
It will better than being killed or ruled by Qaddafi . 
He wanted the Libyans to be like sheeps . 
He want to lead them to where he would like to and if they say no he would slaughter them without legal accountability . 
April 4 , 2011 at 12:27 pm | Sure . 
go ahead , , arm them as soon as possible . . 
cuz gaddafi is killing innocent civillian , , We Are Fighting The Dictator Gaddafi To Be Free April 3 , 2011 at 8:12 pm | Reply YES !!!!!!!!! Our pres ; is to wishy washy just do it before he makes any more mistakes !!!!! Didnt he see the babys and little kids with the holes in there head !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! 1 April 3 , 2011 at 8:34 pm | Reply Many want to see the Libyan Rebels armed by the US or any country because they want to see Libyans depose Gaddafi , however , there are many risks with this strategy . 
The Rebels are , on the whole , undisciplined and untrained and will need to be trained in many of the sophisticated weapons that the coalition could supply . 
There is no guarantee that they would overwhelm Gaddafi forces even with better weapons . 
Strike and counter strike in civilian areas would inevitably lead to civilian deaths , just the thing UN res 1973 was trying to stop . 
Gaddafi is already using kidnap and kill squads that have infiltrated the Rebel held cities and if Gaddafi feels he is going to loose he will sponsor a counter insurgency with terrorist tactics like car bombs . 
Weapons to the rebels will not help against car bombs . 
Splits in the Coalition and UN would inevitably occur if it was obvious that the arming of the Rebels was to effect regime change by proxy . 
A preferable solution would be for the coalition special forces to covertly locate and kill Gaddafi and his sons together with close members of the regime and by any means available . 
This would involve some civilian deaths as Gaddafi will use them as human shields . 
Despite the overwhelming hatred of Gaddafi by the Libyan people , there are still a number of his supporters in Tripoli who may get caught in the cross-hairs . 
The civilian casualties would however be small compared to that produced by months or even years of a civil war . 
The only people to benefit from arming one side or another is arms manufacturers . 
The arms could be captured by Gaddafis men and then used against the Rebels in much the same way that the Rebels have attacked Gadaffi forces with captured Gadaffi weapons . 
Finally we have to consider what will happen to the arms after Gaddafi is deposed . 
They could well find their way onto the black market and into the hands of terrorists . 
April 3 , 2011 at 8:41 pm | Reply US and NATO is the evil of XXI century . 
you are just a simple person without any knowledge in geopolitics and political science . 
Surface knowledge is dangerous . 
Western involvement made the situation so much worse . 
I dont think the fighting would have escalated to where it has if the West didnt push forward with violence . 
Gaddafi was giving the Rebels a few days to put there arms down before they would enter Bengazy . 
Those few days were shortened when the country was under the treat of UN bombings . 
If a more diplomatic approach was taken by the UN , this coild have been solved already , assuming the sides were reasonable and willing to talk April 4 , 2011 at 4:37 am | Reply Yes please , other wise Gaddafi 's will have more chances to kill more innocents civilians and the Libyan blood will be in our hands . 
April 3 , 2011 at 8:50 pm | Reply Yes because we want an Islamic state . 
Long live for the Libyan Islamic state -- Long live for the Libyan Islamic state . 
Long live for the Libyan Islamic state . 
give us a chance to fight the Injustice . 
April 3 , 2011 at 9:13 pm | Reply Ahmad , how much do you hope to gain from this bloodshed ? 
Who is promising you money ? 
Is it Soros Open Institute like it was in Tunisia and Egypt -LRB- but I do n't think so , they ussually try to organise a non-violent revolution , to change the regime as it suits the Great Invesment Cartels -RRB- or are your motives mere ambition and hatred for everyone who thinks different than you ? 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:06 am | How much have you been paid to say this ? 
and by the way , I like the `` almosrati '' thing ... and , also , the `` aisha '' thing ... April 4 , 2011 at 3:21 am | Reply yes cause people are attacked by huge war machines while other has nothing April 3 , 2011 at 9:15 pm | Reply Yes , Abbsalutly and fast . 
Otherwise evil will win . 
The rebels are freedom fighters and if the USA helps them win , The USA will win many Hearts and mindes in the Islamic world and in teh Arab World . 
April 3 , 2011 at 9:27 pm | Reply Here is the problem with arming the rebels . 
What type of arms do you give them ? 
Even US soldiers need extensive training on US weapons before they are ready for combat . 
US-made weapons are quite complex , and they take a lot of maintenance . 
In the dust and grim of the battlefield , particularly in Libya , these weapons would be useless unless there is adequate training and maintenance . 
Right now the rebels are using Soviet\/Russian-made weapons captured from the Gaddafi forces . 
RPG-7 's , AK-74 's , 12.7 mm -LRB- .50 cal -RRB- heavy machine guns , Katyusha and Grad rocket launchers . 
These weapons systems are robust require far less training to use . 
They are `` point and shoot '' weapons , which the rebels have mastered in short period of time . 
They also require far less maintenance than US-made weapons . 
We should arm the rebels , but what do we do ? 
Should we buy Russian-made or -LRB- gulp -RRB- Chinese-made weapons . 
That seems to be the logical choice , but it wo n't set well with the US taxpayer . 
Also Russia and China both have distanced themselves from the Libyan intervention , though I am sure they will hold their nose and take the money , then deliver the weapons in unmarked ships to the NATO ports . 
April 3 , 2011 at 10:19 pm | Reply Please do it please help my family , help the children in my country , help the Libyan people . 
He is still bombing now he 's not just bombing the protesters , it 's everyone , even families in their houses . 
Please when you think of this think of your children think of your family . 
Do you want this to happen to them ? 
No one wants that for sure . 
Please every time you look at your child 's eyes think of the eyes of the Libyan children who they see their parents dying in front of them and who actually die by burning and slaughtering . 
Why are you afraid of arming the rebels ? 
Are you scared they would get back and hurt you ? 
I swear they would n't . 
I 've lived in Libya all my live and I know my people more than anyone else . 
They would n't do something like that to the people who helped them . 
April 3 , 2011 at 10:26 pm | Reply Oh please ! 
`` 18 yer old libyan '' why do n't you sign with your name as most of us do ? 
You think this will better suit to hit the sensitive chord in American people 's heart , do you ? 
The rebels were heavily armed to beggin with ! 
And how is he bombing his people when there is a no fly zone ? 
The truth is that the official libyan army is fighting the group of heavily armed rebels who deliberately choses to fight in towns , rather than on the open where civillian victims could be avoided . 
And why do n't you tell me who gave them those armed pic-ups they are driving around the country , and all the other equipment they have ? 
How could they form a new National Bank so soon ? 
How all the rebels come from one particular area of Libya ? 
The 2007 West Point Study Shows Benghazi-Darnah-Tobruk Area was a World Leader in Al Qaeda Suicide Bomber Recruitment , those are the people you are asking to be delivered even more arms ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 4:41 am | Reply 18 year old libyan >> PS . 
Girl too Ana , just FYI I 'm from the west of Libya not from Bengazi and my whole family is just waiting for those freedom fighters to help them . 
It 's not just my family it 's all people in the West of Libya . 
If the west and east and north and south do n't want him except those people in his family and I 'm pretty sure you 're one of his family members , then who is killing our families is it us killing each other please do n't make me laugh because it 's not the time to laugh and my family might die at any second now . 
I did n't put my real name because I 'm scared if I put it your Qadhafi is gonna take my whole family and God knows exactly what you do to those people you take from their houses just because they did n't want your Qadhafi , and this was n't just now it was like that from the day I was born . 
My dad almost got into Abo Salim prison because he was practicing his religion and going to the mosque to pray every prayer in the morning and be a good person who has faith is that an illegal act to go to prison for ? 
He does that now where we live and it did n't harm anyone and will not harm anyone . 
He almost died with the 1200 people who died all together in one day or two . 
Everyone is fed up with your lies , and with your heartless acts , and I 'm pretty sure more than 90 % of the people do n't believe your lies , the ones who believe you are the ones who do n't watch what is going on around them . 
We do n't want Al Qadhafi in Libya democracy gives us the right to tell him to get out and leave us . 
Even if it was Al Qaida `` like you said '' because I 'm pretty sure my people are not like that , why does n't he get out and stop bringing more mercenaries to kill Libyans ? 
Tell your family members to get out of my country and stop killing civilians . 
Even my little sapling knows that you 're using big tanks to bomb us , and you 're telling me about the No fly-zone they have all info about the tanks and they 're destroying them . 
Stop lying cause you 're embarrassing yourself in front of others . 
April 4 , 2011 at 10:30 pm | Support for Muammar al Gaddafi from the people of Serbia i am writing as a member of facebook group Support for Muammar al Gaddafi from the people of Serbia . 
The group have 65 000 members and we suport people of Libya against NATO -LRB- U.S. -RRB- , from 1st day . 
Show the truth to American people , what is realy happening in Lybia , and what US , French , UK Government realy wants . 
There is one answer OIL . 
Before all this and so-called war for democracy for Lybian people , many didnt know how people in Lybia lived . 
Here are some examples : All citizens are able to obtain interest-free loans , during the study academics have received an average wage for an occupation for which they where educating , if someone can find a job after graduation , the state will paid him as he does the job in his profession , for entry in marriage the state pays flat or a house , vehicles were able to buy at factory prices , There are also free health care and education , for 15 cents you could buy 40 pieces of bread , 25 percent of people have a higher education and do not owe anyone a cent ... I wiil change my democracy for Gaddafi 's dictatorship . 
Show this to the American people , open their eyes . 
April 4 , 2011 at 10:28 am | Reply You support Gaddaffi becuase you got paid to kill libyan civilans , you love killing peoble simliar to kosovo April 4 , 2011 at 4:10 pm | April 4 , 2011 at 6:46 pm | Preventing a loony dictator from killing his people seems like a moral imperative . 
However , sending more arms into the situation amounts to adding fuel to a fire we are trying to extinguish . 
In addition , military-grade weapons are often used much later for different purposes and not always in our interest . 
April 3 , 2011 at 11:15 pm | Reply Yes , The US should be on the side of the freedom fighters . 
Stop calling them rebels . 
Provide arms and other nonlethal help including communications , phones , advice and training . 
Gaddafi forces around Misrata and Zintan must be immediately destroyed . 
The US and Western governments should also shut Gaddafi out and recognize the National Transitional Council as the sole representative of the Libyan people . 
It is a win-win situation . 
The free world could not ask for a better , or more moral cause . 
April 3 , 2011 at 11:22 pm | Reply I totally agree with you they are not rebels they 're freedom fighters April 4 , 2011 at 12:03 am | Reply Again , Farid you are asking the wrong question . 
They are freedom fighters , not rebels . 
April 3 , 2011 at 11:26 pm | Reply It 's the only way to beat Gadafi 's forces , get rid of this regime and build newfree democratic Libya . 
April 3 , 2011 at 11:32 pm | Reply why do you call us with this name `` Rebels '' instead of `` Revolutionary '' . 
It started with peaceful protests and we are human been looking for freedom . 
Unfortunately , our peaceful protests have being facing weapon 's power . 
As a result , we have to safe ourselves . 
We do n't have any other choice . 
We still offer the peace , but we have never given our freedom to express about ourselves till now . 
April 3 , 2011 at 11:42 pm | Reply We call you rebels because the true revolution can only be done peacefully and with a support from the majority of people . 
Armed forces with traces of Al Qaeda and CIA stirring the pot , are not what I would call a Revolution . 
The government forces reacted only after the riots started and the fires were put on public buildings . 
How do you think the American police would react to that ? 
If indeed all the people of Libya support you , how come the Libyan army have n't met with resistance in all those towns you left running away recently . 
Why did n't they help you with your fight , when we know that many houses in Libya have rifles ? 
Is n't it truth that the rebels in East Libya are in fact mercilesly killing black people there ? 
Why do n't you care about the civillians dying from NATO bombing ? 
They do n't count for you ? 
April 4 , 2011 at 5:06 am | Reply Possibly only in Misrata or in other port cities & towns under siege , were the desired impact is more likely to achieved . 
To establish what s needed I think somebody should set up a temporary mobile network along the north coast & along the borders , provide free access and air dropping phones with cameras into those population centres that are cut or being suppressed . 
It s very dangerous for those journalist near Gaddafi and his supporters , at any moment this crazy self centred dictator could take their lives in another propaganda exercise . 
These people could use a trusted symbol to unit behind ; `` Even a poster that can be placed in the streets '' one that clearly say s No to dictators , theorist or any other narrow minded , self interested groups or gangs . 
+ I think a new style of democracy built on better foundations is still the only long-term answer . 
It 's a must , it 's true that US weapons tend to be more complex and less robust that russian 's but lets not forget that a lot of the fighter are ex soldiers and a lot of them are from the special forces regiment , plus i dont think it 's that tricky to train soldiers to use heavy cannons and anti tank missiles , armored vehicles , body armors , sniper rifles , heavy machine guns and night vision goggles should be on list too and also need not too much training April 4 , 2011 at 12:13 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 12:47 am | Reply I think Qadaffi most be in the international court with his sons , they are a group of killers , they want to kill everyone in libya so they stay in power . 
supporting new democratic elected covernoment in libya is so important to libyans and to the world . 
April 4 , 2011 at 1:01 am | Reply if u dont arm then the second option is to put troops on land to stop a massacre , and both accidents r not wellcomed any way . 
hope bush had only armed rebles in afghanistan to finish taliban today we wouldnt see this day April 4 , 2011 at 1:19 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 1:20 am | Reply Yes , I 'm completely agree with arm the libyan free people , couse I know one of the impoetant things . 
the libyan people are very very very peacful people who like to live in new and free countray and they believe they can reach the highest places and improve their country to the highest pleces as Dubi , Qatar , Englend , USA , ... etc. . 
April 4 , 2011 at 1:29 am | Reply those Libyan who marshed in the streets of their own native country peacfuly not harming anyone asking for thier freedom whitch was taking away from them for the past 42 years by a militant whose his identity is unknown , those are n't rebels , they are FREEDOM FIGHTERS April 4 , 2011 at 1:34 am | Reply Plz . 
note that those people , who are fighting in Libya right now are not rebels , but they are really Freedom fighters , who are fighting agaist one of most brutel regime in history of Libya . 
The incumbent libyen regime is equipped withy heavy killing machine and Huge cash of money at his disposal . 
If the freedom fighter does not coquer the current regime 's men including merecenies , It will big disaster for the future of the libyan people , as well as our nighbor countries . 
The whole region will be in chaos . 
April 4 , 2011 at 1:52 am | Reply Gaddafi should go . 
To make him go , he must be killed . 
The sooner the less people will die . 
Libyans should get the chance to become free . 
There will be no AlQaida there . 
Libyans wants to get ride of Gaddafi , not to invite another criminal like BenLaden . 
East had enough with all kind of rubbish regims ... Arm these people and help them to get back their contry and their freedom . 
To the guys who burning Quran : Feel sorry for your brains , if you have any . 
There is no deference between you and extrimests . 
All you and them are the same . 
Go away and let the people live together ... They can do it without you ... April 4 , 2011 at 2:29 am | Reply What I find ridiculous is the U.S. government has propped up the corrupt Libyan government for over 30 years because it was in their interest by way of cheap oil contracts . 
What is also ridiculous is that a no-fly zone or any action at all was not taken UNTIL Gadhafi announced he would no longer be honoring his oil contracts with Western Countries , and would be seeking to sign new contracts with the likes of Russia and China . 
This entire problem is caused by powers such as and almost entirely by the U.S. and now they 're going to arm the people ? 
Is this an Iraq all over again ? 
I scratch my head when I see all of this going on . 
If NATO was anything like it was 20 years or so ago , we would be sending in the `` blue helmets '' ensuring peace and bringing both parties to the table to discuss reasonable ways of resolving the problem , but that would require this situation to have to be about internal politics , and it 's really only all about OIL . 
I dream of the day when mankind will learn that profiteering and non renewable resources will be the source of our demise . 
The U.S. has armed the Libyan army for three decades , and now will arm the rebels . 
Either way , the Libyan people will lose in all of this , because the interests of the U.S. will prevail . 
What really needs to happen is the U.S. population needs to wake up and demand transparency and honesty from its government and to quit meddling in other countries affairs , but that will most probably never happen because people would rather raise the flag way above their heads then to be aware of the horrific truth . 
April 4 , 2011 at 2:31 am | Reply I totally agree with you ! 
If it was n't tragic , it would be ridiculous , how the U.S and the rest of them keep playing the same tune over and over again when they need public support for their dirty wars , and still get away with it ! 
So now they made a boogeyman out of Gaddafi ... Who 's next ? 
Wont American people wake up already ?! I like to think they are not stupid , just uninformed and manipulated ... April 4 , 2011 at 5:58 am | Reply Yes the US should arm the rebels today before tomorrow . 
but there is an important point , it should be done through an Arabic country because Gaddafi might take an advantage of this and get more supporters telling them that these are traitors who brought the west to invade Libya April 4 , 2011 at 3:05 am | Reply The City of Misrata and some other cities who are fighting Gaddaie with few guns , should be armed now before the western side they are dying now they need now , they do n't need it tomorrow April 4 , 2011 at 3:07 am | Reply americans are there only because of oil we all know that April 4 , 2011 at 3:24 am | Reply NO NO NO ... Why US must interlard in all country of the world ? 
This is problem of Lybian people ... This would ' t happend if USA have a lot of oil , that is the reaseon why rebels fight -- for USA ... I hope tha American people are n't with Obama . 
April 4 , 2011 at 3:26 am | Reply Dear CNN , Please broadcast this request . 
All free Libyans want the Libyan Channels to be stopped , How can a channels of obvious unreadability broadcasting and threatening people on the state TV . 
Plzzzzzzzzzz Libya April 4 , 2011 at 3:28 am | Reply Wow ! 
Maybe you would like them bombed like they did in Yugoslavia 12 yers ago ? 
So , anything you do n't like to hear , you kill , shut down , wipe out . 
And it 's OK for NATO to trow the printed propaganda , calling people to abandone Gaddafi , from the planes ? 
Does anyone see the resemblance to Goebbels propaganda ? 
How dare a foreign country demand Gaddafi to step down , when he spent 42 years building that country ? 
Why do n't you rebels tell us exactly what it is that you want changed in the way of life in Libya that you are prepared to kill and get killed for it ? 
From what I read and hear from my Libyan friends , there is n't much that you are not provided with . 
Free education , free health care , payed studies , even in foreign countries , almost everybody in Libya has a house or appartment , natality is +2.47 , average life exp . 
about 76 years , education 90 % -LRB- from only 10 % when Gaddafi took power -RRB- , powerty 7 % , 30 % unemployment -LRB- there are jobs obviously , but the libyan youth preffers to stay home than work manual jobs that they pay foreigners to do -RRB- So , please tell me what do you want ? 
Do you realize you do n't get that even in west ? 
I live in EU , things are horible here . 
The same two parties changing in power from time to time , not providing the people with anything . 
We owe so much that my grandchildren will be paying that off . 
I ca n't pay for my health insurance for a couple of months and I ca n't even go to a hospital if I need to . 
It is very difficult for children to be recieved in University , and when they do , the parents are paying for all the living and traveling expences and even a part of tuition ... April 4 , 2011 at 5:26 am | Reply Yes , in Yugoslavia -LRB- now Serbia -RRB- were bombed tv station and kill 16 young people -- journalists , editors and program implementers ... They did so deliberately and with purpose to put out a second opinion , and with this act they -LRB- NATO -RRB- gave legitimacy to the killing of journalists . 
Now Marwan send a request to do the same ? 
Only a matter of days when someone will say that the killing and other journalists -LRB- CNN , BBS ... etc. -RRB- legitimately . 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:03 am | Ana , so far you are the only reasonable person on this subject , when you look at the rebels in Libya , these are 25years , 28years , guys who have not worked to earn a living by their sweat , their leader worked his brain for them and see how they have been brain washed by the likes of Americans , Let them render their own country to poverty , they have no idea what awaits them , only if they did ! 
free education , free health care , free housing , even Americans do not have that , but the idiots have beaten the hand that feeds them April 4 , 2011 at 10:59 am | April 4 , 2011 at 3:31 am | Reply I think U S should arm the Libyans that fight their crazy president , this ll reconcile between the libyan people and U S government , U S ll benefit by that April 4 , 2011 at 3:31 am | Reply Sorry folks , I did n't pst that stupid comment above . 
If anything , I 'm with Qaddaffy and I want him to remain in power . 
April 4 , 2011 at 9:08 am | Reply I vote yes the U.S should arm the Libyan rebels , to defend and stop killing the civilians in Libya and our freedom , the game over murder go away April 4 , 2011 at 3:34 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 3:51 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 3:58 am | Reply We do n't need your `` help '' and your free -LRB- oil -RRB- dom nd demoNcracy . 
Best regards from Libja . 
Live us and go home ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 8:56 am | Reply If US wants to help , it can help peacefully not by weapons , it can encourage the government to be more democartic and enforce them to do that not by providing people with guns , that means during few months Libya will be empty , is that the target ???? , I am wondering , you care about an injured human in Europe or US and you do n't care about two people will be killed by your weapon !!!! what a double standard !!! really shame . 
April 4 , 2011 at 4:26 am | Reply No weapons for both sides , no blood between brothers . 
peace peace peace April 4 , 2011 at 4:29 am | Reply We must solve our problems by ourselves ! 
Stop arming terrorists in Libya ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 4:39 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 4:48 am | Reply Yes , even help them by bombing Gaddafi heavy guns because the alternative is more killing by Gaddafi army and high risk to the world by Gaddafi saying in power . 
April 4 , 2011 at 4:54 am | Reply The USA and the UK want to arm Libyan rebels ? 
Just as they armed the Mujahidin during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan ? 
After the Soviet withdrawal , the USA and the UK invaded Afghanistan , bombing the very people they d trained and equipped in the first place the Taliban , Osama Bin Laden and al-Qa ida . 
Ten years later , the USA and UK remain there , with young soldiers dying in a pointless war ; the only beneficiary being the Western military-industrial complex . 
`` Revolution '' in Libya : the armed by UK USA and Europe and druged by Afghan grass terrorists-liberals USA and EU haters run in desert screaming , `` Destroy our country ! 
kill our children ! '' 
Set a traitor to the throne and take our oil ! 
And Nobel Prise winner for Peace bombs for the freedom ! 
`` The circus the most cruel circus in the world ! 
DEAR LIBYAN TERRORISTS COME TO USA FASTER ! 
WHY OTHER COUNTRIES MUST SUFFER ? 
GIVE USA YOUR ATTANTION ! 
WE WILL WAIT COME TO THEIR DOORS ! 
THEY WANT VERY MUCH ! 
dEAR TERRORIST COME TO kaz HE WANTS ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 5:54 am | Reply What are you rubbishing dear Olga . 
Do not talk in something you do not understand . 
There is no similarity at all regarding what you talking about . 
Thanks anyway for your trial to talk about something you do not understand . 
April 4 , 2011 at 3:55 pm | A friend of mine told me that Olga might be one of the mercenaries paid by Gaddafi thugs to write anthing for money . 
Is that true dear Olga ? 
How much did you get ? 
I might change my mind if it is worth it . 
April 4 , 2011 at 4:00 pm | Gaddafi AND Sons AND All G `` loyalists\/supporters\/military '' = MASS MURDERERS of Libyan People !! FREE LIBYA - LIBYA ALHURRA ... Regular citizens struggling for basic freedoms\/human dignity with OLD , OLD rifles\/weapons outnumbered against a PAID and Foreign mercenary army with new and HEAVY artillery ... being slaughter city by city , the poor people in the west\/Tripoli are prisoners unless they are a Gaddfi thugs ... `` Peace and love are what the Libyan 's may work on AFTER Gaddafi and supporters are GONE I have never agreed with violence except as in this overwhelming case of SELF-DEFENSE ... some of the commenters here need to find out the real evil of the Gaddafi regime or they do n't really care or understand about freedoms April 4 , 2011 at 5:00 am | Reply Gee American Woman in AK , are n't you ashamed to post in here , showing your obvious limitations . 
What do you know about Libya , anyway ??? April 4 , 2011 at 1:33 pm | Reply The least US can do to protect its citizens is to supply arms and intelligence information to the Libyan resistance fighters to get red of Gaddafi . 
We have not forgotten Gaddafi bombing of PA AM flight over Lockerby , French UTA flight over Niger , the bombing of the American GI 's Label Discotheque in Berlin , the shooting of the London Police , and the arming the rebels around the globe killing hundreds of American and British troops . 
Blood thirst Gaddafi will never change , now he is killing his own people , and if is let free this time his ` revenge ' will be on the Americans , French , and British civilians April 4 , 2011 at 5:05 am | Reply No Tom , Gadaffi had nothing to do with Lockerbie . . 
thers no evidence he did it ... nor did he bomb the discotech ... that was done by the israelis who then got the US to believe it was done by Libya . . 
just google Libya israel trojan device . 
Both these act were carried out by israel , who planted the bomb at London airport . 
etc April 4 , 2011 at 6:27 am | Reply Gaddafi criminal and murderer I hope the U.S. can help catch the children ia criminale April 4 , 2011 at 5:09 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 5:14 am | Reply WE CAN ASK THE REBELS TO FORM A FORMAL ARMY TO MAKE IT EASY TO CONTROLE THE FUTURE OF WEOPONES ... April 4 , 2011 at 5:30 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 5:37 am | Reply Why not arm the people in Bahrein , Siriya , why dont give a weapons to Somalins pirats , paramilitary forces in Nigeria , Talibans in Afghanistan , Shia and Sunni in Iraq , Kurds in Turkey , why not give a weapons to Tamil Tigers , IRA in Irleand , ETA in Spain , Albanian KLA -LRB- Oh , I forgot , you already gave them the weapon -- so , now they can kill your soldiers , like in Germany few month ago -RRB- , why not arm a Columbian drug dealers , every separatist movement in US ... and finally why dont give a nuclear weapons to Iran , North Korea and everybody who wants nuclear ... ? 
Why in the end you do not blow the world ?!? April 4 , 2011 at 5:44 am | Reply The European Union is facing huge financial problems and one by one European country declaring bankruptcy . 
Euro zone has been severely shaken in serious trouble . 
America has all its resources spent 12 years in advance because it is owed to individual countries in the world of 36,000 billion dollars . 
The European Union and America owe the Libyan government for fuel delivered nearly 200 billion dollars . 
2012 beats the concession of large oil companies that claim to Libyan oil . 
Gaddafi called for returning the debt or to enter into international agreements with other countries and companies . 
Therefore , this unprecedented destruction of Libya April 4 , 2011 at 5:51 am | Reply The USA and the UK want to arm Libyan rebels ? 
Just as they armed the Mujahidin during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan ? 
After the Soviet withdrawal , the USA and the UK invaded Afghanistan , bombing the very people they d trained and equipped in the first place the Taliban , Osama Bin Laden and al-Qa ida . 
Ten years later , the USA and UK remain there , with young soldiers dying in a pointless war ; the only beneficiary being the Western military-industrial complex . 
`` Revolution '' in Libya : the armed by UK USA and Europe and druged by Afghan grass terrorists-liberals USA and EU haters run in desert screaming , `` Destroy our country ! 
kill our children ! '' 
Set a traitor to the throne and take our oil ! 
And Nobel Prise winner for Peace bombs for the freedom ! 
`` The circus -- the most cruel circus in the world ! 
DEAR LIBYAN TERRORISTS COME TO USA FASTER ! 
WHY OTHER COUNTRIES MUST SUFFER ? 
GIVE USA YOUR ATTANTION ! 
WE WILL WAIT COME TO THEIR DOORS ! 
THEY WANT VERY MUCH ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 5:51 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 6:08 am | Reply To brush aside America s responsibility as a leader and -- more profoundly -- our responsibilities to our fellow human beings under such circumstances would have been a betrayal of who we are . 
Some nations may be able to turn a blind eye to atrocities in other countries . 
The United States of America is different . 
And as president , I refused to wait for the images of slaughter and mass graves before taking action . 
This from the Great Moral Leader who every day murders civilians in Afghanistan and Pakistan and Yemen and Somalia and now Libya and who turns a blind eye when the great democracy in the Middle East , Israel , murders more Palestinians . 
The American president , whose drones and air force slaughter civilians every day of the year went on to say Libya stands alone in presenting the world with the prospect of violence on a horrific scale . 
Obviously , Obama thinks that one million dead Iraqis , four million displaced Iraqis , and an unknown number of murdered Afghans is just a small thing . 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:20 am | Reply On September 1 , 1969 the pro-western regime that had ruled in Libya was overthrown by Colonel Muamar Gaddafi and his officers . 
At the time , Libya was home to the largest US Air Base -LRB- Wheelus Air Base -RRB- in North Africa . 
Agreements between the USA and Libya signed in 1951 and 1954 granted the USAF the use of Wheelus Air Base and its El Watia gunnery range for gunnery and bombing training and for transport and bombing stopovers until 1971 . 
During the Cold War the base was pivotal to expanding US military power under the Strategic Air Command , and an essential base for fighter and reconnaissance missions . 
The Pentagon also used the base - and the remote Libyan desert - for missile launch testing : the launch area was located 15 miles east of Tripoli . 
Considered a ` little America on the shores of the Mediteranean ' , the base housed some 4600 US military personnel until its evacuation in 1970 . 
With the discovery of oil in Libya in 1959 , a very poor desert country became a very rich little western protectorate . 
US and European companies had huge stakes in the extremely lucrative petroleum and banking sectors , but these were soon nationalized by Gaddafi . 
Thus Libya overnight joined the list of US ` enemy ' or ` rogue ' states that sought autonomy and self-determination outside the expanding sphere of western Empire . 
Further cementing western hatred of the new regime , Libya played a leading role of the 1973 oil embargo against the US and maintained cooperative relations with the Soviet Union . 
Gaddafi also reportedly channeled early oil wealth into national free health care and education . 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:21 am | Reply please give them gun April 4 , 2011 at 6:41 am | Reply The US\/NATO invaded Libya because it said Gadaffis jets had strafed civilians ... this didnt happen , no evidence was provdied and the russians said their satellies saw nothing like that . 
BUT now the US\/NATO have invaded , we are seeing civilians being murdered ... by US\/NATO jets . 
These same war criminals want to arm the armed insurgents like the Libhyan islamic Fighting Group -LRB- LIFG -RRB- ... what a fitting act forn them to do . . 
arm jihadis who kill in afghanistan ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:42 am | Reply There were no substantial evidence to justify this NATO action , no foreign observers , no official reports from the alleged asault of the libyan air forces on civilians , no peace negotiations . 
Just hear-say ... They ask for a cease fire , and when Gaddafi agrees , the rebels still do n't stop their actions . 
And then they say to Gaddafi , why do n't ryou respect the cease fire agreement ? 
Well , what should the libyan army do , hand over the weapons , and let the rebels march all the way to Tripoli ?! And the TV is like -- There is a witness saying this , there is a witness saying that , and poof , we go to war ! 
Where are photos from a satelite , where are dead bodies , where are all those people that support the rebels ? 
Do you really think that if people 's majority was against Gaddafi , they would n't be able to turn the odds with all the help from NATO ? 
April 4 , 2011 at 7:48 am | Reply `` US drops uranium bombs on Libya ' Sun Mar 27 , 2011 2:36 PM The Stop the War Coalition says the bombs and missiles that the US-led military alliance has dropped on several Libyan cities contain depleted uranium -LRB- DU -RRB- . 
The report recently published on the Coalition 's website said that in the first 24 hours of the war on Libya , dozens of bombs and cruise missiles were launched by US , British , and French forces - all with depleted uranium warheads . 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:44 am | Reply Yeah , the libyan people can now enjoy the goodies of democracy , at least untill they die of cancer ... April 4 , 2011 at 7:49 am | Reply Mon 4 April 2011 USA Actually , it 's rather unfair to have this poll at this time as I sit here now , Gaddafi & Sons are still in power and are currently using their military might to pulverize everything in their path throughout Libya , as they have for the last couple months . 
And it 's not like the Gaddafis ' track-record was any different before that . 
If the Gaddafis are not `` put down '' -LRB- euthanized -RRB- , they wo n't stop at the Libyan borders : they 'll continue their nasty habits by conquering Africa , the rest of the Middle East , and Europe . 
While the Gaddafis are still in power , I 'd answer one way , but after the Gaddafis are gone , and\/or dead , and\/or buried , my answer would be different . 
First things first : get rid of the Gaddafis using whatever means necessary as is happening now collectively all nations coming together unwaveringly to get rid of Hitler-Stalin-Gaddafi-overlord family that is a pox on humanity . 
Do n't get distracted . 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:54 am | Reply No Lou : as in IraQ AND AFGHANISTAN , its the US doing the massacring : ` he Stop the War Coalition says the bombs and missiles that the US-led military alliance has dropped on several Libyan cities contain depleted uranium -LRB- DU -RRB- . 
The report recently published on the Coalition 's website said that in the first 24 hours of the war on Libya , dozens of bombs and cruise missiles were launched by US , British , and French forces - all with depleted uranium warheads . 
US B-2 aircraft dropped forty-five 2,000-pound bombs on key Libyan cities , it added . 
DU munitions are controversial because they raise long-term health concerns like kidney damage , cancer , skin disorders and genetic defects . '' 
-LRB- Depleted uranium tipped missiles -RRB- fit the description of a dirty bomb in every way ... I would say that it is the perfect weapon for killing lots of people , '' said Marion Falk , chemical physicist -LRB- retd . -RRB- 
, Lawrence Livermore Lab in California . 
April 4 , 2011 at 7:02 am | Reply Lou , on what bases do you make such claim ? 
What do you even know of Gaddafi 's foreign policy ? 
Do you know how much he helped develop some of those African countries ? 
Do you know that he was one of the most distinguished helpers of Nelson Mandela in a fight against apartheid ? 
That 's why the Eastern Libyans hate the black people of Africa so much . 
They think Gaddafi should n't have `` wasted '' the oil money to help develop Africa and it 's black people . 
Whenever the rebels found black people in the places they went , they killed them , stating that those were Gaddafi 's mercenaries . 
Well if someone helped me like he helped black people of Africa , I would go and fight for free . 
April 4 , 2011 at 7:58 am | Reply Numerous press reports over the weekend add to the evidence that the Libyan rebels fighting the regime of Muammar Gaddafi are under the direction of American intelligence agencies . 
Despite the repeated claims by Obama administration officials that the rebels are a largely unknown quantity , it is becoming increasingly clear that key military leaders of the anti-Gaddafi campaign are well known to the US government and have longstanding relations with the CIA . 
For better than two weeks there had been a virtual ban in the US media on reporting the name of Khalifa Haftar , the long-time CIA collaborator who was appointed chief rebel commander March 17 , on the eve of the US-NATO bombing campaign against Libya . 
Only the regional McClatchy Newspapers chain reported Haftar s appointment , and ABC News ran a brief interview with him on March 27 . 
Otherwise , silence prevailed . 
This de facto censorship abruptly ended April 1 , when a right-wing US think tank , the Jamestown Foundation , published a lengthy study of Haftar s background and record , which was cited extensively by Reuters news service , and then more widely in the US and British media . 
The Jamestown Foundation report declared : Today as Colonel Haftar finally returns to the battlefields of North Africa with the objective of toppling Gaddafi , his former co-conspirator from Libya s 1969 coup , he may stand as the best liaison for the United States and allied NATO forces in dealing with Libya s unruly rebels . 
April 4 , 2011 at 7:11 am | Reply USA must stop interfeering in other countries internal problems . 
you bombed poor Serbia , but clnl Gadafi has guts to say no ! 
all free world supports him . 
stop playing global policeman ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 7:12 am | Reply NATO announced on Friday that the first 24 hours of their command over the Libyan War has resulted in 178 sorties and 74 air strikes . 
NATO warships also stopped two ships in the Mediterranean Sea near Libya , but did not board them . 
At least some of the strikes hit a small village called Zawia el Argobe , near Brega . 
The village doctor said the strike hit a truck carrying ammunition , and the subsequent explosion killed seven civilians and wounded 25 others . 
Among the dead were children as young as 12 . 
Though NATO and the US have been shrugging off most reports of civilian killings in their strikes , they have come under renewed scrutiny since a top Catholic official in Tripoli said that his city alone lost 40 civilians in the bombing campaigns . 
The US was keen to push for a NATO takeover of the Libyan War , and much is being made of the 16 NATO members participating in the war . 
The reality , however , is that the US and France are still contributing a large majority of the attack force . 
April 4 , 2011 at 7:15 am | Reply your information is not true . 
the truth is that Qaddafi forces are kidnapping and killing Libyans because they do not need him , so he bring the dead bodies to the place where the NATO has attacked , and show to the world that these bodies are because of NATO but in reality they were killed by Qaddafi mercenaries . 
I am Libyan and I know all these things . 
We need to be free and Qaddafi is no accepted by Libyan people any more April 4 , 2011 at 7:26 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 8:00 am | You information is not true . 
NATO supprot AL Qaeda . 
Rebels kill us and tablets and drugs form Dubai . 
They kill inocent people in my county . 
Do n't give guns to killer . 
You give to killers enough for killing all country . 
You drop the uranium on my conuty . 
Gaddafi did n't kill any one . 
Do n't listen TV . 
Do n't listen TV April 4 , 2011 at 9:00 am | you have a potent imagination there naser ... but the article pieve i posted is quite true , . . 
your comment tho is unsubstarntiated rubbish ... You cant win so you need to demonise gadaffi ... take this fellow in a debate ... his lie of 10000 womenand childen dead was so laugahle he couldnt last 5 minutes of doubt : in a real debate the libyan opposition can only rant and scream and walk off : meet the man who rages at Gadaffi and says 10000 women and children were killed by him ... that number alone is bogus ... But his arrogance is what reallly shame the Trans council ... I think the world is able to help Libyans . 
the solution for Libya crises is that Qaddafi and his family should leave Libya , the rebels are Libyan people . 
they are not a group . 
they represent all Libyans . 
Qaddafi bring Mercenaries from other countries to kill Libyans . 
This is the first time that we saw that people in Arabic countries do not protest against american forces because they know that UN should protect Libyans from Qaddafi and his family . 
April 4 , 2011 at 7:17 am | Reply you want them to kill each other to get their country ? 
why u want this and u know that there between rebels a lot of members of el qaida ? 
maybe qaida was the target of el Gaddafy from the beginning coz he knew and he said it to the world but u didn t believe till the nato approuve it and u still want to give them more army ? 
what is the benefit do u want el qaida to be more strengthful ?????? April 4 , 2011 at 7:25 am | Reply your information is not true . 
even if the information true . 
Al-Qaeda has members in every country in the world even in The US , so please do not be dullard . 
Qaddafi at the beginning said that he is fighting Al-Qaeda , but after The UN intervention , he said . '' 
this is Crusade and they come because we are Muslims ... !!!!!!!! . 
evey one now is trying to be a friend with the westerns by claiming that he is fighting against Al-Qaeda !!!! April 4 , 2011 at 7:37 am | Reply `` Darnah , northeast Libya : World Capital of Jihadis The most striking finding which emerges from the West Point study is that the corridor which goes from Benghazi to Tobruk , passing through the city of Darnah -LRB- also transliterated as Derna -RRB- them represents one of the greatest concentrations of jihadi terrorists to be found anywhere in the world , and by some measures can be regarded as the leading source of suicide bombers anywhere on the planet . 
Darnah , with one terrorist fighter sent into Iraq to kill Americans for every 1,000 to 1,500 persons of population , emerges as suicide bomber heaven , easily surpassing the closest competitor , which was Riyad , Saudi Arabia . '' '' 
... But since the Al Qaeda personnel files contain the residence or hometown of the foreign fighters in question , we can determine that the desire to travel to Iraq to kill Americans was not evenly distributed across Libya , but was highly concentrated precisely in those areas around Benghazi which are today the epicenters of the revolt against Colonel Gaddafi which the US , Britain , France , and others are so eagerly supporting . 
As Daya Gamage of the Asia Tribune comments in a recent article on the West Point study , alarmingly for Western policymakers , most of the fighters came from eastern Libya , the center of the current uprising against Muammar el-Qaddafi . 
The eastern Libyan city of Darnah sent more fighters to Iraq than any other single city or town , according to the West Point report . 
It noted that 52 militants came to Iraq from Darnah , a city of just 80,000 people -LRB- the second-largest source of fighters was Riyadh , Saudi Arabia , which has a population of more than 4 million -RRB- . 
Benghazi , the capital of Libya s provisional government declared by the anti-Qaddafi rebels , sent in 21 fighters , again a disproportionate number of the whole . 
4 Obscure Darnah edged out metropolitan Riyadh by 52 fighters to 51 . 
Qaddafi s stronghold of Tripoli , by contrast , barely shows up in the statistics at all . 
-LRB- See chart from West Point report , page 12 -RRB- '' You can find the West Point study here to download , or read excerpts . 
The only way to get ready of international terrorism is by eliminating the power and reach of all tyrants like GADDAFY from the face of this plant . 
All Tyrant should be picked and handed back to their own people to take care of them Once and for all . 
If You guys -LRB- west -RRB- have change your mine about Gaddafy and decide to keep him or one of his sons around for any longer , then , I can assure you it will be the wrong signal sent to the world . 
Gaddafy , his family and all of the gang surrounding him MUST GO OUT OF LIBYA NOW . 
April 4 , 2011 at 7:47 am | Reply please help them because good people , and give them gun April 4 , 2011 at 7:56 am | Reply Rebels are not civilians !!! They have guns and weapons !!!! This is not action to protect civilians !!! STOP the occupation and terror !!! US , France and UK , the world is not yours , let the others to live free !!! You are the terrorists , and you will pay for that !!! As the all other occupator throw history , you will fall down and crash , will be destroyed by your self ... I can not wait , you deserve that !!!!! April 4 , 2011 at 7:58 am | Reply - excellent example of classic dictatorship regime 1 . 
Electricity for household use is free , 2 . 
interest-free loans during the study , ... 3 . 
receives the average salary for this profession if you do not find a job after graduation , 4 . 
the state has paid for to work in the profession , 5 . 
Every unemployed person receives social assistance 15,000 $ a year , 6 . 
after the entry into marriage state pays first apartment or house -LRB- 150m2 -RRB- , 7 . 
buying cars at factory prices , 8 . 
do not owe anyone a cent , 9 . 
free health and education , 10 . 
free higher education abroad , 11 . 
25 % of highly educated , 12 . 
40 loaves of bread costs $ 0.15 , 13 . 
water in the middle of the desert , drinking water , 14 . 
8 dinars per liter of oil -LRB- 0.08 EUR -RRB- , 16 . 
For each infant , the couple received $ 5,000 for his needs . 
The Western media are basing a great deal of their reporting on supposed facts provided by the exile group National Front for the Salvation of Libya , which was trained and financed by the U.S. CIA . 
Google the front s name plus CIA and you will find hundreds of references . 
The Wall Street Journal in a Feb. 23 editorial wrote that The U.S. and Europe should help Libyans overthrow the Gadhafi regime . 
There is no talk in the board rooms or the corridors of Washington about intervening to help the people of Kuwait or Saudi Arabia or Bahrain overthrow their dictatorial rulers . 
Even with all the lip service being paid to the mass struggles rocking the region right now , that would be unthinkable . 
As for Egypt and Tunisia , the imperialists are pulling every string they can to get the masses off the streets . 
There was no talk of U.S. intervention to help the Palestinian people of Gaza when thousands died from being blockaded , bombed and invaded by Israel . 
The U.S. intervened to prevent condemnation of the Zionist settler state . 
Imperialism s interest in Libya is not hard to find . 
Bloomberg.com wrote on Feb. 22 that while Libya is Africa s third-largest producer of oil , it has the continent s largest proven reserves 44.3 billion barrels . 
It is a country with a relatively small population but the potential to produce huge profits for the giant oil companies . 
That s how the super-rich look at it , and that s what underlies their professed concern for the people s democratic rights in Libya . 
April 4 , 2011 at 8:06 am | Reply I do n't know where you get you list of `` facts '' . 
I have lived in Benghazi , Libya for a very long time and never seen any of this stuff . 
Ghaddafi goes on TV and give his eternal speeches and promises stuff like this , but it never shows up . 
We actually did have subsidised food staples like rice and free medecine and education , but now there is no more subsidised food , you can go to a public clinic if you can wait around for a few days to see a doctor , but you have to pay market prices for the medecine and beginnig now , you have to pay for public university and schools , at least according to the last royal decree . 
And this was all before the uprising . 
If you are wondering how I could respond to your post , I am not in Libya right now so I have access to internet . 
Something else you do n't have in Libya . 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:56 pm | Reply You did n't live in Libya Khadeejah . 
Becouse you do n't know facts . 
April 5 , 2011 at 11:17 am | I am sorry to tell you that you are either not a libyan or you were in a coma , in the past before Mummar , libya was one of the richest countries in the middle east , now when you watch the TV do you think that these were the richest people in middle east in the past ? 
do you know that libya is the 3rd country in petrol in Africa ... do you see how poor the people are ???? Mummar has took every thing from them and now he is taking their SOULS April 6 , 2011 at 3:34 pm | Reply At this point , however , it must be asked who is the opposition in Libya . 
The opposition is not a monolithic body . 
The common denominator is the opposition to the rule of Qaddafi and his family . 
It has to be said that actions of opposition or resistance against an oppressor and an opposition movement are also two different things . 
For the most part , the common people and corrupt Libyan officials , who harbor deep-seated hate towards Qaddafi and his family , are now in the same camp , but there are differences . 
There is an authentic form of opposition , which is not organized , and a systematic form of opposition , which is either external or led by figures from within the Libyan regime itself . 
The authentic people s internal opposition in Libya is not organized and the people s actions of opposition have been spontaneous . 
Yet , opposition and revolt has been encouraged and prompted from outside Libya through social media networks , international news stations , and events in the rest of the Arab World . 
The leadership of the internal opposition that is emerging in Libya is coming from within the regime itself . 
Corrupt officials that have rebelled against Gaddafi are not the champions of the people . 
These opposition figures are not opposed to tyranny ; they are merely opposed to the rule of Colonel Qaddafi and his family . 
Aref Sharif and Al-Yunis are themselves Libyan regime figures . 
It has to also be considered that some Libyan officials that have turned against Qaddafi are doing it to save themselves , while others in the future will work to retain or strengthen their positions . 
Abdel Moneim Al-Honi , the Libyan envoy to the Arab League in Cairo , can be looked at as an example . 
Al-Honi denounced Qaddafi , but it should be noted that he was one of the members of the group of Libyan officers who executed the coup in 1969 with Qaddafi and that later in 1975 he himself tried to take power in a failed coup . 
After the failed coup , he would flee Libya and only return in 1990 after Qaddafi pardoned him Al-Honi is not the only Libyan diplomat to resign . 
The Libyan ambassador to India has also done the same . 
There is an intention on the part of these officials to be members of the power structure in a Libya after the ouster of Qaddafi : Libyan Ambassador to India Ali al-Essawi told the BBC that he was quitting , opposing his government 's violent crackdown on demonstrators . 
Mr. Al-Essawi was reported to be a Minister in Tripoli and could be an important figure in an alternative government , in case Libyan President Muammar Qadhafi steps down . 
The second Libyan diplomat to put in his papers was Tripoli 's Permanent Representative to the Arab League Abdel Moneim al-Honi , who said in Cairo that he had quit his job to join the revolution in his country . 
I have submitted my resignation in protest against the acts of repression and violence against demonstrators , and I am joining the ranks of the revolution , said Mr. Al-Honi . 
The Second Secretary Hussein Sadiq al Musrati , announced his resignation from China , in an interview with Al-Jazeera , and called on the Army to intervene in the uprising . 
The leadership of the internal opposition that is emerging in Libya is coming from within the regime itself . 
Corrupt officials that have rebelled against Gaddafi are not the champions of the people . 
These opposition figures are not opposed to tyranny ; they are merely opposed to the rule of Colonel Qaddafi and his family . 
Aref Sharif and Al-Yunis are themselves Libyan regime figures . 
Any way everybody want to be Master of free -LRB- OIL -RRB- dom ... but they forget that is only one president can be in one country . 
You can see on this map -LRB- down -RRB- only Libya is free ... I can not understund why somebody want to be Lord of the world ? 
What is necessary and the time is enough for human life ? 
April 4 , 2011 at 8:07 am | Reply Could the United States please stop fu \* king interfering into foreign business ? 
For Pete 's sake , stop your stupid politics , and just LEAVE THEM ALONE ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 8:08 am | Reply yes yes the must give us and ya rab nasrk inshlah April 4 , 2011 at 8:18 am | Reply I think is the best -- -RRB- Yenkee go home ! 
List of countries bombed by the US \* Japan -LRB- Hiroshima & Nagasaki -RRB- \* China 1945-46 Korea 1950-53 \* China 1950-53 \* Guatemala 1954 \* Indonesia 1958 \* Cuba 1959-60 \* Guatemala 1960 \* Belgian Congo 1964 \* Guatemala 1964 \* Dominican Republic 1965-66 \* Peru 1965 \* Laos 1964-73 \* Vietnam 1961-73 \* Cambodia 1969-70 \* Guatemala 1967-69 \* Lebanon 1982-84 \* Grenada 1983-84 \* Libya 1986 \* El Salvador 1981-92 \* Nicaragua 1981-90 \* Libya 1986 \* Iran 1987-88 \* Libya 1989 \* Panama 1989-90 \* Iraq 1991-2002 \* Kuwait 1991 \* Somalia 1992-94 \* Croatia 1994 -LRB- of Serbs at Krajina -RRB- \* Bosnia 1995 \* Iran -LRB- airliner -RRB- \* Sudan 1998 \* Afghanistan 1998 \* Yugoslavia 1999 \* Afghanistan 2001-02 \* Libya 2011 April 4 , 2011 at 8:42 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 8:47 am | Reply weapon will solve the problem ?????? poor and callous people from the west !!!!!! April 4 , 2011 at 8:45 am | Reply The english transaltion of the oil egreement to steal libyan oil by the so called rebels . 
In regards to the France Oil Agreement with the popular front for the liberation of Libya According to our meeting in London and the confirmed decisions has been reached about we had chosen our official representative for Libyan , and we can confirm that we are intensively communicating with the French government through your council and we are thankful for you effort to protect us in Libya and we confirm that our official representative to you and to all western will be Mr. Mahmud Al-shamam instead to MR. Mahmud Gebreal , as we had discover that Mr. Mahmud Gebreal has betrayed us with colonial Al-Gaddafi and he succeed all this time to break into our group . 
Mahmud Al-shamam will sign on our behalf the oil agreement to give an allowance with 35 % to French government from the total Libya oil , and accordingly we would like to ask for complete military support with agreed quality and quantities of weapons that already encoded letter has been sent to you as soon as possible as we have lost all the lands to Colonial Al-Gaddfi army except Benghazi still with us . 
To confidentially via email and attach your Embassy in France or fax cc214m April 4 , 2011 at 8:53 am | Reply We appeal to all people of goodwill to support our appeal to the leaders of RUSSIA and sign it . 
TODAY Libya will be ruined , and Libyan oil wii be CAPTURED , and tomorrow the target of aggression can become any other State . 
Open letter from Russian doctors in Libya to President of the Russian Federation from citizens of Ukraine , Belarus and Russia , working and living in Libya March 24 , 2011 , Tripoli , Libya Dear Mr Medvedev and Vladimir Putin , Citizens of the former Soviet Union refer to you . 
Today we are citizens of different Slavonic countries -- Ukraine , Belarus and Russia . 
Despite this , we all believe that Russia is a successor to the USSR and is the ONLY protector of interests of our countries and security of our citizens . 
Therefore , we call to you for help and justice . 
It s clearly an outrageous AGGRESSION of the USA and NATO against the SOVEREIGN STATE Libya . 
And if anyone has doubts , it s clear for us , because all this is happening beneath our eyes , and the actions of U.S. and NATO threaten lives of not only Libyan civilians , but of all human beings on Lybian territory . 
We are outraged by the barbaric bombing of Libya , which is currently carried out by coalition of U.S. and NATO . 
The bombings of Tripoli and other cities in Libya are aimed not only on military targets and Libyan army , but on civilian infrastructure as well . 
Today , 24 March 2011 , NATO and U.S. aircraft were bombing a suburb of Tripoli -- Tajura -LRB- where , in particular , is Libya 's Nuclear Research Centre -RRB- trough all night and early afternoon . 
Air Defense and Air Force facilities in Tajura were destroyed during the first 2 days of air strikes . 
There are much more military facilities in the city but today Libyan army barracks were targeted . 
Moreover there is a high density inhabited area around it . 
Air strikes also damaged the largest Libyan Heart Surgery Centre . 
Civilians and doctors could not imagine that residential areas will be attacked by fire as well , so none of the residents or hospital patients was evacuated . 
Bombs and missiles struck residential houses , some dropped near the hospital . 
The windows in the Cardiac Centre building were shuttered , and the wall and part of the roof of the building of the maternity ward for pregnant women with heart disease collapsed . 
This lead to a ten miscarriages , the women are now in intensive care , doctors are fighting for their lives . 
We and our colleagues are working seven days a week to save people . 
A consequence of falling bombs and missiles in residential buildings is dozens of deaths and injuries , which are now being treated by our doctors . 
Enormous number of killed and injured only for one day . 
By the way those horrible figures are much higher than during all the riots all together . 
And this is being called `` protecting the civilian population '' ? 
With full responsibility as witnesses and participants of what is happening , we state that it is a genocide carried out by the United States and its allies against the Libyan people -- as it already happened in Yugoslavia , Afghanistan and Iraq . 
These are crimes against humanity , carried out by coalition forces are similar to those committed by fathers and grandfathers of today 's Western leaders and their henchmen in Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan and in Dresden in Germany , where civilians were also killed for seeding terror , to break the will of the people to resist -LRB- Germany remembers it , and therefore refused to participate in the new mayhem -RRB- . 
Today they want to make the Libyan people to give up their leader and the legitimate government and calmly surrender their national wealth to the countries of the coalition We understand that appealing to the `` international community '' to save the people of Libya and us living in Libya , is useless . 
Our only hope is that Russia has the priority of veto in the UN , and special April 4 , 2011 at 9:41 am | Reply Please do . 
It is good for the west to have free Libya April 4 , 2011 at 9:46 am | Reply drop dead america , drop dead nato , drop dead america -- drop dead nato america and nato going hitlers steps this is fashism DROP DEAD AMERICA , DROP DEAD NATO drop dead america drop dead FU April 4 , 2011 at 9:51 am | Reply What is up with all these people out of Serbia ? 
What 's all this noise and half-ass arguments of these bloody-fools Serbs ? 
Do they support Gaddafi out of ignorance , or because he spends our money on them ? 
Clearly they identify with him as a criminal and bloody putcher like their leader in the war against Bosnia ? 
You do n't understand Freedom , Justice , or Democracy . 
Keep out of it you poor bastards . 
Yes , The US should provide arms to the freedom fighters , and you should not call them rebels . 
April 4 , 2011 at 10:14 am | Reply You will never be free because America does not need a strong and free Libya already occupied state to do what they want . . 
Think of it until it 's too late . . 
Stop the Civil War April 4 , 2011 at 12:56 pm | Reply OK , so why do n't you give us some facts ? 
The facts about Libya I gave earlier are from THE CIA WORLD FACT BOOK , printed edition . 
The other document that is linking the rebels to Al Qaeda and suicide bombers is a West Point study published in 2007 . 
So you are asking help from Americans , but You say their operatives forged facts about life in Libya ? 
Those are American Government fact studies of Libya and I do n't take them without some reserve , if you have something more accurate , please share it with us . 
Speak with facts , or even if it 's a speculation , give us some source . 
It seems to me that some of you who have been educated with the money government gave you , lots of times , prolonging the education for years to live on the government money in foreign countries , now want to take a bigger piece of cake , without actually working . 
You know what they say : '' Idle hands are the devil 's workshop '' You know what ? 
You should try democracy ! 
You should start loaning money from Western banks , as they robe you from your wealth , and then try to explain to your children and grandchildren what you were fighting for . 
I promise you , if you are in fact a decent person and not some voluntary western puppet , in about 10 years or even sooner , you will feel manipulated , ashamed and robed of hope and money . 
You will be a slave to the Great Investing Cartels of the West , as we all are . 
Here in Greece , in a beautiful touristic area where I live , the Foreign companies -LRB- with Roth ... d hands in them -RRB- have gained the government approval to dig for gold in a place near to the source of the only river in the area . 
It has been proven by the scientists and the doctors that this could be highly dangerous for the area , because of high % of Arsenic , Cyanide and Sulfur that are released in the area . 
But because those cartels are financing both political parties that hold the majority of seats in the parliament , and the scientist get paid to shut up , we are now facing something that could destroy our water supply , agriculture , honey production and tourism . 
And that for only about 1.5 t. of gold they believe they can extract . 
What do you think they have in store for you with so much oil ? 
Oh , and the reason I did n't finish the name of one of the investors , is that one men dared to state the name of the Mining company in connection with the potential danger , and got sued for it , they are now asking him to pay 1.000.000,00 EUR as a fine !!!! April 4 , 2011 at 4:31 pm | Reply II agree with you Ana . . 
message for the Libyans , `` Gaddafi saved or you will become slaves to the West '' . . 
America and the West does not want good for those watching their own interest . . 
THIS IS THE TRUTH April 5 , 2011 at 7:56 am | Unlike radical Obama , violent Bush , it seems that Former President Bill Clinton knows when to use power appropriately . 
April 4 , 2011 at 10:32 am | Reply Yes , arm the rebels in Libya to insure no more terrorism in Libya , April 4 , 2011 at 10:51 am | Reply This stupid country 's going arm those so-called `` rebels '' hell or high water in spite of the fact that this country faces a huge deficit . 
It 's funny how the right-wing thugs in Washington always seem to have money to fight all these obnoxious wars but ca n't do anything about our huge deficit ! 
We keep electing the wrong people ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 11:01 am | Reply Ma jebao vas obama . 
retardirana nacijo ... za mir ste , da naoruzate pobunjenike i pobijete sve dole bombama ... kreteni ... dosadno vam pa pljujete u tudju drzavu . 
ratujte malo u amreci ... April 4 , 2011 at 11:01 am | Reply This voiting looks fraud ! 
This is not true that more people -LRB- 2\/3 -RRB- want to arm rebels !!! Any normal person would not do that . 
Those rebels have nothing with democracy -- they are proved -LRB- and nothing but -RRB- oil-poachers ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 11:18 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 11:22 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 11:26 am | Reply Ja vi e neu da klikem , ako kojekakvi ludaci smatraju da se teroriste i pobunjenike trebaju podpomagati , onda Bujrum ... April 4 , 2011 at 11:27 am | Reply Libyan people they need gun because Gaddafi kills them , and they are need freedom on their country April 4 , 2011 at 11:35 am | Reply Thinking , thinking , thinking , our brain is not for watermachine , our brain is for thinking !!! Dont give media to manipulated with you , be free ! 
Nobody dont kill civilians , some people take guns and make atack on goverment in their country . 
Its terrorist atack and all goverment in the world must answer with gun on terrorism . 
What American people thinking , if somebody from Texas take gun and start to kill police and army what army will doing ? 
Maybe to make country for them ? 
Maybe rest off world need to send guns for them becayse its just `` civilians '' , hahaha ... . 
dont be stupid , be clever people . 
I know , some people like to watch war on television but its not video game , maybe tommorow , devil -LRB- shejtan -RRB- make pley around your house ! 
Be Christianity , dont be evil idiot ... . . 
just thinking , nobodu dont living 1000 years , why we can not live normal our life , like human been , with owner , not with blood and dead ... be normal ... April 4 , 2011 at 8:24 pm | Reply Keep Nato out of Libya , they will just set-up a puppet government , just like what happened to Egypt . 
April 4 , 2011 at 11:40 am | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 12:34 pm | Reply STOP BOMBING Libya-Gaddafi 's military positions are throwing bombs with depleted uranium , says German expert Christoph Herstl TRIPOLI -- Libya facility for throwing depleted uranium ! 
According to Kristof Hearst , the German specialist for radioactive weapons , `` it is suspected that the Allies in the attack on Libya using very harmful bomb . '' 
- It 's their dirty habits . 
Americans were using weapons with depleted uranium in Iraq , Afghanistan and the Balkans . 
Unfortunately , Libya is no exception . 
If this really happens , people will suffer . 
Raae their crippled children -- said Herstl . 
April 4 , 2011 at 12:34 pm | Reply few words about democracy my post is removed I TELL AGAIN ... DROP DEAD AMERICA DROP DEAD NATO ... ... . . 
SMRT NATO-u ... DROP DEAD AMERICA DROP DEAD NATO dead for america , dead for nato April 4 , 2011 at 1:30 pm | Reply USA bombed my country and now Libya . 
That 's why I support Gaddafi and his fight to clean up the land of bandits . 
Long live Serbia and Libya !!!! Radomir from Serbia ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 1:59 pm | Reply YES ! 
Arm and train if them if we do n't perhaps an anti american group will besides that its the right thing to do April 4 , 2011 at 2:12 pm | Reply I think the freedom is very important for honest people -LRB- reples -RRB- who need wepons to fight for it . 
April 4 , 2011 at 2:18 pm | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 3:09 pm | Reply This is not just decide Is it conceivable that such a decision by people Mjholoa identity If the channel you want to know the facts you should ask the owners of the land themselves , it is supposed to go to Libya and asked people from both parties to a war not a game . 
April 4 , 2011 at 3:37 pm | Reply Iajpan was afraid you 're on your people for the return of H April 4 , 2011 at 3:44 pm | Reply And you and you are clearly outside your country , your country p p seconded Arabs April 4 , 2011 at 3:45 pm | Reply In Middle east , we always on believe NATO is power to protect western interest , but in Libya case we trying to change this believe . 
We are trying to believe there is a moral duty for this power after the world shocked by the horrible massacres by Gaddafi regime and the bloody machinery of Kaddafi continue to kill civilians in Libya . 
Unfortunately NATO failed to stop mad Gaddaffi from killing his own people in Libya , although the 1973 UN resolution very clear protect Civilians with out giving details how to achieve this purpose . 
In last few days we have seen the NATO very slow on response against Gaddafi killing machinery and there is excuses every day , we believe the NATO giving chance to Gaddaffi to regroup and getting the equipments needed to kill more Libyans . 
We as Libyans on believe NATO plying games to put pressure on Libyans revolution to dictates the post Gaddaffi era or alternatively to stabilises Gaddaffi regime . 
We hear from our people in Libya NATO targeting the less important and useless bases of Gaddaffi and keeping the big obvious targets functioning in full capacity . 
Gaddaffi forces will never advance to the east ; with out re-assurances from NATO , they will be not attacked . 
Free United Libya with NATO or without NATO April 4 , 2011 at 3:48 pm | Reply Dear Mr Obama , on behalf of the innocent Libyan civilans and myself would like to thank you , your people and your army to degrade the atrocious Libyan monster 's air force , which was used to bombard his own people who bear him and his devious sons for 42 years , spoilt the country 's wealth , to threaten the innocents everywhere in the world , employed the terrorists everywhere , then employed mercenaries to kill his own people . 
I can not imagine how you accept such kind of draculas who kills for the pleasure of killing , he stated with his sons very clearly , in front of all that he is going to kill and crush every one who says no to him . 
what you would say to your children when they ask you what did you dad to save the innocent children in libya , no excuses now , as all massacres are documented and broadcasted in all channel tvs , it is your responsibility to save the civilians , to degrade his armed forces which used every now and then to crush more innocents , ruin everything in the country . 
I am sure if you did not intervene he would killed thousands of innocents . 
please continue your moral task to degrade his armored forces and apply no drive-zone for his forces to save the innocents , I am sure the history will write this task as one of the greatest humantarian tasks in the 21st century April 4 , 2011 at 3:57 pm | Reply janja-I am an Arab and I fear for every Arab , whether with Gaddafi , or against its survival is important is that no one interferes in solving the problems of the Arabs because he Sikrjrn a new Iraq or disaster , new in the world , either in Libya or Syria or Bahrain in the whole world is important that humans live in peace . 
According to I am familiar with and see what NATO did in Libya , the past few days . 
The regime dying and try to rescue by any thing even claiming Mr. Shalgom mother who died 10 years back she back to life . 
No body belive gaddaffi and his sons and there visionless suporters . 
time is over new free libya is coming try to hid with the money you stolen from libyan people April 4 , 2011 at 7:50 pm | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 4:53 pm | Reply For the information of the Arab world that the Internet and foreign uninterrupted on the Libya April 4 , 2011 at 4:58 pm | Reply Hence in my capacity as a peace-loving man I hope to solve their problem Libyans themselves without any intervention or support from any quarter , but pray for them to return to the negotiating table and Taatther home from the base . 
April 4 , 2011 at 5:02 pm | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 5:31 pm | Reply Please , do not vote ! 
This is not fair voting , for example when you click : NO , and when you came back your vote does n't count and everything goes in : YES ! 
This is so big lie , and somebody should be reported for making this kind of manipulation !!! How we discovered this ? 
Well , just log in through proxy , and delete last two cookies and you will see , you can vote again and again ! 
STOP LYING PEOPLE , YOU MURDERS ! 
Long Live Colonel Gaddafi !!! April 4 , 2011 at 5:39 pm | Reply And this is all about democracy , my previous post is deleted ! 
I just said that this voting is a big lie and I explained how they got so much : yes votes . 
Proxy is the answer ! 
And I hope this message wo n't be deleted ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 5:46 pm | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 5:48 pm | Reply fooshika You do not know what happened in Bosnia and Croatia ! 
You probably do not know where they are located . 
so silent April 4 , 2011 at 5:55 pm | Reply Saviour , what truth you think you know ? 
Just shut up , and why are you even here ? 
who is paying you bastards from Serbia to support Gaddafi ? 
Who is paying you . 
The Libyan people will never never never forgive you for sending mercenaries and snipers to help Gaddaifi wage war on Libyans inside their own country . 
You are committing war crimes . 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:00 pm | Reply Why do you always trow insults and accusations you ca n't substantiate with evidence ? 
With the same logic , I could ask you , who is paying you to call on a bombing military mission on your own people ?! But , I wo n't ask , because I have a very strong idea , but can not prove it . 
Also , I do n't have any more time to spend here reading your words of hatred and propaganda , some of us have to go to work in a couple of hours . 
You see , I 'm doing this for free , because I want to tell my children that I was n't one of those people who sat indifferently and let Imperialism get away with it once again , destroying a sovereign country , robbing it of it 's wealth and killing their people with depleted uranium bombs , under false pretense of humanitarian help . 
That 's all from me , you failed to answer all of my calls for facts so far , so if you do n't have anything in store except insult , I should really go to sleep a couple of hours . 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:27 pm | Reply Libyan affairs are none of your business , until you understand what you are talking about . 
If you actually know anything about Libya you would be supporting the UN intervention . 
By the way , do you know where Libya is ? 
a bit of its history ? 
April 4 , 2011 at 7:57 pm | I have better solution when they already start and they ca n't without war . . 
Obama declare war , so why do n't he goes 2 Libya and fight for his country and risk his own life then he sent innocent people who have children , wifes and old parent 's . . 
I call for president Obama 's Nobel peace prize to be revoked ! 
He do n't deserve that prize and that position ! 
People of America made the same mistake like last time ! 
They do n't care if today died 20 young people , they just care about there own interest and they will enter in our life 's and ours decision 's every time they have chance so ppl pls say STOP ! 
Hole world remember how was 1999 when NATO was bombing ex Yugoslavia and we will never forget that days-the hardest day in life 's of our parent 's and families how they was frightened for our life 's and our security ! 
It 's not too late , that ppl in Libya do n't deserve too go trough that hell like our parent 's ! 
thanks -- this is just my opinion but i think that I 'm not only who think like this . . 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:08 pm | Reply Vote people but your vote wo n't do anything ! 
EU resolution does n't support arming the rebels ... Truth will win ! 
Long live Colonel Gaddafi ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:10 pm | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 6:36 pm | Reply For all of you who think the pro-democracy fighters in Libya should not be armed and have written your views here or on another website or have spoken their views out loud , I would like you to think about something . 
If you were in Libya doing this , you would be kidnapped , tortured , raped and killed or just shot outright . 
I know this is true because I live in Benghazi , Libya . 
I am not in Benghazi now or I would n't be able to write this . 
There is no internet allowed in Libya except for a minority of people who have some very unusual resources . 
I grew up in America and I was taught that Americans believe that the rights and freedoms that they enjoy are universal and all the people of the world should have the same rights and freedoms . 
Now in Libya , very brave people have stood up to a dictator who has ruled them mercilessly for over 40 years . 
These people have been threatened by their government to be hunted out inch by inch , house by house , room by room , alley by alley and person by person and destroyed because they are rats and germs . 
Last March 19th this despot very nearly carried out this threat against Benghazi , but the coallition led by France , Britian and America stepped in and prevented a massacre . 
Right now many other cities in Libya are under heavy artillary fire by Ghaddafi 's forces . 
Men , women and children are being killed and injured every day . 
The people in Libya are begging for NATO air strikes against these forces . 
The oil fields of Msala and Sireer were completely destroyed today by missiles from columns of tanks . 
There are many ancient sites in Libya some UNESCO world heritage sites . 
Will NATO be there if Ghaddafi decides to destroy them ? 
The people in Libya are being shot with the same weapons which should be used to protect them . 
These weapons were bought and paid for with the wealth of the nation that should have been used for the benefit of the people . 
Libya has no defensive army . 
It has instead a highly armed `` palace guard '' designed to protect Muammar Ghaddafi and his family . 
Neither American or Libyan people want American solders on the ground in Libya . 
What the pro-democracy fighters in Libya do need is some support form NATO and training and weapons . 
The United States is very good at verbally encouraging the spread of democracy and condemning the abuse of human rights . 
In Libya right now , The United States has a unique opportunity to prove that it can do more than just talk the talk . 
The pro-democracy movement in Libya is grass-roots and genuine . 
Libya is an example for other governments in the region who repress their people . 
If the Libyan people are not given support in real tangible ways , like air strikes and weapons , other dictators will be confirmed in their beliefs that all The United States does is talk . 
But , if America gives the pro-democracy fighters real support now , it will prove that America is more than just talk . 
America walks the walk , America stands behind the pretty words about freedom , democracy and human rights . 
I am proud of my Libyan brothers and sisters fighting for freedom . 
I hope that I can be proud of my American brothers and sisters for standing behind what they believe and doing what should be done when it counts . 
April 4 , 2011 at 6:41 pm | Reply Genocide or Armed Civil War Unlike all ongoing mass popular Arab uprisings , the Libyan conflict began as an armed insurrection , directed at seizing power by force . 
Unlike the autocratic rulers of Egypt and Tunisia , Gaddafi has secured a mass regional base among a substantial sector of the Libyan population . 
This support is based on the fact that almost two generations of Libyans have benefited from Gaddafi s petroleum-financed welfare , educational , employment and housing programs , none of which existed under America s favorite , King Idris . 
Since violence is inherent in any armed uprising , once one picks up the gun to seize power , they lose their claim on civil rights . 
In armed civil conflicts , civil rights are violated on all sides . 
Regardless of the Western media s lurid portrayal of Gaddafi s African mercenary forces and its more muted approval of revolutionary justice against Gaddafi supporters and government soldiers captured in the rebel strongholds , the rules of warfare should have come into play , including the protection of non-combatants-civilians -LRB- including government supporters and officials -RRB- , as well as protection of Libyan prisoners of war in the areas under NATO-rebel control . 
The unsubstantiated Euro-US claim of genocide amplified by the mass media and parroted by left spokespersons is contradicted by the daily reports of single and double digit deaths and injuries , resulting from urban violence on both sides , as control of cities and towns shifts between the two sides . 
Truth is the first casualty of war , and especially of civil war . 
Both sides have resorted to monstrous fabrications of victories , casualties , monsters and victims . 
Demons and angels aside , this conflict began as a civil war between two sets of Libyan elites : An established paternalistic , now burgeoning neo-liberal , autocracy with substantial popular backing versus a western imperialist financed and trained elite , backed by an amorphous group of regional , tribal and clerical chiefs , monarchists and neo-liberal professionals devoid of democratic and nationalist credentials and lacking broad-based mass support . 
April 5 , 2011 at 11:19 am | Reply I swear that if being ignorant was a virtue , the vast majority of people blogging in here would be living saints !!! Of course we have no business arming the so-called anti-Qaddafy `` rebels '' . 
This so-called `` uprising '' was most probably orchestrated either by the C.I.A or the infamous British MI-6 or both !!! April 4 , 2011 at 7:40 pm | Reply This is an appeal from the Libyan citizens both inside and outside Libya . 
We are deeply concerned about the current situation in Libya and the war crimes and atrocities that have been committed by the Gaddafi fascist regime since February 15 , 2011 . 
INTERPOL-UN Special Notices are designed to allow INTERPOL to assist the UN directly in making its sanctions effective . 
Since the Gaddafi regime has lost its legitimacy as the representative of the Libyan people , we urge you to express your solidarity with the Libyan citizens and abide by the UN Security Council resolution and INTERPOL that forbids aiding and abetting this criminal regime . 
The citizens of Libya urge you to : Discontinue the broadcasting of all of the Gaddafi regime s satellite channels , in particular the Jamahirya satellite channel , and alshababia that are being broadcast by your satellites because it is mainly broadcast lies , threats , promote hatred , and genocide . 
The illegitimate Gaddafi regime has been using your satellite services to spread its terror propaganda to the Libyans citizens and people around the world . 
Furthermore , there have been reports from Libya that coded messages have been disseminated to Gaddafi s mercenaries and security forces via Al-Jamahirya satellite TV channel . 
It is imperative for us -LRB- the Libyans -RRB- to notify all organizations\/companies that are providing communication logistics for the survival of this fascist regime that their continued support is a violation of the UN resolution . 
I thank you all in advance . 
April 4 , 2011 at 7:56 pm | Reply Podr ka al Gadafiju iz Srbije Blagodaryu vas , Podrska al Gadafiju iz Srbije . 
Vy vsiu istnnu skazal . 
In case you could n't read it , I was thanking you in Russian . 
Some of that even I did n't know before . 
April 5 , 2011 at 1:12 pm | World is all unnormal , who normal can vote for war , for guns , more guns and more guns ... its for freedom , hahaha . 
If you have so much guns somewhere you get bloody and loong war -- maybe its point ??? Rebels kill civilians , watch you tube !!! Be normal , vote NO , be human been -- vote NO , be man -- vote NO ! 
Its very hard for God with us , who we are ??? Good and peace people or shejtan slaves , thinking about it , please . 
There child die from bombing , can you imagine your town under bombiong , you are not guilty for nothing , but bombing go on your house , and around , civilians people . 
Becayse , somebody is stronger , and he can kil you ... is this world normal world , I ask you good people . 
Best wishies forr all peaceful people around world . 
Make peace -- NO WAR !!! April 4 , 2011 at 8:04 pm | Reply Long live freedom fighters in Libya and Nato , and Gaddafi gangs and Serbs you 've all drank from the same tainted breast of lies , propaganda , and genecide . 
So glad Nato and US bombed you 12 years ago and saved thousands of lives from your murdering army which is now sending snipers to Libya , hope none of your snipers comes back home after Gaddafi is gone . 
April 4 , 2011 at 8:11 pm | Reply Ok , we drunk , but you ilness , you must in hospytal now . 
There will give to you tablets for come down . 
I see , you knows all the best . 
Your bombing allways help peoples around world to be free , hahahahha ! 
This is funny , good joke -RRB- -RRB- -RRB- . 
Bomb n3ever dont give peace , never . 
You kill 200 000 inoccent civilian in Hiroshima and Nagasaki , its tragedy for all hymanity , for this planet ! 
Shame on you , Hitler dont do this , your country kill thousend childrens , womens , old person , for what , and why ??????? ... somebody will in HELL , sorry , but its that , Shame on you ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 8:34 pm | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 8:11 pm | Reply April 4 , 2011 at 8:14 pm | Reply Podr ka al Gadafiju iz Srbije If u r not from some of inwolve nation -LRB- America , nato pact -RRB- just wait few years , they will bomb your country also , soon as they become more greedy on richis of your contry -LRB- that can be oil , drugs or to make some base near to Russia -RRB- . 
you will not wait to long , that will bi soon . 
And then u will be sorry for these words u sad . 
April 4 , 2011 at 9:09 pm | Reply UN 1267 committee still lists LIFG as a terrorist entity -LRB- page 70 -RRB- : so the war on terror is a fraud : US and NATO give air support to the very guys they are supposed to fight . . 
its afghanistan 1980s all over again . 
April 5 , 2011 at 4:15 am | Reply Colonel Muammar Gadaffi is frequently referred to in the media as a `` mad dictator '' and `` bloody tyrant '' , but do these allegations accord with the facts ? 
Libya consists of over 15O tribes , with the two main groups , the Meghabra living in Tripolitania in the west and the Wafallah living in Cyrenaica in the east . 
Previous attempts to unite these tribes by the Turkish -LRB- 1855-1911 -RRB- and ltalian -LCB- 1911-43 -RRB- colonial rulers failed and the country was split in two for administrative purposes . 
Oil was discovered in Libya in 1959 , but King ldris of the Senussi tribe allowed most of the oil profits to be siphoned into the coffers of the oil companies . 
The coup d'etat on 1 September 1969 led by Colonel Gadaffi had countrywide support . 
He subsequently married a woman from the royal Barqa tribe and adroitly unified the nation . 
By retaining Libya 's oil wealth for the benefit of all its people , Gadaffi had created a socialist paradise . 
There is no unemployment , Libya has the highest GDP in . 
Africa , less than 5 % of the population is classified as poor and it has fewer people living below the poverty datum line than for example in Holland . 
Life expectancy is 75 years and is the highest in Africa and I0 % above the world average . 
With the exception of the nomadic Bedouin and Tuareg tribes , most Libyan families possess a house and a car . 
There is free health care and education and not surprisingly Libya has a literacy rate of 82 % . 
Last year Gadaffi distributed $ 500 to each man , woman and child -LRB- population 6.5 million -RRB- . 
Libya has a tolerable human rights record and stands at 61 on the International Incarceration Index , comparable with countries in central Europe -LRB- the lower the rating , the lower the standing -- the USA occupies the no. 1 spot ! -RRB- . 
There is hardly any crime and only rebels and traitors are dealt with harshly . 
Anyone who has read Gadaffi 's little Green Book will realize that he is a thoughtful and enlightened leader . 
April 5 , 2011 at 4:20 am | Reply Podr ka al Gadafiju iz Srbije Nato and Americans please stop with ataking libyan country . 
you listening lies from rebels -LRB- or that is yours oil interest ? -RRB- 
You are not World police , you are supporting terorist all over the world : Pakistan , Yugoslavija , Libija ... STOP You making history , same like you made history with Indians . 
Watch on youtube what yours army doing in Iraq , how they treting people and the property of that people ... sick ... and one day they will come back , to you , to America , and then they will treat you same . 
remmember lost generation , Wietnam generation , are they happy ? 
Are you happy for them ? 
Stop with that on time . 
Please , for pease ... and humanity ... April 4 , 2011 at 8:50 pm | Reply you are right ... but US\/NATO cant stop ... its a habit like heroin April 5 , 2011 at 5:33 am | Reply Brian , you right , its like drugs , they depend from violence , ilness ... April 5 , 2011 at 10:44 am | You 're both right . 
This country needs a cure and needs it bad ! 
We need to break the power of the MIC -LRB- military-industrial-complex -RRB- and vote the right-wing fanatics out of office !!! April 5 , 2011 at 1:16 pm | Reply According to some news items , arming supporters of the Transitional National Council to counter the violence against civilians is considered a legal possibility by some of the coalition . 
Such legality is debatable in light of point 9 in Resolution 1970 concerning the arms embargo on Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . 
So , if there are any dissenting voices coming from any of the UN Member States over providing arms to the regime s opponents , I would say it is time for the United Nations to clarify what is meant by an arms embargo on Libyan Arab Jamahiriya , and have member states vote again on a reworded resolution . 
In view of past humanitarian disasters , I think it is vital that nobody in the coalition proceed with action where its legality is debatable . 
April 4 , 2011 at 11:24 pm | Reply Oh poor naive Libya people who are comenting here and supporting NATO bombing og their own country , with uranium bombs , and colateral damage -LRB- wich is in translation ur pilots were to much into playng games with their joystick -RRB- just look at the Iraq and Avganistan , and everywhere where USA and NATO came to `` save '' civilians , to move dictators , to save the world from non existing nuclear wepon ... look at that people there and try to find one single civilian in those country who dont want them to go from their countru , who will sign now to bring back their dictators just to don live like animals in safay for usa soldiers , just on youtube u hava thousands of videos showing how they are `` helping '' civilans ask gadafy to forgive you poor naice people , and then try in democratic ways , in any way but not with `` help '' from them who just want your oil April 4 , 2011 at 11:24 pm | Reply anyone who asks a foreign power to come to theri country and bomb their enemies , hasnt read Machievelllis The Prince , and has no real concern about what will happen to the ` collateral damage ; the foreigners inevitably create . 
The DU seems to be useing DU weapons now , and has already killed -RRB- 100 people they said they were there to protect . 
the US\/NATO briought the world the destruction of Yugoslavia , Iraq , Afghanistan , and do the sick minds of the Libyan opposition believe they wont do the same to Libya ? 
will they then leave ? 
No point in answering such stupid question ! 
Under normal circumstances , I 'd say NO , since we 've all seen who they armed in the past : terrorists\/warlords\/war criminals such as Bin Laden , Sadam or organ thieves from Kosovo Liberation Army ... the list goes on . 
In addition to arming them , they are offering full aerial support using taxpayer 's $ $ $ while regular Joe is barely making ends meet , has inadequate Medicare , and ca n't send kids to college . 
I suppose this has more to do with the Euro\/US debt that Gadaffi was about to call in , then `` human rights '' and similar bs US is serving the world . 
If US is concerned about human rights -- they should swing by Ivory Coast , there 's more blood on the streets over there than in Iraq and Libya together . . 
Oh , yes , they do n't have oil or anything that US really needs . 
April 5 , 2011 at 12:31 am | Reply US should not use any military action . 
Libya is a free country April 5 , 2011 at 2:23 am | Reply the War on Terror is a fraud , as US . 
NATO are giving air support to terrorists in Libya : UN 1267 committee still lists LIFG as a terrorist entity -LRB- page 70 -RRB- : Colonel Muammar Gadaffi is frequently referred to in the media as a `` mad dictator '' and `` bloody tyrant '' , but do these allegations accord with the facts ? 
Libya consists of over 15O tribes , with the two main groups , the Meghabra living in Tripolitania in the west and the Wafallah living in Cyrenaica in the east . 
Previous attempts to unite these tribes by the Turkish -LRB- 1855-1911 -RRB- and ltalian -LCB- 1911-43 -RRB- colonial rulers failed and the country was split in two for administrative purposes . 
Oil was discovered in Libya in 1959 , but King ldris of the Senussi tribe allowed most of the oil profits to be siphoned into the coffers of the oil companies . 
The coup d'etat on 1 September 1969 led by Colonel Gadaffi had countrywide support . 
He subsequently married a woman from the royal Barqa tribe and adroitly unified the nation . 
By retaining Libya 's oil wealth for the benefit of all its people , Gadaffi had created a socialist paradise . 
There is no unemployment , Libya has the highest GDP in . 
Africa , less than 5 % of the population is classified as poor and it has fewer people living below the poverty datum line than for example in Holland . 
Life expectancy is 75 years and is the highest in Africa and I0 % above the world average . 
With the exception of the nomadic Bedouin and Tuareg tribes , most Libyan families possess a house and a car . 
There is free health care and education and not surprisingly Libya has a literacy rate of 82 % . 
Last year Gadaffi distributed $ 500 to each man , woman and child -LRB- population 6.5 million -RRB- . 
Libya has a tolerable human rights record and stands at 61 on the International Incarceration Index , comparable with countries in central Europe -LRB- the lower the rating , the lower the standing -- the USA occupies the no. 1 spot ! -RRB- . 
There is hardly any crime and only rebels and traitors are dealt with harshly . 
Anyone who has read Gadaffi 's little Green Book will realize that he is a thoughtful and enlightened leader . 
Libya has been accused of having committed numerous acts of terrorism in the past , but many of these have been perpetrated by foreign intelligence agencies as false flag operations -- the Lockerbie bombing being a prime example . 
The report represents a severe blow to the attempts by Washington and its NATO allies , backed by the overwhelming majority of the Western media , to dismiss the Libyan government s claims of civilian casualties as propaganda and portray the continuous air raids as a humanitarian defense of the population . 
The so-called humanitarian air raids have taken the lives of dozens of civilians in various areas of Tripoli , Bishop Giovanni Innocenzo Martinelli , the Apostolic Vicar of Tripoli told Agenzia Fides , the Vatican news service . 
Of particular concern , in the district of Buslim , a building collapsed because of the bombing killing 40 people , he said Yesterday I reported that the bombing had affected some hospitals , albeit indirectly . 
I can now confirm that one of these hospitals is in Misda , a town about 110 miles south of Tripoli . 
The Euronews television channel reported that a bombing raid on an ammunition dump in Misda had caused damage to the hospital and nearby homes , wounding at least 13 civilians . 
April 5 , 2011 at 5:30 am | Reply ` Over the past two weeks Libya has been subjected to the most brutal imperial air , sea and land assault in its modern history . 
Thousands of bombs and missiles , launched from American and European submarines , warships and fighter planes , are destroying Libyan military bases , airports , roads , ports , oil depots , artillery emplacements , tanks , armored carriers , planes and troop concentrations . 
Dozens of CIA and SAS special forces have been training , advising and mapping targets for the so-called Libyan rebels engaged in a civil war against the Gaddafi government , its armed forces , popular militias and civilian supporters -LRB- NY Times 3\/30\/11 -RRB- . 
Despite this massive military support and their imperial allies total control of Libya s sky and coastline , the rebels have proven incapable of mobilizing village or town support and are in retreat after being confronted by the Libyan government s highly motivated troops and village militias -LRB- Al Jazeera 3\/30\/11 -RRB- . 
One of the most flimsy excuse for this inglorious rebel retreat offered by the Cameron-Obama-Sarkozy coalition , echoed by the mass media , is that their Libyan clients are outgunned -LRB- Financial Times , 3\/29\/11 -RRB- . 
Obviously Obama and company don t count the scores of jets , dozens of warships and submarines , the hundreds of daily attacks and the thousands of bombs dropped on the Libyan government since the start of Western imperial intervention . 
Direct military intervention of 20 major and minor foreign military powers , savaging the sovereign Libyan state , as well as scores of political accomplices in the United Nations do not contribute to any military advantage for the imperial clients according to the daily pro-rebel propaganda . ' 
April 5 , 2011 at 5:34 am | Reply ` peaceful protestors ' have a military wing ?? This same study revealed that Haftar played an important role in establishing the so-called Libyan National Army -LRB- LNA -RRB- in June 1998 , which is the military wing of the National Front for the Salvation of Libya with strong backing from the Central Intelligence Agency . 
Not only did the CIA set up the LNA but they created a training camp in Virginia where members of the group were taught counter-insurgency and destabilization tactics by the U.S. government . 
A spokesman for the counter-revolutionary rebel grouping , Colonel Ahmed Bani , told Reuters in Benghazi on March 24 that Hefta would head the rebel army . 
Another spokesman for the rebels , Abdel Hameed Ghoga , is also cited in a Reuters article saying that the military -LRB- rebels -RRB- was being reorganized and the situation would become clearer in two days time . 
He did not elaborate . 
-LRB- Reuters , April 1 -RRB- Reports also suggest that LNA leader Khalifa Hafter has resided in Virginia for the last two decades . 
The Nation magazine notes in an April 3 article entitled The CIA , the Libyan rebellion , and the president , that It seems then that a long train of earlier commitments in Libya was set in motion as soon as the Egyptian uprising began . 
-LRB- The Nation , April 3 -RRB- This same Nation article concludes that An event that Americans were led to believe was an autonomous rising on the model of Egypt turns out to have been deeply compromised from the start , and compromised by American meddling . 
All the external parties are in Libya for different reasons . 
Things could not have gotten this far without the CIA . 
April 5 , 2011 at 5:56 am | Reply Death for Americans and their servants in Europe ! 
Long live Serbia , eternal fatherland , long live free Libya ! 
Next Qaddafi , the U.S. cattle trample ! 
April 5 , 2011 at 6:33 am | Reply April 5 , 2011 at 6:35 am | Reply April 5 , 2011 at 6:36 am | Reply April 5 , 2011 at 6:37 am | Reply Russian , Ukrainian and Belarusian doctors serving in Libya in a letter to Russian leaders reminded them that in Libya people are entitled to free treatment in hospitals that have the best of medical equipment . 
Education in Libya is free . 
The government also meets the expenses of those who pursue higher education abroad . 
When marrying , young couples receive 60,000 Libyan dinars -LRB- about 50,000 U.S. dollars -RRB- of financial assistance at zero interest . 
The government subsidizes the price of cars enabling everyone to own a vehicle . 
Petrol and bread cost a penny while no taxes are imposed on those who are engaged in agriculture . 
April 5 , 2011 at 7:45 am | Reply what is going on in Libya is a crime against humanity . 
It will be a shame upon big countries like USA , UK and France if they do n't move and stop Gaddafi 's madness ... we have lost hope in Arab countries but we bear great deal of hope with regarad USA . 
April 5 , 2011 at 9:18 am | Reply unsoundness , what madness are you talkking about ? 
do you mean this : How was Libya doing under the rule of Gadaffi ? 
How bad did the people have it ? 
Were they oppressed as we now commonly accept as fact ? 
Let us look at the facts for a moment . 
Before the chaos erupted , Libya had a lower incarceration rate than the Czech republic . 
Libya had the lowest infant mortality rate of all of Africa . 
Libya had the highest life expectancy of all of Africa . 
Less than 5 % of the population was undernourished . 
In response to the rising food prices around the world , the government of Libya abolished ALL taxes on food . 
People in Libya were rich . 
Libya had the highest gross domestic product -LRB- GDP -RRB- at purchasing power parity -LRB- PPP -RRB- per capita of all of Africa . 
The government took care to ensure that everyone in the country shared in the wealth . 
Libya had the highest Human Development Index of any country on the continent . 
The wealth was distributed equally . 
In Libya , a lower percentage of people lived below the poverty line than in the Netherlands . 
How does Libya get so rich ? 
The answer is oil . 
The country has a lot of oil , and does not allow foreign corporations to steal the resources while the population starves , unlike countries like Nigeria , a country that is basically run by Shell . 
April 6 , 2011 at 4:49 am | Reply Apart from the subject of the poll . 
i belive that you MUST have a creditable poll system or\/and software . 
i was surprised that CNN had such a poor one . 
the software -LRB- apparently polldaddy.com -RRB- allows multiple vote which leads for more vote for one person that other -LRB- who dont know about this bug -RRB- . 
i personally aware of people vote for more than 300 times ! 
for YES just to win over the other group who vote for no. . 
Though i hope you will consider that at the end of the vote or at least mention it , but i do honestly doubt that . 
April 5 , 2011 at 10:37 am | Reply If not to prevent genocide , grab the oil or promote democracy -LRB- via Patriot missiles -RRB- , what then is the driving force behind the Euro-US imperial intervention ? 
A clue is in the selectivity of Western military intervention : In Bahrain , Saudi Arabia , Yemen , Jordan , Qatar and Oman ruling autocrats , allied with and backed by Euro-US imperial states go about arresting , torturing and murdering unarmed urban protestors with total impunity . 
In Egypt and Tunisia , the US is backing a conservative junta of self-appointed civil-military elites in order to block the profound democratic and nationalist transformation of society demanded by the protesters . 
The junta aims to push through neo-liberal economic reforms through carefully-vetted pro-Western elected officials . 
While liberal critics may accuse the West of hypocrisy and double standards in bombing Gaddafi but not the Gulf butchers , in reality the imperial rulers consistently apply the same standards in each region : They defend strategic autocratic client regimes , which have allowed imperial states to build strategic air force and naval bases , run regional intelligence operations and set up logistical platforms for their ongoing wars in Iraq and Afghanistan as well as their future planned conflict with Iran . 
They attack Gaddafi s Libya precisely because Gaddafi had refused to actively contribute to Western military operations in Africa and the Middle East . 
The key point is that while Libya allows the biggest US-European multi-nationals to plunder its oil wealth , it did not become a strategic geo-political-military asset of the empire . 
As we have written in many previous essays the driving force of US empire-building is military -- and not economic . 
This is why billions of dollars of Western economic interests and contracts had been sacrificed in the setting up of sanctions against Iraq and Iran with the costly result that the invasion and occupation of Iraq shut down most oil exploitation for over a decade . 
The Washington-led assault on Libya , with the majority of air sorties and missiles strikes being carried out by the Obama regime , is part of a more general counter-attack in response to the most recent Arab popular pro-democracy movements . 
The West is backing the suppression of these pro-democracy movements throughout the Gulf ; it finances the pro-imperial , pro-Israel junta in Egypt and it is intervening in Tunisia to ensure that any new regime is correctly aligned . 
It supports a despotic regime in Algeria as well as Israel s daily assaults on Gaza . 
In line with this policy , the West backs the uprising of ex-Gaddafites and right-wing monarchists , confident that the liberated Libya will once again provide military bases for the US-European military empire-builders . 
April 5 , 2011 at 11:20 am | Reply US and NATO are already well known by their aggression and bombing civilian targets . 
They are the ones who want war to go on and on all over the world , 'cause where is the war there is the money . 
US did something like this to Serbia because Kosovo in 1998 , and know they are doing it to Libya . 
Time will come when the world will see threw their lies . 
April 5 , 2011 at 12:17 pm | Reply Let 's just hope that you 're right , General Draza . 
I 'm sick and tired of all the lies the right-wing news media tells us . 
No wonder we have so many ignorant people blogging in here with their obvious limitations !!! April 5 , 2011 at 1:20 pm | Reply US and NATO are already well known by their aggression and bombing civilian targets . 
They are the ones who want war to go on and on all over the world , 'cause where is the war there is the money . 
US did something like this to Serbia because Kosovo in 1998 , and know they are doing it to Libya . 
Time will come when the world will see threw their lies . 
STOP BOMBING LIBYA ALREADY !!! April 5 , 2011 at 12:20 pm | Reply April 5 , 2011 at 2:27 pm | Reply Arm all rebels starting with Palestinians . 
Next , arm those who voted for Jean Bertrande Aristedes -- the vast majority of Haiti . 
Arm all those rebels in Honduras . 
Do n't forget Yemen , Bahrain , Saudi Arabia and Uzbekistan . 
April 5 , 2011 at 3:37 pm | Reply Opinion polls in America involves first telling these folks what their opinions should be , giving them the most exaggerated facts while withholding any mitigating facts , then stick a microphone in their faces and ask them their opinions . 
MOST are not smart enough or honest enough to simply answer , `` I do not know enough about the situation to render an intelligent opinion . '' 
April 5 , 2011 at 3:44 pm | Reply this is not true because in rt.com was for no arming them , but here i think some thing is wrong and people vote many times No weapons for both sides , no blood between brothers . 
peace peace peace April 5 , 2011 at 3:45 pm | Reply Listen up all of you annoying Serbs , your Ratko Mladi is announced dead by his wife . 
We are looking forward for the beath of the Libyan butcher Muammer Gaddafi . 
You can have him then since you seem to have no pride and love dictators . 
April 5 , 2011 at 8:34 pm | Reply April 6 , 2011 at 9:12 am | Reply April 5 , 2011 at 9:56 pm | Reply Can someone from Libya tell me is this true or not ? 
Life in Libya under Gaddafi : 1 . 
Electricity for household use is free 2 . 
Free health and education 3 . 
Free higher education abroad 4 . 
Receives the average salary for this profession if you do not find a job after graduation 5 . 
Every unemployed person receives social assistance 15,000 $ a year 6 . 
After the entry into marriage state pays first apartment or house -LRB- 150m2 -RRB- 7 . 
For each infant , the couple received $ 5,000 for his needs I 'm against every violence , war , terror ! 
I just want to know the truth if it 's possible ! 
If what you are saying is true , we -LRB- Libyans -RRB- would be the happiest people on earth . 
Some of what you have mentioned applies to Gaddafi 's family and the people loyal to him . 
Other Libyans are actually suffering . 
Can you believe that a father of a family of what ever size gets around # 100 a month , and there is no such a thing as a housing benefit , a child benefit nor job seeker allowance . 
April 7 , 2011 at 7:07 pm | Reply Yes 86.46 % -LRB- 61,519 votes -RRB- There you go , most people voted yes ! 
Give them their guns and hope for the best . 
April 6 , 2011 at 4:10 am | Reply the libyan opps are not fit to rule : the NFSL have long allowed themselves to be used as tools by the CIA , trained to assassinate Gadaffi . 
They have allowed foreiign militaries into the country , who are killing Libyans ... and destroying the country ... just like they did in yusoslabvia and Iraq and afghanistan ... and the will do the same to Libya NEVER TRUST THE AMERICANS OR NATO April 6 , 2011 at 4:58 am | Reply Al Qaeda : Pawns of CIA Insurrection from Libya to Yemen havent the The stupid anti libyans libyans read Machievellli ... NEVER allow in foreign armies , esp the US and NATO ... cause they wont leave April 6 , 2011 at 5:41 am | Reply Obviously you are on welfare and do n't have to work . 
You should use the time to find the truth instead of the junk you call information . 
AL QAIDA IS TAKING OVER LIBYA A NUMBER OF SURFACE TO AIR MISSILE ARE TAKEN AND BOUGHT FROM REBALS IN BENGAZI THOUSE COULD BE USED AGINST ITALY SPAIN GREECE ... IS NATO SUPPORTING BIN LADEN NOW ??????????? April 6 , 2011 at 10:07 am | Reply Brian you must be on welfare . 
I have no time for this kiddish stupidity , I have to work . 
As for you Brian and the other few kids who ca n't see Gaddafi for the criminal he is , I say : Stay stupid , it looks good on you . 
Libya is bleeding , help Libya , protect the poor civilians : ' -LRB- . . 
Mummer stop the blood shed GO OUT !! April 6 , 2011 at 3:30 pm | Reply # # # # # # # # April 6 , 2011 at 3:38 pm | Reply the argument that there are alqaida member with the rebel is absord and here is why 1 the libyan rebel fight for democracy and civil right , and when alqada member fight under the comand of people fight for democracy they belive that they will go to hell afterlife , because democracy is an secular idea and not an islamic state , 2 . 
the claim that if usa armed the rebels they will turn there power against the us like the taliban , here is the thing taliban from the start make it clear , we fight for islamic state , the libyan rebel fight for democracy 3 . 
the usa armed the kurdish rebel against saddam and they never make an terror attack on usa 4 . 
even israel armed and the usa traind the palestinian authority and they never attacks an singel israely 5 . 
the russian armed the Ramzan Kadyrov chechnya forces and that worked well April 6 , 2011 at 4:38 pm | Reply New video of al-Qaida in Libya -LRB- -LRB- ateia allah -RRB- -RRB- Execution of a police officer in Libya , play and beat him after his death by the rebels February 17 The death of Libyan children with the result of Allied bombing on civilians in Libya April 6 , 2011 at 4:50 pm | Reply de ja vu History : we had Rome at war with carthage and seeking to destroy the main obstacle to its imperial designs in the region . 
Now its Libya with Gadaffi playnig the role of Hannibal . 
Rome was insane with the desire to get rid ofCarthage , the US has inherited the same malady . 
How will this story unfold ? 
April 7 , 2011 at 4:00 am | Reply stoooooop fighting ... . . 
stoooooop fighting ... . . 
stoooooop fighting ... . . 
stoooooop fighting ... . . 
inf !!! we need peace . 
to build our country . 
and i hope it will be an Islamic state . 
the Islam is the peace . 
we need kedafi out out . 
April 7 , 2011 at 12:11 pm | Reply i hope that fence help us for freedom not for oil >> because i file like they do it not for islam but for personal problem with Libyan regime . 
April 10 , 2011 at 8:30 pm | Reply Dear Brian , I want to talk to you westerner to westerner -LRB- Judging by your name -RRB- . 
I understand that you care about this situation , and you care about the truth . 
I do not want to warp your pride but I must tell you these Libyans are right . 
I was in Libya for 8 months 10 years ago and the whole country lives in a constant state of fear . 
it is like playing hide and seek , only the game never ends and if you 're found you disappear . 
If you were a Libyan you would have secrets so deep you would be afraid to tell your wife , and you would have friends that disappeared . 
Every Libyan has their story . 
They do n't even know what it means to be free . 
this word `` freedom '' you and I know , but these people never felt it . 
When I came home I cried for months , feeling the weight of this . 
the suffering if horrible . 
I know 2 people personally who were jailed . 
and have heard of several other disappearances and imprisonments . 
Please be careful what you say , and do not hurt these precious people any more . 
They have suffered enough . 
Instead listen to their stories , cry with them and pray that God will give them the freedom you have every day . 
April 12 , 2011 at 12:31 pm | Reply no one is love gaddafe if he is crazy or killer cuz he is kill us cuz we say one thinge freedom no thing else donot belive any ony say ilove him cuz they take alot of mony to say that amirecan kids heat him too April 18 , 2011 at 1:52 pm | Reply Thanks for share very nice informations . 
Your website is greatI am impressed by the information that you have on this blog . 
I really feel stupid that I have not opened a blog till now . 
Will really start up a blog now . 
December 2 , 2011 at 7:03 pm | Reply Gee ali , you 're obviously an ignorant,right-wing , foul-mouthed Tea Partier , judging by your choice of words ! 
I support Mohammar Qaddafy myself and I 'm proud of it !!! Neither the U.S. nor NATO has any right to be in Libya !!! April 4 , 2011 at 9:13 am | Reply What gives you the right to talk about Libya , stupid bastard . 
If you had any brains you would not be for Gaddafi . 
We are the Libyans and we decide who is invited . 
NATO and the USA are welcom . 
You sorry remnants of the USSR are not . 
April 4 , 2011 at 10:19 am | Reply When your people start dying from cancer in the next 10 years will feel sorry that you wrote this . . 
April 4 , 2011 at 12:45 pm | Reply Like Cast Lead against Gaza , Odyssey Dawn is criminal imperial war , willfully attacking non-combatants and civilian targets , including vital infrastructure , hospitals , non-military airports and buildings , ports , power generating facilities , and other sites unrelated to military necessity . 
These and more besides so-called rebels killing hundreds on the ground , targeting anyone thought to be pro-Gaddafi , including African guest workers there for employment , not political allegiance . 
April 5 , 2011 at 9:36 am | Reply what gives me the right ? 
education : How was Libya doing under the rule of Gadaffi ? 
How bad did the people have it ? 
Were they oppressed as we now commonly accept as fact ? 
Let us look at the facts for a moment . 
Before the chaos erupted , Libya had a lower incarceration rate than the Czech republic . 
Libya had the lowest infant mortality rate of all of Africa . 
Libya had the highest life expectancy of all of Africa . 
Less than 5 % of the population was undernourished . 
In response to the rising food prices around the world , the government of Libya abolished ALL taxes on food . 
People in Libya were rich . 
Libya had the highest gross domestic product -LRB- GDP -RRB- at purchasing power parity -LRB- PPP -RRB- per capita of all of Africa . 
The government took care to ensure that everyone in the country shared in the wealth . 
Libya had the highest Human Development Index of any country on the continent . 
The wealth was distributed equally . 
In Libya , a lower percentage of people lived below the poverty line than in the Netherlands . 
How does Libya get so rich ? 
The answer is oil . 
The country has a lot of oil , and does not allow foreign corporations to steal the resources while the population starves , unlike countries like Nigeria , a country that is basically run by Shell . 
April 6 , 2011 at 4:50 am | Reply Janja , my people would be dead right now if it was not for the USA and NATO intervention . 
April 4 , 2011 at 12:53 pm | Reply 1Libyan-My email is arsic.janja@gmail.com . . 
write me what is really happening there . . 
April 4 , 2011 at 1:06 pm | Reply US-NATO bombings kill civilians in Tripoli US-NATO air strikes on Tripoli and other Libyan cities have claimed growing numbers of civilian victims , according to the Vatican s top representative in the Libyan capital . 
The report represents a severe blow to the attempts by Washington and its NATO allies , backed by the overwhelming majority of the Western media , to dismiss the Libyan government s claims of civilian casualties as propaganda and portray the continuous air raids as a humanitarian defense of the population . 
The so-called humanitarian air raids have taken the lives of dozens of civilians in various areas of Tripoli , Bishop Giovanni Innocenzo Martinelli , the Apostolic Vicar of Tripoli told Agenzia Fides , the Vatican news service . 
Of particular concern , in the district of Buslim , a building collapsed because of the bombing killing 40 people , he said Yesterday I reported that the bombing had affected some hospitals , albeit indirectly . 
I can now confirm that one of these hospitals is in Misda , a town about 110 miles south of Tripoli . 
April 5 , 2011 at 5:32 am | Reply Libyan civilians are being killed Not by gadafi but the US . 
Despite this , we all believe that it is Russia as successor to the USSR , which is our SOLE safeguard for the interests of our countries and the security of our citizens . 
Therefore , we appeal to you for help and justice . 
Today , there is blatant external aggression of USA and NATO against a sovereign country Libya . 
And if anyone can doubt this , then we say this obvious fact is well known , because all this is happening before our eyes , and the actions of U.S. and NATO threaten the lives of not only the citizens of Libya , but to us who are on its territory . 
We are outraged by the barbaric bombing of Libya , which is currently carried out by a coalition of U.S. and NATO . 
The bombing of Tripoli and other cities in Libya is aimed not only at the objects of air defense and Libya s Air Force and not only against the Libyan army , but also the object of military and civilian infrastructure . 
Today , 24 March 2011 , NATO aircraft and the U.S. all night and all morning bombed a suburb of Tripoli Tajhura -LRB- where , in particular , is Libya s Nuclear Research Center -RRB- . 
Air Defense and Air Force facilities in Tajhura were destroyed back in the first 2 days of strikes and more active military facilities in the city remained , but today the object of bombing are barracks of the Libyan army , around which are densely populated residential areas , and next to it the largest in Libya s Heart Centers . 
Civilians and the doctors could not assume that common residential quarters will be about to become destroyed , so none of the residents or hospital patients was evacuated . 
Bombs and rockets struck residential houses and fell near the hospital . 
The glass of the Cardiac Center building was broken , and in the building of the maternity ward for pregnant women with heart disease a wall collapsed and part of the roof . 
This resulted in ten miscarriages whereby babies died , the women are in intensive care , doctors are fighting for their lives . 
Our colleagues and we are working seven days a week , to save people . 
This is a direct consequence of falling bombs and missiles in residential buildings resulting in dozens of deaths and injuries , which are operated and reviewed now by our doctors . 
Such a large number of wounded and killed , as during today , did not result during the total of all the riots in Libya . 
And this is called protecting the civilian population ? 
With full responsibility as witnesses and participants of what is happening , we state that the United States and its allies are thus carrying out genocide against the Libyan people as was the case in Yugoslavia , Afghanistan and Iraq . 
Crimes against humanity , carried out by coalition forces akin to those crimes committed by the fathers and grandfathers of today s Western leaders and their henchmen in Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan and in Dresden in Germany , where civilians were also being destroyed in order to deter , to break the will of the people to resist -LRB- Germany remembers it , and therefore refused to participate in this new slaughterhouse -RRB- . 
Today they want in such ways to make the Libyan people surrender their leader and the legitimate government and meekly lay down their national oil wealth for the countries of the coalition . 
We understand that applying to the international community to save the people of Libya and we were living in Libya , is useless . 
Our only hope is Russia that has the right of veto in the UN , and specifically its leaders the President and the Prime Minister . 
We still hope for you , as hoped in the past , when we took the decision to stay in Libya , and to help its people , medical duty playing its role in the first place . 
After an abortive coup attempt in late February , the situation calmed down in Libya and the government had successfully restored order . 
To everyone in Libya , it was clear that without American intervention the country would soon return to normal life . 
Convinced that Russia , which has veto power , would not allow the aggression of the United States and its allies , we decided to stay in Libya , but were mistaken : Russia , unfortunately , believed the false assurances of Americans and did not oppose the criminal decision of France and the U.S. US-NATO air strikes on Tripoli and other Libyan cities have claimed growing numbers of civilian victims , according to the Vatican s top representative in the Libyan capital . 
The report represents a severe blow to the attempts by Washington and its NATO allies , backed by the overwhelming majority of the Western media , to dismiss the Libyan government s claims of civilian casualties as propaganda and portray the continuous air raids as a humanitarian defense of the population . 
The so-called humanitarian air raids have taken the lives of dozens of civilians in various areas of Tripoli , Bishop Giovanni Innocenzo Martinelli , the Apostolic Vicar of Tripoli told Agenzia Fides , the Vatican news service . 
Of particular concern , in the district of Buslim , a building collapsed because of the bombing killing 40 people , he said Yesterday I reported that the bombing had affected some hospitals , albeit indirectly . 
I can now confirm that one of these hospitals is in Misda , a town about 110 miles south of Tripoli . 
The Euronews television channel reported that a bombing raid on an ammunition dump in Misda had caused damage to the hospital and nearby homes , wounding at least 13 civilians . 
In an interview with Euronews , Bishop Martinelli said that the scores of casualties had been confirmed to me by people who have lost loved ones because of these bombings . 
He cited another incident in which an air strike hit a munitions warehouse located in close proximity to a civilian neighborhood . 
This building was exploding for three , four hours , he said , claiming more victims . 
If it is true that the bombings appear to be very targeted , Martrinelli told the Fides news agency , it is also true that they are hitting military targets which are in the midst of civilian neighborhoods , thus the local people are also affected . 
The bishop added : The situation in Tripoli is becoming more difficult every day . 
The fuel shortage has worsened , as evidenced by the queues of cars at petrol stations . 
Describing the military conflict as an impasse , he urged a diplomatic solution to end the bloodshed between Libyans , giving Gaddafi a dignified way out . 
NATO , which formally assumed command of the US-led war against Libya Thursday , said it was investigating the reported casualties . 
Lt. Gen. Charles Bouchard , the Canadian officer heading the NATO command in Libya , described the bishop s account as a news report and insisted that NATO was operating under very strict rules of engagement and within the legal mandate of our United Nations mandate . 
Echoing similar statements issued by the NATO command in response to the continuous killing of civilians in Afghanistan , he added , I appreciate the source of this report , but it is worth noting that I take every one of those issues seriously . 
In a separate incident , the Associated Press interviewed the family of an 18-month-old toddler , Sirajuddin al-Sweisi , who was killed when an ammunition dump near their home in the village of Khorum , about 55 miles south of Tripoli , was attacked by US-NATO warplanes . 
The young boy s mother said that their house was rocked by the blast at about six in the morning , with debris piercing the wall of the family s home . 
She found her son , who was sleeping , with a piece of hot metal embedded into the side of his face . 
His blood was streaming down my arm , she said weeping . 
He was crying out , Mama , Mama , reaching out with his hand to me . 
The family rushed him to the hospital where he was treated for burns and broken bones , but he died the same night . 
Neighbors said that the explosions caused by the air raid injured a number of other people and damaged houses in the area . 
Washington and its allies have claimed legitimacy for their imperialist assault on Libya by invoking United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 , which authorizes all necessary measures to protect civilians from attack . 
It has become increasingly evident that these measures include the slaughter of the very civilians that are supposedly being protected . 
April 6 , 2011 at 5:08 am | Reply There are a lot of news and info out there If you care to find out . 
For example : Yes , just show them some truth and they will ban you from this page ! 
I just asked them : Who are you , people , no one here is from Libya , am I right ? 
On Serbian page we have real people , from FREE Libya ! 
April 4 , 2011 at 5:42 pm | Reply the Libyan crisis has offered a convenient excuse for the embedded media to shift attention away from Bahrain where people are disappearing overnight and Yemen where scores are killed daily . 
Yet the demonisation of Gaddafi is priority number one for the embedded media , including Al-Jazeera . 
In reality , Libya is a good example of a welfare state . 
Gaddafi has not built huge palaces like the Gulf sheikhs have done with public money . 
April 5 , 2011 at 7:35 am | Reply Bullshit Brian , you do n't know what Gaddafi really is . 
Libyans only know and have decided to kick him out , just wait and see . 
If you were fair you would realize that the atrocities committed by Gaddafi are far worse than any where else . 
Speak the truth or shut up . 
April 5 , 2011 at 8:31 pm | Reply I am Libyan and Kaddafi has always killed Libyans with cold blood . 
if you like him let him be the head of your state . 
we have got enough of him . 
we got out into peaceful protests and he faced us with anti-aircraft missiles . 
your figures are rubbish . 
I am an engineer and my salary is less than 100 $ a month . 
Kaddafi and his family are the riche not the Libyans . 
however we want our country back and now it is not matter of money it is matter of freedom . 
42 years of dictatorship is enough . 
no one has elected him nor his criminal sons . 
his policy is EITHER RULE YOU OR KILL YOU . 
we will not stop even if we are all killed . 
April 6 , 2011 at 3:26 pm | Reply he info about Gadaffi : that he has tried to benefit Libya is now quite voluminous ... but so are the lies used by his enemies , whio want to turn back the 1969 revolution and make Libya again a foreign control satrap , with wealth going to a minority April 6 , 2011 at 4:52 am | Reply Adel : what atrocities ? 
Lets take alok at Gadafi and what he has done for Libya : How was Libya doing under the rule of Gadaffi ? 
How bad did the people have it ? 
Were they oppressed as we now commonly accept as fact ? 
Let us look at the facts for a moment . 
Before the chaos erupted , Libya had a lower incarceration rate than the Czech republic . 
Libya had the lowest infant mortality rate of all of Africa . 
Libya had the highest life expectancy of all of Africa . 
Less than 5 % of the population was undernourished . 
In response to the rising food prices around the world , the government of Libya abolished ALL taxes on food . 
People in Libya were rich . 
Libya had the highest gross domestic product -LRB- GDP -RRB- at purchasing power parity -LRB- PPP -RRB- per capita of all of Africa . 
The government took care to ensure that everyone in the country shared in the wealth . 
Libya had the highest Human Development Index of any country on the continent . 
The wealth was distributed equally . 
In Libya , a lower percentage of people lived below the poverty line than in the Netherlands . 
this is the sort of truth YOU want to silence April 6 , 2011 at 4:54 am | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
