He was a Foreign Office diplomat on the fast track to an ambassadorship and knighthood . 
So why , after 15 years at the top , did Carne Ross turn his back on the power and the status to go freelance ? 
Carne Ross : ` I 'd read the intelligence on WMD for four and a half years , and there 's no way that it could sustain the case that the government was presenting . ' 
Photograph : Sarah Lee Carne Ross must have been an unusual schoolboy . 
He did n't dream of being a footballer , a cricketer or even an engine driver . 
He dreamed of being a diplomat . 
`` At quite a young age , '' he recalls , `` I realized that I was fascinated by abroad . 
I decided quite early on that I was going to become a diplomat , and was very discouraged by everybody saying it was incredibly difficult and that only very clever people became diplomats . '' 
At 22 , fresh out of Exeter University , Ross proved the doubters wrong : he passed the necessary exams , joined the Foreign Office 's graduate fast-track , worked at the UK embassy in Bonn and its mission to the UN , enjoyed a good salary , status , even a sniff of power , and was on course to an ambassadorship with obligatory knighthood . 
Then , last September , the dream turned to dust . 
He quit - part of the diplomatic fallout from the Iraq war - to be an `` independent diplomat '' . 
A contradiction in terms , according to some of his Foreign Office friends , but not according to the Joseph Rowntree Charitable Trust , which last week chose Ross as one of its seven `` visionaries for a just and peaceful world '' . 
For the next five years , the trust will pay him a stipend of almost # 40,000 a year to attempt to prove his former colleagues wrong and turn his vision of what might be called committed diplomacy - putting right before might and morality before national interest - into reality . 
Ross , a confident , crop-haired 38-year-old , spent 15 years in the Foreign Office . 
He loved the life but ultimately hated having to bend the truth on behalf of his country . 
The gradual process of disillusionment began in Germany in the mid-1990s when refugees from the war in Yugoslavia flooded into the country . 
`` We of course supported the British policy that the war in Yugoslavia was a civil war and that an arms embargo was a fair way of treating all the parties , '' he says . 
`` This was deeply mistaken and inhuman . 
In effect it enabled one group to genocidally pursue another . 
The war was born of a grasp for power by Milosevic and his henchmen on the back of an invented Serb nationalism . '' 
It took Ross almost a decade to realize the full extent of the mistakes the Foreign Office made in the Balkans . 
His lack of faith in British policy in the Middle East manifested itself far more quickly . 
From 1995-98 he worked in London on the Middle East peace process and as speechwriter to foreign secretary Malcolm Rifkind , before joining the British delegation at the UN , where the issue of Iraq - he was the key British negotiator with the Iraqi government and the weapons inspectors - was soon to take over his life . 
He says the New York posting , which occupied him for almost five years , was `` dramatic '' , `` exciting '' , `` challenging '' . 
The hours were long but he enjoyed the drama - trying to work out what the Iraqis were doing , negotiating resolutions in the security council , being pursued by film crews desperate to understand where the diplomatic dance was leading . 
But , in Ross 's mind , one word obliterates all those others - `` guilt '' . 
`` I think sanctions -LRB- against Iraq -RRB- were wrong and they harmed the wrong people , '' he says . 
`` They did immeasurable damage to the Iraqi civilian population . 
We were conscious of that damage , but we did too little to address it . 
We said we were trying to address it , but frankly it was n't enough and I 'm not proud of my own role in that because I was a vigorous defender of British policy in the security council . 
We would not have treated a European or American people in that way . '' 
Ross was in New York on September 11 2001 and his recollection of the attack on the World Trade Centre is vivid . 
`` I saw the first plane go over and then went to a ludicrous EU meeting which dragged on as reports were coming in of the attacks , '' he recalls . 
`` The meeting ended after both planes struck . 
The UN building was evacuated and we were sent home . 
My home was downtown , so I walked back against this flood of people coming the other way - people covered in ashes and weeping . 
I went to my apartment on the south side of Union Square which looks south over lower Manhattan . 
I watched all afternoon , watched this huge pall of smoke which did n't go away for weeks . 
You could smell it in the apartment and in the streets around for weeks afterwards . '' 
The lesson he draws from 9\/11 is of the compassion of New Yorkers and the way political leaders in the US and UK misjudged the mood . 
`` There was no desire for vengeance among people on the streets , '' he says . 
`` Union Square became a collecting point for people to light candles , pray , sing , grieve . 
I 'd make my way through these crowds every day and it affected me very profoundly . 
Tragically , that compassion is something that the governments of both the US and Britain have seemed to ignore since . '' 
In the wake of 9\/11 , Ross was given responsibility for UK policy on Afghanistan . 
He quickly realized that meant preparing for war . 
When the invasion came , he spent six weeks in Kabul negotiating with warlords . 
Again his account tempers the excitement of the moment with the disillusionment of having to come to terms with what could be achieved . 
The allies did n't understand Afghanistan , did n't have sufficient forces on the ground , were trapped in their fortified compounds , were naive about the willingness of the warlords to cede power , and were far too optimistic in their belief that opium production could be curtailed . 
He returned to New York and , increasingly doubtful of the wisdom of British policy in the Middle East , decided to take a year-long sabbatical , joining the graduate international affairs program at the New School in Greenwich Village , where he studied a subject of which Donald Rumsfeld might approve - the limits of knowledge in decision-making . 
`` I was ultimately trying to grasp the claim in diplomacy , and in policy-making in general , to knowledge , '' explains Ross , `` because I had doubts about the whole thing . 
What is it that we know , how do we know it and how can we make policy on the basis of that knowledge ? 
Examining the theory helped crystallise a lot of my doubts . '' 
While he was on sabbatical , Britain and the US invaded Iraq and Ross 's doubts turned to anger . 
`` I was very close to my former colleagues in the mission and was in touch with a lot of the diplomats at the security council , '' he says . 
`` I was very conscious of what the British government was doing , and I was very sceptical of it . 
I contemplated resigning at the time and making a fuss , but felt that resigning would be standing up in front of a runaway train and I 'd just be crushed . 
`` It was an agonised experience because I knew that the evidence they were presenting for WMD was totally implausible . 
I 'd read the intelligence on WMD for four and a half years , and there 's no way that it could sustain the case that the government was presenting . 
All of my colleagues knew that , too . 
We all believed the Iraqis had something , but that is very different from saying they had that much . 
The intelligence indicated that they 'd failed to account for what they had in the past . 
They had n't given us a complete account of the disposal of their past stocks , so we thought there was something , but there was no way that the claim of an imminent threat was sustainable . 
The 45-minute stuff was ridiculous . '' 
He had lost faith in the Foreign Office but had no idea what to do with his life , so at the end of his sabbatical year he engineered a compromise - a secondment to the UN in Kosovo . 
In the summer of 2004 , he supplied a secret , written testimony to the Butler inquiry on intelligence and weapons of mass destruction . 
The act of giving evidence finally brought his career as a British diplomat to an end . 
`` I told -LRB- the inquiry -RRB- what I knew in terms of the evidence on WMD and what the inspectors told me during the four and a half years that I dealt with it , '' he says . 
`` I also wrote down my views on the available alternatives to war , which were fairly forthright . 
I felt that war should be the last alternative , and emphatically it was not in this case . 
There was a very good alternative to war that was never properly pursued , which was to close down Saddam 's sources of illegal revenue . 
That testimony crystallised what I felt about the Iraq issue , and once I 'd written it I felt there was no going back . 
I had to quit . 
I could n't honestly work for this government with a smile on my face . '' 
It was a bold , some would say foolhardy , step . 
Ross gave up everything - income , status , what he calls the `` grandeur '' of the Foreign Office . 
He wrote to the permanent undersecretary and to the political adviser to the secretary of state stating his reasons for resigning ; neither replied . 
Some former colleagues were `` indifferent to the point of rudeness '' ; he does n't know whether they took his resignation as an implied criticism of their own actions or whether they thought him mad . 
`` I had a very good career under way and it was a huge sacrifice , '' he says . 
`` I 'd always wanted to be a diplomat , so it was a very painful decision . 
I still feel sad about it when I walk past the Foreign Office . 
But in the end I felt I had no choice . 
Although diplomacy and the Foreign Office was a deeply satisfying and enjoyable career , it was n't answering to a deeper part of my soul . '' 
His wife Carmen - a Croatian-born film-maker living in New York when they met - gave Ross the idea of offering his diplomatic skills on a freelance basis . 
Henceforth he would not be beholden to the British government but to his own conscience , and his policy advice would be steered not by national interest but by the alleviation of suffering . 
Independent Diplomat , the slogan of which is `` A diplomatic service for those who need it most '' , was born . 
Ross is currently advising the government of Kosovo and trying to raise awareness of the Saharawi people , displaced by Morocco 's long-standing occupation of the western Sahara . 
He hopes the Rowntree money will enable him to start building a global network of diplomats and lawyers who can help emerging governments or `` political groups struggling to make their case heard '' . 
Independent diplomats will not dissimulate , sit on the fence or hide behind national interests ; their instincts will be to help the marginalised and oppressed ; they will take sides . 
`` I often felt as a British diplomat that the things I really wanted to do were help the people who were less privileged than us , '' he says . 
`` I do n't believe in the received wisdom about what foreign policy is about . 
I do n't believe in things like British interests and the calculus of security and trade and all the rest of it . 
I think it 's mostly manufactured . '' 
He holds up his present preoccupation , the refugees of the western Sahara , as a test case for his new approach . 
`` If you look at these people suffering in a refugee camp in the middle of the desert , most British people would think that was wrong and that something should be done . 
Yet British policy is to do nothing because British interests dictate that fairly minuscule trade with Morocco is more important . 
At the UN I used to perform these calculations myself and send telegrams saying we had no interest in supporting the Saharawi cause . 
At the Foreign Office you are taught to think that trade and market share and security are the most important things , and that human suffering is not important if it 's nothing to do with Britain . 
I disagree with that analysis . 
The best way to a safer and more peaceful world is through alleviating suffering . 
Simplicity is the only thing that works in a complex world . '' 
Details of Independent Diplomat can be found at www.independentdiplomat.com Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article appeared on p4 of the G2 section of the Guardian on 16.53 BST on Monday 20 June 2005 . 
