Monday 20 June 2005 00.26 BST DHL 's intrepid couriers promise speedy delivery of packages to almost anywhere in the world - including addresses in the war-torn cities of Iraq and Afghanistan . 
But it seems that certain parts of Britain 's inner cities have become no-go areas for the company 's delivery drivers . 
The German-owned company has revealed that some neighborhoods of big cities , including London , Manchester , Birmingham and Glasgow , have been blacklisted because of the risk of couriers being attacked . 
Residents in the Canning Town and Custom House areas of London , for example , were told recently they would have to pick up their packages from a depot amid fears for the safety of DHL staff . 
A DHL spokesman , Matthew Zamoyski , said : `` Mostly , it has been a case of threatening behavior , or people surrounding the vehicle and making life difficult . '' 
He said decisions not to deliver to some areas were taken by local managers , but insisted there was no `` blanket list '' of problem areas . 
`` Where there is an area we have had problems with , the local manager would make a decision that they wo n't deliver for a while until it has settled down , '' he said . 
`` It 's a case of the manager talking to his driver and saying , ` How do you feel about this ? ' 
He might say , ` It 's getting a bit hairy out there , ' and a decision might be made that it 's not safe . '' 
There are thought to be about two dozen postal areas in Britain on the company 's blacklist at any time , but DHL refused to say where they were . 
Many are thought to be council estates and tower blocks in inner-city areas . 
The list is not permanent , and areas can be taken off the list if the situation improves . 
Mr Zamoyski said he was not aware of any surge in attacks . 
DHL was one of the first companies to open in Baghdad after the fall of Saddam Hussein , and also operates in Afghanistan and North Korea . 
The company opened in Baghdad only days after the Iraq war ended . 
One of its transport planes was hit by a shoulder-launched rocket as it left Baghdad airport in November 2003 , but managed to land safely . 
The spokesman said DHL was able to deliver there because of local arrangements . 
He said : '' -LRB- Iraq and Britain -RRB- are very different cases . 
There are local security arrangements applicable in every country , and they differ . '' 
DHL employs more than 170,000 people across the world and can deliver to 220 countries and territories . 
The company , which began couriering in 1969 , takes its name from the initials of the three men who founded it , Adrian Dalsey , Larry Hillblom and Robert Lynn . 
DHL started by shipping papers by plane from San Francisco to Honolulu , but soon expanded across the rest of the world . 
