Credit : Reuters\/Libyan TV via Reuters TV THE HAGUE | Mon May 16 , 2011 7:33 am EDT THE HAGUE -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The International Criminal Court prosecutor said on Monday he had requested arrest warrants for Libya 's Muammar Gaddafi , his son Saif al-Islam and the country 's spy chief on charges of crimes against humanity . 
ICC prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo had said earlier this month he would seek three arrest warrants for the `` pre-determined '' killing of protesters in Libya following U.N. Security Council referral of the violence to the Hague-based court in February . 
It had been widely expected that Moreno-Ocampo would seek an arrest warrant for Libyan leader Gaddafi , but in addition to a warrant for his son Saif , the prosecutor said he would also seek the arrest of Libya 's head of espionage , Abdullah al-Senussi . 
`` The office gathered direct evidence about orders issued by Muammar Gaddafi himself , direct evidence of Saif al-Islam organizing the recruitment of mercenaries and direct evidence of the participation of al-Senussi in the attacks against demonstrators , '' Moreno-Ocampo said at the ICC . 
He added the office of the prosecutor also documented how the three held meetings `` to plan the operations '' and Gaddafi used his `` absolute authority to commit crimes in Libya '' . 
The ICC prosecutor has moved with unprecedented swiftness in his investigation , with the request for arrest warrants coming just two and a half months after it the Security Council referral . 
Moreno-Ocampo said the swiftness of his investigation stems from global consensus that the crimes committed in Libya had to be investigated , although judges will now need to decide whether there is sufficient evidence to issue warrants . 
The ICC has no police force and relies on member states to enforce arrests . 
Despite NATO bombing operations intended to protect civilians , Libya has been plunged into civil war , seriously complicating efforts to arrest ICC suspects . 
-LRB- Reporting by Aaron Gray-Block ; Editing by Giles Elgood -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
If anyone committed crimes against humanity its them = -RRB- Knowingly using false information as a pretense for the invasion and occupation of a sovereign nation resulting in the deaths of tens of thousands of innocent civilians . 
What Muammar Gaddafi has allegedly done is a joke in comparison . 
Libya now has two governments both semi-functional . 
The pro-regime one has its spokesman already killed by NATO bomb and many defected diplomats . 
The pro-rebellion one has yet to acquire more sovereign recognition . 
Gaddafi built his command center underneath a kindergarten . 
It truly is a human shield . 
That 's what he did and who he is . 
He will fight from his bunker even all his compounds turned into rubble . 
His crimes against humanity are listless . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
