PARIS | Wed Oct 12 , 2011 8:23 am EDT PARIS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Western nations are not doing enough to pressure Russia into changing its stance on Syria and must do more to support the burgeoning opposition , the figurehead for the Syrian National Council -LRB- SNC -RRB- said on Friday . 
Paris-based Burhan Ghalioun , considered the group 's de facto leader , told France 24 television the newly formed SNC hoped to get recognition from European countries once its structure is in place . 
The European Union has welcomed the creation of the Syrian council and urged other countries to do the same , but stopped short of any call to recognize the body which is seeking international support for a six-month-old uprising against President Bashar al-Assad . 
France , the first Western country to recognize Libya 's opposition , has been championing the cause of pro-democracy protesters in Syria , leading calls for a U.N. Security Council resolution to condemn the government 's bloody crackdown on them . 
In a symbolic display of support , French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe met Ghalioun in Paris earlier this week . 
`` Juppe 's gesture was significant , '' Ghalioun said . 
`` The French will consult the other Europeans and we hope to have recognition from European countries later , but let 's wait a few days , weeks , '' he said . 
Ghalioun , an intellectual and political sociologist based at the Sorbonne university , was thrust into the limelight this year when peaceful protests against Assad 's government turned violent and demonstrators looked for somebody to help galvanize various strands of the opposition . 
The 66-year old said the West could be more `` aggressive '' in its approach to Russia , which has refused to join international condemnation of Syria 's long crackdown on protesters and used its veto along with China to reject a draft U.N. resolution . 
He also called for a conference bringing together the main stakeholders in the Syrian conflict . 
`` I think the European Union and Western countries have not done everything politically to convince Russia and other reticent countries , '' Ghalioun said . 
`` I do n't think there are strong enough positions and actions . '' 
Some figures inside Syria privately criticize the opposition in exile for being too ready to seek outside intervention . 
Other issues dividing the opposition include ethnic and sectarian differences , disagreement over the place of religion in the state and a generational gap between veteran opposition figures and youth activists . 
Michel Kilo , a member of the Syria-based National Committee for Democratic Change -LRB- NCDC -RRB- who has criticized the SNC for not including those in Syria , said on Tuesday he was ready to talk more to the council to avoid divisions that could play into the hands of Assad 's government . 
`` Today , there is the council and there are other opposition members and we will do everything to make sure there is just one voice , '' Ghalioun said . 
`` I do n't think the opposition is divided . 
I think the opposition is unanimous on one objective : the end of the regime and fall of Bashar al-Assad . '' 
Asked whether the SNC could take up arms if protests did not lead to the government 's collapse , Ghalioun dismissed the idea for now but said there was a risk of escalation . 
`` We are afraid of it ending up in civil war and anarchy so it 's up to show that a new Syria wo n't be one of vengeance and revenge , '' he said . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Immigrants involved in long distance politics should be deported . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
