US oil spill ` enters Loop Current ' with Florida at risk Oil has been gushing out of the blown-out well for almost a month The first oil from the Gulf of Mexico spill has entered an ocean current that could take it to Florida and up the east coast of the US , scientists say . 
A `` small portion '' of oil sheen is in the Loop Current , which circulates in the Gulf , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- said . 
Diluted oil could appear in isolated parts of Florida if persistent winds pushed the current that way , it added . 
European scientists warn the spill could reach Florida within six days . 
Oil has been spewing into the Gulf since the offshore drilling rig Deepwater Horizon , leased by oil giant BP , exploded off the coast of Louisiana on 20 April and sank two days later . 
Satellite images released by the European Space Agency -LRB- ESA -RRB- depict a streak of oil stretching south from the main slick into the Loop Current - a body of fast-flowing water coming from the Caribbean which the agency says is likely to propel oil towards Florida within six days . 
The Loop Current could carry the oil around Florida and into the Atlantic Scientists at the NOAA , the US government 's own climate body , broadly share that analysis , but say the oil is a `` light sheen '' representing just a small portion of the overall amount . 
The oil would be `` highly weathered '' if it reached Florida , or could evaporate en route , it said . 
The scientists warned that the turbulent Loop Current could mix the oil and water , making it difficult to track the oil 's progress in the coming days . 
Meanwhile , the US Coast Guard said tests showed that tar balls that washed up on Florida beaches in recent days had not originated from the oil spill off Louisiana . 
It is unclear where the tar balls came from , Coast Guard officials said . 
Oil has covered the vegetation in the wetlands Also on Wednesday , the US said it was having talks with Cuba over the spill . 
Observers say the rare talks demonstrate a concern that the oil may be carried by currents far from the site of the Deepwater Horizon disaster . 
In Louisiana , a lawyer has asked a panel of federal judges to consolidate more than 100 cases related to the oil spill into a single action . 
Daniel Becnel asked that the growing number of cases against oil companies BP , Transocean , Halliburton and Cameron be combined and heard in Louisiana , the Associated Press news agency reported . 
The lawsuits have been filed by commercial fishermen , restaurants , hotels and property owners and others who say the oil spill has cost them income . 
A BP executive said this week that the company had paid out $ 15m -LRB- # 10.4 m -RRB- in claims , much of it to shrimpers and commercial fishermen who have little or no income because of the spill . 
Meanwhile , astronauts and cosmonauts aboard the International Space Station have said they could see the oil spill while passing over the Gulf of Mexico . 
`` It looks very scary , '' Russian cosmonaut Oleg Kotov told reporters via a video link . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
