LONDON | Fri Aug 26 , 2011 10:04 am BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The government needs to relax its hold on power and allow English cities to jump-start their local economies after inner-city rioting spread across the country this month , former Conservative deputy prime minister Michael Heseltine said . 
Seeking a response to the worst urban violence for decades , commentators and politicians have looked back to 1981 when Heseltine led efforts to tackle deprivation in the northern English city of Liverpool that had sparked similar unrest . 
Heseltine , now 78 , garnered praise for his efforts to promote private investment in a city struggling for an identity after its port went into decline , causing mass unemployment . 
Liverpool 's regenerated Albert Dock , home to a branch of the Tate Art Gallery and a Beatles museum , is one project that has brought lasting benefits to the city . 
Thirty years on , many English cities still look to national government to solve their problems , something that Heseltine wants to change . 
Few city mayors are directly elected and councils get much of their funding from central grants , leaving them exposed to deep state spending cuts . 
Heseltine is widely seen in the Conservative Party as a politician close to the thinking of Prime Minister David Cameron and one with a particular grasp of the problems of inner cities . 
He believes Cameron 's Conservative-led coalition government has done the right thing with its initial hardline response to the riots , flooding the streets with police and arresting around 3,000 people . 
`` You have got to regain the streets . 
That they have done and rightly so , '' Heseltine said in an interview . 
`` It would be for example a tragedy if the Notting Hill carnival was not to go ahead and be peacefully conducted , '' he added , referring to this weekend 's African-Caribbean festival in London , one of the biggest street parties in Europe . 
Prime Minister David Cameron had already asked Heseltine and former Tesco supermarket boss Terry Leahy , who is from Liverpool , to produce an updated development plan for the city . 
That report is sure to be required reading for those seeking to ease the plight of England 's inner cities . 
Relations with prime ministers have not always been so cordial . 
Heseltine , a millionaire magazine publisher , was one of the most talented politicians of his generation but his dominant personality and centrist leanings made for combustible relations with then-Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher . 
He stormed out of government in 1986 in a row over the ownership of a defense firm . 
His leadership challenge in 1990 helped to end Thatcher 's reign but the more emollient John Major piped him to become party leader and prime minister . 
Now retired from front line politics , Heseltine says there is no quick fix after looting of shops and arson attacks spread from London to other major English cities , leaving five people dead , businesses in ruins and damaging Britain 's image abroad . 
He is careful not to telegraph the conclusions of his report on Liverpool , but he believes the centralised government and the dominance of London , home to the financial services industry , is holding the country back . 
`` We are the only country of our sort that runs virtually everything from the center , if you look at all the other major economies they have very powerful devolved and therefore competitive economies , '' he said . 
Britain 's deficit-cutting government talks about rebalancing the economy -- helping to nurture high-tech manufacturing and spreading growth more evenly geographically . 
Plans to create low-tax , light-regulation enterprise zones echo the Heseltine prescription of the 1980s . 
Heseltine said large English cities like Liverpool , Manchester , Newcastle and Birmingham needed strong local leaders to complement this approach . 
`` They do n't have people who have the power to take real decisions and give proper leadership , '' he said , applauding government plans to allow larger English cities to directly elect their mayors . 
He notes that London 's high profile mayor Boris Johnson has very limited powers , making him more of a figurehead . 
In an illustration of London 's problems , the interview was conducted by telephone , with the Reuters correspondent in Heseltine 's office in the district of Hammersmith surrounded by racks of his firm 's magazines and the ex-minister stranded in snarled traffic and unable to get to the appointment in person . 
Thatcher was famously dismissive of Heseltine 's contribution to urban renewal , noting acidly in her memoirs that `` Liverpool has defeated better men than Michael Heseltine . '' 
However , Heseltine has his backers in the city , birthplace of the Beatles and home to one of Europe 's most successful soccer clubs . 
`` Heseltine is respected across the political divide as somebody who has put Liverpool 's case regularly , '' said Joe Anderson , the Labor leader of the city council . 
`` All governments have n't got to grips with the problems that inner cities faced . 
He 's right to make the case that government seems to be London-centric , '' he told Reuters . 
`` Liverpool was once an economic powerhouse of the Commonwealth and he sees the potential here . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
