People punt on the River Cam as it passes through Cambridge University in Eastern England October 23 , 2010 . 
CAMBRIDGE , England | Fri Aug 26 , 2011 11:49 am BST CAMBRIDGE , England -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Got 48 hours to explore the colleges , pubs , green spaces and leafy towpaths of Cambridge , England ? 
Reuters correspondents with local knowledge help visitors get the most out of a visit to the city that is home to one of world 's oldest universities . 
6 p.m. Arrive at Cambridge train station and breathe in the soft air of the Fenlands . 
Cambridge is a town of cyclists , where everyone from students to software millionaires ride bicycles to get around . 
If you want to get the most out of the city , you can rent one too right outside the station at Station Cycles -LRB- www.stationcycles.co.uk -RRB- . 
Buy a map while you 're at it . 
If you 're staying in the center of town and you like a bit of history , stop in at The Eagle . 
It is one of the oldest pubs in Cambridge , dating back to the 1600s with a galleried courtyard for outdoor drinkers . 
A plaque outside will tell you this is the pub where Cambridge scientists Watson and Crick cracked the secret of DNA and there will likely be plenty of modern-day geniuses knocking back their Friday night pints . 
The ceiling in the RAF room at the back is festooned with the smoky signatures of World War Two airmen stationed around Cambridge , who wrote their names in soot on the ceiling before flying off to confront the Luftwaffe . 
11 p.m. Most pubs in Cambridge still close near or around this traditional closing time , though some stay open past midnight . 
You could try the nightlife if you 're keen . 
There are at least three busy late night clubs close by The Eagle : The Kambar , Lola Lo and Fez Club . 
But beware it 's an early start in the morning ... 8 a.m. Rowing is a Cambridge passion , though the Cambridge University Boat Club -LRB- www.cubc.org.uk -RRB- lost the 157th `` Boat Race '' against Oxford this year . 
Nevertheless , students , lecturers , top athletes and keen amateurs all turn out in the early morning for a row . 
If you 're in Cambridge in early June you can see the Cambridge University `` May Bumps '' races for the student `` gownies '' or in late July the Town Bumps for `` townies . '' 
Both sets of races are a big spectacle and bring thousands of people to the river for four days of rowing mayhem , dinners , picnics , parties , BBQs and bonfires . 
The races are conducted in boats with crews of eight who chase each other down the river intent on overtaking to `` bump '' the crew ahead . 
Crashes , sinkings and even rowers knocked out of boats are regular occurrences . 
Bankside , cyclists race along the towpaths screaming support for their teams , so watch out ! 
Cycle out across Midsummer Common to the towpath to see the rowing or just look at the lovely college boathouses perched on the banks , with their escutcheons proudly displayed . 
Foremost of these is Goldie Boathouse -LRB- 1880 -RRB- , where the Cambridge University team conduct their indoor training . 
If you 're lucky , the doors will be open and a number of scantily clad top athletes will be getting put through their paces . 
12 p.m. Hit the pub . 
The riverside pubs in Cambridge are gorgeous on a fair day and filled with rowers . 
Most have outdoor seating and serve food . 
One of the oldest is the Fort St. George , right on the banks of the Cam . 
Just up the road is the Old Spring . 
Further along the river heading out of town towards Ely are the Green Dragon and about an hour 's cycle is The Bridge at Waterbeach . 
If you 've gone to the Bridge at Waterbeach then you 'll have to cycle back into town . 
After a big lunch and a few pints it might take longer than expected . 
Do n't rush , the river outside of town is surrounded by picturesque countryside and home to herons , ducks , swans and kingfishers . 
Sheep and horses can sometimes be seen grazing in fields by the bank . 
3 p.m. Do n't abandon the river just yet . 
After all the excitement of the rowing and hours in the saddle , it 's time for you to get on the Cam yourself for a glorious introduction to the gardens and architecture in Cambridge . 
The river wends its way through the middle of town and around the back of some of the university 's oldest colleges . 
The best way to drink it in is from a traditional punt on the river . 
There are any number of hire companies , but one of the biggest is Scudamore 's -LRB- www.scudamores.com -RRB- . 
Feel free to attempt punting -- propelling the traditional flat-bottomed wooden boat using a wooden pole -- yourself . 
But beware that it 's a hilarious past-time for locals to snigger at the hapless tourists who end up spluttering in the river when their pole becomes stuck and their punt slides out from under them . 
A more relaxing way to see the college `` Backs '' is to hire a chauffeur , often a student , who will propel you along regaling you with the history of the colleges while you laze in the punt eating strawberries and cream , drinking Pimm 's and enjoying the blooming gardens and the serene beauty all around you . 
6 p.m. Drop into the Granta pub overlooking the Mill Pond or The Mill for a swift pint or two after your punting and before you get changed for dinner . 
There are a number of good restaurants for fine dining in Cambridge and of course , plenty of pubs . 
For the pub option take your pick of the pubs reviewed by Cambridge Pubs , with a map and descriptions at www.cambridge-pubs.co.uk . 
Cambridge has a number of good fine dining options . 
Midsummer House Restaurant -LRB- www.midsummerhouse.co.uk -RRB- has two Michelin stars and is located right on the river on Midsummer Common next to the Fort St. George pub . 
It is set in a converted Victorian house serving French Mediterranean food . 
Cotto restaurant -LRB- www.cottocambridge.co.uk -RRB- has n't the Michelin stars but boasts that it uses only the freshest ingredients sourced locally . 
Hotel Du Vin -LRB- www.hotelduvin.com\/HotelLanding.aspx ? 
HotelId = 7 -RRB- , in the center of town has an 80-seat bistro serving European cuisine . 
11 p.m. Go home to bed or brave the raucous Saturday night clubs in town . 
There will be plenty of walking tomorrow to get round the colleges . 
Now that you 've had what the British refer to as `` a lie-in '' you should feel ready to tackle Cambridge on foot in order to have a close-up look at an academic institution whose life began in 1209 and whose alumni range from Isaac Newton , Charles Darwin and William Wordsworth to Stephen Hawking , actor Hugh Laurie and Sacha Baron Cohen , the man behind Borat . 
You 'll never get through all the colleges as there are many and some will be closed to visitors . 
But a good place to start is at the bottom of St. John 's Street next to the 12th century Round Church , founded by the Fraternity of the Holy Sepulchre . 
Have a peep inside at the Romanesque architecture . 
Wander up St. John street from here , taking in the colleges . 
Two of the biggest and most interesting to wander around are Trinity and King 's . 
Pop into Trinity -LRB- www.trin.cam.ac.uk -RRB- through the Great Gate . 
On the outside of the college , is a statue of its founder , Henry VIII . 
Some years ago the statue 's sceptre was replaced by a chair leg as an undergraduate prank . 
Ask the tourist porter at the gate if you can have a wander round . 
Visitors must pay a small entrance fee , but then have the opportunity to see the college chapel , Great Court , Hall , Nevile 's Court and the magnificent Wren library completed in 1695 to the design of Christopher Wren . 
The library contains a number of special collections including medieval manuscripts ; early Shakespeare editions ; books from Newton 's own library and A.A. Milne 's manuscripts of Winnie-the-Pooh . 
Wander the courtyards and buildings that have inspired 32 Nobel prizewinners as well as Francis Bacon , Lord Byron , and Alfred Tennyson . 
12 p.m. Press on along the same street , although it 's now called Trinity Street , past the grand Senate House , where formal ceremonies are held . 
You should now be on King 's Parade , a grand boulevard where stand the impressive buildings of King 's College -LRB- founded in 1441 -RRB- . 
Call in at the Porter 's lodge to gain entry to the beautiful court and grounds inside , where one of the most famous sights is King 's College chapel . 
The foundation stone was laid in 1446 and it took over a century to build , including an interruption during the War of the Roses . 
The chapel houses the painting `` The Adoration of the Magi '' by Rubens . 
Every Christmas eve Carols at King 's is broadcast around the world . 
2 p.m. Trundle up King 's Parade onto Trumpington Street and stop at Browns -LRB- www.browns-restaurants.co.uk\/menu-cambridge.php -RRB- for hearty lunch fare or Loch Fyne -LRB- www.lochfyne.com\/Restaurants\/Locations\/Cambridge.aspx -RRB- for seafood . 
You can return to wandering around the colleges in the afternoon if you have n't had enough academic history . 
For a lazier afternoon option punt , take a taxi or cycle to Grantchester Meadows just out of town where students for generations have whiled away the hours reading , picnicking in an area made famous by World War One poet Rupert Brooke in his poem `` The Old Vicarage , Grantchester '' . 
The Orchard Tea Garden -- where Brooke once lolled under the trees and ruminated -- serves morning coffee , light lunches , afternoon tea and champagne to guests who can rest their weary bones in wood and canvas chairs under the very same boughs . 
Though the Old Vicarage is now home to novelist Jeffrey Archer , you can still see the church clock stand at ten to three and there really is honey still for tea . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
