Liverpool 's Raul Meireles holds his head during their English Premier League football match against Sunderland at Anfield in Liverpool , northern England August 13 , 2011 . 
MANCHESTER , England -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Brief news ahead of this weekend 's Premier League matches : \* Liverpool will be missing midfielder Raul Meireles for Saturday 's home game against Bolton Wanderers -LRB- 5:30 p.m. BST -RRB- after the Anfield club confirmed he would be out of action for up to a fortnight with a collarbone injury . 
The club had feared that Meireles faced a longer lay-off after he was hurt in Wednesday 's League Cup tie at Exeter City but Liverpool manager Kenny Dalglish told the club website -LRB- www.liverpoolfc.tv -RRB- : `` It 's his collarbone that is damaged but it 's only a week or two . 
We 've been quite fortunate with that . '' 
\* Midfielder Darren Fletcher is back in the Manchester United squad for the first time this season for Sunday 's match against Arsenal -LRB- 4:00 p.m. BST -RRB- , his manager Alex Ferguson told a news conference on Friday . 
The Scottish international has appeared only twice for United since early March because of the lingering effects of a debilitating virus but has come through two reserve-team run-outs . 
`` Darren Fletcher played a game last night which is great news , '' Ferguson said . 
`` I think the boy is back now . 
He had a terrible time but he is now looking terrific . 
He will be in the squad for Sunday . '' 
Ferguson also confirmed that Rio Ferdinand and Antonio Valencia were back in training but Nemanja Vidic would be absent for another month . 
\* Arsenal defender Thomas Vermaelen is `` a little doubt '' for Sunday 's game , manager Arsene Wenger said on his club 's website -LRB- www.arsenal.com -RRB- . 
Wenger added that Tomas Rosicky , Johan Djourou and Laurent Koscielny should be fit to play but Kieran Gibbs , Jack Wilshere and Abou Diaby remained injured . 
Emmanuel Frimpong , Gervinho and Alex Song are all suspended . 
\* Chelsea have their new signing from Spain , Juan Mata , available for the home game against Norwich City on Saturday -LRB- 3:00 p.m. BST -RRB- though he is not expected to start . 
Manager Andre Villas-Boas told his club website -LRB- www.chelseafc.com -RRB- that it was too early for the 23-year-old Spaniard to start three days after the completion of his move from Valencia . 
David Luiz is still missing , together with Petr Cech . 
\* Manchester City will be without midfielder Nigel de Jong for Sunday 's match against Tottenham -LRB- 1:30 p.m. BST -RRB- as he continues his recovery from the ankle injury suffered in the opening game of the season against Swansea City . 
Manager Roberto Mancini told a news conference on Friday : `` Nigel 's not fit , but I hope he can recover after the national break . '' 
Samir Nasri will be available to make his debut for City after joining from Arsenal on Wednesday . 
Emmanuel Adebayor , signed by Spurs on loan from City , will be unable to play against his parent club but Tottenham manager Harry Redknapp was quoted in the local press as saying Luka Modric would start , despite having not featured this season because of interest from Chelsea . 
`` He 'll be playing on Sunday for sure , '' said Redknapp . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
