BP 's shares slide after US sues over oil spill The US government has issued a lawsuit against BP and several of its partners over the oil well disaster in the Gulf of Mexico BP 's Deepwater Horizon oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico exploded in April 2010 . 
Photograph : HO\/AFP\/Getty Images BP 's shares fell 3 % at the start of trading in London today after the oil company was hit with a lawsuit from the US government over the Deepwater Horizon disaster . 
The prospect of BP facing even greater costs over the worst offshore oil spill in American history knocked 15p off its share price , which dropped to 461.1 p. This wiped around # 2.8 bn off BP 's market capitalization . 
The suit is seeking fines and penalties under the Clean Water Act to cover the damage caused by the oil spill . 
That could potentially lead to a fines of up to $ 4,300 for each barrel of oil released into the Gulf if the courts find the company grossly negligent . 
The US estimates that nearly 5 million barrels of oil spewed into the ocean - suggesting a potential fine of $ 20bn -LRB- # 12.8 bn -RRB- . 
BP has warned last month the disaster could cost it $ 40bn in clean-up costs , compensation and a likely fine . 
But the ongoing uncertainty over the spill appears to have unsettled the market David Buik , City commentator at BGC Partners warned that the lawsuit could `` run for a decade '' , unless BP can agree a deal with the Department of Justice . 
There would of course be a price that BP might be prepared to agree to allow everyone to get on with their lives . 
We will all wait with bated breath . 
Last night BP 's shares initially fell 2.6 % in New York , but closed only 1.3 % down at the close . 
This lawsuit is surely in the price ? 
It may be the 2nd half of 2011 before the DOJ tells us the cost of the gross negligence . 
BP 's shares were worth 650p before the Deepwater Horizon rig caught fire and sank , and hit a low of 298p before the leak was finally capped . 
The lawsuit claims that BP , and the other companies involved with the well , had violated safety regulations prior to the blast in which 11 men died , and failed to monitor conditions during the drill . 
BP , though , says that the suit is '' `` solely a statement of the government 's allegations and does not in any manner constitute any finding of liability or any judicial finding that the allegations have merit . '' 
