United States sues BP over Gulf oil disaster The action , filed in a New Orleans court , accuses them of violating safety regulations The Obama administration has sued BP and several of its partners in the oil well disaster in the Gulf of Mexico , potentially exposing them to billions in legal costs . 
The action , filed in a New Orleans court yesterday , accuses them of violating safety regulations , and seeks unlimited damages to cover the costs of cleaning up the oil , the losses suffered by local businesses , and the damage done to the environment . 
`` I 've seen the devastation that this oil spill caused throughout the region , to individuals and to families , to communities and to businesses , to coastlines , to wetlands , as well as to wildlife , '' the attorney general , Eric Holder , told reporters . 
Aside from BP , the suit names Trans-ocean , which owned the rig , Anadarko Petroleum and MOEX offshore , which were minority partners in the well , and Lloyd 's of London . 
Halliburton , which has come under intense scrutiny in investigations for the faulty design and construction of the cement seal at the bottom of the well , is not listed in the suit . 
But Holder said the complaint could be amended at a later date , and that criminal and civil investigations into the oil disaster would continue . 
`` We will not hesitate to take whatever steps are necessary to hold accountable those responsible for this spill , '' he said . 
The suit says the full extent of damages caused by BP 's gusher in the Gulf remain unknown , but the costs far exceed the $ 75m cap on existing oil spill legislation . 
The suit also seeks fines and penalties under the Clean Water Act for the months when oil was spewing into the Gulf , potentially exposing the oil companies to billions in additional costs . 
BP has paid $ 20bn into an account to compensate Gulf businesses for lost livelihoods because of the oil disaster . 
But it could also face fines of up to $ 4,300 for each barrel of oil released into the Gulf if the courts find the company negligent . 
The explosion on the Deepwater Horizon on the night of 20 April killed 11 men . 
Government scientists estimate that 4.9 m barrels of oil were released before the well was sealed in September . 
BP has begun to dispute the size of that estimate . 
Oil washed up on sandy beaches and fragile wetlands from Florida to Texas . 
Scientific expeditions continue to find a thick layer of crude on the ocean floor . 
Last week , the authorities closed 4,000 square miles of the Gulf to fishing after a shrimper pulled up tar balls in his nets . 
The 27-page complaint filed yesterday accuses BP and the other companies of failing to use the safest available techniques to drill the well and provide continuous monitoring of its conditions , and of failing to protect employees on the rig and the natural resources of the Gulf . 
A commission appointed by Barack Obama this month accused all the firms involved of bad management and communications breakdown , citing nearly a dozen occasions where workers took poor decisions that compromised safety . 
Last week , a coastguard investigation heard that the Halliburton employee in charge of monitoring well control missed the first signs of dangerous pressure levels because he was on a cigarette break . 
BP already faces hundreds of other law suits filed by fishing interests , hotel chains , restauranteurs , even condo owners who say the spill ruined their holidays . 
The state of Alabama is also suing BP and other firms connected to the disaster . 
cents This article was amended on 16 December 2010 . 
Yesterday 's suit had been long expected . 
In an initial reaction , BP said the complaint at this stage represented what were only the government 's allegations . 
Transocean , meanwhile , denied responsibility for the explosion , saying that BP as the well owner had sole liability under the law . 
