What the lawsuit against BP can achieve The US justice department 's suit against BP for the Deepwater Horizon spill sends a message to oil executives about risk Oil floats on the surface of the water near a controlled burn above BP 's Deepwater Horizon well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Attorney General Eric Holder announced on Wednesday that the US government is suing several companies involved for damages . 
Photograph : Ann Heisenfelt\/EPA A disaster as large as the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico can not be remediated through the courts but we can still sue the bastards . 
This is America , after all . 
The US department of justice has filed a civil lawsuit against BP and associated companies like Anadarko and Transocean for damages resulting from the Deepwater Horizon explosion that erupted on 20 April , and spewed nearly 5m barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico before it was capped on 15 July . 
The suit cites damage to the Gulf 's natural resources , wildlife and their associated human activities . 
These natural resources do n't just have aesthetic value for a few bird watchers ; they have economic value , too . 
As much as we like to think of ourselves as insulated from nature , we still depend on the complex marine ecosystem for our sustenance , all the way down to the plankton at the bottom of the food chain . 
The oil executives may tell us we need to be pragmatic in considering the economic effects of environmental controls , but the disaster has already had a pretty big practical effect on the shrimpers , who had 4,200 square miles of Gulf waters closed to their boats last month after tar balls were found in their nets . 
The lawsuit , announced by Attorney General Eric Holder , did not specify damages sought , noting ominously -LRB- pdf -RRB- : `` The full extent of potential injuries , destruction , loss and loss of services is not yet fully known and may not be fully known for many years . '' 
In other words , this could take a while . 
But if the suit takes five or ten years to wind its way through the courts , is it worth it ? 
According to the old saying , justice delayed is justice denied . 
But the suit does n't have to be resolved quickly for it to affect corporate behavior . 
BP has already set up a $ 20bn compensation fund for those affected by the mess . 
The justice department lawsuit is n't intended to compensate victims , but to give pause to those managers who are too willing to cut corners on safety . 
And in the meanwhile , the companies will have to set aside enormous reserves against legal losses , and carry the reserves on their books until all claims are settled . 
BP 's shares fell 3 % on the news of the lawsuit . 
With luck , the oil and gas companies ' risk managers will look at the numbers and tell the engineers to tighten up on their safety procedures . 
Even if the lawyers are successful in suing the perpetrators of this spill , though , we still have larger problems with the energy industry . 
Maybe the lawyers can help prevent future explosions like the one on the Deepwater Horizon , but the planet is still on a slow boil from the burning of fossil fuels . 
