BP falls out of index of top 100 brands after Deepwater Horizon oil spill Oil company 's brand value has been ` destroyed ' while Apple is biggest riser , according to leading marketing consultancy Up in smoke : the Deepwater Horizon disaster caused billions of dollars to be wiped from the value of the BP brand . 
Photograph : AP The disastrous financial , political and PR fallout from the Deepwater Horizon spill has stripped billions of dollars from the value of the BP brand , according to a leading marketing consultancy , which has dumped the oil giant from its index of the world 's best brands for the first time in 11 years . 
Interbrand concluded that the `` majority of the company 's brand value has been destroyed '' by the Gulf of Mexico disaster , as it published its annual survey of the top 100 brands . 
The blow comes a day after outgoing BP chief executive Tony Hayward was grilled by MPs about the company 's operational record and handling of the worst oil spill in US history . 
Since 1999 Interbrand has produced an annual report giving a dollar value to the world 's 100 most valuable brands , based on three factors financial performance , role of the brand in purchase decisions , and its strength in securing earnings for the company . 
Interbrand stripped billions from BP 's brand value , which last year was calculated at $ 3.7 bn , ranking the company 83rd , and instead promoted rival oil company Shell to 81st place , at $ 4bn . 
Because BP did not make the top 100 , Interbrand did not reveal its estimate of the company 's remaining brand value . 
However , Julian Dailly , director of valuation at Interbrand London , said : `` BP failed to execute on the level of standards they talked so proudly about in the press and the majority of the company 's brand value has been destroyed as a result . 
The overall impact can last a long time with the company finding it harder to enter new markets and bid for new contracts . 
The incident may not change the behavior of people turning left and right at the petrol pump but it will have a huge impact on the company 's bottom line and for a mineral giant that is critical . '' 
The report also saw the value of the Apple brand jump by 37 % to more than $ 21bn -LRB- # 13.5 bn -RRB- as embarrassing technical issues with the iPhone 4 were more than offset by the successful launch of the iPad . 
Apple showed the biggest increase year on year among Interbrand 's top 100 brands for 2010 , jumping three places to 17th . 
Interbrand attributed Apple 's resilience , in the face of a major flaw with the eagerly anticipated iPhone 4 , to factors including the `` guru-like '' following of the brand and the company 's chief executive , Steve Jobs . 
`` The antenna flaw may have grabbed headlines from more legitimate news headlines but sales were certainly not affected , '' said Interbrand . 
`` And let 's not forget how quickly the negative buzz over the iPad name was replaced with long lines of eager buyers waiting to make their purchase . '' 
Higher up the list Google further closed the gap on technology rival Microsoft with an impressive 36 % year-on-year jump in brand value to $ 43.5 bn . 
Google moved from seventh to fourth , just one place behind Microsoft , which managed a 7 % increase in value to $ 60.8 bn . 
Coca-Cola took the top spot in the list , for the 11th year running , with a brand value of $ 70.4 bn . 
Only Toyota , which has been forced to recall more than 8m cars because of an accelerator problem , and Harley Davidson suffered bigger percentage falls . 
cents To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or phone 02033533857 . 
For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 02033532000 . 
cents If you are writing a comment for publication , please mark clearly `` for publication '' . 
