As a professional ornithologist , I am called to ponder the calamity now gushing forth in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Its most unnerving feature is that we can not begin to estimate how far-reaching its biological effects will be , let alone the scale of its economic impacts . 
The most essential facts are still emerging , and changing , each day . 
How much oil eventually will be released into the high seas ? 
How far away will the havoc of this expanding oil spill be reached ? 
How many hundreds -- or thousands -- of miles of coastline will be affected ? 
How many oyster beds , sperm whale pods , bluefin tuna spawning beds , sea turtle beaches , and bird colonies will fall victim ? 
Can we ever measure accurately the accumulated effects of this disaster on commercial fishing , and tourism , and human happiness ? 
Amidst these uncertainties , some essential facts are important to bear in mind . 
The Gulf of Mexico teems with life all year , and especially during spring days and nights when hundreds of millions of birds migrate northward across it . 
A large proportion of these will stop to replenish themselves at the very shorelines likely to be blackened by oil over the coming weeks . 
News reports already feature hopelessly oiled birds being rushed to soapy `` rescues , '' but let 's not fool ourselves . 
The biology of birds tarred at sea by crude oil is well known -- most will die , even among those few that are found and given a reprieve by well-meaning nature lovers . 
Birds are tough creatures when it comes to facing natural hazards -- after all , those that could not survive storms , droughts , floods , and fires through the millennia have long since died out without leaving descendants . 
But birds were never built to handle environmental onslaughts of the scale we humans have thrown at them . 
In the 1800s we exploited some of them to extinction . 
In the 1900s we ransacked their habitats with wholesale conversion and industrial pollutants . 
Now , in the 21st century , we confront birds with burgeoning oil spews of unprecedented scale directly at the peak , and dead-center in the pathway , of their annual migration . 
Depending on wind directions over the coming weeks , breeding birds of Gulf Coast marshes and estuaries could end up paying the biggest price of all . 
The most important point , however , is that doomed birds laden with oil are not , themselves , the story . 
Rather , they play the familiar role of canaries in this coal mine . 
The blackened gannets and pelicans we see on the evening news are messengers for a much , much larger story that is far harder to see or comprehend , much less to measure . 
Unwittingly , birds always have been effective communicators to humans , and today is no exception . 
These oiled birds represent the headlines for myriad untold catastrophes that may unfold over the coming weeks : mass deaths of wildlife , reproductive failures , population crashes , and food-web collapses affecting literally thousands of species within the Gulf ecosystem . 
Events like this can have ecological effects that may last decades , perhaps much longer . 
More than 20 years after Exxon Valdez , we are still learning the facts about how populations and ecosystems respond to such unnatural disasters . 
Certainly , we need to avoid hand-wringing , and mobilize now to begin learning from this one . 
The Deepwater Horizon gusher was generated by twenty-first century technology , but it symbolizes the nineteenth century ethics we continue to apply when environmental protection contradicts energy exploitation . 
Although we can not yet know the eventual scale of its biological and economic costs , we should , for once , agree that we must never again forget the fundamental lessons of this disaster . 
The unthinkable is possible , and must be planned for in advance . 
As we assess risks versus rewards , as we fully audit the true costs of energy exploration and extraction , we need to incorporate and properly mitigate the enormous risks and costs of disasters like Deepwater Horizon . 
Finally , with just one planet to steward and only one chance at this game , all of us should be called on to ponder whether some natural systems are just too complex and valuable to risk losing them , regardless of what temporary energy boost lies beneath them . 
John W. Fitzpatrick , Ph.D. , is the director of the Cornell Lab of Ornithology . 
For more , visit www.birds.cornell.edu Fox Forum is on Twitter . 
