TRIPOLI | Thu May 26 , 2011 9:20 pm BST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya said on Thursday it was ready for a cease-fire and negotiations with rebels who hold the east of the country but demanded it include an immediate halt to NATO airstrikes . 
But Libyan rebels quickly rejected the offer , saying Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 's government was only trying to win reprieve from NATO air strikes . 
The proposal by Prime Minister Al-Baghdadi Ali Al-Mahmoudi , who said it mirrored a plan floated by the African Union , one of Tripoli 's few allies , for resolving the conflict , came on the heels peace overtures to Spain and other foreign countries . 
It also follows some of the heaviest attacks to date in NATO 's Libyan air campaign , which Gaddafi 's government says has exceeded a mandate of civilian protection based on United Nations Security Council resolutions , and now aims at killing or toppling the Libyan leader . 
`` Libya is serious about a cease-fire , which must be a cease-fire from all sides , especially NATO , '' Mahmudi told reporters in Tripoli . 
He dismissed , however , any prospect of Gaddafi 's departure -- a key rebel demand . 
`` Muammar Gaddafi is the leader of the Libyan people ; he decides what the Libyan people think , '' Baghdadi said . 
`` He is in the hearts of the Libyan people . 
If he departs , then so do all the Libyan people . '' 
Libyan rebel spokesman Abdel Hafiz Ghoga said the rebels do not trust Gaddafi or his prime minister . 
`` By talking about a cease-fire , he just wants NATO to stop its strikes on its communications centres , '' Ghoga said in comments broadcast on Dubai-based Al Arabiyah television . 
White House deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes , speaking at the Group of Eight summit in France , also said the United States did not see the new Libyan cease-fire offer as credible because it was not accompanied by action . 
Libya was not complying with U.N. demands and its forces were still attacking population centres , so the United States would continue with the military campaign , he told reporters . 
The prime minister scorned the rebel Transitional National Council , recognized by a handful of states as Libya 's legitimate representative , as former members of the same order they aim to overthrow . 
`` Now they absolve themselves of everything . 
Who was responsible for the security file ? 
They were , and now they are on the other side , calling on NATO to do the job for them , '' he said . 
But he said the door was open for talk with the rebels nonetheless . 
`` We are ready to speak with popular groups that represent all of Libya , anyone in that framework we welcome , whether he is in the council or not . 
All Libyans are welcome at the roundtable to talk . '' 
His remarks came as Spain confirmed it had received an offer of an immediate cease-fire from him . 
He declined to elaborate on that offer , or others Spain said Libya had made , and called for a fixed date to implement a cease fire . 
Gaddafi , who Libya says NATO is trying to assassinate , was alive and well , Mahmudi said . 
`` He 's in good health , handling his duties , in fine condition and he has no restrictions on his movements Libyans know he 's fine , '' he said . 
`` When we need him , we contact him or he contacts us . 
We ask about his health . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Joseph Logan and Sami Aboudi ; Editing by Louise Ireland and Angus MacSwan -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
