Residents often said everything was great : `` mia mia '' Was it a coping method or a survival tactic under Gadhafi ? 
Watson says he watched slow destruction of a country Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- `` Mia mia . '' 
It is an extremely popular phrase , widely used in Libya , that translates roughly to `` 100 percent . '' 
Nine times out of 10 , that is what Libyans said when I asked how they were coping with nightly bombardments by NATO warplanes , electricity blackouts that lasted days and rebel forces who were pressing forward on three fronts . 
`` Mia mia , '' they said with a smile . 
In other words , everything 's great ! 
Was this the cheerful coping method of a society living amid olive groves and palm trees next to the Mediterranean Sea ? 
Or was `` mia mia '' a survival tactic for people who had grown up within the authoritarian system of Moammar Gadhafi 's perpetual revolution ? 
The whispers of dissent my colleagues and I often heard in Tripoli suggested the latter . 
One night , after we had filmed the largest poster ever of a head of state in Tripoli 's Green Square , a middle-aged man rode past on a bicycle , yelling , `` Do n't believe what you see ! 
It 's all lies ! '' 
Then he disappeared into traffic , swallowed up amid posters of Gadhafi and regime loyalists , who shrouded themselves in the green of the Libyan flag . 
His weapon of choice ? 
His brush Even in peacetime , Gadhafi 's Libya had the Orwellian trappings of a police state governed by a culture of fear . 
I first traveled to Tripoli in 2007 , when I was greeted at passport control by a portrait of Gadhafi in sunglasses and the revolutionary slogan `` Partners not Wage-Slaves . '' 
At the time , Libya was coming in from the cold after years of international isolation . 
U.S. diplomats opening a new American Embassy were temporarily housed in a sky-high suite of the pricey Corinthia Hotel . 
Meanwhile , European businessmen were downstairs in the hotel lobby , plotting ways to profit off bountiful Libyan petro-dollars . 
The foreigners were free to make deals with the government . 
But Libyans were still clearly afraid to say much beyond the mantra of `` mia mia . '' 
Gadhafi 's cult of personality reigned supreme . 
During that visit , I watched a highly placed engineer and an academic at a government `` think tank '' separately feign illness rather than speak on the record about their country . 
Even though I had jumped through bureaucratic hoops , acquiring all the necessary permits from the Foreign Press Department to conduct interviews , these adult , educated men were terrified about sticking their necks out and perhaps saying something that might accidentally challenge Gadhafi 's utopian vision of Libya . 
After all , in the 1980s , Gadhafi banned restaurants , lawyers and the entire retail sector . 
Now he had performed an ideological U-turn and was apparently embracing capitalism . 
In 2007 , I had to travel everywhere with a government minder . 
I was permitted to spend only a single night reporting in the eastern city of Benghazi before being hustled back to Tripoli . 
The regime 's discomfort was prescient . 
Four years later , the barely contained political tensions in Benghazi exploded , and Libya 's second city became the capital for anti-Gadhafi rebels . 
Some Libyans clearly had had enough of `` mia mia . '' 
It was surprising , then , to see the Gadhafi regime still hosting journalists from the U.S. , France and England five months into an aerial bombing campaign that had been led by these three governments . 
The government was trying to shape international opinion . 
But it was doing so with the clumsiness one would expect from a regime that enjoyed absolute control over its own media for more than 40 years . 
Throughout the conflict , almost all foreign journalists have been housed in the luxury Rixos Hotel , which lost its Turkish management after Ankara turned its back on Gadhafi several months into the war . 
The only time we were allowed to film outside of the hotel was on government bus tours , surrounded by government escorts . 
Oftentimes , we would n't learn about the destination until the last minute . 
It was like trying to see Libya through a keyhole . 
When the regime did n't like our subsequent reporting , it did not hesitate to insult and intimidate . 
`` I think you are an agent of NATO . 
You work for Hillary Clinton , '' the head of the foreign media department told me when he summoned me to his office for one of several hourlong lectures . 
`` You are a criminal ! '' 
yelled his young assistant Issa . 
They were furious at my reported estimate that `` more than 10,000 '' regime supporters attended a recent pro-Gadhafi rally . 
They would have preferred the headline printed in the regime 's English-language Al-Jamahiriya News : `` More than Five Million Libyans organized in the Marches . '' 
Considering Libya 's entire population is estimated at just over 6 million , Al-Jamahiriya 's alleged rally would have been a remarkable event to witness , especially when broad swaths of the country were still under the control of the rebels . 
Sometimes , the bus tours backfired . 
On a visit to the front-line city of Zlitan , government officials brought us to a law school that had clearly been bombed by NATO warplanes . 
It was , they said , yet another example of the Western military alliance bombing a civilian target . 
But the campus of the bombed-out school was littered with military uniforms and empty wooden ammunition boxes . 
`` Those belonged to the school 's security guards , '' said a minder . 
We asked outside military experts to examine the serial numbers on the ammo boxes . 
They all agreed that Cyrillic letters clearly showed that one box had contained Russian-made 14.5 millimeter armor-piercing incendiary B-32 rounds . 
These are high-caliber munitions for the kind of machine gun that is typically mounted on armored personnel carriers and anti-aircraft guns . 
`` The guard would need to be about 3 meters tall to carry the gun for those , '' security analyst Zoran Kusovac wrote in an e-mail to CNN . 
`` But if Hulk Hogan was the guard ... '' The trouble is , the regime 's habit of exaggeration and outright lies was often matched by the outrageous claims of the rebels . 
The opposition fighters often claimed to control cities that later proved to be in loyalist hands . 
After last month 's killing of rebel military commander Abdul Fattah Younis , the Benghazi-based Transitional National Council issued wildly contradictory statements . 
Eventually , it emerged that a rival rebel faction killed Younis and set his corpse on fire before dumping it in a valley . 
NATO did n't help matters in the truth department . 
Throughout the conflict , Western governments stuck to their argument that NATO 's mission was to `` save civilian lives . '' 
But the aerial bombardment of loyalist positions just before rebels launched offensives against Gadhafi-held towns hardly resembled life-saving operations . 
Add that to the crippling economic blockade of Tripoli , and suddenly NATO 's mission appeared to be focused more on regime change than on protecting innocent civilians . 
The Libyan government could make a strong case that NATO had exceeded the mandate provided by a United Nations Security Council Resolution . 
But the Gadhafi regime was so obsessed with not appearing weak that it refused to let journalists see the hardships endured by Libyan citizens . 
I saw the extent of the crippling power shortages only when I sneaked out of the Rixos one night . 
In downtown Tripoli , I was stunned to see an entire neighborhood plunged into darkness , with families breaking their Ramadan fast by candlelight . 
Residents told me they had n't had any electricity in days . 
We also started hearing rumors of protests due to the lack of power . 
I asked Libya 's prime minister about these reports at a news conference the next day . 
`` The only rallies that came out on the streets in the last few days were those supporting the leadership of the country , '' Baghdadi Al-Mahmoudi said . 
`` Libyans are able to hold firm against these sanctions and this aggression . '' 
Another `` mia mia '' moment from one of the highest-ranked officials in the land . 
And who could challenge him ? 
As early as March , the regime shut down Internet access and cell phone text messaging throughout the entire country . 
One of the only exceptions was the Rixos Hotel , where government minders came to check their e-mail -LRB- and charge their cell phones , as the power shortages got worse -RRB- . 
The Rixos was where Libyan state TV talk show host Yousef Shakeer lived with his family . 
He broadcast from a studio in the basement , serving up nightly denunciations of NATO , the rebels and the foreign journalists in the hotel ... while predicting Gadhafi 's imminent victory over his enemies . 
Every night , gunfire rang out around the Rixos . 
Asked what it was , government officials always said , `` They are supporters of Gadhafi celebrating victory . '' 
Celebrating five months of near-constant victory must have been exhausting . 
When NATO 's nightly bombing runs struck closer to the Rixos , the strange collection of regime supporters who somehow could afford $ 400-a-night hotel rooms sometimes lashed out at foreign reporters . 
`` F -- off ! '' 
a Libyan man screamed at CNN producer Jomana Karadsheh , as she ran to film 2 a.m. explosions from the roof . 
Later , he apologized when he learned that Jomana was Jordanian . 
Seen through this bizarre lens and surrounded by antagonistic ideologues , reporters ended up questioning themselves on everything they saw . 
Was that person I interviewed actually a government agent ? 
Were the dead people in those coffins really civilians killed by last night 's airstrikes ? 
How many people really supported Gadhafi ? 
Imagine my surprise when on one of my last days in Libya , I sneaked away from government minders in the neighborhood of Souk al Jumma , which has been the scene of anti-Gadhafi street protests . 
There , I met a man named Tahir who told me he was being patient , waiting for the rebels to come from the Nafusa Mountains and Misrata to liberate Tripoli . 
`` Lies , all lies , '' he said when I asked him about the wild crowds of Gadhafi supporters broadcast nightly on Libyan state TV . 
`` Thank you , Britain ; thank you , America , '' a group of teenagers playing foosball yelled to Jomana and cameraman Joe Duran in another part of Souk al Juma . 
The best argument I ever heard for defending the dictator came from an interpreter named Mohamed . 
He was worried about his family 's safety , having heard rumors of rebels attacking dark-skinned Libyans . 
Never having worked with the rebels , I could not confirm or deny Mohamed 's claim . 
But it raised the specter of racial and tribal conflict in the event of Gadhafi 's overthrow . 
`` Report the truth , please , '' a Libyan man standing in line told me as a Tunisian customs officer processed my passport last week . 
I was about to leave Libya and at the end of my rope after a month of virtual house arrest . 
`` What is the truth ? '' 
`` Mia mia ?! '' No , the man said . 
He was fleeing to Tunisia with his family because there was no electricity in Tripoli and because Gadhafi 's forces had opened fire with machine guns on a recent street protest against the power outages . 
Another claim I could not independently confirm . 
For now , only one thing is certain . 
During my month in Libya , I watched a country slowly being destroyed , city by city , town by town . 
It does n't matter whether the damage is being caused by warplanes , rebel machine guns , loyalist rockets or the sudden departure of the foreign guest workers and educated Libyans who kept the economy working . 
The fact is , Libya is starting to look and feel more and more like another Arab country whose long-ruling dictator was overthrown with the help of foreign armies . 
