Syria 's President Bashar al-Assad is under growing pressure from the international community Syria 's President Bashar al-Assad has granted a general amnesty for all crimes committed during the 10-month uprising , state-run media report . 
It would apply to army deserters who turned themselves in before the end of January , peaceful protesters and those who handed in unlicensed weapons , Sana news agency is quoted as saying . 
Tens of thousands of people have been detained in the past year . 
At least 28 people died in violence across Syria on Sunday , activists said . 
Among them , five factory workers were killed when their bus was hit by a bomb in the northern province of Idlib . 
A further five were also killed in the same province , the Local Co-ordination Committees , a network of opposition activists , said . 
Thirteen died in Homs , two in Jasem , in Daraa , and two in Madamiah , near Damascus . 
Another person died in Amouda , the network reports . 
Casualty figures are hard to verify as most foreign media are barred from Syria . 
Earlier , UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon reiterated a plea to Mr Assad to end the bloodshed . 
`` Stop the violence . 
Stop killing your people . 
The path of repression is a dead end , '' Mr Ban said in a speech at a conference on Arab democracy in Beirut . 
This is not the first time President Assad has offered an amnesty to his opponents , and it is unlikely to have any more impact than the ones he proposed last year , the BBC 's Jonathan Head in neighbouring Turkey says . 
There is no evidence that many people took up his previous offers , or that the state ever honored its promises of immunity , he adds . 
More than 5,000 civilians have been killed , says the UN More than 400 killed since start of Arab League mission on 26 December UN denied access to Syria Information gathered from NGOs , sources in Syria and Syrians who have fled Vast majority of casualties were unarmed , but the figure may include armed defectors Tally does not include serving members of the security forces Tens of thousands of people have been detained and routinely tortured over the past year , human rights groups say . 
Exact numbers are hard to verify as most foreign media are barred from reporting freely in Syria . 
The UN says at least 5,000 people have died as protesters continue to defy a bloody crackdown in order to take to the streets calling for an end to the Assad regime . 
In a rare public address last week , President Assad again accused international powers of trying to destabilise Syria , and vowed to crush `` terrorists '' with an `` iron fist '' . 
On Saturday , the ruler of Qatar , Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani , said Arab countries should send troops into Syria to end the bloodshed . 
`` For such a situation to stop the killing ... some troops should go to stop the killing , '' he told US television channel CBS for a program to be aired on Sunday . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
Yes , it was the same game in Libya . 
When you look at the news that was shown on TV , it was not actually Tripoli , there were obvious differences in the buildings , it was a film set . 
A quick search on YouTube will even show you videos where the directors accidentally gave the protestors Indian flags instead of Libyan flags . 
Indians should be concerned about the stock of Indian flags 15th January 2012 - 22:57 Unfortunately no party has suggested Elections . 
Syria is very fortunate to have Turkey for a neighbor , Turk leadership has enough moral authority to supervise honest polls regardless of their preferences in this conflict . 
Keep Zionists out of this in all it 's manifestations , Israel , US , UN , EU and Arab paragons of democracy like Jordan and Qatar . 
15th January 2012 - 22:52 154 : The African Union -LRB- with US Supplies -RRB- is in Somalia and its good to see them stepping up and bringing control -LRB- and food supplies -RRB- to that country . 
We heard the same thiing about Tripoli being faked in Dohar and Alex Crawford and the journalists all being MI6 agents ... 15th January 2012 - 22:45 Strange how this is happening just at the same time as the US is beating it 's war drums ready to attack Iran . 
It 's completely clear that this is a covert operation with sophisticated propaganda to destabalise Iran 's alley Syria , ideally starting up chaos in the country so as they will be in no shape to help Iran . 
Watch out for Western controlled Al Jazeera using news made in film studios . 
15th January 2012 - 22:44 guys i dont get it . . 
why is US so interested in bringing peace to syria and not doing anything about somalia ? 
Somali famine ` will kill tens of thousands ' ... you dont need any kind of intervention there . . 
is it some kind of political agenda they have ? 
All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
