Wed Oct 12 , 2011 8:59 am EDT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Here is a timeline of the civil war in Libya since protests against Muammar Gaddafi 's four-decade rule began in February : February 15\/16 , 2011 - The arrest of human rights activist Fethi Tarbel sparks a riot in Benghazi , Quryna newspaper reports . 
February 24 - Anti-government militias take control of central coastal city of Misrata after evicting forces loyal to Gaddafi . 
February 26 - The U.N. Security Council imposes sanctions on Gaddafi and his family , and refers Libya 's crackdown on rebels to the International Criminal Court -LRB- ICC -RRB- . 
February 28 - EU governments approve a package of sanctions against Gaddafi and his closest advisers . 
March 5 - The rebel National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- in Benghazi declares itself the sole representative for Libya . 
March 17 - The U.N. Security Council votes to authorize a no-fly zone over Libya and `` all necessary measures '' -- code for military action -- to protect civilians against Gaddafi 's army . 
March 19 - The first air strikes halt the advance of Gaddafi 's forces on Benghazi and target Libya 's air defenses . 
April 30 - A NATO missile attack on a house in Tripoli kills Gaddafi 's youngest son and three grandchildren , his government says . 
June 27 - The ICC issues arrest warrants for Gaddafi , his son Saif al-Islam and intelligence chief Abdullah al-Senussi on charges of crimes against humanity . 
August 21 - Rebels enter Tripoli with little resistance . 
Gaddafi makes audio addresses over state television calling on Libyans to fight off the rebel `` rats . '' 
August 23 - The rebels overrun Gaddafi 's fortified Bab al-Aziziya compound in Tripoli trashing the symbols of his rule . 
August 29 - Gaddafi 's wife , his daughter Aisha and two of his sons enter Algeria . 
Aisha Gaddafi gives birth in a clinic in a border town hours after crossing the frontier . 
September 1 - Libya 's interim rulers meet world leaders at a conference in Paris to discuss reshaping Libya . 
Gaddafi , on the 42nd anniversary of his coming to power , urges his supporters to fight on . 
September 8 - Interim prime minister Mahmoud Jibril arrives in Tripoli on his first visit since it was taken by his forces . 
September 11 - Libya has started producing oil again , Jibril says . 
Niger says Gaddafi 's son Saadi has arrived there . 
September 13 - Interim government chief Mustafa Abdel Jalil makes his first speech in Tripoli to a crowd of about 10,000 . 
September 15 - France 's Nicolas Sarkozy and Britain 's David Cameron land in Libya to a heroes ' welcome , promising help for the new rulers . 
September 16 - The U.N. Security Council eases sanctions on Libya , including on its national oil company and central bank . 
The U.N. General Assembly approves a request to accredit interim government envoys as Libya 's sole representatives at the U.N. , effectively recognizing the NTC . 
September 20 - President Barack Obama calls for the last of Gaddafi 's loyalist forces to surrender as he announces the return of the U.S. ambassador to Tripoli and pledges help . 
Gaddafi taunts NATO in a speech broadcast by Syrian-based Arrai television station . 
September 21 - The interim rulers say they have captured most of Sabha , one of three main towns where Gaddafi loyalists have been holding out since the fall of Tripoli . 
Gaddafi 's birthplace Sirte and the town of Bani Walid continue to resist . 
September 25 - The first Libyan crude oil to be shipped in months sails from the eastern port of Marsa el Hariga for Italy . 
September 26 - The investigation into the 1988 Lockerbie bombing is closed and Tripoli says it will not release more evidence that could lead to others being charged . 
Britain says the investigation `` remains open . '' 
September 27 - NATO says Libya 's interim rulers have taken full control of the country 's stockpile of chemical weapons and nuclear material . 
October 9 - NTC forces capture the main hospital at Sirte as well as the university and a lavish conference center . 
October 12 - More than 80 percent of Sirte is under NTC control . 
NTC forces say they believe Gaddafi 's son Mo ` tassim , his father 's national security adviser , is still holed up there . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
