TRIPOLI | Wed Oct 12 , 2011 10:00 am EDT TRIPOLI Oct 12 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A holiday in Libya may sound like an absurdity now , but many of the country 's tour operators and officials are already starting to predict a bright future for the travel industry once the dust of war settles . 
The coastal country has all the makings for a vibrant tourism business , they say : warm weather , beaches , antiquities and proximity to Europe -- all factors that helped the industry thrive in neighbouring Egypt and Tunisia . 
If developed , tourism could eventually help dent Libya 's high jobless rate by creating work for tour guides , drivers , restaurant workers and hotel staff , as well as help it diversify its economy away from dependency on oil and gas . 
The fact that operators are thinking about resuming business at all -- some predicted tourists would start arriving again within a year -- testifies to the relative peace that has prevailed in Tripoli and other parts of Libya since the former rebels ousted Muammar Gaddafi 's forces from the capital in August . 
One company , Sherwes Travel , already advertises a three-day , 295-euro tour of `` post-war Libya '' on its website , featuring visits to sites in Tripoli and to the Roman ruins of Leptis Magna . 
Employees admit it may be a bit optimistic . 
`` The tour was very popular , actually . 
But not now , not yet , '' said Ibrahim Usta , the company 's self-described international customer assistant . 
He said while some potential visitors had been in touch , it was not yet possible to bring them to Libya . 
`` We have many inquiries right now , but the problem is mainly security and visas , '' he said . 
`` There 's no -LRB- visa -RRB- system in place and many embassies are not functioning . '' 
Usta and others said tourism was languishing before the revolt because of apathy , incompetence , complex visa requirements , draconian police oversight and mercurial regulations under Gaddafi 's government . 
Sabri Ellotai , manager of Sabri Tours and Travel , described bringing a group of Germans in 2009 only to have them turned away at the airport because they did not have an Arabic translation for their passports -- a requirement he had never heard of before . 
`` I heard about it -LRB- the law -RRB- at the airport , '' Ellotai said , shaking his head . 
He and others said they hoped the country 's new rulers -- currently represented by the interim National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- -- would be able to do more with the industry when the war is over . 
NTC forces are still fighting to take over Gaddafi 's hometown of Sirte and a few other bastions of Gaddafi loyalists , which has impeded efforts to set up effective government nationwide and restart oil production . 
Libya 's lucrative oil and gas industry made tourism less of a priority than in Egypt and Tunisia , where it was a major contributor of jobs and foreign revenues before the uprisings in those countries . 
Libyan central bank official Ali Shnebesh estimated tourism could account for between 3 and 4 percent of the economy within five to ten years , depending on how much effort the country 's new government puts into it . 
`` It would decrease unemployment , since we have a lot of areas that are good for tourism , '' he said . 
`` It would put thousands of our people to work in these places in many sectors -- telecommunications , transportation , hotels -- everywhere . '' 
It is difficult to tell how much tourism contributed to Libya 's economy before the revolt because it was not tracked as a separate industry in central bank records , but Shnebesh estimated it was below half a percent of gross domestic product . 
That compares to Egypt , for instance , where officials said it accounted for over 11 percent before the revolt . 
There is plenty of evidence of the lax oversight at the ancient Greek colony of Cyrene , which was featured in the chronicler Herodotus 's `` The Histories '' and is now a UNESCO world heritage site , in the eastern Jebel al-Akhdar region . 
The site is overgrown with weeds and graffiti etched onto one of its old columns . 
A renovation crew of Italians , Americans and French fled after the uprising started , guards there said . 
Jamal Salem , 50 , sitting in the afternoon sun outside a souvenir shop filled with woven baskets , photographs and ceramic statues still on display , said there were n't many visitors even before the revolt . 
`` A lot of people think Libyans are terrorists , and so they 're afraid of coming here , '' he said . 
`` We hope the picture will become clearer now , and that things will get better . '' 
Others lingering in the area of Cyrene said they also hoped the revolt would help stamp out what they saw as widespread corruption and regional favouritism in the industry . 
`` Before , companies had their headquarters in Tripoli . 
They brought the cars from Tripoli , they brought the translators from Tripoli , everything . 
Nobody here benefited from it at all , '' Hussein Saleh , who volunteered to help guard Cyrene , said . 
Others near Cyrene and other sites said they also hoped a new government would show more interest in preserving relics . 
`` We 're expecting a better future , and maybe more interest in renovating the antiquities , '' said Muftah Mabrook , a 35-year-old researcher at the ancient Greek port of Apollonia , a picturesque collection of columns and other ruins set against the sea . 
While such ambitions are running high , it 's too soon to say how the situation will turn out . 
Tripoli 's atmospheric old city is slowly coming back to life as jewelry shops and cafes reopen up in its winding streets , for instance , but many alleys are still littered with bullet casings . 
In some areas , young men with Kalashnikov assault rifles sit smoking and chatting on stoops or around street corners . 
They are friendly , for the most part , as they smile and wave at foreign passersby , but their presence is not likely to encourage most holidaymakers . 
The relative lack of English and French language speakers , as well as the ban on alcohol , may also make it hard for Libya to compete on a large scale with Egypt and Tunisia even after the war is finished , some operators say . 
But Usta , like many others , was confident the industry would eventually thrive . 
`` We have everything . 
We have the desert , we have the sea , we have mountains . 
We just need the right people in the right place . '' 
-LRB- Editing by Sonya Hepinstall -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
