A crowd clapped and chanted as she was removed from the rubble A 16-year-old girl has been pulled out of the rubble in the Haitian capital , Port-au-Prince , 15 days after the earthquake struck , rescuers say . 
Darlene Etienne was said to be happy but dehydrated . 
Rescuers said she had survived by drinking water from a bath . 
Her rescue comes five days after Haitian government officially ended the search and rescue operation . 
Meanwhile President Rene Preval has said parliamentary elections due to be held on 28 February will be postponed . 
As many as 200,000 people died in the 12 January earthquake . 
More than 130 people have been pulled alive from the rubble . 
A rescue worker described the discovery of the teenager , two weeks after the quake destroyed the city , as a `` miracle '' . 
Rico Dibrivell , early 30s - rescued after 12 days Wismond Exantus , 24 , found after 11 days Emmannuel Buso , 21 - rescued after 10 days Marie Carida , 84 - saved after 10 days Mendji Bahina Sanon , 11 - trapped for eight days Lozama Hotteline , 25 - pulled out after seven days Elisabeth Joassaint , 15 days - buried for seven days , half her life Ena Zizi , 69 - rescued after seven days `` I do n't know how she happened to resist that long , '' said rescue worker JP Malaganne . 
The 16-year-old was found in the rubble of a house near the College St Gerard , which one of her relatives said she had just started attending . 
Neighbours had been searching in the rubble of their homes in the central Carrefour-Feuilles district when they heard a weak voice and called rescue teams to help . 
They managed to locate the girl in the wreckage and less than an hour later had dug a hole to pull her out , covered in dust . 
Rescuer Claude Fuilla told the Associated Press news agency : `` She could n't really talk to us or say how long she 'd been there but I think she 'd been there since the earthquake . 
`` I do n't think she could have survived even a few more hours . '' 
Darlene was given water and oxygen before being taken to a French field hospital and medical ship . 
`` She just said ` Thank you ' , she 's very weak , which suggests that she 's been there for 15 days , '' said Samuel Bernes , head of the rescue team that discovered her . 
He described her location within the rubble as `` in a pocket , surrounded by concrete '' . 
The BBC 's Karen Allen , in the Haitian capital , said that rescue workers had told her the teenager was trapped in the bathroom when the quake struck and was able to survive by drinking water from a bath . 
On Tuesday , rescuers discovered a 31-year-old man who had been trapped for 12 days after being caught in one of the numerous aftershocks that rocked the city after the earthquake . 
In announcing the election delay , Mr Preval said he would not seek to remain in office beyond the end of his term in February 2011 . 
He added : `` I do n't think the time is right to hold elections now given the conditions in which people are living . '' 
