Many of Haiti 's streets were devastated after the earthquake Wilmer Blanc sits in the rubble of what remains of his house , refusing to move . 
The former bus conductor saved all his life to build this . 
Now it is a wreck , with what few items of furniture he has been able to salvage stacked neatly in a corner . 
`` The way things are now , '' he says . 
`` It 's like we are waiting to die - I 've got nothing left . '' 
His next-door neighbor Jerry , a pensioner , feels the same . 
He gestures towards a pile of rubble 50m -LRB- 164ft -RRB- away . 
Deep beneath the debris are almost certainly buried his neighbor and her two young children . 
More than 1.5 million people have been left homeless by the quake Nearly every Haitian you meet has a similar story to tell . 
These men are among more than one and half million Haitians left homeless following the earthquake . 
In Leogane , the epicentre of the quake , 50km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- south-west of the capital , Port-au-Prince , streets have been reduced to dust , and many people , like Wilmer , are not expecting help from the government . 
It is a government that barely exists now , and which before the earthquake , was mistrusted by many because of high levels of corruption . 
I 'm not going to wait for the government to help me But across the road from these men , modest rebuilding efforts are already under way . 
Pierre Paul Guerrier used to run the local brewery . 
Although the place has been flattened , along with two of his other houses , he has sold what furniture he has been able to salvage and has begun to rebuild the place . 
`` I 'm not going to wait for the government to help me . 
As you can see I 'm rebuilding the foundations here , to stop any rainwater from coming in . '' 
In the coming months Haiti 's seasonal rains will begin . 
So the drive towards reconstruction is a race against time . 
The Haitian government needs billions of dollars in assistance to begin the mammoth task of rehabilitating the country . 
In March a major conference is scheduled to persuade the international community to contribute . 
Many are hoping this could be the chance to give the poorest country in the western hemisphere , a fresh start . 
The finance ministry building is among those badly damaged by the quake But few Haitians have any illusions about the challenges that lie ahead . 
In Port-au-Prince , almost the entire seat of government has been destroyed . 
The government revenue office is a sea of rubble and tax forms , and the ministry of finance is a crumbling wreck . 
Miraculously the central bank seems to have survived relatively unscathed , but it is surrounded by twisted metal , cars mashed between concrete slabs and huge chunks of stone . 
Bulldozers from Haiti 's ministry of public works have started to shift some of the rubble in the main business centres , but if the pace of current progress is anything to go by it is likely to take weeks . 
The debris is being taken to a waste site on the edge of town , ready to be reused when the reconstruction work begins . 
Do n't be fooled by the fact that this looks like business as usual In the worst hit areas , crisis teams have been scrambled from among Haitian professionals and local government chiefs , determined to take a lead . 
Their job is to determine the need for the weeks and months ahead . 
`` Schools will be a priority , '' says Leogane deputy mayor Vincent Saint Juste . 
`` We also want to rebuild the churches and health clinics . 
This is a city where 90 % of the buildings were destroyed and the remaining ones are unsafe . 
So we have to start from scratch . 
It 's a city that has to be totally rebuilt . '' 
The Red Cross is beginning to send out assessment teams to determine what food , shelter and medicine Haitians will need . 
`` Do n't be fooled by the fact that this looks like business as usual , '' said one Red Cross Worker , who has traveled the world responding to natural disasters . 
People here have been incredibly resilient , but although you see them out trading on the streets , clinging on to some sense of normality , Haiti remains a country deeply shaken by the events of the past two weeks . 
