The Obama administration is actively discussing the creation of a regulatory commission that would have broad authority to protect consumers who use financial products as varied as mortgages , credit cards and mutual funds , according to several sources familiar with the matter . 
The proposed commission would be one of the administration 's most significant steps yet to overhaul the financial regulatory system . 
It would also be one of its first proposals to address causes of the financial crisis such as predatory mortgage lending . 
Plans for a new body remain fluid , but it could be granted broad powers to make sure the terms and marketing of a wide range of loans and other financial products are in the interests of ordinary consumers , sources said . 
Sources , who spoke on condition of anonymity because discussions are ongoing , said talks have begun with industry officials , lawmakers and other financial experts about the proposal , which would require legislation . 
Last night , senior policymakers , including Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner and National Economic Council Director Lawrence H. Summers , were to discuss the idea at a dinner held at the Treasury Department . 
Responsibility for regulation of consumer financial products is currently distributed among a patchwork of federal agencies . 
Some of these regulators regard consumer protection as a low priority . 
And some financial products are not regulated at all . 
The proposal could centralize enforcement of existing laws and create a vehicle for imposing tougher rules . 
The idea is likely to face significant opposition from industry groups , which argue that stricter regulation limits the availability of financial products to consumers . 
It could also trigger a massive regulatory turf war . 
Banking regulators and agencies such as the Securities and Exchange Commission , which regulates mutual funds , could stand to lose powers , personnel and funding . 
Those agencies are likely to argue they are positioned to protect consumers because they oversee the financial firms directly and have experience writing and enforcing rules governing financial products . 
The proposal is part of the administration 's broader plan to improve financial regulation . 
Officials have proposed the creation of a systemic risk regulator whose job would be to spot threats to the health of the overall financial system . 
Officials also have called for tighter regulation of individual financial firms and markets , including new rules governing hedge funds and derivatives . 
While those proposals focus on the guts of the financial system , this new plan would concentrate on the front end -- consumers who borrow money to buy homes and products and who invest their money for retirement , college education and savings . 
The leading proponent of such a commission is Elizabeth Warren , a Harvard University law professor who now chairs the Congressional Oversight Panel for the government 's financial rescue initiative . 
Her plan is the kernel of the idea the White House is now considering , sources said . 
Warren wrote in a 2007 article in the journal Democracy that the government had failed to protect American consumers in their relationships with financial companies . 
`` It is impossible to buy a toaster that has a one-in-five chance of bursting into flames and burning down your house . 
But it is possible to refinance an existing home with a mortgage that has the same one-in-five chance of putting the family out on the street , '' Warren wrote . 
`` Why are consumers safe when they purchase tangible consumer products with cash , but when they sign up for routine financial products like mortgages and credit cards they are left at the mercy of their creditors ? '' 
Warren proposed creating a new commission modeled on the Consumer Product Safety Commission , which protects buyers of products such as bicycles and baby cribs . 
Such a commission could be very powerful . 
A number of sweeping federal laws already offer broad protection to consumers of financial products , but those laws have been lightly enforced in recent years . 
The Department of Housing and Urban Development , for example , has clear authority to crack down on companies that charge excessive closing costs on mortgage loans , but repeatedly postponed planned reforms in the face of industry opposition . 
Warren 's proposal initially found little support in Washington , but the mood has shifted dramatically with the onset of the financial crisis and the election of a Democratic administration . 
In March , Sen. Richard J. Durbin -LRB- D-Ill . -RRB- 
introduced legislation to create a commission like the one that Warren had described . 
The legislation is co-sponsored by Sen. Charles E. Schumer -LRB- D-N.Y. -RRB- and Sen. Edward M. Kennedy -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- . 
The White House 's support would greatly improve its chances of passing . 
In proposing the legislation , the senators said that the commission would be responsible for identifying emerging problems and for educating consumers . 
They were also critical of the existing process . 
`` The Federal Reserve was supposed to do this , but they were asleep at the switch , '' Schumer said at the time . 
Staff writer Neil Irwin contributed to this report . '' 
