Aug. 21 , 2009 : Convicted Lockerbie bomber Abdelbaset al-Megrahi shakes the hand of Libyan leader Muammar Qaddafi in Tripoli in this image from Libya TV . 
-LRB- Reuters -RRB- BP 's role in the release of the Lockerbie bomber from a Scottish prison is being questioned in a letter to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee by Sen. Frank Lautenberg , who is requesting an investigation into the oil company 's success in securing a drilling contract in Libya . 
Abdel Basset al-Megrahi , a Libyan intelligence agent convicted in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am flight 103 , won early release from prison last year after a doctor testified that he was near death and it would be compassionate to let him die a free man . 
But there are suggestions that Megrahi , who was given just weeks to live but is still alive and kicking , may have been the linchpin in BP 's efforts to secure drilling rights in the Gulf of Sidra . 
`` The prospect that oil contracts between BP and the government of Libya may have affected the release , as well as new questions about the veracity of medical reports detailing Mr. Megrahi 's health at the time , are disturbing developments that demand the attention of Congress , Lautenberg , D-N.J. , wrote to Sens. John Kerry , D-Mass . 
, and Richard Lugar , R-Ind . 
, the co-chairmen of the Foreign Relations Committee . 
The explosion of the plane over Lockerbie , Scotland , killed 270 people , including 189 Americans . 
The same doctor who called for his release now says Megrahi could live for years . 
The U.K.-based BP , which is responsible for the oil spill that has been gushing into the Gulf of Mexico for 85 , admitted that in 2007 it raised concern that a `` prisoner transfer agreement with the Libyan government might hurt '' the oil deal , according to Lautenberg . 
Megrahi originally had not been part of the prisoner transfer , but former British Secretary of State for Justice Jack Straw later cited `` overwhelming interests for the United Kingdom '' in including Megrahi . 
BP could earn as much as $ 20 billion from the deal with Libya , set to begin next month . 
`` It is shocking to even contemplate that BP is profiting from the release of a terrorist with the blood of 189 Americans on his hands , '' Lautenberg wrote . 
`` The families of the victims of Pan Am flight 103 deserve to know whether justice took a back seat to commercial interests in this case . '' 
