Why is the media being kept from covering the BP oil spill ? 
This is a rush transcript from `` Glenn Beck , '' July 12 , 2010 . 
This copy may not be in its final form and may be updated . 
GLENN BECK , HOST : I wrote this book -- took me almost two years to write it . 
It 's a New York Times number one bestseller . 
Thank you for that . 
If you do n't have it , it 's available everywhere -- `` The Overton Window . '' 
But I want to read something to you that relates to what you are going to talk about . 
This comes from Edward Bernays . 
He 's the author of `` Propaganda . '' 
He 's the guy that Goebbels learned propaganda from , worked for the Wilson administration . 
He says , `` The conscious and intelligent manipulation of organized habits and opinions of the masses is an important element in a democratic society . 
Those who manipulate this unseen mechanism of society constitute an invisible government which is the true ruling power of our country . '' 
Now , I have taken things like that and made them into fiction to show you what could happen . 
Let 's go into facts now . 
We have been showing you radicals and radical agendas . 
The president makes decisions in minutes and hours on some things and yet takes forever on others that seem to be an emergency to most Americans . 
Yet , the media witnesses it and stays silent . 
Media is now being silenced and no one is even reporting on the silence . 
Why is the media being kept from covering the BP oil spill ? 
Here are a few things . 
First , a pilot wanted to take a photographer from the Times-Picayune of New Orleans to snap photographs of the oil slicks blackening the water . 
Response from a BP contractor who answered the phone last month of the command center was swift and absolute . 
That 's the contractor . 
I think I understand that . 
What about the government ? 
The New York Times reported that the owner of the seaplane that was set to go out with a photographer - he said , `` We were questioned extensively , who was on the aircraft , who did they work for . 
The minute we mention the media , the answer was , ` Not allowed . ' '' 
The Times article continued , `` Last week , Sen. Bill Nelson , a Democrat from Florida , tried to bring a small group of journalists with him on a trip that was taking -- he was taking them through the gulf on a coast guard vessel . 
Mr. Nelson 's office said the coast guard agreed to accommodate reporters and camera operators . 
But at about 10:00 p.m. in the evening before the trip , someone from the Department of Homeland Securities Legislative Affairs Office called the senator 's office to tell him that no journalist would be allowed . '' 
America , the founders knew that the republic could not stand without checks and balances , without three equal branches -- the judicial , the legislative and the executive branch . 
But you also needed a free press . 
We have the most radicalized president this nation has ever seen . 
And the media is not telling you that they are being forced to sit on the sidelines in the biggest national disaster in this country 's 234-year history . 
And now , with Attorney General Eric Holder -- he 's announced his investigation of the gulf oil spill -- may not just include BP . 
Watch : ATTORNEY GENERAL ERIC HOLDER : There are a variety of entities and a variety of people who are the subjects of that investigation . 
And for people to conclude that BP is the focus of this investigation might not be correct . 
BECK : Who wants to bet that means Halliburton ? 
BP -- OK , who is the focus of this ? 
I do n't know . 
Halliburton -- I bet every dollar on it . 
Transocean , the owner of the rig that BP leased ? 
But is it possible that there is even a wider net cast ? 
Maybe Exxon - Mobil , Chevron -- all U.S. oil companies . 
We know that this president does n't like oil . 
We know that Barack Obama had already reached the conclusion even before obtaining all available information as with the police in Cambridge who acted stupidly . 
When he was asked if he had spoken with the CEO of B.P. , here is what he said . 
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA : I have not spoken to him directly and here is the reason , because my experience is when you talk to a guy like a B.P. CEO , he is going to say all the right things to me . 
I 'm not interested in words . 
I 'm interested in action . 
BECK : What does that mean ? 
He will sit down and talk to Ahmadinejad , but what does a guy like him mean ? 
Obama had his mind made up before he even met the man . 
And I 'm not sticking up for B.P. . 
Now , Holder is investigating and who knows who he is investigating in the gulf ? 
We do n't know . 
We do n't know what is even going on there . 
America , I fear the radical revolutionaries have our country by the throat and they are in charge . 
We showed you the Black Panther who says he wants to kill white cracker babies . 
We showed you the Weather Underground who said the same thing . 
These people have ties to the White House in a myriad of ways . 
Eric Holder is opening the floodgates giving them permission to do what they want to do . 
He 'll look the other way , except on things that they think need fundamental transformation . 
I am worried about the people who have already threatened violence . 
And I do n't think it 's unjustified , because I 'm going to show you another story that no one in the media seems to really care about from Houston , Texas . 
It was an exploding box of candy at a woman 's home this weekend , a story you wo n't believe you have n't heard . 
BECK : All right , America . 
Tonight , we have been talking to you about radical revolutionaries , the people who say and have done in the past crazy things -- violent things . 
Then I told you about what is happening in the gulf coast . 
Let me take you to Houston , Texas , in a story that I do n't think you probably have heard . 
It may be unrelated , but I wonder who will find at the other end of a pipe bomb disguised as a box of chocolates . 
It was left on the doorstep of a home in a quiet street in Houston , Texas when it was found by a 60-year-old woman . 
She is actually 62 . 
She is the homeowner . 
When she opened up the box of chocolate , it exploded and nails and tacks and shrapnel blew into her face . 
Imagine your grandmother having nails driven into her face . 
These nails and shrapnel blew so high they were found on the roof of their home . 
Officials say the bomb looks to be put together by professionals because of the wiring . 
Now , is there anything to this story ? 
Initial reports mention that it was n't known whether the woman was the intended target or the home was . 
They 're sending a house chocolates ? 
And the name on the chocolate -- it was misspelled , but it was the woman 's name on the package . 
Fortunately for her , injuries are not life-threatening but the woman appears to be -- are ready for this , see if this makes it relevant -- the wife of president of the Adams Resources Exploration Corporation . 
That is an oil company . 
Her husband is an oil company executive , a company that is actively engaged in the exploration and development of domestic oil and gas properties primarily along the gulf coast of Texas and Louisiana . 
Gosh , why does n't this story find its way into the media ? 
I 'm just trying to -- I 'm just trying to figure this out . 
Radicals are being wound up , new ones . 
And those from the 1960s Nancy Pelosi cries about are the tea parties . 
But no one mentions these radicals . 
And now , actual violence on an oil executive 's wife . 
Police say it looks professional . 
The Alcohol , Tobacco and Firearms Unit is now looking into it . 
If we can just get the Department of Justice to be investigating , well , then I know we will get to the bottom of it . 
What do you say -- just for the heck of it , what do you say we stay on top of it as well ? 
We could use your help . 
If you are in the gulf coast region , some weird stuff is going on . 
Please send us a tip on this story or anything else you see . 
Send it to me at becktips@foxnews.com or you can tweet me on my Twitter account . 
Content and Programming Copyright 2010 Fox News Network , LLC . 
All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced , distributed , transmitted , displayed , published or broadcast without the prior written permission of Roll Call . 
You may not alter or remove any trademark , copyright or other notice from copies of the content . 
