TRIPOLI | Sun Mar 20 , 2011 7:55 pm EDT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Western powers pressed ahead on Sunday with a campaign of air attacks in Libya , promising more strikes despite criticism by the Arab League . 
U.S. military officials said Saturday 's strikes had halted an advance by Muammar Gaddafi 's forces on the eastern rebel stronghold Benghazi and hit his air defenses , allowing western powers to send in planes to impose a no-fly zone . 
But the day-old U.N.-mandated military intervention to force Gaddafi 's troops to end attacks on civilians hit a diplomatic setback when the Arab League chief questioned the bombardment . 
`` What is happening in Libya differs from the aim of imposing a no-fly zone , and what we want is the protection of civilians and not the bombardment of more civilians , '' Egypt 's state news agency quoted Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa as saying . 
Gaddafi himself said the air strikes amounted to terrorism and vowed to fight to the death , although at 9 p.m. -LRB- 3 p.m. EDT -RRB- on Sunday an armed forces spokesman said the army was ordering all troops to cease fire immediately . 
The United States and Britain , who along with France , Italy and Canada have joined operation `` Odyssey Dawn , '' dismissed the ceasefire announcement , arguing that Gaddafi 's government had promised and then broken a ceasefire on Friday . 
In central Benghazi , sporadic explosions and heavy firing could be heard in the streets late in the evening . 
A Reuters witness said the firing lasted about 40 minutes . 
Residents had said they feared some of Gaddafi 's troops could try to force their way into the city , where they would be surrounded by civilians and protected from attacks from the air . 
Outside Benghazi , the advance by Gaddafi 's troops was stopped in its tracks , with smoldering , shattered tanks and troop carriers littering the main road . 
The charred bodies of at least 14 government soldiers lay scattered in the desert . 
However , government tanks did move into Misrata , the last rebel-held city in western Libya , seeking the shelter of built-up areas after a base used by Gaddafi 's forces outside was hit by Western air strikes , residents said . 
Abdelbasset , a spokesman for the rebels in Misrata , told Reuters : `` There is fighting between the rebels and Gaddafi 's forces . 
Their tanks are in the center of Misrata ... There are so many casualties we can not count them . '' 
A Libyan government health official said 64 people had been killed in the Western bombardment overnight from Saturday to Sunday , but it was impossible to verify the report . 
The Arab League 's Moussa called for an emergency meeting of the group of 22 states to discuss Libya . 
He requested a report into the bombardment , which he said had `` led to the deaths and injuries of many Libyan civilians . '' 
Arab backing for a no-fly zone provided crucial underpinning for the passage of a U.N. Security Council resolution last week that paved the way for Western action to stop Gaddafi killing civilians as he fights an uprising against his rule . 
The intervention is the biggest against an Arab country since the 2003 invasion of Iraq . 
Withdrawal of Arab support would make it much harder to pursue what some defense analysts say could in any case be a difficult , open-ended campaign with an uncertain outcome . 
Britain and the United States rebuffed Moussa 's comments . 
A senior U.S. official said a U.N. resolution endorsed by Arab states covered `` all necessary measures '' to protect civilians , `` which we made very clear includes , but goes beyond , a no-fly zone . '' 
The safe enforcement of the no-fly zone required the targeting of Libya 's air defense capabilities , a British Foreign Ministry spokesman said . 
A spokesman for the rebel movement criticized Moussa 's comments , telling Al Jazeera that more than 8,000 Libyans aligned with the rebel movement had been killed . 
`` Today , when the secretary-general spoke , I was surprised , '' Abdel Hafiz Ghoga said . 
`` What is the mechanism that stops the extermination of the people in Libya , what is the mechanism , Mr Secretary-General ? 
If the protection of civilians is not a humanitarian obligation , what is the mechanism that you propose to us ? '' 
The U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , Admiral Mike Mullen , said the no-fly zone was now in place . 
But he told CBS television the endgame of military action was `` very uncertain '' and acknowledged it could end in a stalemate with Gaddafi . 
Mullen said he had seen no reports of civilian casualties from the Western strikes . 
But Russia said there had been such casualties and called on Britain , France and the United States to halt the `` non-selective use of force . '' 
Libyan state television showed footage from an unidentified hospital of what it called victims of the `` colonial enemy . '' 
Ten bodies were wrapped up in white and blue bed sheets , and several people were wounded , one of them badly , the television said . 
The Libyan government has denied breaking a ceasefire that it announced on Friday , blaming rebels who it says are members of al Qaeda . 
The armed forces spokesman announced a new ceasefire on Sunday , saying that `` the Libyan armed forces ... have issued a command to all military units to safeguard an immediate ceasefire from 9 p.m. -LRB- 1900 GMT -RRB- this evening . '' 
Both before and after he spoke , heavy anti-aircraft gunfire boomed above central Tripoli . 
A senior military official said the United States expected to conduct more strikes on Libya . 
`` This is an ongoing military operation . 
I fully expect more strikes , '' he said . 
Britain said it was taking part in a second night of coordinated strikes and had once more launched Tomahawk cruise missiles from a submarine in the Mediterranean . 
Italy said it also had planes in the air . 
The United States , after embarking on wars in Afghanistan and Iraq , has been reluctant to take the lead in the military operation , keen to leave this to France and Britain while also assembling a large coalition to support it . 
French planes fired the first shots of the intervention on Saturday , destroying tanks and armored vehicles near Benghazi . 
France sent an aircraft carrier toward Libya and its planes were over the country again on Sunday , defense officials said . 
Britain said its planes had targeted Libya 's air defenses , mainly around the capital Tripoli . 
U.S. and British warships and submarines launched 110 Tomahawk missiles on Saturday night and Sunday morning against air defenses around Tripoli and Misrata , U.S. officials said . 
Aircraft from other countries , including Qatar , were also moving toward Libya to participate in the operation , Mullen said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Mohammed Abbes and Angus MacSwan in Benghazi , Maria Golovnina and Michael Georgy in Tripoli , Hamid Ould Ahmed and Christian Lowe in Algiers ; Tom Perry in Cairo , John Irish and Elizabeth Pineau in Paris , Missy Ryan in Washington , Matt Spetalnick in Rio de Janeiro ; Writing by Myra Macdonald ; Editing by Kevin Liffey -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
And the goal is to do what ? 
Change the government -- the traditional purpose of WAR . 
The excuse `` to protect civilians '' is a novel one . 
I 'll give the imperial powers credit for that . 
My guess is civilians will get killed and a civil war prolonged . 
But why are Europe and the US so anxious to overturn Gadhafi after more than 40 years ? 
And were they behind the rebellion to begin with ? 
That was the case in Afghanistan in 1978 , when Carter armed and financed the rebellion that led to Russian intervention and a million deaths . 
I notice that when Israeli aircraft and missiles are used against civilians in Lebanon or Gaza , I do n't see the West threatening anything at all -- no embargo , nothing to prevent Israel from flying and bombing , and surely no attack on tanks or armored vehicles used to kill civilians . 
More than 20,000 civilians in many such attacks going back to 1978 . 
The definition of a bully is `` one who uses strength or power to intimidate or harm others . '' 
Looks like the West , Gadhafi , and Israel have a lot in common . 
As in every other tragedy and including this one , those who have had their homes and families destroyed do not care about geopolitical opinions . 
Anonymous , what on earth are you talking about ? 
This is a secular rebellion against a secular government ! 
Not everything in the Middle East is about religion , you fearmonger . 
What they cheered is irrelevant ; the article did n't say , so why are you assuming that it was `` Allah Akbar '' -LRB- No different than a Christian saying `` Thank God ! '' 
, for your information -RRB- ? 
I 'm sick of these Muslim-Haters commenting on news articles , spreading their irrational paranoia to others like the disease it is . 
Bush is n't president anymore . 
The politics of fear are over ! 
Get over it ; al Qaida has \* NOTHING \* to do with the popular rebellion in Libya , so just drop it , hatemonger ! 
As for whether a war is good or bad , the issue is that this was already a war well before the West got involved . 
It was just a monstrously unfair war , with the side of the despot being armed with sophisticate weapons of war that the rebelling patriots just could n't stand against . 
The point of establishing the no-fly zone is so that the people of Libya can fight this issue out for themselves , without one side simply wiping out the other summarily . 
The forces of Gadhafi were already destroying the homes of innocent civilians , and the Western Coalition is only attacking military targets , exclusively . 
War is a horrible thing when it happens , but it is part of human nature , and at times when a people are dealing with a fascist despot that will not let go of power through peaceful\/diplomatic means , then war is what is left . 
I hate war more than most people , but people have to think ; if England came up with a powerful weapon that was wiping out hundreds of American Rebel Troops during the US War of Independence and they could do nothing to stand against it , would n't you have wanted Spain or some other big global power at the time to step in and stop that mega-weapon from being used , so that the war did n't turn into a genocide ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
