10 Banks Allowed to Repay $ 68B in Bailout Money Capital One , which operates retail branches in the Washington area as Chevy Chase Bank , plans to repay $ 3.5 billion `` in the coming weeks . '' 
-LRB- By Bill O'leary -- The Washington Post -RRB- Ten of the nation 's largest banks will be allowed to repay $ 68 billion in federal aid granted at the height of the financial crisis , the Treasury Department announced yesterday . 
The banks , which could begin to return money this week , include J.P. Morgan Chase , Goldman Sachs and Capital One Financial , according to company statements . 
The decision is a milestone for the Obama administration 's financial rescue plan , reflecting new confidence that some large banks have returned to stable profitability . 
It is also a victory for the banks , which have pressed for permission to show strength and avoid restrictions including executive pay limits . 
But senior officials cautioned that the repayments are not a sign of a broader economic revival . 
`` These repayments are an encouraging sign of financial repair , but we still have work to do , '' Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner said in a statement . 
The focus of that work increasingly will turn from rescue efforts to addressing the causes of the crisis by overhauling supervision of the financial industry . 
The administration plans to unveil a blueprint for sweeping reforms next week . 
President Obama said yesterday that the ability of companies to repay the government does not detract from the need for reform . 
`` The return of these funds does not provide forgiveness for past excesses or permission for future misdeeds , '' Obama said in remarks at the White House . 
`` It 's critical that as our country emerges from this period of crisis , that we learn its lessons , that those who seek reward do not take reckless risk , that short-term gains are not pursued without regard for long-term consequences . '' 
The list of banks granted permission to repay the government was longer than many financial analysts had expected , in part because banks have been able to attract billions of dollars in new capital from private investors following the conclusion of government stress tests . 
The Treasury granted repayment requests from eight banks that received a clean bill of health after the tests , plus Morgan Stanley , which was required to strengthen its capital reserves , and Northern Trust , which was not subjected to a test . 
The government did not announce the names on the list , allowing each bank to disclose the news on its own . 
Others are American Express , Bank of New York Mellon , BB&T , State Street and U.S. Bancorp. . 
If all 10 banks return the money , the government will recoup roughly one-third of the $ 200 billion so far invested in about 600 banks under its financial rescue plan . 
Capital One , which operates retail branches in the Washington area as Chevy Chase Bank , said in a statement yesterday that it planned to repay the government 's $ 3.5 billion investment `` in the coming weeks . '' 
BB&T , which has a large retail presence in the Washington area , said it would move immediately to pay the government $ 3.13 billion . 
The company 's chief executive , Kelly S. King , issued a statement hailing the government 's decision . 
`` We will become even more focused on the business of serving our clients , rather than dealing with government distractions , '' King said . 
The government already has allowed 22 community banks to repay about $ 1.8 billion in federal aid , but the announcement yesterday marks the first time large banks have been given permission to return money . 
Treasury officials say they are comfortable that these banks can weather the recession without direct government support . 
The government continues to support banks through other less visible programs , including debt guarantees , cheap loans and a pledge that the largest banks will not be allowed to fail . 
Former Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. , who made the decision to invest federal money in the banks last fall , said yesterday that the repayments validated his strategy . 
`` The recovery of our financial system is underway , but the road ahead is not short , '' Paulson said in a statement . 
`` I look forward to the day when our system and our economy are sufficiently strong that we can end the FDIC debt guarantee , close the Fed 's liquidity programs , and resolve the permanent status of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . '' 
The government will continue to hold warrants in the 10 banks , allowing it to buy shares of their common stock . 
Administration officials say they do not intend to exercise the warrants , which would give the government ownership stakes . 
Negotiations are ongoing over how much the banks should pay the government to rip up the warrants . 
The repayments will create a clear line of demarcation between these banks and their weaker rivals . 
The stress tests found that 10 banks needed to strengthen their capital reserves against projected losses , including Bank of America and Citigroup . 
Only one of those companies , Morgan Stanley , has been approved for repayment . 
