WASHINGTON | Sat Aug 20 , 2011 10:14 pm BST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A plane in the Royal Air Force 's `` Red Arrows '' aerobatic team crashed on Saturday , killing the pilot , after a performance at an air festival on the southern coast of England , authorities said . 
The plane of Flight Lieutenant Jon Egging , 33 , crashed near an airport some 100 miles from London after performing at the Bournemouth Air Festival , local officials and the Ministry of Defense said in separate statements . 
Egging , known as `` Eggman '' according to Captain Simon Blake , Commandant of the RAF 's Central Flying School , joined the team last year . 
Before joining the Red Arrows , Egging flew operational missions to support coalition ground forces in Afghanistan . 
`` It was with great sadness that I heard of the death of Flight Lieutenant Jon Egging whilst performing with the Red Arrows today , '' British Defense Secretary Liam Fox said in a statement posted on the MOD 's website . 
`` Joining the Red Arrows was his lifetime ambition and he performed with great skill whilst on the team . '' 
Egging became interested in flying at an early age , the MOD said , inspired by his pilot father who allowed him in the cockpit for take offs and landings . 
Though other RAF pilots expressed their wishes to continue with flying displays at the festival Sunday , head of Bournemouth tourism Mark Smith said in the statement posted on the Air Festival 's site that the Red Arrows would not be performing . 
Egging is survived by his wife , Emma . 
`` Jon was everything to those that knew him , and he was the best friend and husband I could ever have wished for , '' she said in the MOD statement . 
`` He loved his job and was an exemplary pilot . 
Watching him today , I was the proudest I 've ever been . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Molly O'Toole ; Editing by Jerry Norton -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
