By John Sepulvado , CNN Radio Khaled Ahmed , known as Khaled M. , poses in Chicago as part of the `` Ca n't Take Our Freedom '' picture campaign . 
Khaled Ahmed performs under the rap name Khaled M. The U.S.-born Libyan-American uses music to share a message of freedom for his homeland His song `` Ca n't Take Our Freedom '' has built buzz on the internet and he has a following Chicago -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- On an unusually warm Chicago night , Khaled Ahmed sits on a stoop outside the towering John Hancock building in downtown , talking about his childhood . 
The way Ahmed tells it , he may have been a bit of a knucklehead growing up in Lexington , Kentucky . 
As teenage boys sometimes do , especially when bored , Ahmed threw eggs at houses , played pranks on neighbors , and would ditch school occasionally . 
He rooted for the University of Kentucky Wildcats , rode his bike around town , and listened to Lauryn Hill , Tupac Shakur and Nas . 
`` Yeah , it was a pretty normal childhood , for the most part , '' Ahmed says . 
`` Except I grew up wanting to assassinate -LRB- Libyan leader Moammar -RRB- Gadhafi . '' 
Ahmed , a 26-year-old U.S.-born Libyan-American , is better known as the rapper Khaled M. His father , Mohamed Ahmed , and mother , Wafa Nashnoush , spent most of their lives protesting the Gadhafi regime . 
Now , Khaled M. is doing the same in the song `` Ca n't Take Our Freedom . '' 
Ahmed grew up in Lexington 's Libyan community . 
His father was a Libyan political prisoner from 1972 to 1977 , after leading student groups against Gadhafi . 
Mohamed Ahmed was able to escape prison , flee Libya and lead opposition groups from abroad . 
But after three years of running , the family decided to raise Khaled and his two brothers in one town . 
The family settled in Kentucky , Khaled says , because `` Gadhafi 's assassins would never look for members of the opposition in Lexington . '' 
`` Every day , for the first five years I can remember , we lived with the paranoia that Gadhafi 's thugs would come to the door like they did to political opponents living in Europe , '' he says . 
After college at the University of Kentucky , Khaled moved to Chicago to pursue his rap career . 
`` Ca n't Take Our Freedom '' is his only overtly political song -- and his biggest hit . 
In the first week , the video for the song got more than 50,000 plays on YouTube . 
`` It is a tremendous feeling knowing people in Libya are hearing that message , '' he says . 
`` And not just there , but Indonesia and Argentina . 
There are a lot of people around the world who want to see a free Libya . '' 
It is quite a transition for Ahmed , who began rapping about girls back in sixth grade . 
`` It was never my intention to be a political rapper , or write political songs , '' he says . 
But , he adds , he felt compelled to record the song as the protests in Libya turned into a civil war . 
`` I felt like I had to stand up with them , in the way I know how . '' 
As the sun goes down and the wind picks up , we start winding down our interview . 
Ahmed , dressed in a black pea coat , flat cap and square-rimmed glasses , is looking down at his phone , trying to pick up more news about the fighting in Libya . 
Just then , two young women carrying shopping bags approach . 
Khaled is oblivious to them as he scrolls through his phone . 
They stand in front of him for a moment before asking if they can take his picture . 
`` Absolutely , '' he says . 
He stands up , and the woman with a free hand whips out her phone and snaps a quick shot . 
As they begin to leave , Ahmed shakes her hand , while his manager , who is on hand for the interview , quickly hands her fliers for an upcoming show . 
Ahmed 's manager Darrin Rich tells me that during that time , people have begun noticing the rapper with the trademark flat hat on the street . 
In the past month , he has been featured in more than a dozen national and local news profiles . 
As the two women leave , Ahmed seems unfazed . 
He plops back down on the stoop . 
`` I 'm not going to tell you it 's not nice being noticed , '' he says as he leans back against a concrete wall . 
`` But I think success comes for me personally only if I stay humble , if I stay happy , if I stay on a straight path . '' 
He looks straight down while he talks -- his eyes glued to the phone , searching for more news from Libya . 
