By Pam Benson , CNN National Security Producer Khamis Gadhafi , son of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi , was seen on live Libyan state TV Monday night . 
NEW : Libyan leaders son , Khamis Gadhafi . 
seen on live TV Monday NEW : The younger Gadhafi 's TV appearance counters rumors of his death Youngest son runs elite special forces Internship sponsor `` shocked and outraged '' by son 's role in fighting Washington -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's youngest son , who runs the country 's elite special forces for his father 's regime , was on an internship program in the United States when public unrest exploded in Libya last month . 
Khamis Gadhafi abruptly cut off his visit and returned to Libya , where he has led the 32nd Reinforced Brigade , known at the Khamis Brigade , in its brutal suppression of rebel forces . 
The brigade 's headquarters was the target of six Tomahawk missiles overnight , according to Vice Adm. William Gortney of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . 
Gortney described the brigade as `` one of the most active in terms of attacking innocent people . '' 
Libya 's state TV on Monday night broadcast live footage from Gadhafi 's Tripoli compound of Khamis Gadhafi dressed in uniform and greeting people . 
Prior to the broadcast there had been unconfirmed reports that the younger Gadhafi had died from injuries he suffered when a plane flown by a disgruntled Libyan pilot crashed into a military compound while he was there . 
ABC News was the first to report Khamis Gadhafi 's recent stay in the United States . 
Gadhafi opposition runs into resistance AECOM has business dealings with Libya . 
The younger Gadhafi traveled from coast to coast meeting with high-tech companies , universities and defense contractors . 
His itinerary included stops in San Francisco , Los Angeles , Colorado , Chicago , Houston , Washington and New York City . 
Khamis Gadhafi left the United States for Libya on February 17 . 
Paul Gennaro , the senior vice president and chief communications officer for AECOM , issued a statement saying , `` The educational internship , which consisted of publicly available information , was aligned with our efforts to improve quality of life , specifically in Libya , where we were advancing public infrastructure such as access to clean water ; quality housing ; safe and efficient roads and bridges ; reliable and affordable energy ; and related projects that create jobs and opportunity . '' 
Gennaro said the company was `` shocked and outraged '' to learn of Khamis Gadhafi 's role in the Libyan crisis . 
`` We were aware of the student 's family relationship , but we were not informed of any military connection whatsoever , '' Gennaro said . 
It was the company 's understanding that Khamis Gadhafi was an MBA student from an accredited university in Spain . 
`` The student was positioned to help oversee improvements in Libya 's quality of life and infrastructure initiatives , which the country had been advancing since 2007 , '' he said . 
The U.S. State Department was aware of and approved all the meetings , Gennaro said . 
According to Gennaro , AECOM did not provide any funding for either Khamis Gadhafi or the internship program . 
Since 2008 , AECOM has been involved in a multibillion-dollar initiative with Libya to modernize the country 's infrastructure . 
The company withdrew all its expatriate employees and their families from Libya earlier this month . 
The joint project to train Libyan engineers to build and maintain homes , roads and water systems is on hold . 
