By David Gergen , CNN Senior Political Analyst President Barack Obama 's decision to intervene in Libya had only middling support in polls David Gergen says a key aim of Obama 's speech was to build support for his decision He says Obama made a good case for action but was vague on potential outcomes Gergen : Obama laid out a much more cautious , collaborative approach than past presidents Editor 's note : David Gergen is a senior political analyst for CNN and has been an adviser to four U.S. presidents . 
He is a professor of public service and director of the Center for Public Leadership at Harvard University 's Kennedy School of Government . 
For another view , read '' Now the tricky part '' and for Fareed Zakaria 's analysis , read here . 
Cambridge , Massachusetts -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Now that the `` commentariat '' has had its say about President Barack Obama 's speech Monday night on Libya , chewing over every phrase , the decisive American verdict about his address rests not in television studios but in homes across the country . 
And so , if I may , let me ask : What did you think ? 
Do you believe that the president made a compelling case for military intervention by the U.S. and its coalition partners ? 
Before the speech , a Pew survey found that a bare 47 % thought the president had made the right decision in intervening , compared with 36 % who disagreed . 
That was the lowest level of support in years for a president sending U.S. troops into harm 's way . 
After the speech , there was a near-universal view among commentators that the president had indeed made a convincing argument on behalf of intervention . 
I was among those who believed so . 
But what about you , the people who count ? 
Do you believe that the president was clear about his goals and what should come next in Libya ? 
Before the speech , Pew showed that a strong majority -- 50 % to 39 % -- thought that Obama has not been clear about U.S. goals there . 
Afterward , the pundits were split on whether he answered the big question of where this goes . 
I was among those who believe that he left enormous vagueness -LRB- e.g. , the stated mission has been to defend citizens from Moammar Gadhafi 's forces , but with a rebel force now on the offensive , should NATO give assistance ? 
What do we do if there is a stalemate and Gadhafi clings to power ? 
What happens , on the other hand , if there is an internal coup and Gadhafi is overthrown ; will the U.S. be heavily engaged in nation building ? -RRB- . 
I did not think the president clearly answered those questions . 
But more important than what commentators thought -- what did you think ? 
Did the president enunciate a new Obama doctrine about the uses of U.S. military power that you find appealing ? 
As CNN 's Wolf Blitzer said after the speech , we clearly heard Monday night the beginnings of an Obama doctrine -- the clearest enunciation he has provided so far of his views on the use of force . 
Some thought he was opening the door to the possible use of military force in other Middle Eastern nations that are shooting protesters -LRB- e.g. , Syria , Bahrain , Yemen -RRB- ; I thought just the opposite , that the president was closing the door unless there was horrific violence and a number of other exceptional circumstances . 
To me , the speech laid out a vision of U.S. leadership that was much more limited , cautious and collaborative than we have had in recent presidents -- certainly a far cry from the muscularity of President John F. Kennedy 's inaugural address that said we would pay any price , meet any burden in the defense of liberty . 
A half century ago , Americans rallied to JFK 's call , but today , when Americans are weary of war and feeling broke , perhaps people will find his more cautious approach more appealing . 
How did you interpret his `` doctrine '' and what do you think of it ? 
Give the president credit : His speech has advanced an important dialogue not only about Libya but about American leadership in the world . 
What did you think ? 
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of David Gergen . 
