Friday , October 29 , 2010 ; 10:22 AM Hours after a presidential commission raised new questions about the safety of the cement mixture intended to temporarily seal BP 's Macondo exploration well , oil field service giant Halliburton said the final version of the mixture did not undergo a foam-stability test . 
The presidential commission investigating the mammoth oil spill said Thursday that the cement mixture repeatedly failed lab tests before the April 20 blowout . 
Halliburton later issued its own statement , dismissing some of those lab tests as preliminary or irrelevant but also adding - without explanation - that the cement mixture ultimately used on the well did not undergo the complete battery of safety tests . 
As early as February , Halliburton was getting poor results in lab tests of the recipe for the cement it was planning to use , according to evidence collected by the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling . 
Three separate tests suggested that the mixture would be `` unstable , '' according to a commission staff letter released Thursday . 
Halliburton notified BP by e-mail about only one of the tests before the well explosion , according to the commission . 
The two companies went ahead with the cementing job anyway . 
Its failure became the first in a cascade of factors leading to the accident . 
The results of a fourth Halliburton test - the only one indicating that the cement slurry might have been able to contain the high-pressure pool of oil and gas at the bottom of the Macondo well - were not available until the night of April 19 at the earliest and perhaps not until after the cement was poured , the commission staff said . 
The oil spill commission is sifting through the events leading to the April 20 explosion , which killed 11 workers , sank the Deepwater Horizon and triggered a massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The cement at the bottom of the exploratory well was supposed to have provided a seal until a production facility could be built . 
The reason for the cement job 's failure has been a matter of dispute for months . 
Halliburton has pointed at BP ; BP has challenged Halliburton . 
Halliburton late Thursday night issued a statement disputing the commission staff 's letter , calling the February tests `` preliminary '' and saying that `` final well conditions were not known at that time . '' 
Halliburton added that the first of the April tests was `` irrelevant '' because of errors at the lab , and it said that , contrary to the commission letter , BP was informed of that test . 
The news spooked shareholders ; Halliburton 's stock closed at $ 31.68 a share , down nearly 8 percent . 
BP said it had no comment . 
The commission letter reiterated that the cement was just one contributor to the disaster . 
`` Cementing wells is a complex endeavor , and industry experts inform us that cementing failures are not uncommon even in the best of circumstances , '' the commission letter says . 
But the new details call into question whether Halliburton 's recipe - which mixed nitrogen and other additives with ordinary cement to create a foamy mixture - was the right one . 
