Mr Hayward initially said the impact would be ` very modest ' In the wake of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , BP chief executive Tony Hayward has been criticised for a series of public relations setbacks that have enraged residents of the Gulf coast and US politicians . 
Earlier this month , President Barack Obama said in a television interview that Mr Hayward `` would n't be working for me after any of those statements '' . 
Here is a selection of what he has said and done to cause the controversy : President Obama 's Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel on Mr Hayward 's `` PR gaffe '' Mr Hayward is criticised by White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel for taking time off to go sailing . 
In an interview with ABC News , Mr Emanuel says it has `` just been part of a long line of PR gaffes and mistakes '' . 
`` I think we can all conclude that Tony Hayward is not going to have a second career in PR consulting . '' 
A BP spokesman says Mr Hayward had not had a break since the spill began and was merely `` spending a few hours with his family at the weekend '' . 
In a nationally broadcast TV advertisement , Mr Hayward pledges : `` For those affected and your families , I 'm deeply sorry . 
We will make this right . '' 
Tony Hayward apologises for the oil spill on the BP website He also promises BP would clean up every drop of oil and `` restore the shoreline to its original state '' . 
President Barack Obama says the following day that the $ 50m spent by BP on the campaign and allocated dividends should have instead gone towards the clean-up operation and compensating devastated local businesses . 
`` What I do n't wanna hear is when they 're spending that kind of money on their shareholders and spending that kind of money on TV advertising that they 're nickel and diming fishermen . '' 
Asked what he would tell people in Louisiana , where oil had begun to reach parts of the state 's south-eastern marshes , Mr Hayward tells reporters : `` The first thing to say is I 'm sorry . '' 
`` We 're sorry for the massive disruption it 's caused their lives . 
There 's no one who wants this over more than I do . 
I would like my life back . '' 
The statement was particularly criticised given that eleven people died in the drilling platform explosion that caused the spill . 
In an interview with Sky News , Mr Hayward says he is not overly concerned by the amount of oil that is flowing into the Gulf of Mexico . 
`` I think the environmental impact of this disaster is likely to be very , very modest . 
It is impossible to say and we will mount , as part of the aftermath , a very detailed environmental assessment as we go forward . 
We 're going to do that with some of the science institutions in the US . '' 
`` But everything we can see at the moment suggests that the overall environmental impact of this will be very , very modest . '' 
In an interview with the Guardian , Mr Hayward insists the leaked oil and the dispersant that is being released into the sea to try to tackle the slick should be put in context . 
`` The Gulf of Mexico is a very big ocean . 
The amount of volume of oil and dispersant we are putting into it is tiny in relation to the total water volume . '' 
In an interview with NBC , Mr Hayward insists BP was not at fault for the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon on 20 April and the subsequent oil spill . 
`` Well , it was n't our accident , but we are absolutely responsible for the oil , for cleaning it up , and that 's what we intend to do . '' 
`` The drilling rig was a Transocean drilling rig . 
It was their rig and their equipment that failed , run by their people and their processes . '' 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
