Thoughts , comments , suggestions or criticisms about The Post 's Live Q&A s ? 
Send us an e-mail . 
Friday , May 28 , 2010 ; 1:00 PM Bill Nye , the Science Guy , was online Friday , May 28 , at 1 p.m. ET to discuss the Gulf oil spill and the latest efforts to cap the well , including the `` top kill '' maneuver . 
Chantilly , Va. : Why is the oil still gushing out after more than a month ? 
I always assumed they need pumps and other equipment to get the oil to the surface . 
Where is the pressure coming from to continue to let the oil out of the well ? 
Sarasota , Fla. : BP has not been clear about the quantity of mud versus oil coming out of their gushing pipe . 
There seems to be uncertainly interpreting the video . 
But could n't they determine the relative quantities from a quick , simple analysis of the fluid they are pumping to the surface ? 
-- College Park , Md. : Why ca n't we use explosives to collapse the leaking well ? 
Anonymous : Why is difficult to recreate enough pressure to push the oil back down into the reservoir via the top kill . 
Presumably , when they pumped out the mud and replaced it with sea water , there was a situation where the mud 's weight was enough , why is n't it enough now ? 
The first question is a great to open the forum . 
I 'd like to follow up that question with the question . 
What is the pipe 's , that is currently broken at the sea floor , capacity for non-flow pressure along its walls , i.e. what 's preventing the current capping effort from causing the pipe to blow out underground given the pressure is so great ? 
St. Croix , USVI : In order to extract oil from the earth -LRB- whether beneath the sea or above -RRB- do n't you need to have a pumping mechanism in place ? 
Once this well was opened , does it mean it could just pour oil until resources were diminished ? 
Could a natural disaster like an earthquake cause the same type of oil leak beneath the sea ? 
Baseball : Wikipedia says you have switched your allegiance from the Mariners to the Nats ? 
I noticed that there 's an ad on this page for 10 cents off per gallon at Shell . 
Back to my question : do you think within your lifetime , you will see an end to oil\/gas usage ? 
Ashton , Md. : Sorry to be off-topic , but my kids and I are wondering if you 'll ever do more episodes of Bill Nye the Science Guy ? 
Anonymous : With the pressure from the mud vs. pressure from the oil , is it likely that the pressure will build in the tube and explode causing an even bigger hole ? 
Washington , D.C. : I 've heard a lot about proposed chemical dispersants , but I 'm not sure what effect they will have in mitigating any damage . 
-LRB- When I add soap to a sink of oily water , the oil does n't disappear . -RRB- 
What do you think the immediate benefits of dispersants are ? 
Do the benefits outweigh the drawbacks ? 
D.C. : Why is the procedure called a `` top kill ? '' 
Huntsville , Ala. : My comment -- after 30 yrs + in thermoset polyurethane experience I think the leakage may be stopped by pumping a highly reactive chemical system either polyurea -LRB- example truck bed spray -RRB- or polyurethane -LRB- example skateboard wheels -RRB- into the pipe . 
Either system cld be catalyzed to react almost instantly at the temperature and pressure in that pipe . 
Augusta , Ga. : Any projections about the how toxic this oil is to the green things in the Gulf ? 
-LRB- The oceans phytoplankton produce 90 percent of the world 's oxygen and deserve consideration for their work for us and the sustaining diversity we need . -RRB- 
McMinnville , Ore. : This does n't pertain to the leak itself , but about the use of dispersants . 
Is n't crude oil anionic ? 
Why not use a cationic substance to bind the oil ? 
I work in the wine industry , and we use bentonite clay to bind layby proteins for clarification in white wines . 
Louisville , Ky. : I did just tweet this . 
There is a video suggesting the use of hay or straw to sop up -LRB- not stop -RRB- the oil spill . 
It is so simple -- it sounds like a joke , but watch the video at How to clean up the oil spill -LRB- YouTube -RRB- I 'd love your comment . 
Who is winning these days between you and Bagely ? 
Richmond , Va. : Is the oil spill going to be severe enough to eliminate or lead to the extinction of any species of marine life unique to the Gulf Coast ? 
Michigan : First , thank you Bill Nye , for making science fun and interesting to so many youths . 
Second , after just looking at the live feed , it certainly look like there is much oil still coming out with even more mud . 
Do you think this effort will work ? 
and do you think that they could make things worse ? 
A major collapse of the sea floor would do what to the oil underneath ? 
could n't we seal up the well with somethin more permanent than mud ? 
or are they trying to keep the options of redrilling this well later ? 
Harrisburg , Pa. : My question comes from a bit more ignorance , I 'm afraid . 
They said that they would know right away if it was failing , but would n't know if it was successful for several days . 
Laurel , Md. : Charles Krauthammer writes today that offshore drilling has been forced into keep water by environmental regulations discouraging drilling in safer environments closer to shore . 
If this well had been in only 1,000 feet of water , would it have been solved by now because human divers could work on it ? 
Rockville , Md. : Why ca n't they just crimp the broken end of the pipe ? 
Is n't that what the blowout preventer was supposed to do ? 
Do n't we have a pair of `` super pliers '' that can do the job ? 
San Antonio , Tex. : It sounds like all that pressure is going to be really hard to contain . 
What are the chances of attaching another valve to the failed BOP ? 
Columbia , Md. : What 's so special about golf balls in this instance ? 
Why not tennis balls ? 
GSA across the street from Interior : Even if the well is `` permanantly sealed '' wo n't BP and the Federal Government have to monitor this well forever ? 
Bill Nye : Thanks for all the great questions . 
Read them over ; look at all the ideas you all have . 
There 's bound to be a few good ones in there . 
Keep up the good work . 
Let 's change the world . 
Editor 's Note : washingtonpost.com moderators retain editorial control over Discussions and choose the most relevant questions for guests and hosts ; guests and hosts can decline to answer questions . 
washingtonpost.com is not responsible for any content posted by third parties . 
To Refresh Page : Press the F5 key on your keyboard or click here . 
: Christless Christianity Guest : Dr. Michael S. Horton Viewpoint is a paid discussion . 
The Washington Post editorial staff was not involved in the moderation . 
