With mud continuing to battle oil in an attempted `` top kill '' of the leaking well at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico , the historic scale of the disaster became clearer Thursday when scientists said the mile-deep well has been spewing 12,000 to 19,000 barrels of oil a day , far more than previously estimated . 
The new figure supports what many observers have assumed from the images of oil slicking the gulf surface , slathering beaches and spurting from a pipe on the sea floor : This is the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
President Obama , feeling pressure to act in a crisis now in its sixth week , yanked the exploratory drilling permits for 33 deepwater rigs in the gulf and suspended planned exploration in two areas off the coast of Alaska . 
He announced the moves at a news conference carried on cable TV channels that simultaneously showed the live video feed of effluent billowing from the cracked riser pipe at the bottom of the gulf . 
Obama pushed back on suggestions that , as he put it , `` BP is off running around doing whatever it wants and nobody is minding the store . '' 
He said that his administration is doing all it can , but that , when it comes to plugging the leak , `` the federal government does not possess superior technology to BP . '' 
The eventful day included the first prominent administrative casualty of the crisis . 
Elizabeth Birnbaum , head of Minerals Management Service , which issues permits for offshore drilling , resigned . 
The political developments continue to be overshadowed by a technological struggle that has no precedent . 
Whether the top kill is going to work remains highly uncertain . 
The maneuver is a brute-force , yet delicately calibrated , injection of heavy drilling mud into the blowout preventer atop the wellhead . 
As the mud is pumped from ships at the surface , the hydrocarbons should be forced back down the well toward their source in a porous reservoir called the Macondo field , about 21\/2 miles below the floor of the gulf . 
It has not been smooth sailing . 
After pumping mud for about nine hours on Wednesday , BP put the pumping on hold throughout the day Thursday while it pondered the initial results . 
The company resumed Thursday evening . 
`` Nothing has gone wrong or unanticipated , '' Doug Suttles , BP 's chief operating officer , told reporters . 
He said engineers hope to improve on their initial performance by preceding a mud injection with a blast of rubber balls and other rough-textured materials -- a `` junk shot '' -- to clog the blowout preventer and force more mud down into the hole , rather than shooting it out of the leaks in the riser . 
`` We did believe we did pump some mud down the well bore . 
We obviously pumped a lot of mud out the riser , '' Suttles said . 
BP Managing Director Bob Dudley likened the top kill to an `` arm-wrestling match with two fairly equal-rated forces . 
Or taking two fire hoses and driving them together , trying to overcome the other . '' 
The well wo n't be considered killed until the mud injection has been followed by cement to permanently plug it -- at which point the news would be carried by `` the roar coming out of this building , '' the deadpan Suttles said . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
