Explore all of our oil spill graphics to track the spill , see its effects , and learn its possible solutions . 
BP is coming in for plenty of abuse these days , and certainly much of it is deserved . 
Mistakes made by BP officials , or contractors and suppliers they engaged and supervised , led to a preventable explosion that killed 11 people and unleashed an environmental disaster of immense but still unknown proportion . 
Compounding those initial mistakes has been a failure to anticipate such a disaster and have an adequate response plan in place . 
It is now clear that the ecosystem in the Gulf of Mexico has been badly damaged , perhaps irreparably , affecting the livelihoods of hundreds of thousands of people in the region . 
The future of offshore oil drilling is now in question , with implications not only for the rest of the oil and gas industry but also for energy prices and energy policies here and around the world . 
So extensive is the damage , and so great are its potential liabilities , that BP 's very existence is now at stake -- a company that until a few weeks ago was posting annual profits of $ 14 billion with a market valuation in excess of $ 180 billion . 
As corporate screw-ups go , it just does n't get any bigger than this one -- and the damn hole still is n't plugged . 
My purpose today , however , is not to bury BP but to praise it . 
When confronted with such crises , corporate executives instinctively head for the bunker , withhold information , deny responsibility and drag their feet on efforts to clean up the mess they 've created . 
That 's a natural human reaction , particularly when people have died , jobs are on the line , the stock price is plummeting and the whole thing is playing out 24\/7 on cable television . 
This bunker mentality is further encouraged by the army of lawyers who inevitably show up on the scene , whose sole concern is preventing criminal sanctions and reducing civil damages . 
But to their credit , rather than respond in ways you would expect them to , BP and its executives have generally responded in ways you 'd want them to . 
From the start , the company has declared that it is ultimately responsible for what happened and responsible for making things right , waiving any liability limits it might be entitled to under federal law . 
The company 's chief executive , Tony Hayward , moved from London to the gulf , personally overseeing operations , visiting with government officials and conducting regular news interviews where his contrition seemed genuine . 
At its own expense , the company mustered a private army , navy and air force to disperse the oil , contain the spill and clean up the damage on shore . 
It flew in experts from around the world to devise and execute strategies for capturing the leaking oil and plugging the leak , sparing no expense . 
