La. scientist locates another vast oil plume in the gulf Explore all of our oil spill graphics to track the spill , see its effects , and learn its possible solutions . 
Friday , May 28 , 2010 ; 4:37 PM A day after scientists reported finding a huge `` plume '' of oil extending miles east of the leaking BP well , on Friday a Louisiana scientist said his crew had located another vast plume of oily globs , miles in the opposite direction . 
James H. Cowan Jr. , a professor at Louisiana State University , said his crew on Wednesday found a plume of oil in a section of the gulf 75 miles northwest of the source of the leak . 
Cowan said that his crew sent a remotely controlled submarine into the water , and found it full of oily globules , from the size of a thumbnail to the size of a golf ball . 
Unlike the plume found east of the leak -- in which the oil was so dissolved that contaminated water appeared clear -- Cowan said the oil at this site was so thick that it covered the lights on the submarine . 
`` It almost looks like big wet snowflakes , but they 're brown and black and oily , '' Cowan said . 
The submarine returned to the surface entirely black , he said . 
Cowan said that the submarine traveled about 400 feet down , close to the sea floor , and found oil all the way down . 
Trying to find the edges of the plume , he said the submarine traveled miles from side to side . 
`` We really never found either end of it , '' he said . 
He said he did not know how wide the plume actually was , or how far it stretched away to the west . 
He said the plume was found in an area that had already been closed to fishing by the federal government . 
Cowan 's finding underscores concerns about oil moving under the surface , perhaps because of dispersant chemicals that have broken it up into smaller globules . 
BP officials have played down the possibility of undersea oil plumes . 
This discovery seems to confirm the fears of some scientists that -- because of the depth of the leak and the heavy use of chemical `` dispersants '' -- this spill was behaving differently than others . 
Instead of floating on top of the water , it may be moving beneath it . 
That would be troubling because it could mean the oil would slip past coastal defenses such as `` containment booms '' designed to stop it on the surface . 
Already , scientists and officials in Louisiana have reported finding thick oil washing ashore despite the presence of floating booms . 
It would also be a problem for hidden ecosystems deep under the gulf . 
There , scientists say , the oil could be absorbed by tiny animals and enter a food chain that builds to large , beloved sport-fish like red snapper . 
It might also glom on to deep-water coral formations , and cover the small animals that make up each piece of coral . 
`` You 're almost like a deer in the headlights when you 're watching this . 
You do n't know what to say , '' Cowan said . 
He said the oil 's threat to undersea ecosystems `` is really starting to scare us . '' 
In the discovery described Thursday , scientists aboard a University of South Florida research vessel found an area of dissolved oil east of the leak that is about six miles wide , and extends from the surface down to a depth of about 3,200 feet , said Professor David Hollander . 
