Here 's my question : Why were we drilling in 5,000 feet of water in the first place ? 
Many reasons , but this one goes unmentioned : Environmental chic has driven us out there . 
As production from the shallower Gulf of Mexico wells declines , we go deep -LRB- 1,000 feet and more -RRB- and ultra deep -LRB- 5,000 feet and more -RRB- , in part because environmentalists have succeeded in rendering the Pacific and nearly all the Atlantic coast off-limits to oil production . 
-LRB- President Obama 's tentative , selective opening of some Atlantic and offshore Alaska sites is now dead . -RRB- 
And of course , in the safest of all places , on land , we 've had a 30-year ban on drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge . 
So we go deep , ultra deep -- to such a technological frontier that no precedent exists for the April 20 blowout in the Gulf of Mexico . 
There will always be catastrophic oil spills . 
You make them as rare as humanly possible , but where would you rather have one : in the Gulf of Mexico , upon which thousands depend for their livelihood , or in the Arctic , where there are practically no people ? 
All spills seriously damage wildlife . 
That 's a given . 
But why have we pushed the drilling from the barren to the populated , from the remote wilderness to a center of fishing , shipping , tourism and recreation ? 
Not that the environmentalists are the only ones to blame . 
But it is odd that they 've escaped any mention at all . 
The other culprits are pretty obvious . 
It starts with BP , which seems not only to have had an amazing string of perfect-storm engineering lapses but no contingencies to deal with a catastrophic system failure . 
However , the railing against BP for its performance since the accident is harder to understand . 
I attribute no virtue to BP , just self-interest . 
What possible interest can it have to do anything but cap the well as quickly as possible ? 
Every day that oil is spilled means millions more in losses , cleanup and restitution . 
Federal officials who rage against BP would like to deflect attention from their own role in this disaster . 
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar , whose department 's laxity in environmental permitting and safety oversight renders it among the many bearing responsibility , expresses outrage at BP 's inability to stop the leak , and even threatens to `` push them out of the way . '' 
`` To replace them with what ? '' 
asked the estimable , admirably candid Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , the national incident commander . 
No one has the assets and expertise of BP . 
The federal government can fight wars , conduct a census and hand out billions in earmarks , but it has not a clue how to cap a one-mile-deep out-of-control oil well . 
Obama did n't help much with his finger-pointing Rose Garden speech in which he denounced finger-pointing , then proceeded to blame everyone but himself . 
Even the grace note of admitting some federal responsibility turned sour when he reflexively added that these problems have been going on `` for a decade or more '' -- translation : Bush did it -- while , in contrast , his own interior secretary had worked diligently to solve the problem `` from the day he took office . '' 
Why had n't we heard a thing about this ? 
What about the September 2009 letter from Obama 's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration accusing Interior 's Minerals Management Service of understating the `` risk and impacts '' of a major oil spill ? 
When you get a blowout 15 months into your administration , and your own Interior Department had given BP a `` categorical '' environmental exemption in April 2009 , the buck stops . 
In the end , speeches will make no difference . 
If BP can cap the well in time to prevent an absolute calamity in the gulf , the president will escape politically . 
If it does n't -- if the gusher is n't stopped before the relief wells are completed in August -- it will become Obama 's Katrina . 
That will be unfair , because Obama is no more responsible for the damage caused by this than Bush was for the damage caused by Katrina . 
But that 's the nature of American politics and its presidential cult of personality : We expect our presidents to play Superman . 
Helplessness , however undeniable , is no defense . 
Moreover , Obama has never been overly modest about his own powers . 
Two years ago next week , he declared that history will mark his ascent to the presidency as the moment when `` our planet began to heal '' and `` the rise of the oceans began to slow . '' 
Well , when you anoint yourself King Canute , you must n't be surprised when your subjects expect you to command the tides . 
