The scene this morning outside David Kellermann 's house . 
-LRB- Gerald Martineau - The Washington Post -RRB- David Kellermann poses in an undated handout photo . 
Kellermann joined Freddie Mac as an analyst in 1992 . 
-LRB- Bloomberg News -RRB- A Fairfax County investigator packs equipment into a van outside the home of David Kellermann . 
-LRB- Gerald Martineau - The Washington Post -RRB- Fairfax County police personnel escort an unidentified woman into the Kellermann home . 
-LRB- Gerald Martineau - The Washington Post -RRB- Alesia Humphries , a neighbor of the Kellermanns , reacts to news of his death . 
-LRB- Gerald Martineau - The Washington Post -RRB- In the months before he died , David B. Kellermann would trek most evenings to Freddie Mac 's executive suite to see his boss . 
Long after other employees had headed home from the McLean campus , Kellermann , the acting chief financial officer , would remain cloistered with chief executive David Moffett , wrestling for hours with the difficulties of a company that had been near collapse . 
Kellermann usually brought a three-page list of to-do items . 
Moffett was new to the company , appointed by the government after it seized Freddie Mac in September , and he recalled leaning heavily on Kellermann 's 16 years of experience at the firm for guidance . 
Kellermann , 41 , was found dead yesterday morning in his Fairfax County home in an apparent suicide , police said . 
He left no note , law enforcement sources said , and his motivations were not known . 
But even if his final act was unrelated to work , his last months were consumed by the mounting stresses at the center of the financial crisis . 
People who knew him said he was deeply committed to Freddie Mac , just about the only place he 'd worked professionally , and its struggles had taken an increasingly visible toll . 
`` David was engaged in all parts of the company , '' said Moffett , who tapped Kellermann as his chief financial officer before resigning the top post last month . 
`` The CFO of any company in today 's environment is a very stressful job ... particularly when you 're in a company that 's undergoing a tremendous amount of change and uncertainty . '' 
Kellermann had worked his way up at Freddie Mac from a young financial analyst to one of the mortgage giant 's main points of contact with its government overseers . 
Recently , he 'd faced intense pressures dealing with the company 's billions of dollars in losses and myriad other accounting and legal issues , refusing to take time off , his colleagues said . 
`` He endured a tremendous amount of stress over the years ... It 's been a difficult environment , '' said Peter Federico , Freddie Mac 's treasurer and a close friend . 
The news of Kellermann 's death yesterday stunned his colleagues . 
`` It 's one of the things that puts everything in perspective . 
It 's difficult for everybody to deal with it , '' Federico said . 
Kellermann was found by his wife , Donna , yesterday in the basement of their home in the upscale Hunter Mill Estates subdivision in Vienna , law enforcement sources said . 
He had hanged himself on a piece of exercise equipment , the sources said . 
There were no signs of foul play . 
His body was taken to the office of the medical examiner , who will rule on the cause of death . 
Soon after Kellermann 's death was reported , television trucks pulled up outside his stately brick home and its manicured lawn , beaming the image around the world . 
Many neighbors were taken aback by the attention given to the apparent suicide . 
Susan Unger , a neighbor , said she last saw him a few weeks ago working in his yard . 
She woke up early yesterday morning to the sound of rescue crews arriving . 
`` They took the stretcher in and brought it out empty , so I thought everything was okay , '' Unger said . 
`` It 's just so sad ... I 'm just in total shock . '' 
The neighbors knew Kellermann mostly as a doting father of a young daughter and meticulous gardener . 
He decorated his home lavishly for Christmas and threw great parties for Halloween and University of Michigan football games . 
He 'd attended Michigan before receiving a graduate degree from George Washington University . 
But Sergio Moreno , who lives up the street , said he had recently noticed some changes . 
Kellermann was busier than ever and more stressed . 
A large man , Kellermann had lost a lot of weight . 
