BEIJING -- With Jamaica 's currency in free fall , unemployment soaring and banks heavily exposed to government debt , the Caribbean island 's diplomats went into crisis mode earlier this year . 
They traveled to all corners of the world to seek help . 
Jamaica 's traditional allies , the United States and Britain , were preoccupied with their own financial problems , but a new friend jumped at the opportunity to come to the rescue : China . 
When contracts for loan packages totaling $ 138 million were signed between the two countries in March , China became Jamaica 's biggest financial partner . 
Headlines in Jamaica 's leading newspapers , which only a year ago were filled with concern about China 's growing influence in the region , gushed about its generosity . 
`` The loan could n't have come more in time and on more preferred terms , '' E. Courtenay Rattray , Jamaica 's ambassador to China , said in an interview . 
While the island nation continues to value its close relationships with Western powers , he added , in some respects Jamaica has more in common with China . 
`` Those are developed countries . 
They do n't have such an in-depth understanding of the development aspirations of Jamaica as does China , '' he said . 
Overseas aid and loans are just one way China is asserting itself in its new role as a world financial leader . 
While polishing China 's own image , Premier Wen Jiabao and other top leaders have blamed the West for the global economic crisis . 
Chinese officials increasingly are challenging the primacy of the dollar , warning other countries about the danger of keeping reserves in just one or two currencies , such as dollars and euros . 
And as the global economic crisis has eroded faith in U.S.-style capitalism , there 's growing talk that a new `` Beijing Consensus '' will replace the long-dominant Washington Consensus on how developing countries should manage their economies . 
Coined by British economist John Williamson 20 years ago , the term `` Washington Consensus '' refers to a standard set of policies -- including privatization of state enterprises , free trade , deregulation and restraint in public spending -- that the International Monetary Fund , the World Bank and the U.S. Treasury Department have long urged on debt-ridden nations , particularly in Latin America . 
A fierce debate has broken out among academics and financial policymakers about how to define the Beijing Consensus , or even whether such a thing exists ; many say that it is a loose package of political points rather than an economic model , and that there is no formal effort by the Chinese government to promote it . 
But some experts are already calling it a challenge to the existing order . 
`` It is very possible that the Beijing Consensus can replace the Washington Consensus , '' said Cui Zhiyuan , a professor of public policy at Tsinghua University who edited a recent book on the subject . 
`` Since the crisis , the world does n't have as much confidence in the U.S. economic model as before . '' 
In a report last month titled `` The Beijing Consensus , '' South Korea 's Ministry of Strategy and Finance sounded an alarm over China 's aid and loans . 
Developing countries that accept Chinese assistance , it warned , may lower their guard and gravitate toward a Chinese-style economic model . 
Jamaica 's Rattray dismissed those fears as overblown . 
China 's financial assistance to his country came with `` no requirement to adopt specific macroeconomic policy approaches , '' he said , and there is `` no debate about the government of Jamaica 's commitment to a free-market economic model . '' 
Cheng Enfu , an economics researcher at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences , a government-affiliated think tank , said he defines the Beijing Consensus as promotion of economies in which public ownership remains dominant ; gradual reform is preferred to `` shock therapy '' ; the country is open to foreign trade but remains largely self-reliant ; and large-scale market reform takes place first , followed later by political and cultural change . 
The global economic crisis , Cheng said , `` displays the advantages of the Chinese model '' and has already expanded China 's influence . 
`` Some mainstream economists are saying that India should learn from China ; Latin American countries are trying to learn from China . 
When foreign countries send delegations to China , they show interest in the Chinese way of developing , '' Cheng said . 
Barry Sautman , a political scientist at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology , said in a research paper that Western academics often deride the Chinese model as `` economic growth without the constraints of democratic institutions . '' 
But , he argued , the emerging Beijing Consensus `` takes seriously some aspirations of developing states often ignored or opposed by the West , '' such as `` a more equitable international distribution of wealth and power . '' 
As Beijing grows more assertive in international finance , it is working inside as well as outside existing organizations . 
In January , it joined the Inter-American Development Bank -- which is active in Latin America and the Caribbean -- as a donor country . 
It is in talks with the IMF to increase its contribution to the fund in exchange for more of a say in IMF policies . 
And in Asia , it is leading the push by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations for a regional fund that will compete with the Asian Development Bank . 
This week , China 's allies Kazakhstan and Pakistan -- both of which recently got new loans from China -- threw their support behind calls from China 's central bank governor , Zhou Xiaochuan , to create a new world or Asian reserve currency to replace the dollar . 
Venezuelan President Hugo Ch vez , who also signed a credit line with China recently , has backed the proposal . 
In the past five months , China has signed $ 95 billion in currency swap agreements with six countries that now hold part of their reserves in yuan . 
The government has also begun to allow companies in southern China to settle contracts with foreign neighbors in yuan instead of dollars or euros . 
Nouriel Roubini , a professor at New York University who as far back as 2006 predicted a U.S. economic collapse triggered by a housing bubble , said in an interview that the financial crisis has shown that `` different countries grow in different ways , and nobody has the monopoly on that type of wisdom . '' 
While he does not expect any immediate change in the international monetary system , he said , in five to 10 years `` the Chinese currency could be the new reserve currency . '' 
But Michael Pettis , a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and a professor of finance at Peking University , says China 's recent moves are more about public relations and aiding diplomatic allies than a true effort to remake the global financial system or to push a new model of development . 
Beijing has long used foreign aid to encourage developing countries to stop recognizing Taiwan -- as Jamaica did in 1972 -- and the talk about creating a new international `` supercurrency '' may be mostly a warning to the United States not to cover mounting deficits simply by printing money . 
`` It 's about signaling concern about U.S. monetary policy , '' Pettis said . 
At an economic forum in the southern Chinese city of Boao last weekend , China 's leaders seized every opportunity to criticize Western countries and institutions . 
China 's top banking regulator , Liu Mingkang , called the recent Group of 20 meetings in London and Washington `` mainly lip service without many concrete actions . '' 
Former vice premier Zeng Peiyan said that if the United States wants to continue receiving `` foreign funding support , '' it should guarantee the value of its Treasury securities to countries that buy them . 
And Zheng Xinli , deputy head of the China Center for Economic Exchanges , an influential new research center , called for a new Asian development bank to compete with Western-dominated institutions . 
Researchers Zhang Jie in Beijing and Robert E. Thomason in Washington contributed to this report . 
