As anyone who reads my blog probably knows , I have been a critic of the U.S. military involvement in Libya from the beginning -LRB- see some of my writings on the topic here , here , here , here , here , and here ; and podcasts here , here , and here -RRB- . 
As I ve watched the Libyan adventure unfold , I ve been particularly interested by the myriad justifications that proponents have offered for intervention . 
The predominant reason given and indeed authorized in UN Security Council Resolution 1973 has been to protect civilians and civilian populated areas under threat of attack . 
Beyond this narrow mandate , however , an additional set of overlapping reasons have been put forth , before and since the intervention began on March 19 . 
Below are but five of the more prominent secondary justifications put forth by Obama administration officials , congressional members , pundits , and policy analysts . 
On the second day of the bombing campaign , cruise missiles were launched into Moammar Gadhafi 's Bab al-Azizia compound in Tripoli . 
The stated military objective was to disrupt the command and control of loyalist forces , but the immediate intention was to kill Gadhafi in an attempt to quickly resolve the civil war . 
The day prior , British defense minister Liam Fox was asked if Gadhafi was a legitimate target , and responded that attacking the Libyan leader would potentially be a possibility . 
Since then , while NATO officials emphasize that it does not intentionally target specific individuals , the alliance has routinely bombed Gadhafi 's suspected residences , including one attack that reportedly killed the Libyan leader s son and three of his grandchildren . 
Since then , the calls for regime change through a targeted killing have only increased . 
Five weeks into the NATO-led bombing campaign , Senator Lindsey Graham demanded that the alliance cut the head of the snake off , go to Tripoli , start bombing -LRB- Gadhafi 's -RRB- inner circle . 
Senator John McCain further lamented that while President Obama was limiting America s military mission to achieve primarily humanitarian objectives , the fact is that we need to take -LRB- Gadhafi -RRB- out . 
Foggy Bottom , apparently , wants Gadhafi deposed but only of his own volition . 
Last week , when presented with several potential diplomatic solutions to resolving the civil war , a State Department spokesperson responded that the only option that the United States was willing to entertain was Gadhafi stepping down from power . 
Thus , beyond the initial stated military mission of protecting civilians , the only acceptable outcome of the intervention has become the removal of Gadhafi from power , with the bombing campaign continuing until whenever that objective is achieved . 
Sending a Message to Other Dictators The Libyan uprising and subsequent civil war occurred within the broader context of the Arab Spring that began in neighboring Tunisia , and has swept across North Africa into the Middle East . 
It was believed by many that the demonstration effect of intervening to attempt to stop the brutal repression used by the Gadhafi regime would deter other dictators from doing likewise . 
As the events in Yemen , Bahrain , Syria , and even Libya have demonstrated , attempting to use force for second-order psychological effects is a fool s errand , and should not be included as a justification for military intervention in the first place . 
Nevertheless , in the absence of intervention in Libya s civil war , President Obama warned in his March 28 address to the nation that the democratic impulses would be eclipsed by the darkest form of dictatorship , as repressive leaders concluded that violence is the best strategy to cling to power ; former State Department official , Anne Marie Slaughter , contended that if Colonel Gadhafi wins , regimes across the region will conclude that force is the way to answer protests ; Nicholas Kristof , New York Times columnist , claimed that If not for this intervention the message would have gone out to all dictators that ruthlessness works ; former British Prime Minister Tony Blair wrote , We would send a signal of Western impotence in a region that analyzes such signals keenly ; and Senator John Kerry believed that a military intervention in Libya sends a critical signal to other leaders in the region : They can not automatically assume they can resort to large-scale violence to put down legitimate demands for reform without consequences . 
Supporting the Libyan Rebels While the Libyan rebels have been unable to remove Gadhafi from power , its self-appointed leadership group the Transitional National Council -LRB- TNC -RRB- has succeeded at courting western support since its founding on March 5 . 
Utilizing the skills of multi-national public relations firms like the Harbour Group and Bell Pottinger , the TNC has consistently portrayed itself as inclusive , western-educated , committed to democratic principles , and opposed to any Islamist influences . 
The TNC s official website motto : Freedom . 
Democracy provides upbeat messages about the progress of the war , and extensive coverage of every foreign official who tours Benghazi . 
After one such visit in mid-May , Senator John McCain vouched for the rebel leadership , stating : Their Prime Minister got a doctorate at the University of Pittsburgh . 
Their Finance Minister was recently teaching economics in Seattle others are lawyers , doctors , women activists . 
Similarly , after British Foreign Secretary William Hague held talks with the TNC in the rebel-held capital in early June , he declared : These people at the top of this organization are genuine believers in democracy and the rule of law . 
It is quite inspiring . 
After another early June visit to Benghazi , Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs Jeffrey Feltman wrote of being profoundly impressed by everyone he encountered , and drew a vivid picture for how the military intervention in Libya was transforming America s image in the Arab world : Imagine walking in the main square of a teeming Arab city and having people wave the American flag , clamor for photographs with a visiting American official , and celebrate the United States as both savior and model . 
Repaying European Support in Afghanistan Reports of the White House debate over whether to join the Paris and London-led war party show that the Obama administration has been a reluctant participant from the start . 
One reason that the administration overcame its reluctance was to maintain the limited support that European NATO allies have provided to the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan . 
To repay them for their cooperation in the Hindu-Kush , the United States was compelled to support those European allies in North Africa . 
In explaining why the United States was intervening in a country that was not a vital interest , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton admitted in late March : We asked our allies , our NATO allies , to go into Afghanistan with us ten years ago . 
They have been there and a lot of them have been there despite the fact they were not attacked They stuck with us . 
When it comes to Libya , we started hearing from the U.K. , France , Italy , other of our NATO allies . 
This was in their vital national interests . 
This rationale has endured , with Secretary Gates acknowledging last week : What was going on in Libya was considered a vital interest by some of our closest allies . 
Those are the same allies that have come to our support and assistance in Afghanistan . 
And so it seems to me the kind of limited measured role that the president decided on in support of our allies , who did consider it a vital interest , is a legitimate way to look at this problem . 
Or , as Senators Joe Lieberman and Marco Rubio wrote yesterday : American disengagement would also inflict irreparable damage on the NATO alliance Having walked out on our European allies in the middle of a battle , we can expect them to do the same to us in Afghanistan . 
It Will Be a Piece of Cake A final proposition put forward by intervention proponents was that , ultimately , it would not be very hard to achieve the desired end state . 
Whether based on recent technological advances or the fragile nature of loyalist security forces , such best-case scenario thinking was evident on both sides of the Atlantic . 
Libya s rebels encouraged the Western assumption that Gadhafi could be deposed with ease . 
One purported spokesperson for the rebels Transitional National Council claimed on March 13 , We are capable of controlling all of Libya , but only after the no-fly zone is imposed . 
The United States , according to Obama , would lead with days , not weeks of military action , thus shaping the conditions for the international community to act together . 
White House spokesperson , Jay Carney , later clarified America s role to be a time-limited , scope-limited military action , in concert with our international partners . 
My Council on Foreign Relations colleague Elliot Abrams asserted that only a small amount of effort -LRB- is -RRB- needed from the United States to ensure that Gadhafi is defeated . 
The former U.S. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Merrill McPeak , discussing the imposition of a no-fly zone over Libya , contended that it would change their calculation of who might come out on top . 
Just the mere announcement of this might have an impact . 
Meanwhile , the French philosopher Bernard Henri Levy , who was instrumental in flying Libyan rebel leaders to Paris to meet with French President Nicolas Sarkozy , made the implausible claim that If the decision had been made to intervene five or six days earlier , bombing three airports would have been sufficient . 
So Why Does This Matter ? 
Every time the United States considers the use of military force , proponents and opponents offer a smattering of justifications for why it should or should not happen . 
Of course , people have varying vantage points and biases , which leads different arguments to be convincing to different audiences . 
This is to be expected in a democracy . 
But presidents do not have the luxury of finding a lot of arguments convincing enough . 
When presidents authorize a military action , they must have a clear objective in mind . 
Without a singular , defined goal , policymakers can not appropriately match means and ends , which increases the likelihood of failure . 
The United States will assuredly use military force against another state in the future , whether to attempt to protect civilian populations , destroy threatening WMD or ballistic missile capabilities , or degrade assets associated with an adversarial regime . 
When the debates over such interventions unfurl , take the time to sift and winnow through each of the justifications provided by government officials and pundits . 
Then decide for yourself if these arguments either individually , or in some cluster rise to the level of requiring the use of the American military . 
In the case of Libya , there was one overarching rationale provided the protection of civilians yet the initial intervention and the now ninety-seven day bombing campaign has been about so much more . 
I 'm sick and tired of ppl acting like it s ok for us to sit on the sidelines when innocent ppl are being tortured and rapped . 
Has anyone seen the video of the women being sodomized by a broom stick ?!?!?!?!?! Plus it helps that Libya sits on a lake of oil -LRB- uuughh duh we really need it -RRB- . 
These are the same ppl that thought we could negotiate with Hitler . 
And a Hitler and Ghadafi comparison is accurate and not over reaching here , unlike the GW and Obama comparisons . 
Anytime ppl ask for freedom and are lucky to get shot instead of raped and tortured , and the country has a financial means to lift itself from oppression of course we should step in !!!!! Unless its China and or a formable opponent\/ally . 
June 24 , 2011 at 12:44 pm | Reply Anyone else notice the writer does n't really deal with issue # 3 ? 
There 's no explanation in this article about why helping the rebels is `` insufficient '' justification . 
The article merely mentions that the rebels have worked with PR firms . 
Guess what , so does the U.S. Government . 
So does every state government and probably all but our smallest municipalities . 
Since `` helping the rebels '' is just another way of describing NATO 's stated goal -LRB- protecting Libyans from a hostile Gadaffi regime that Libyans by and large have soundly rejected -RRB- , it 's hard to figure why this article was even published , since it does n't address this very central point . 
June 24 , 2011 at 1:53 pm | Reply The right-wing thugs in Washington will always find some excuse to get us into one of their obnoxious wars , no matter how lame ! 
In fact , Barack Obama has gotten us involved in Yemen in order to save that creep Ali Abdullah Saleh 's hide and that makes me sick to no end . 
I guess that they deem him too good a stooge for the U.S. June 24 , 2011 at 4:01 pm | Reply What we have been bombing Yemen for awhile since like 2002 . 
Where have you been dude ? 
June 25 , 2011 at 5:18 pm | Reply This might be a little hard to swallow , but the real terrorist here are the United States . 
What are we doing ? 
Why do we continue to murder civilians and children in Lybia , with unmanned drones , and claim that Gaddafi is doing it ? 
We ca n't afford any more Obama wars . 
Why has n't he been impeached for his violations of the US Constitution and War Powers act ? 
We have the most CORRUPT and evil government in the world . 
Just makes you proud to be an American , does n't it . 
We can only murder and plunder for so long on foreign soil . 
This will come back here to the US to haunt us . 
June 24 , 2011 at 4:36 pm | Reply June 24 , 2011 at 7:42 pm | Reply The rebels have been well received lately by the international community . 
Yet a week ago they complained that they still have n't seen the funds that had been promised by donors and should have been deposited last week . 
Meanwhile , rebel leaders said their administration had run out of money as donors ' pledges had not been materialised . 
It will be interesting to see whether the youngster will accept the former enemies , those defected brothers in arms in the new regime . 
June 24 , 2011 at 6:27 pm | Reply If raising the debt ceiling is necessary to continue Libyan operations , bring on default . 
Loss of credit rating apparently is the only thing that will stop more-Bush-than-Bush Obama , though I bet he 'll still bang the drum for more debt , at a higher interest rate , to continue his MBTB . 
June 25 , 2011 at 10:24 am | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
