By the CNN Wire Staff Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has said the NATO mission in Libya should not be abandoned , speaking during a trip to Jamaica . 
`` To deny them funding would be a mistake , '' Gates says `` The government gets shakier by the day , '' he say `` The president has failed to make his case , '' Boehner says Washington -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Outgoing Defense Secretary Robert Gates said Thursday it would be a mistake for Congress to cut funding for U.S. military operations in Libya . 
`` I think , once we have our forces engaged , to deny them funding would be a mistake , '' Gates told PBS News . 
U.S. allies -- particularly the British , the French and the Italians -- consider Libya a vital interest , and `` our alliance with them is a vital interest for us , '' he said , citing their efforts in Afghanistan . 
Progress has been made toward the U.S. goal of ousting Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi from power , Gates said . 
`` Based on everything we see , the government gets shakier by the day . 
His forces have been significantly diminished . 
The opposition is expanding the areas under their control . '' 
But , he acknowledged , `` I do n't think anybody can predict when he will and\/or leave . '' 
But the bottom line is , whose side are you on ? 
Are you on Gadhafi 's side or are you on the side of the aspirations of the Libyan people and the international coalition that has been created to support them ? 
-- Secretary of State Hillary Clinton . 
Protesting for , against Gadhafi in Libya Gates was appointed to the job 4-1\/2 years ago by President George W. Bush , and continued to serve in the role under President Barack Obama . 
He is slated to retire June 30 . 
But Congress has expressed impatience with the pace of the NATO military effort , which got under way three months ago to protect peaceful anti-government demonstrators in Libya . 
Republicans have accused Obama of having violated the War Powers Act by not having sought congressional authorization for the military intervention within 60 days -- a deadline that has passed . 
Obama said last week that he did not believe he needed the approval because the U.S. military role is limited . 
But that did n't placate some House Republicans . 
`` I believe -- and I think most of my colleagues believe -- that the president has failed to make his case as to why we have engaged in Libya , '' House Speaker John Boehner told reporters Thursday . 
`` I think the strategy was flawed from the beginning . 
As I said then , I understand the humanitarian mission , but the idea that the rest of the strategy was to hope that Gadhafi would leave begged the question of well how long are we going to be there ? '' 
But , the Ohio Republican added , `` I do n't want to do anything that would undermine NATO or to send the signal to our allies around the world that we are not going to be engaged . 
This is primarily a fight between the Congress and the president over his unwillingness to consult with us before making this decision . '' 
During a trip to Jamaica on Wednesday , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton dismissed fears of a quagmire and said the mission should not be abandoned now . 
Clinton said the Libyan opposition has made `` very clear progress '' in its political organization , as well as in its fight against forces loyal to Gadhafi . 
`` But the bottom line is , whose side are you on ? '' 
she said to reporters . 
`` Are you on Gadhafi 's side or are you on the side of the aspirations of the Libyan people and the international coalition that has been created to support them ? '' 
`` For the Obama administration , the answer to that question is very easy . '' 
Boehner said Wednesday that the GOP-controlled House will not back a resolution sponsored by Sen. John McCain , R-Arizona , expressing congressional support for limited American involvement in the NATO-led military campaign in Libya . 
McCain 's resolution , introduced Tuesday with Sen. John Kerry , D-Massachusetts , authorizes the commitment of U.S. forces for a year , while stressing the lack of support for any use of American ground troops . 
McCain , the GOP 's 2008 presidential nominee and a decorated veteran of the Vietnam War , said he believes Obama `` did the right thing by intervening -LRB- in Libya -RRB- to stop a looming humanitarian disaster . '' 
House leaders are preparing to hold a vote on the McCain-Kerry measure , but are also considering another resolution that would strictly limit U.S. involvement in Libya to a noncombat role . 
Clinton testified Thursday on the matter in private session before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee . 
