Army deserters have joined the uprising against President Assad The Arab League 's monitoring chief has warned of an escalation of violence in Syria in recent days , as the government intensifies its crackdown on protests . 
Gen Mustafa al-Dabi said the violence would make it more difficult for the two sides to engage in talks . 
Activists say 135 people have died in two days . 
A BBC reporter in Damascus says the regime appears to be losing control of rebellious areas of the capital . 
The UN Security Council is due to discuss a draft resolution on Syria . 
The BBC 's Jeremy Bowen in Damascus says opposition fighters have set up checkpoints and appear to move around freely in the suburbs of Douma and Saqba . 
President Bashar al-Assad 's forces still operate in these areas , but they do not appear to be able to maintain control , our correspondent says . 
Thousands of people attended the funeral of an anti-government protester killed on Thursday in Saqba . 
Jeremy Bowen BBC News , Damascus A convoy of journalists , without regime minders , went alone to Saqba , a poor district about 20 minutes from central Damascus , where a funeral was due to happen of a man killed by the Assad regime 's forces . 
Once we left the center we saw no regime security men . 
Then on the edge of Saqba we came upon several dozen armed and masked fighters from the Free Syria Army . 
Local people said that the intelligence and police conducted operations in the area , sometimes a couple of times a week , sometimes every night . 
It 's clear that the regime forces , when they deploy enough men , can enter the rebellious suburbs of Damascus . 
But they do not appear to have the force to hold them . 
This does not mean that the president is about to fall . 
He has his own hard-core support , and he also has well-armed forces , in and out of uniform . 
It looks as if Syria faces more blood and more bitterness . 
Mourners chanted : `` Better to die than be humiliated . '' 
Much of the violence in the past two days has focused on the central city of Homs . 
Activists say Homs was bombarded on Thursday and more than 30 people were killed . 
Rami Abdul-Rahman of the the UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights described the attack as `` a terrifying massacre '' . 
More deaths were reported in Homs on Friday , and the nearby city of Hama also came under assault with heavy gunfire and loud explosions . 
Earlier it was reported that 30 people had been killed in Hama , but rights groups now give a much lower figure . 
The Local Coordination Committees , a Syria-based network of activists , reported deaths in cities across the country . 
On Friday evening , the group said 135 people had been killed in the past two days . 
Gen Dabi , whose monitoring mission has been extended until late February , said violence had soared `` in a significant way '' in recent days . 
Earlier in the week the general had claimed that the Arab League mission had helped bring down violence in Syria . 
The mission was set up in late December to monitor Damascus ' compliance with a league plan to end the fighting . 
But six league members , including Saudi Arabia , have decided to withdraw their observers in protest at the continuing crackdown . 
It is thought that Friday 's Security Council meeting , announced by France 's UN mission on its Twitter page , will discuss an Arab League plan to end the violence . 
The plan calls for Syria to form a national unity government with the opposition within two months . 
The Damascus government has already rejected the initiative , calling it `` flagrant interference '' in Syria 's internal affairs . 
The UN has conceded it can not keep track of the death toll , which it estimated earlier as more than 5,400 people . 
The government says it is fighting `` terrorists and armed gangs '' and claims that some 2,000 members of the security forces have been killed since the unrest began last March . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
