27 January 12 15:06 GMT BBC Middle East editor , Damascus The BBC has seen more evidence of the extent to which the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has lost control of sections of the poor suburbs of Damascus . 
We had no luck following Arab League observers . 
They drove round a middle class , largely Christian and largely pro-Assad neighborhood in the center of the capital , without stopping , before returning to their hotel with their escort of regime security men . 
So a convoy of journalists , without regime minders , went alone to Saqba , a poor district about 20 minutes from central Damascus - where a funeral was due to take place of a man killed by the Assad regime 's forces . 
Once we left the center we saw no regime security men . 
Then on the edge of Saqba we came upon several dozen armed and masked fighters from the Free Syria Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- . 
An older man - who said he had been a general in the Syrian army - was in charge . 
He was n't masked , had a stubbly , scarred face and was carrying a hand grenade . 
His men had sandbagged positions , and said they were protecting the local people . 
They took us deeper into Saqba where several thousand local men had gathered , marching through the streets and chanting anti-regime slogans , some calling for President Assad 's execution . 
They processed the body of the dead man on an open stretcher . 
Local people said that the intelligence services and police conducted operations in the area , sometimes a couple of times a week , sometimes every night . 
They pointed out bullet holes in lamp posts . 
It 's clear that the regime forces , when they deploy enough men , can enter the rebellious suburbs of Damascus . 
But they do not appear to have the force to hold them . 
It is equally clear that the only way the president can enforce his authority in Saqba , and other suburbs of the city , is through the barrel of a gun . 
His regime faces opposition in the capital that is increasingly armed and organised . 
This does not mean that the president is about to fall . 
He has his own hardcore support , based on minority communities - his own Alawites , Christians , some Druze and Kurds , and also well-off Sunnis . 
Mr Assad also has well-armed forces - in and out of uniform . 
It looks as if Syria faces more blood and more bitterness . 
