Syria crisis : UN Security Council mulls Assad measures The BBC 's Jeremy Bowen in Damascus suburb where President Assad appears to be losing his control The UN Security Council has met to consider a draft resolution against Syria 's government . 
Activists and the Arab League urged the UN to take stronger action after a surge in violence this week in which dozens of people have died . 
The UK , France and Germany drafted a resolution with Arab states , supporting the League 's call for President Bashar al-Assad to hand power to a deputy . 
Russia , an ally of Mr Assad , has said it will not back the text . 
Russia 's UN envoy Vitaly Churkin told reporters after the meeting in New York that the draft resolution was unacceptable , but Moscow was ready to engage in further talks . 
He said Russia had set out its `` red lines '' and that the resolution should not contain any threat of sanctions or an arms embargo . 
Jeremy Bowen BBC News , Damascus A convoy of journalists , without regime minders , went alone to Saqba , a poor district about 20 minutes from central Damascus , where a funeral was due to happen of a man killed by the Assad regime 's forces . 
Once we left the center , we saw no regime security men . 
Then , on the edge of Saqba , we came upon several dozen armed and masked fighters from the Free Syria Army . 
Local people said that the intelligence and police conducted operations in the area , sometimes a couple of times a week , sometimes every night . 
It 's clear that the regime forces , when they deploy enough men , can enter the rebellious suburbs of Damascus . 
But they do not appear to have the force to hold them . 
This does not mean that the president is about to fall . 
He has his own hard-core support , and he also has well-armed forces , in and out of uniform . 
It looks as if Syria faces more blood and more bitterness . 
The draft `` not only ignored our red lines but also added some new elements which we find unacceptable as a matter of principle , '' AFP news agency reported him as saying . 
`` The Security Council can not go about imposing solutions in crisis situations in various countries of the world . '' 
The BBC 's UN correspondent , Barbara Plett , says Russia will not support any measure that could mean regime change . 
Moscow was also concerned about a warning of further measures if Syria does not comply with the resolution , fearing that this could open the door to outside intervention , our correspondent says . 
Russia and China vetoed a previous draft resolution against Syria late last year . 
Western nations have been hoping that Arab League support for this resolution will soften Russian resistance . 
The current draft , presented to the council by Morocco , largely supports a plan outlined by the Arab League earlier this week calling for Mr Assad to hand authority to a deputy , who would form a national unity government with the opposition within two months . 
The draft resolution calls for further measures if the Syrian government does not comply with the call for political transition . 
The council will not vote on the resolution until next week . 
`` There is now a chance that the Security Council will finally take a clear stand on Syria . 
That is long overdue , '' said German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle . 
The French ambassador to the UN , Gerrard Araud described the situation in Syria as a major crisis . 
`` The country is sinking into civil war . 
We are desperately looking for a political solution , '' he said . 
`` We have here the League of Arab States which is proposing a solution . 
So our reaction is simply to support it , but again , there is nothing else . '' 
Syria 's UN ambassador , Bashar Ja'afari , expressed anger towards the states that drafted the resolution . 
`` They are talking about my country without consulting us , without sharing with us their concerns , their remarks , '' he said . 
`` They deal with us as if we are a former colony , that we should subjugate ourselves to their will . 
They are wrong and they will be disappointed . '' 
The UN meeting comes amid a spike in violence across Syria , with activists reporting 135 people killed in the past two days . 
Gen Mustafa al-Dabi , head of the Arab League 's monitoring mission , said violence had soared `` in a significant way '' in recent days . 
Earlier in the week , the general had claimed that the Arab League mission had helped reduce the level of violence in Syria . 
Opposition forces have set up checkpoints in parts of the capital , and correspondents say forces loyal to Mr Assad appear unable to maintain control . 
The UN has conceded it can not keep track of the death toll , which it estimated as more than 5,400 people since the unrest began last March . 
The government says it is fighting `` terrorists and armed gangs '' and claims that some 2,000 members of the security forces have been killed . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
