President Barack Obama addresses a joint session of the United States Congress on the subject of job creation on Capitol Hill in Washington , September 8 , 2011 . 
WASHINGTON | Fri Sep 9 , 2011 9:48 am BST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - President Barack Obama 's jobs package could lift U.S. economic growth by one to three percentage points in 2012 , add well over one million jobs and lower the unemployment rate by at least half a percentage point , judging by early estimates . 
It might not exactly deliver the `` jolt '' Obama claimed in his speech to Congress Thursday night , but it would be enough to make a difference . 
The basic idea is to give a sufficient boost to get the stalled recovery over the hump where households , banks and businesses have paid down more of their debt loads and regained the confidence to start spending , lending and hiring again . 
Once demand picks up , the private sector will kick in and begin hiring , and the fiscal props can fall away . 
It would deliver the economic medicine prescribed in recent weeks by Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and the International Monetary Fund to prevent a worrisome slowdown in global economic growth from turning into recession . 
U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner also can assure his fellow finance officials at the G7 meeting of top industrial nations in Marseilles on Friday the United States is pulling its weight . 
The wild card of course is whether a Republican-dominated U.S. House of Representatives will agree to the full $ 447 billion -LRB- 280 billion pounds -RRB- package , an unlikely prospect given their criticism that the $ 830 billion stimulus program of February 2009 failed to deliver lift-off for the U.S. economy and added to the huge U.S. budget deficit . 
The U.S. economy is so scarred by the 2007 housing credit implosion , the bank failures it triggered in 2008 and the deepest recession in 70 years that it is taking a very long time to recover and create jobs . 
`` What you come down to is that there is no silver bullet , no magic bullet that this president or anyone can propose that would drive unemployment down to 5 percent in the next year , '' said Joel Prakken , chairman of Macroeconomic Advisers , an economic modeling firm in St. Louis . 
`` It has to come from the private sector and for that you have to work through the overhang from the housing crisis that is suppressing aggregate demand , '' he said . 
This suggests that Obama 's jobs program most likely would serve as a palliative , not a cure , leaving room for the Federal Reserve to provide further monetary stimulus to keep the economy from slipping back into recession . 
Analysts at Capital Economics estimated that Obama 's plan is equivalent to 3 percent of U.S. GDP and should be enough to add significantly to 2012 growth if passed in full by Congress . 
The biggest single boost could come from a $ 250 billion reduction in payroll taxes . 
Obama proposes extending an existing 2 percent cut in the payroll tax and increasing its size to 3.1 percent for workers , and adding a cut for employers . 
`` These payroll tax reductions are the proposals that have the greatest chance of getting passed by Congress because it will be harder for Republicans to vote against proposed tax cuts , '' said Paul Ashworth , chief U.S. economist for Capital Economics . 
The tax cuts could add as much as $ 375 billion to economic output to the $ 14 trillion U.S. economy , based upon Congressional Budget Office estimates in August of the economic impact that fiscal stimulus programs can have on GDP . 
But not all of that would be fresh stimulus money , since a $ 112 billion payroll tax cut is already in place and would simply be extended . 
Additionally , the full impact would be lessened because it does not target lower income workers . 
`` It gives money disproportionately to people at the top of the income scale . 
Higher income individuals are more likely to save the money , they do n't need to spend it on essentials , so the effective impact is lessened , '' said Roberton Williams , senior fellow at the centrist Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center . 
Still Macroeconomic Advisers estimated that the 2 percent payroll tax cut extension alone would add 400,000 jobs and boost GDP in 2012 by 0.5 percent . 
The larger sum might increase that to roughly 0.7 percent GDP and 600,000 jobs . 
The second biggest element in Obama 's plan is the $ 105 billion in infrastructure investment , which could add as much as $ 262 billion to the economy , based on the CBO figures . 
Macroeconomic Advisers estimates that could create about 150,000 new jobs in the first year and add over half a million jobs over three years -- good news but small for an economy that usually generates over two million jobs a year when in good health . 
The challenge also would be to find `` shovel-ready '' projects where highways , railroads or school renovation plans are on the drawing board awaiting funding . 
Otherwise it can take years to get major construction projects under way . 
Extending unemployment benefits , which total $ 49 billion in Obama 's plan , also has a significant impact . 
It could add up to $ 102 billion to the economy . 
Macroeconomic Advisers estimates it would add 0.25 percent to GDP growth in 2012 and create 200,000 new jobs by putting extra cash in consumers ' pockets . 
Economists were re-running computer models late on Thursday to update their figures . 
Based on a smaller $ 300 billion stimulus package that Obama unveiled , Ian Shepherdson , U.S. economist at High Frequency Economics , had estimated a 1.3 percent boost to GDP and 1.7 million jobs over the life of the programs . 
Their initial reaction was if it were adopted in full , which is quite unlikely , the plan would lower the 9.1 percent unemployment rate closer to 8 percent in 2012 and give a welcome boost to an economy that grew at a 1 percent annual rate in the second quarter . 
But it is does not guarantee solid recovery . 
`` Is this going to be more than a panacea for our problems ? 
It is hard to tell , '' said Williams . 
`` This downturn has been deeper and longer than anything we have seen since the 1930s and we do n't fully understand it . 
What we do know is that what we did in 2009 was not big enough . '' 
-LRB- Editing by Mary Milliken and Philip Barbara -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
