By Jonathan Marcus BBC Diplomatic Correspondent The three men were taking part in a meeting of ministers and security heads , state TV said The reported attack in Damascus could mark an important symbolic turning point in the struggle to overthrow President Bashar al-Assad 's regime . 
The claim that a bomber was able to carry out such an attack against a high security target speaks volumes about the government 's ability to protect its own members and raises questions about the broader capacities of Syria 's `` security state '' . 
Caution , though , is still needed . 
Details of the event are sketchy , contested , and rely upon elements all with their own axes to grind . 
Why , according to reliable witnesses , does the building where the bomb apparently went off appear to be undamaged ? 
Why has Syrian government TV refrained from showing its usual lurid images of the casualties ? 
Conspiracy theorists may have a field-day , but there is one inescapable fact . 
The news put out by the Syrian government of a rebel attack against the very heart of the regime can not be interpreted as anything other than a disaster for President Assad and his supporters . 
It sends out a message that if these men can not be protected by the state security apparatus , then who can ? 
It is in this sense that the attack marks a new phase in the struggle for Syria 's future . 
As the level of senior defections from the Syrian military continues and as the fighting encroaches on key areas of the capital Damascus , many analysts believe that it is now not so much a question of `` if '' the Syrian regime collapses from within , but `` when '' . 
23 Dec 2011 - 44 people killed in twin car bomb attacks in Damascus 10 Feb 2012 - 28 people killed as security compounds hit by two suicide car bombs in Aleppo 17 Mar - 27 people die in explosions in Damascus near intelligence and security buildings 10 May - Two suicide bombers blow themselves up outside military intelligence in Damascus killing 55 No wonder , then , the warning from US Defense Secretary Leon Panetta that the crisis in Syria risks spiralling out of control . 
While the Syrian military with its artillery , tanks and air power still retains the overwhelming preponderance of firepower , there are growing indications that its actual performance on the ground is less than impressive . 
Western sources indicate that the army in some areas is having to move troops by helicopter since the roads are so dangerous . 
Nobody should be under the impression , though , that this is simply about President Assad himself and his immediate associates . 
The months of bitter fighting have introduced a nasty sectarian edge to the conflict . 
Mr Assad 's Alawite supporters have nowhere to go , raising fears of continuing sectarian violence in the country even if the president himself were to be forced from office . 
Amidst this background , international diplomatic efforts appear to be turning in the void . 
The UN is seeking a new resolution to try to apply practical sanctions against the Assad regime if the president does not agree to a peace plan . 
Russia - for reasons which have as much to do with its own approach to international affairs and its concerns about non-interference by the West , as it does to any affinity with the Assad family - has set itself firmly against such a step , offering up instead its own resolution that would extend the mandate for UN monitors . 
But - in the absence of any ceasefire - quite what their role might be is unclear . 
Events on the ground are driving this crisis . 
Diplomacy is struggling to keep up . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
