The following is a timeline of key events in the Syrian conflict . 
Beginning with the start of the uprising in March 2011 , it charts major attacks on government targets as well as the worst cases of killings of civilians . 
Efforts by the members of the international community to influence and bring an end to the conflict are also mentioned . 
Demonstrators demanded the release of political prisoners , but some were shot dead by security forces , triggering unrest that gradually spread throughout the country . 
The Syrian uprising , then a month old , experienced its bloodiest day so far on 22 April when 72 protesters were killed by security forces firing on crowds . 
Many of the dead were in the southern village of Ezra , near Deraa and in a suburb of Damascus . 
Jisr al-Shughour , 3-6 June 2011 In June 2011 , the Syrian government announced that 120 security personnel had been killed in the north-western town of Jisr al-Shughour . 
The figure may have been inflated but it was a major attack and , as the BBC 's correspondent Jim Muir said at the time , it showed that the government was facing an armed uprising rather than mass peaceful protests . 
Opposition groups formed the Syrian National Council and pledge to overthrow President Bashar al-Assad . 
The Arab League voted to suspend Syria , accusing it of failing to implement an Arab peace plan , and imposed sanctions . 
Jabal al-Zawiya , 19-20 December 2011 Villages in the area of Jabal al-Zawiya in Idlib province were the site of a massacre of army defectors . 
Opposition activists said around 70 soldiers were mown down by machine-guns on 19 December after hundreds fled their positions between the villages of Kafrouaid and Kansafra . 
This was later backed up by eyewitnesses and a report by Human Rights Watch . 
The London-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said a further 111 people - also mostly army defectors - were hunted down by the army and killed the next day in an `` organised massacre '' . 
Syrian forces began shelling the restive city of Homs on 3 February , in what was to become a month-long bombardment . 
Early reports talked of as many as 200 deaths , but one of the main activist groups later revised its confirmed number down to 55 . 
The BBC 's Paul Wood , who was in Homs traveling with fighters from the Free Syrian Army , described a city under siege . 
The bodies of 45 people , mostly women and children , were found in the Karm el-Zeytoun neighborhood of Homs on 12 March . 
New York , 21 March 2012 The UN Security Council backed UN-Arab League envoy Kofi Annan 's peace plan to end all violence , provide humanitarian relief and secure a peaceful transition of power . 
The Syrian government accepted the plan six days later . 
The first UN observers , a group of just six , began their work to monitor the situation on the ground as part of the Annan peace plan . 
Their numbers increased to nearly 300 over the following weeks , but with violence continuing to escalate they suspended their operations on 16 June . 
The largest of a series of attacks blamed on suicide bombers in the capital , in which 55 people died after explosions outside the military intelligence building . 
Many of the attacks have targeted security facilities . 
The government blames anti-regime forces and Islamist groups linked to al-Qaeda , but the opposition says the attacks are staged in an attempt to discredit them . 
The village of Taldou , in the Houla region near Homs , witnessed one of the worst massacres in Syria 's uprising . 
UN observers confirmed that 108 people were killed , most of them women and children . 
Some had been killed by shell fire , but the majority had been shot at point-blank range or stabbed . 
The government blamed terrorists , but survivors and human rights groups pointed the finger at the army and shabiha militiamen allied to the government . 
Manaf Tlas , a general from a Sunni family close to the Assads , fled Syria , in the highest-level desertion of the regime so far . 
Two weeks later , he was confirmed to be in France . 
Opposition activists and witnesses said army tanks bombarded the village for several hours before pro-government militiamen swept in , shooting and stabbing victims at close range . 
They reported that as many as 220 people were killed , including a number of rebel fighters . 
The Syrian government said at least 50 people were killed in Tremseh , but it blamed `` armed terrorist groups '' . 
Defense Minister Daoud Rajiha and his deputy Assef Shawkat , President Assad 's brother-in-law , are killed in a suicide attack during a high-level meeting at the national security headquarters , Syrian state TV says . 
General Hassan Turkomani , an assistant to the vice-president , is also killed in the attack . 
The interior minister and national security chief were said to be injured in the attack , which some analysts describe as a turning point in the fate of the Assad regime . 
The rebel Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- and a jihadist group calling itself Lord of the Martyrs Brigade both said they were behind the bombing . 
Reports say the bomber was working as a bodyguard for members of the inner circle . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
