By Elise Labott , CNN Senior State Department Producer The U.S. State Department has said Ali Aujali , Libya 's opposition representative , can become the official head of mission . 
Move follows formal request by the Transitional National Council Ex-ambassador will have to work out diplomatic status in order to return The move comes as the rebel movement experiences internal strife U.S. has warned this is a `` do-or-die moment , '' administration official said Washington -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The U.S. State Department has signed an order handing over the Libyan Embassy in Washington to the Transitional National Council , a senior department official told CNN . 
The official said move would allow the Libyan rebel movement to reopen the embassy , accredit diplomats and regain control of the embassy 's frozen bank account , worth about $ 13 million . 
It follows a formal request from the TNC to reopen the embassy under its control and accredit Ali Aujali , the former Libyan ambassador to the United States , as its ambassador . 
In March , the State Department ordered the embassy closed and expelled diplomats loyal to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi . 
Aujali had resigned his post as the regime 's ambassador to the United States in February and has since represented the opposition in Washington . 
The United States on July 15 recognized the rebel movement based in Benghazi as Libya 's rightful government . 
The State Department official said that Aujali can become the official head of mission after he works out his official diplomatic status , which was technically interrupted when he broke with the regime . 
Rebels find mines left by Libyan troops Ramadan does n't slow civil war in Libya The move comes amid internal strife in the rebel movement , and the State Department is warning the Transitional National Council to get its act together . 
An administration official told CNN the United States has warned the TNC that this is a `` do-or-die moment '' for the organization to carry out a credible and thorough investigation of the killing of its military commander , Abdel Fatah Younis . 
Concerns have been raised that last week 's mysterious assassination might have been carried out by feuding rebel groups . 
NATO has been bombing Libya for more than four months under a U.N. mandate to protect civilians from troops loyal to Gadhafi . 
The U.S. Embassy in Tripoli was shuttered and American personnel evacuated by sea and air in late February after the revolt erupted . 
Libyan and U.S. officials held face-to-face talks in Tunisia last month , but Washington says the sole point of the meeting was to repeat its demand that Gadhafi `` must go . '' 
