They slow the advance of rebel fighters In Tiji , civilians used as shields are keeping rebels from attacking , they say In Zlitan , reporters are taken to a funeral after a NATO strike Qawalish , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The front lines of Libya 's grinding war weave through the western mountains and around Zlitan , the last city east of Tripoli still under the grip of strongman Moammar Gadhafi . 
In many places that Gadhafi 's forces have fled , they 've left behind deadly fields of mines -- tens , perhaps hundreds of thousands of them , say the rebels . 
Not only do they pose a danger for civilians but they also have slowed the advance of the rebels in their march toward Tripoli . 
Here in Qawalish , a town 60 miles southwest of Tripoli where fierce fighting has taken place in recent weeks , the war looks like this : Men in no protective gear sift through a public park to fight an enemy that can kill instantly and indiscriminately . 
Here , the enemy is Gadhafi 's landmines . 
Milad al Saidy and his fellow `` sappers , '' as those who work with mines are known , are armed only with simple metal probes and a couple of metal detectors . 
A burned-out shell of a car sits as evidence of what the mines can do . 
Libya 's frontline on an ancient fort Ramadan does n't slow civil war in Libya Reporter 's journey into Western Libya So far , they say , about 2,500 mines have been discovered , all left by fleeing pro-Gadhafi forces . 
Al Saidy has been doing this work for 16 years but many others are green -- fresh recruits who volunteered for a potentially deadly job . 
Some learn on the job . 
Amazingly , al Saidy said , no one has been killed or hurt . 
`` It 's very , very dangerous but people are insisting they want to work with us to secure the lives of the innocent , the children , so families can come without the fear of landmines , '' he said . 
The sapper teams find a Chinese-made anti-tank mine , designed to blow up armored vehicles . 
The rebels explain that the anti-tank mines require a lot of pressure to detonate . 
So , Gadhafi 's men place Brazilian-made anti-personnel mines , which blow when a person steps on them , atop the bigger mines . 
The result is an easier but potentially far more deadly blast . 
The work , al Saidy said , is crucial . 
He and his men toil under the sun , even though it is Ramadan . 
They observe the rules of the holy month , neither eating nor drinking and pausing only to pray . 
`` The circumstances command us to work , '' he said . 
Farther west , rebel fighters loom over the town of Tiji from an observation post . 
This place , the locals say , was used by the Berbers 2,000 years ago to look out for invading Roman armies . 
Now it 's a lookout for a whole new war . 
The rebels call Tiji a gateway city . 
If they are able to wrest control from Gadhafi 's men , there would be little between them and Tripoli . 
But talk of victory and actually achieving it are two different things . 
The rebels said they engaged Gadhafi 's troops this week but then saw women and children running into houses . 
`` In this situation we 're facing a big problem because Gadhafi is using people as a human shield , '' said Tarek Zambou , head of the local military council . 
CNN could not independently verify that claim , but it 's clear that after making significant gains last week in half a dozen towns beneath the Nafusa Mountains , rebel advances have stalled in this key town . 
The rebels said they have sent word to residents : Leave now . 
It wo n't be long before they are firing again . 
Five months into the Libyan war , the rebels have won international support and NATO jets have continuously bombed Gadhafi 's forces . 
But so far , they have not been able to break the dictator 's hold . 
On the eastern front , they have been pushing in Zlitan . 
Thursday , however , it appeared that Gadhafi 's forces were still in control of the central city . 
In recent weeks , NATO has intensified its bombing of Zlitan , which is less than 50 miles west of rebel-held Misrata . 
Tuesday , jets struck two buildings in Zlitan , the alliance said . 
One of Gadhafi 's main battle tanks was destroyed in that attack . 
A follow-up run Thursday morning attacked another command-and-control center , used to support multiple rocket launchers , NATO said . 
A mother and her two boys were buried Thursday . 
The Libyan government , which took reporters on a tour of the city , said they were killed in the airstrikes that hit a two-story villa in a residential neighborhood . 
A NATO spokesman acknowledged the airstrike but said : `` We do not know of any casualties , we have only heard the government allegations of casualties visa the media . '' 
Abu Bakr , the brother of the slain woman , wept through the funeral . 
He pulled back the blankets covering the two small coffins bearing the bloody bodies of his nephews , Mohamed , 5 , and Motez , 3 . 
`` Whether you like it or not , we 're staying here , '' he yelled . 
`` This is our country . '' 
He damned NATO and `` the rats , '' the Libyan regime 's word for the rebels . 
Back in Qawalish , al Saidy , the sapper , leaves the minefields to return to his vehicle . 
He knows there is no end date yet for his risky work . 
`` The more we advance , the more landmines we are facing , '' he said . 
But at least on this day , there 's good news . 
CNN 's Michael Holmes reported from Qawalish and Tiji and Ivan Watson reported from Zlitan . 
Jomana Karadsheh contributed to this report . 
