January 25 , 2011 | By Amir Ahmed , CNN Demonstrators clash with Egyptian police in central Cairo during a protest over the economy and corruption . 
People across Egypt took to the streets on Tuesday in demonstrations against corruption and failing economic policies , rallies partly inspired by similar protests that rocked Tunisia this month . 
Thousands were protesting in the capital of Cairo , according to the `` Front to Defend Egypt Protesters , '' an alliance of lawyers who helped organize the events . 
At first , witnesses said , the police were restrained in Cairo . 
But later , they said , police fired around a dozen rounds of tear gas on the protesters , and people in the crowd threw the canisters back at the officers . 
The group said about 200 demonstrators were in the southern city of Aswan , 2,000 in the eastern city of Ismailiya , and about 3,000 in the northern city of Mahallah . 
Protest organizers said they hope to capture the regional momentum for political change set by Tunisians , who 10 days ago forced the collapse of Zine El Abidine Ben Ali 's 23-year rule . 
The Egyptian government did not issue permits for Tuesday 's planned protests . 
In an interview released Tuesday with state-run al-Ahram newspaper , Interior Minister Habib Adly warned that `` the security agencies are able to stop any attempt to attend '' the demonstrations and called the efforts of the `` youth staging street protests ineffective . '' 
By early Tuesday morning , more than 90,000 people throughout the country had pledged to participate in the event in a Facebook group called `` We Are All Khaled Said , '' named after an Alexandria activist who was allegedly beaten to death by police . 
The Facebook group demands raising the minimum wage , sacking the interior minister , creating two-term presidential term limits and scrapping existing emergency laws that the group says `` resulted in police control '' over the people and the nation . 
To highlight the role of police corruption , organizers tapped January 25 -- Police Day and a national holiday -- to hold protests . 
Amnesty International released a statement Monday `` urging the Egyptian authorities not to crack down '' on the planned nationwide demonstration . 
The banned Muslim Brotherhood , the biggest organized opposition to Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak 's regime , had stated it would not have an official presence at Tuesday 's protests , but some of its members `` have reportedly been summoned and threatened with arrest and detention '' if they attend and protest , Amnesty International said . 
