Alabama expects billions from BP over oil spill BIRMINGHAM , Ala. , | Tue Sep 28 , 2010 3:55 am IST BIRMINGHAM , Ala. , -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Alabama expects to receive billions of dollars in penalties from BP Plc in the wake of the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , a state commission said on Monday . 
BP and the White House will probably soon reach an agreement on how much money will be available to four Gulf states that have been affected by the spill , said the state Coastal Recovery Commission set up by Governor Bob Riley . 
`` While we do n't know the total or how it will be divided ... we have every reason to believe Alabama will suddenly have significant resources at its disposal , likely in the billions of dollars , '' the statement said . 
The commission is charged with examining the impacts of the spill and recommending proposals to protect and enhance the coastline , Riley said in a separate statement . 
Alabama has to `` make sure that the aftermath of this disaster is addressed and that we have a plan to fully recover what has been lost , '' said Ricky Matthews , publisher of the Mobile Press-Register newspaper and chairman of the commission . 
`` We have to understand what the issues are and how to handle them , '' he said in an interview . 
The commission is due to meet on Tuesday . 
Louisiana 's coastline bore the brunt of damage from the spill , which began on April 20 when a BP deepwater rig exploded and sank , unleashing millions of gallons of oil into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Alabama , Mississippi and Florida also sustained damage . 
The spill ran until July 15 , when the well was capped . 
BP this month turned down Alabama 's claim for $ 148 million in lost government revenue because it said there was ongoing litigation over the issue . 
The state 's attorney general , Troy King , accused the company of `` playing games '' with Alabama and other states on the Gulf of Mexico coast . 
There is a growing dispute over how states , individuals and businesses should be compensated for losses suffered as a result of the spill . 
BP has set up a $ 20 billion compensation fund administered by lawyer Kenneth Feinberg to handle claims but a plethora of lawsuits also have been filed against the company . 
Alabama 's losses stem from diminished sales , lodging and fuel tax revenues as tourists avoided the state 's coast this summer because of the spill . 
