U.S. official says BP spill fines should go to Gulf NEW ORLEANS | Tue Sep 28 , 2010 8:50 pm EDT NEW ORLEANS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A large portion of fines that BP Plc may pay for its role in the worst oil spill in U.S. history should go toward fixing the damage caused to Gulf Coast states , a federal official said on Tuesday . 
Navy Secretary Ray Mabus , who drew up a Gulf Coast recovery plan at the direction of President Barack Obama , said Congress should dedicate `` a significant amount '' of penalties levied on BP under the Clean Water Act to restoring a region that suffered economic and environmental damage from the spill . 
Mabus did not make clear what proportion of the BP fines should be dedicated to the recovery effort and how much money it would involve . 
BP faces potentially billions of dollars in fines from the spill , which began in April and was plugged in July . 
Meanwhile , a U.S. Department of Justice official denied that it was in settlement talks with the British energy giant after a U.S. congressman told reporters the two parties were in negotiations over spill fines . 
Republican U.S. Representative Steve Scalise had told reporters in New Orleans that he understood that negotiations were ongoing between BP and the Justice Department that could lead to a settlement or , if they failed , to a protracted court case . 
In a report , Mabus also recommended that Congress create a federal Gulf Coast Recovery Council to oversee the funds that would be set aside for Gulf Coast recovery . 
Funds should go toward repairing damage to water and wetlands , to economic recovery , to tourism and seafood marketing and promotion , and to improving the health and mental health of people affected by the disaster , Mabus said . 
`` Congress has to come up with a number , '' he said . 
Environmental groups praised the recommendations made by Mabus , a former governor of Mississippi , one of the states affected by the spill . 
`` Secretary Mabus is doing his part to fulfill President Obama 's promise to create a long-term plan to restore the Gulf Coast and make it better than it was before the BP oil disaster , '' said a joint statement from groups including the Environmental Defense Fund , the National Audubon Society and the National Wildlife Federation . 
The latest government estimate on how much oil spilled from the ruptured well off the Louisiana coast in the Gulf of Mexico is more than 4 million barrels . 
That could mean a fine of more than $ 17 billion if the government seeks the maximum penalty against BP . 
In another development , the seven-member White House commission that is developing recommendations on the future of offshore energy drilling accused companies involved in the spill of failing to cooperate fully with its inquiry . 
The panel lacks subpoena power to force companies such as BP and Transocean Ltd to provide information . 
A Transocean spokesman said the company `` has been and will continue to be responsive to the Commission and other federal entities investigating the Macondo well incident . '' 
The U.S. House of Representatives passed legislation giving the commission subpoena authority but the measure has languished in the partisan gridlock of the U.S. Senate . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Mitt Romney was the 70th Governor of Massachusetts from Jan 2,2003 to Jan 4,2007 . 
During his one term the Buzzards Bay oil spill happened during April 2003 . 
On April 27 , 2003 , eight years ago the Bouchard Barge B-120 hit an obstacle in Buzzards Bay , creating a 12-foot rupture in its hull and discharging an estimated 100,000 gallons of No. 6 oil . 
The oil is known to have affected an estimated 90 miles of shoreline , killed 450 numerous bird species , and recreational use of the bay , such as shell fishing and boating . 
Since the 2003 oil spill the US Coast Guard has appealed the 2004 Massachusetts Oil Spill Prevention Act and one Mattapoisett , Massachusetts property damage lawsuit has dragged on for eight years . 
Republican Mitt Romney is laying the groundwork for a possible White House campaign in 2012 , hiring a team of staff members and consultants . 
Partisan gridlock is a natural result of the current two-party system . 
I know other parties -LRB- i.e. Green and Libertarian -RRB- have tried to change this , but the established parties are too strong . 
I believe the answer lies in individual states making elections non-partisan . 
The top vote-getters in the primary square off for the general election . 
This would keep Republicans from going far right to get elected and Democrats from going far left . 
With the current system it is no wonder that the result is gridlock in Congress . 
The parties can still exist and promote their candidates , but the result would allow more mainstream candidates to get elected . 
BP is already liable under law for Gulf restoration costs and the proposed use of civil and criminal fines for that purpose is effectively a kickback to BP . 
The fines should be placed in a special adjunct fund to the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund to be distributed for improvement of oil spill response technology , create effective Area Response Plans and to create baseline ecological studies of our coastal and inland waterways . 
Right now , our skimming systems recover 200 times less than advertized , our Area Response Plans are ineffective and we do n't even know how ecological systems may be irreparably damaged by spills , dispersants and air pollution from burning oil . 
We need to develop : high speed skimmers that reliably work in high seas ; long duration aircraft that can map oil distribution including oil thickness and then directly transmit those maps directly to response vessels in real time , and ; complete maps and studies of marine , lake and river ecosystems so we can effectively protect the most sensitive areas from oil spill impacts . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
