Dodd Endorses Creation of Consumer Financial Products Agency Sen. Christopher Dodd -LRB- D-Conn . -RRB- 
chairs the panel that would legislate White House plans for a new agency . 
-LRB- By Harry Hamburg -- Associated Press -RRB- Christopher J. Dodd -LRB- D-Conn . -RRB- 
, chairman of the Senate Banking Committee , yesterday announced his support for the creation of a new agency with broad authority to protect consumers of financial products such as mortgage loans and credit cards . 
The Obama administration plans to propose such an agency next week as a key piece of its agenda for the reform of financial regulations . 
Dodd , whose committee will play a crucial role in legislating those reforms , had reserved judgment until now . 
The new office would strip away a major part of the responsibilities of the federal agencies that regulate banks , particularly the Federal Reserve . 
Consumer advocates and many members of Congress have said the Fed 's failure to enforce existing laws was a key cause of the financial crisis because firms could sell products that consumers could not afford . 
For example , the Fed waited until last summer to restrict mortgage-lending practices such as penalizing borrowers for attempting to refinance loans before an interest-rate adjustment and issuing loans without verifying the borrower 's income . 
By then , defaults on millions of loans issued on those terms already were contributing to a meltdown of financial markets . 
`` The economic mess we 're in is rooted in a spectacular failure of consumer protection , '' Dodd said in a statement . 
The statement added that the Fed `` failed for over 14 years to put an end to the predatory mortgage lending practices that led to the financial crisis . '' 
The Fed declined to comment . 
But regulators and industry representatives have quietly started to make the case that a new agency would be even less effective at protecting consumers and that strengthening the role of the existing agencies is a better approach . 
