`` Libya is not a piece of cake ; we are not a Mickey Mouse , '' Gadhafi 's son says The city of Zawiya is under government control NATO says a U.N. mandate is needed for a no-fly zone Diplomatic moves against the Gadhafi regime are afoot Read a day-by-day account of the battle for control of key areas of Libya and for the latest on what 's next for Libya , the opposition and Moammar Gadhafi , tune in to '' AC360 '' at 10 p.m. ET Thursday on CNN . 
Ras Lanuf , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Libya 's ragtag rebels in Zawiya succumbed Thursday to better armed and organized government soldiers after enduring a week of attacks that left the coastal city strewn with the debris of war . 
The city 's main Martyrs ' Square was littered with the bombed-out , scorched carcasses of army tanks and other military vehicles . 
Workers were sweeping up the evidence as supporters of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi chanted slogans and waved green flags . 
`` Today Zawiya , tomorrow Benghazi , '' ITV News ' Bill Neely said a Gadhafi supporteer told him in a reference to Libya 's main rebel-held city in the east . 
Journalists beaten , tortured in Libya Neely said he was the first reporter to reach the city center Thursday after the government wrested its control from the rebels . 
He said doctors had told him that scores of civilians had been wounded or killed in the siege ; they called the onslaught a massacre , a war crime . 
He counted more than 20 freshly dug graves . 
The city itself was quiet ; shops were closed and houses appeared empty . 
The mosque 's minaret was demolished , and spent bullets and other munitions lay on the ground with bloodied mlitary clothing . 
State-run television broadcast video of weapons and ammunition reportedly left behind by the rebels , whom the reporter referred to as `` terrorists , dogs and traitors , '' Neely said . 
Government retaliation against the residents appears to have begun , said one man , who told ITV that government forces were carrying out house-to-house searches in Zawiya . 
`` They start to arrest people , normal people , '' he said . 
`` Some of them I know personally ; they have nothing to do with what 's happening . '' 
Battles also raged in and around the eastern city of Ras Lanuf and many other cities , with the regime using planes and heavy artillery in its effort to reclaim areas that had been taken by the opposition . 
Libya 's state TV reported that `` Ras Lanuf has been cleansed from the armed gangs connected to al Qaeda . '' 
A doctor who worked in Ras Lanuf said at least three people were killed and 30 wounded in fighting before the main hospital had to be evacuated . 
Doctors at a hospital in the city of al-Brega reported two deaths and more than 20 people wounded in fighting in Ras Lanuf . 
Opposition forces could be seen retreating from the city . 
Some fighters said they had pulled back to a checkpoint five miles east of the city , but it was not clear who was in control of the city . 
CNN 's Ben Wedeman said the rebel forces appeared in disarray . 
`` It 's been a very chaotic effort on the part of the opposition fighters from the beginning , '' he said , adding that they had no command-and-control structure and little discipline . 
He credited them for their enthusiasm and spirit , but added , `` Once the going gets tough , the ranks start to fall apart and it descends into anarchy , chaos . '' 
Reporter : Libyan army fired at civilians Saif Gadhafi , a son of Moammar Gadhafi and a prominent spokesman for the regime , vowed to retake eastern Libya as well and insisted his father still commanded support . 
`` I receive hundreds of calls from the east daily and they are saying , ` Save us . ' 
They are begging us and pleading for us to save them and my answer is two words . 
Listen to me and I want those armed groups to listen to me real well , and I want our people in the east to hear this as well : We 're coming . '' 
He bristled at the possibility of military intervention . 
`` The Libyan people they will never welcome NATO or Americans , '' he said . 
`` Libya is not a piece of cake ; we are not a Mickey Mouse . '' 
Though the Libyan government forces appeared to advance on the ground , the opposition gained momentum internationally . 
The French government recognized the newly created Libyan opposition movement as the sole representative of the country and the British foreign secretary spoke to an opposition representative over the phone . 
In response , Libyan state TV said the Gadhafi government would consider ending its relationship with France . 
In the United States , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced plans to meet with opposition leaders . 
She said the United States was suspending relations with the Libyan Embassy in Washington , and an administration official added the embassy `` must shut down . '' 
But an official told CNN that `` ending the operations of the Libyan Embassy does not mean we 're cutting off diplomatic ties with Libya . '' 
Protests against the 68-year-old Gadhafi began February 15 as anti-government demonstrators sought his ouster after nearly 42 years of rule , and the discontent devolved into a fierce and bloody civil war . 
America 's top U.S. intelligence official , James Clapper , took note of Libya 's military prowess at a Senate Armed Services Committee meeting Thursday . 
He said Gadhafi is in the fight for the long haul , with military far superior to that of the opposition . 
Clapper described the Libyan air defense as `` substantial , '' saying it is the region 's second-largest , after Egypt , but he did not address how fighting would fare against Libya if a no-fly zone or other military strategies were imposed . 
He said Gadhafi has a lot of aircraft , although many are not operational . 
To `` some extent , '' he said , the aircraft have been used for attacks , but they have caused more structural damage than injury . 
In Brussels , Belgium , NATO defense ministers discussed the option of a no-fly zone over the North African country . 
Its secretary-general said any move to impose one would require a clear mandate from the United Nations . 
NATO also decided to bolster its presence in the Mediterranean Sea and perform detailed planning on humanitarian assistance . 
International military officials say the imposition of a no-fly zone could be complicated , but some opposition figures -- such as Mustafa Abdul-Jalil , a former justice minister who quit last month in protest and now heads the interim government in eastern Libya -- are advocating for the move . 
Gadhafi has said that imposing such a zone would simply unite Libyans behind him . 
Saying NATO is `` united , '' `` vigilant , '' and `` ready to act , '' Anders Fogh Rasmussen , the group 's secretary-general , said the body has begun round-the-clock airborne surveillance of Libya 's airspace . 
`` Time is of the essence , '' he said , adding that the crisis requires `` close international coordination '' among organizations such as NATO , the United Nations , the European Union , the African Union , and the Arab League . 
U.S. authorities have frozen $ 32 billion in assets tied to the Libyan regime , White House spokesman Jay Carney said . 
British Foreign Secretary William Hague spoke by telephone with Mahmoud Jabril , the National Transitional Council 's special envoy . 
He said European foreign ministers on Thursday talked about how the EU should react `` to the continuing appalling and unacceptable actions '' of the regime . 
Hague `` made clear that planning was under way on a full range of responses , including the possible establishment of a no-fly zone , '' the Foreign Office said in a statement . 
`` It would need international support , a clear trigger and a legal basis . 
He also said that another diplomatic mission would be sent to Benghazi shortly . '' 
At the NATO meeting , U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates said a no-fly zone option was still being considered , but was only in the planning stages . 
Gates added that any military response to Libya would need the United Nations to sanction it . 
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev signed an executive order banning the sale to Libya of arms , ammunition and military equipment , according to the Kremlin 's website . 
The Council of the European Union Thursday announced it will extend restrictions against Libyan entities . 
As for Gadhafi 's government , it has sought to influence international sentiment , announcing that its secretary of state for international relations will travel to Portugal , Greece and Malta on an exploratory , fact-finding mission that may include other destinations . 
The country has also invited British , French , Dutch and German fact-finding teams to examine reports of aerial bombardment and massacres . 
None has taken up Gadhafi on the offer . 
Death toll estimates have ranged from more than 1,000 to as many as 2,000 . 
As of Thursday morning , the war had forced out nearly 250,000 people , many of them poor migrant workers who have been stranded at both the Tunisian and Egyptian borders , the U.N. refugee agency said . 
The United States will soon send disaster relief teams into eastern Libya , White House National Security Adviser Thomas Donilon said . 
He said the teams ' activities should not be viewed as military operations . 
U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay on Thursday condemned the detention and possible torture by Libyan authorities of a BBC news team working to cover the conflict in Zawiya . 
The journalists , released from detention in Libya Wednesday , told of beatings and mock executions . 
The Guardian , a British daily newspaper , reported that one of its correspondents , Ghaith Abdul-Ahad , was missing . 
He was traveling with Andrei Netto of the Brazilian newspaper Estado , who was detained by authorities while reporting from Libya , the Guardian said . 
Netto was released Thursday and was to leave the country Friday . 
CNN 's Ben Wedeman , Pam Benson , Jill Dougherty , Whitney Hurst , Jonathan Wald and Journalist Saskya Vandoorne contributed to this report 
