President Barack Obama said Friday that all options for responding to the crisis in Libya remain on the table , but he added that any military option means that `` you 've got to balance costs versus benefits , and I do n't take that decision lightly . '' 
Obama told reporters the desired outcome would be for Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi to `` step down '' in the wake of civil war that has erupted in the North African country and Gadhafi 's military attacks on his own people . 
His comments followed a call by European Union leaders earlier Friday for Gadhafi to `` relinquish power immediately , '' and France 's embrace of the Libyan opposition leadership . 
The U.S. Treasury Department on Friday added nine more Libyans , including Gadhafi 's wife and several more of his children , to a list that freezes their assets in the United States and restricts their dealings with U.S. entities . 
Gadhafi and some of his other sons already were on the list . 
At a White House news conference , Obama outlined steps the United States has taken so far to pressure Gadhafi to step down , including the previously announced sanctions as well as talks with NATO allies on the possibility of establishing a no-fly zone over Libya . 
He noted that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton would meet with Libyan opposition figures in coming days during a trip to Egypt and Tunisia , and that his government has assigned `` a representative whose specific job is to interact with the opposition and determine ways that we can further help them . '' 
However , Libya 's former U.S. ambassador , who resigned last month in protest of Gadhafi 's violence against protesters , called Friday for the United States to recognize the newly created opposition National Transitional Council he now represents . 
`` We want recognition from all the rest of the world for this council , '' Ali Aujali told Libyan-American supporters and reporters . 
The French government on Thursday recognized the opposition council as the sole representative of the country , and the British foreign secretary spoke to an opposition representative over the phone . 
German Chancellor Angela Merkel was more cautious , calling the Libyan council a possible interlocutor . 
Clinton told a House committee Thursday that Washington was `` suspending '' its ties to the Libyan Embassy and reaching out to opposition leaders `` inside and outside of Libya . '' 
The move effectively orders the embassy to close , though it stops short of breaking U.S.-Libyan diplomatic relations , a senior administration official told CNN . 
Aujali abandoned Gadhafi last month , and the United States has not recognized his replacement , the official said . 
Obama has been criticized by Republicans and some Democrats for not ordering a no-fly zone over Libya or other steps intended to prevent Gadhafi from using military force against his own people . 
Both Obama and Clinton have said any U.S. military involvement must be part of an international effort , preferably sanctioned by the United Nations and Arab governments . 
Obama said Friday that NATO officials will meet next week to consider creating a no-fly zone over Libya . 
On Thursday , White House National Security Adviser Thomas Donilon said the U.S. government planned to send `` purely humanitarian '' disaster relief teams into eastern Libya , where rebels battling Gadhafi were losing ground . 
The U.S. Agency for International Development teams will be sent into monitor the delivery of humanitarian aid and should not be viewed as a military operation , he said . 
