By the CNN Wire Staff U.S. provides arms in Libya Russian President Medvedev says Libya 's Gadhafi needs to step aside Russia has strongly criticized the NATO-led campaign in Libya Western leaders and Libya 's prime minister have asked Medvedev to mediate Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Russian President Dmitry Medvedev has joined American and other European leaders in calling for Moammar Gadhafi to step down from power , a shift that appears to indicate a closing diplomatic window for the longtime Libyan strongman . 
Moscow has been a strong critic of the NATO-led mission in Libya , arguing that the scope of the organization 's air campaign against Gadhafi 's forces far exceeds the civilian protection mandate approved by the U.N. Security Council . 
Medvedev 's call for Gadhafi to step aside came at the end of the Group of Eight summit in Deauville , France , on Friday . 
The G8 includes the United States , the United Kingdom , France , Canada , Japan , Germany , Italy and Russia . 
The G8 leaders also issued a written statement Friday expressing support for the democratic uprisings in the Middle East and North Africa . 
The summit leaders agree that `` the regime of Gadhafi has lost its legitimacy and he must leave , '' Medvedev said , according to Russia 's state-run RIA Novosti news agency . 
`` This was decided unanimously . '' 
His statement came on the heels of a request from the other G8 leaders to have the Russian leader mediate a settlement . 
Earlier , Gadhafi 's government also called for a Russian mediation , a sign that the Libyan leader may be searching for a way to bring about an end to the months-long war . 
Libyan Prime Minister Al-Baghdadi Ali al-Mahmudi asked for help in achieving a cease-fire and starting talks without preconditions , according to a statement posted late Thursday by the Russian Foreign Ministry . 
During that conversation , Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said Libya would have to comply with the Security Council mandate and stop any action that would cause harm to civilians , the statement said . 
On Wednesday , the Russian Foreign Ministry called NATO 's recent bombing of certain Tripoli targets a `` flagrant deviation '' from U.N. Security Council resolution 1973 . 
That resolution authorizes all means necessary , short of occupying forces , to enforce a no-fly zone and protect Libyan civilians from attacks by forces loyal to Gadhafi . 
Russia , a permanent member of the Security Council , abstained from the vote on the resolution . 
U.S. President Barack Obama , who had an extended private meeting with Medvedev while in France , insisted Friday that `` the U.N. mandate of civilian protection can not be accomplished when Gadhafi remains in Libya directing his forces in acts of aggression against the Libyan people . '' 
`` We are joined in resolve to finish the job , '' he declared . 
A spokesman for Libya 's transitional government said Gadhafi must leave before the opposition could consider negotiations or a cease-fire . 
`` There is no more room for him in or near Libya , '' said Jalal el-Gallal , a spokesman for the National Transitional Council . 
NATO member Spain said Thursday that Libya had sent a message to Madrid and other European capitals , listing `` a series of proposals that could lead to a cease-fire , '' but the allies have rebuffed earlier Libyan proposals for an end to the fighting . 
While Gadhafi has been unable to come to terms with NATO demands , there may also be a growing rift between the NATO allies and the Libyan rebels over the nature of a post-Gadhafi regime . 
French President Nicolas Sarkozy indicated Thursday that any future Libyan government may include senior members of Gadhafi 's regime so long as those individuals do not have `` blood on their hands . '' 
El-Gallal responded to Sarkozy by declaring Friday that it `` is only up to the Libyan people '' to decide `` who will remain '' in government and who will not . 
Intense fighting , meanwhile , continued on the ground in Libya , with at least 10 people killed and over 40 injured during clashes that occurred Friday in Dafniya , outside the hotly contested coastal city of Misrata . 
NATO warplanes bombed the Tripoli area late Thursday , with a tribal site near the capital the target of the latest attacks , a Libyan official said . 
Five explosions , most large enough to shake buildings some distance away , struck Tripoli shortly before midnight . 
The Libyan official , who spoke on condition of anonymity , said the target was the tribal compound at Bab Al-Azizya , about 2 kilometers -LRB- 1.3 miles -RRB- from the center of Tripoli . 
CNN could not independently confirm the report . 
The site is a former military base now used to welcome tribal visitors to Tripoli , offering them guest houses during their stay , the official said . 
It has been used as a center for people volunteering to support Libyan authorities since the revolt against Gadhafi erupted in February . 
CNN 's Maxim Tkachenko , Amir Ahmed , Ben Wedeman and Alan Silverleib contributed to this report . 
