By James M. Lindsay - Special to CNN More than two months of bombing make it clear that the United States and its NATO allies are seeking to oust Libyan strongman Moammar Gadhafi . 
The air war , however , is not producing the quick result that NATO wanted . 
President Obama continues to resist European calls for a greater American commitment . 
He argues for sitting tight the air war will eventually force Gadhafi from power . 
Public opinion polls explain Obama s reluctance to do more right now Americans take a dim view of the operation . 
A new Quinnipiac University Poll finds that 57 percent of Americans don t think that the United States should be involved in Libya . 
Democrats and Republicans are equally unenthusiastic . 
But sitting tight requires patience that Americans and Europeans may not have . 
If domestic opposition to the air war grows , Gadhafi and his supporters might gain confidence that he can hang on , thereby undermining the bombing campaign . 
What steps could the administration take if it decides that the current air war isn t working , or working fast enough ? 
Obama has repeatedly ruled out sending in U.S. combat troops . 
Given the American public s intervention fatigue , he isn t likely to change his mind . 
So what might he do instead ? 
Here are five possibilities : 1 -RRB- Seek a negotiated solution . 
Washington could cut a deal with Gadhafi that imposes a ceasefire or sends him into exile . 
The Libyan dictator looks to be searching for such a deal . 
Obama has said it is impossible to imagine a future for Libya with Gadhafi in power . 
So any deal that allows him or his sons to continue ruling , which is what a ceasefire would do , would be seen as a substantial defeat . 
2 -RRB- Arm the Rebels . 
Obama has authorized sending Libyan rebels $ 25 million worth of nonlethal equipment like body armor and uniforms . 
The British , French , and Italians have gone slightly further , providing some military advisers . 
Sending military arms might tip the balance in the fighting because airstrikes have seriously degraded Gadhafi s military forces . 
Arming the rebels does not guarantee a quick victory . 
Sophisticated weapons require training to use , and that training can take months . 
Washington also worries that weapons sent to Libyan rebels today could end up in the hands of anti-U.S. forces tomorrow . 
3 -RRB- Ask NATO allies to do more . 
Obama has pushed Britain and France to lead the air war . 
They have grumbled but complied . 
France has begun dispatching attack helicopters to Libya , and Britain is considering the move . 
Washington can insist they do even more . 
How much more NATO allies can and will do , though , is an open question . 
The capacity of some contributing countries is already being tested , and European capitals share Washington s reluctance to wade deeper into Libya . 
So pushing Europe to do more could strain the transatlantic alliance 4 -RRB- Expand the air war . 
NATO could expand its target list to put more pressure on Gadhafi s supporters . 
It also could use airpower to support rebel fighters on the ground . 
Britain and France want the United States to commit roughly ten close air support aircraft to the fight . 
These AC-130 and A-10 planes were used early in the fighting to destroy Gadhafi s tanks . 
Two months of bombing have destroyed most of Libya s militarily significant targets . 
Gadhafi s forces now avoid airstrikes by hiding amongst civilians . 
Widening the target set or sending in close air support aircraft risks killing more civilians and undermining domestic support for the air war . 
5 -RRB- Send in Special Forces . 
Navy SEALs raided Osama bin Laden s compound in Abbottabad , Pakistan . 
They could try to replicate that feat in Tripoli . 
The Abbottabad raid worked because the United States had exceptional intelligence on bin Laden s whereabouts as well as the element of surprise . 
Precise information about Gadhafi s location is hard to come by , and Special Forces wouldn t have surprise working for them . 
A raid that turned into Blackhawk Down rather than Abbottabad would hand Gadhafi a major political victory . 
Even as Obama struggles with how to push out Gadhafi , he has to contemplate a bigger challenge : what to do once he is gone . 
Iraq offers a cautionary lesson that it is far easier to topple dictators than it is to install just and effective governments . 
I 've got a 6th option ... US pulls ALL of our military out of every ungrateful , terrorist harboring sespool on this planent & we take care of our own . 
Let India & pakistan blow each other up , Let Korea blow itself up , & let Isreal do what ever they want to the other middle eastern countries that are trying to destroy there soverignty . 
May 27 , 2011 at 7:37 pm | Reply This is the best option . 
Any other options is a disgrace to the human dignity and the sorvereignty of the nations . 
Nato including U.S is a ugly bulldog . 
May 28 , 2011 at 2:13 am | Reply I sympathize with the idea of pulling all U.S. troops out of these quagmires . 
But remember that , while they may not deserve our help and do n't appreciate it , it may do us more harm than good in the long run to abandon them . 
It 's satisfying to consider , but there are complex repercussions if we do . 
Also , be careful about the argument from `` national sovereignty '' . 
Nations may be sovereign in comparison to OTHER nations , but only individual human beings are truly Sovereign . 
A nation has NO right to oppress it 's own people by violating their sovereignty . 
It may not be in our best interest to defend the rights of individuals in other countries against their own governments , but `` national sovereignty '' is NOT a valid excuse for failing to do so . 
May 28 , 2011 at 4:49 am | Reply It is good to protect civilians from these cruel dictators . 
However , in Libya we are seeing invasion , destruction and imperialism because if that was the case , then how about those civilians in Yemen , Bahrain and elsewhere ? 
In Egypt people were encouraged to avoid confrontation and taking weapons otherwise Mubarak would have crashed them and US , Europe would have backed him as they are doing so in Bahrain and Yemen . 
Without encouraging opposition in Libya that I sympathized with at the beginning to take weapons , Muammar Qaddafi would have gone today and the number of casualties would not have reached the figures we have today . 
We need to understand who French -LRB- the hell of Africa -RRB- , British and US are . 
May 31 , 2011 at 5:56 pm | The US is the biggest terrorist state . 
That means you ARE the terrorists !! May 28 , 2011 at 9:06 am | Reply And yet , blackjack , it was not the USA that pushed to get us into this . 
It was EU AND the middle east that wanted NATO esp . 
USA involved in Libya . 
It is a true quagmir for us no different than ` nam . 
Until 1985 , we had always been involved in a war about every 20 years . 
Now , we are constantly involved . 
This has gotten old and is a true drain . 
May 28 , 2011 at 11:39 am | May 28 , 2011 at 7:31 pm | We do n't kill 3,000 civilians by ramming planes into a skyscraper . 
We do n't rule by terror . 
We do n't hide in caves . 
We do n't trick others into beleiving in a false cause . 
We only try to help the world get on the right track but it seems like the world does not want our help . 
May 31 , 2011 at 2:10 pm | go and screw yourself , you are an idiot calling the US a terrorist May 31 , 2011 at 3:23 pm | I agree , there is no need for supporting terrorism and nato and US is supproting terrorist against a government that was stable and nation was investing in africa and libya shame May 31 , 2011 at 6:55 pm | Well said ! 
Time for a `` regime change '' in the White House . 
Either that or WW3 is just around the corner . 
June 2 , 2011 at 9:28 pm | then the other countries will destroy israelis -LRB- that God -RRB- and we wo n't do nuthin ! 
May 29 , 2011 at 2:00 am | Reply May 29 , 2011 at 2:01 am | You stupid arrogant religious bastard ! 
How could you say that ! 
No human being deserves to be killed based on what they believe in ! 
i hate people like you who assume that ypur religion is the best and that everyone else is wrong ! 
Believe it or not your religion might just be wrong . 
May 31 , 2011 at 3:06 pm | Leaving the terrorist Gaddafi in charge of an oil-rich country is totally irresponsible for American interest , Libyan people 's interest , regional interest , Western interest , and Global security interest . 
May 30 , 2011 at 10:50 pm | Reply That 's just nonsense , and you sound like a pentagon fagot spreading false propaganda online . 
Li Tai Fang is a STUPID FAG ! 
June 2 , 2011 at 1:52 pm | I agree with what you are saying , but what happens when the next world power comes in and starts playing the same game the US has been playing , trying to control the world resources including placing dictators in countries , in the end if the US pulls out of it all then the newer leaders shall try and take all their vent out on the US itself , either way the US is in deep trouble . 
May 31 , 2011 at 3:20 pm | Reply You 'll bet that Britain & France will be the biggest beneficiaries in Libya financially and politically -LRB- and to a lesser extent the US & Italy -RRB- when Gadhafi is gone . 
In fact , they have already gained in many respects as they got to test their weaponry plus dump all their older bombs , missiles etc etc on Gadhafi 's military . 
Then they hit Libyan 's infrastructures\/residences just by labeling them command and control structures coupled with the NLC rebels and Gadhafi 's forces madly destroying each other 's cities like in Misrata . 
When the civil war ends the Brits and French will get billions of juicy contracts to replace Libya with new tanks , fighter jets , warships , civil contracts etc etc with Libyan 's oil and huge frozen foreign reserves . 
Diplomacy is not a lucrative option . 
Politically , Nato will earn the title of liberator and for democracy . 
Hip Hooray to the 3 Musketeers . . 
leave it to them to do the cleverest of things . 
May 31 , 2011 at 4:53 pm | Reply Hahahahaha geeze you guys are jokes , no wonder y no one respects the states anymore , thank God for Canada where ppl are actually normal and think logically May 31 , 2011 at 5:06 pm | Reply I think that all americans are gay mofos and sould all hail ALLAH !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! May 31 , 2011 at 6:18 pm | Reply be that as it may i love america and whould do anything for my country if i could get my fat ass out my recliner and stop eating fast food i could probably do something for this fantastic nation May 31 , 2011 at 6:37 pm | June 1 , 2011 at 2:27 am | ## Americans are gay because they were abused by their priests at church as kids . 
June 2 , 2011 at 1:26 pm | 1 - The ideal option would be first to stop bombing a small defenseless country under the pretext of `` humanitarian '' bullshit , let the legitimate Libyan government handle its own business and bring peace and order as it did for decades . 
Here rots Barack Obama , a black Zionist slave , an American terrorist and international war criminal , and 3rd ever `` illegitimate '' son of a Jewish whore to become US president NOTE : You may spit anywhere on grave I support the war in Afghanistan because we do n't want the terrorists to come back , but this Libya non-sense is a non-starter . 
We do n't need it . 
I understand the U.S. has spent upwards of a billion dollars in the Libya campaign so far . 
That 's a billion dollars better used to close budget gaps in state budgets for K-12 education or giving more college students grants and scholarships . 
This waste of money is unnecessary . 
Let 's leave Libya to Europe and the Libyans . 
May 27 , 2011 at 7:59 pm | Reply Quite true ! 
Libya is a nonstarter and should be left to its electors to sought out . 
Already the onset of the conflict was an unconsidered rush of France and Britain , which led to the current situation . 
A sensible thing to do is to let the UN deploy peace forces and set up a buffer zone . 
This will scale down all those air-strikes , that terrorise the populace and minimize further losses of lives . 
A diplomatic solution is the only answer to resolve the stalemate over this civil war . 
May 28 , 2011 at 3:42 am | Reply You are correct that we never should have gone in . 
However , we did so to back up our allies in EU . 
If we pull out , they will pull out of Afghanistan . 
The whole thing is a real mess . 
All of this goes back to W 's massive screw-up with Afghanistan . 
Education is the most powerful weapon which you can use to change the world . 
While our government is bombing the 7 million people of Libya , Mr White here is worried about how much money is being spent on killing people . 
Do n't you worry Mr White , it will be paid for by Libya 's frozen assets that our government stole from them , the biggest theft ever in human history . 
June 2 , 2011 at 10:21 pm | Reply 7th option all the millions of dollars we spend destroying our sarin gas stockpiles could be saved by dumping it on him an his an be done with it 2 birds one stone May 27 , 2011 at 8:53 pm | Reply The U.S. helping Libyans avoid being slaughtered renewed my faith that there are some decent politicians left . 
Turning a blind eye to allow Gaddafi to butcher his people that oppose his families rule of Libya and then turning around buying oil from him would be what China would do ... At least we , the U.S. , is on the right side this time ... It would be nice to believe that this campaign will also help the UN in the future to be taken more serious by other dictators when the UN warns them to stop killing peaceful protestors . 
By not completing this campaign and then to remove Gaddafi , strips away any perceived authority of the UN and I would not expect any future dictator to take warnings seriously . 
May 27 , 2011 at 9:19 pm | Reply Most of you idiots commenting are either sitting in the Pentagon spreading rubbish propaganda on the Web , or ignorant American scumbags with nothing better to do than to cheer for war and killing . 
Gaddafi did NOT kill his people , the proof is already out . 
It 's all a BIG LIE , just like every other US attack on another country . 
Gaddafi is a national hero and a good man , whether you PIGS like it or not . 
Gaddafi 's Libya does NOT have homeless people nor beggars , and did have a fast-growing economy before you bastards destroyed it . 
You can take your hoax of a democracy and shove it you fools . 
Now we know what kind of immoral lying stealing killing terrorist trash you are , you low life criminals . 
May the Creator of the Universe the Lord Almighty strike the US with a major earthquake to swallow millions and cripple the country . 
Thank you Lord for the US tornadoes , please make Americans suffer a thousand times more than the suffering they are inflecting on our people and other free people of the world . 
May 28 , 2011 at 2:58 am | Reply I 'm full agree with your veiw ! 
I 'm from Russia May 28 , 2011 at 4:03 am | i understand your frustration but you do n't need insults to make your voice heard ! 
May 28 , 2011 at 4:54 am | black jack , mark my word . 
they are not going to win this war . 
May 28 , 2011 at 4:58 am | This is NOT a war ... it is an attack , an aggression , a crime , the biggest $ 140 billion robbery in history was of the Libyan government 's overseas investments , coupled with crippling sanctions and complete isolation using baseless UN resolutions . 
If any of you had a gram of decency you would be supporting Gaddafi . 
How can anyone just sit there and watch a 70 yr-old leader and his family being threatened with assasination . 
The US and NATO bastards already killed Gaddafi 's son and 3 grandchildren with 4 bombs on their house . 
Four bombs on a house with kids ? 
Please people , you either speak the truth or just find something else to do . 
You are far from righteous or noble when you support such an attack on a small defenseless country , on the good man that Gaddafi is and what he did for the country for 41 yrs , etc. . 
Western leaders are playing with fire and are clearly committing war crimes in plain sight , yet you people comment blindly to destroy lives of millions of people . 
May 28 , 2011 at 5:42 am | so let it be written ... so let it be done ! 
May 29 , 2011 at 2:03 am | You sound mentally impaired ... Seriously . 
He did kill his own people and he made a huge announcemtn saying he will slaughter his own people . 
He used attact helicopters on his own people . 
Fools like you make me happy that we are there . 
At this point , talk all you want . 
The US is in Libya and we arent leaving until OUR national interest have been fulfilled . 
We will , and have , disregarded your national soverignty and there is nothing you can do about it . 
Gripe all day and night , but when it comes down to it , WE are the most powerful force in the free world and all you can do is sit back watch us work and complain on the internet . 
May 31 , 2011 at 1:11 pm | @Blackjack Interesting thought , except Gadhaffi is STILL killing his own people . 
The rebels , are people of his country . 
Talk all you want about America but no matter how crazy a riot got here it would be a cold day in hell before we responded with killing protesters and shelling residential areas with cluster shell mortars . 
May 31 , 2011 at 1:49 pm | GJ you just proved my point . 
The US government may lie . 
But the people are still in control . 
May 31 , 2011 at 2:12 pm | You sound like one of those people who thinks that america is horriable . 
No country is perfect . 
Can you prove to me that i should belive you ? 
ANd you call us scum when you thank your god for a tornado that crippled and killed a community . 
wait hell is to good for you . 
i hope that you never find peace in your life May 31 , 2011 at 3:09 pm | Blackjack . . 
I totally sympathise with your situation , personal frustration at what 's happening to Libya . 
At the same time , I admire your opinion to stand up for Gaddafi . 
I think it is not so much the American 's doing this time , but it is the British and French 's connivance using NATO as a cover . 
Fact is if you are not kissing Britain and France 's arses , they 'll get you one day . 
Power politics is the game ... and the Middle East and North Africans do n't seem to learn from their colonial history . 
May 31 , 2011 at 5:24 pm | You know what blackJack I hope someone cuts your head , arms , and legs and then rips out your eye balls then takes out all of your organs then burns the rest of your body . 
first of America has right to be in Libya because there Leader Qaddafi killed Americans in 1986 , and Qaddafi is not a hero I do n't know if your just a retard , but when someone kills another peoples from another country that country has the right to respond to the person that is responsible . 
Qaddafi has killed his own people your probably one of his supporters the reason the U.S responds to violent regimes that kill there own people is because the U.N does n't to anything about violent regimes that violate human rights laws . 
Which Qaddafi has broken you retard , and thanking god for the tornadoes in the U.S and wishing for an Earthquake that is just wrong and I hope along with Qaddafi you both burn in hell when you both die . 
June 1 , 2011 at 2:21 am | June 2 , 2011 at 11:11 pm | BlackJack why do n't you just suck Qaddafi 's dick you would probably like any ways you fag Al Qaeda terrorist . 
June 4 , 2011 at 12:23 am | 9999 you sound like a US military fagot hired to blog and spread false propaganda , you coward lying american queer . 
TFOOOOOO !! June 4 , 2011 at 12:52 am | False propaganda BlackJack are you hearing your self . 
Stop saying stuff that is not true because , know what your a hater you hate America because America has been the most successful nation the World has ever known your probably from some foreign country that is nowhere near America level in success in history . 
If I wanted to I could beat you to a bloody pulp , and your just a pussy who supports terror , and your probably living in Mom 's basement . 
June 4 , 2011 at 11:28 am | FU your bitch-ass shit eating bastard cunt queer Qaddafi lover . 
I hope you die your an idiot my 11 month old niece is smarter than you fucking retard I hope you go to hell you fucking Al Qaeda queer . 
Your just a pussy Who probably has mental problems , your an ass , a bitch , a bastard , a fucking idiot FUCK U FUCK U FUCK U FUCK U FUCK U FUCK U FUCK U FUCK U FUCK U FUCK FUCK U !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! I wish you would stop being stupid and open up your eyes but wait I forgot you have serious mental problems June 4 , 2011 at 10:00 pm | May 27 , 2011 at 10:29 pm | Reply May 27 , 2011 at 10:33 pm | Reply May 27 , 2011 at 10:33 pm | Reply CNN is no longer a reliable source of news , or a trustworthy place to exchange opinions . 
It is too easily taken over by special interests . 
CNN should remove the `` Report abuse '' button until it is resolved . 
All libyan news bloggs have simply become propaganda threads for Gadhafi . 
May 27 , 2011 at 10:43 pm | Reply Again ... CNN is no longer a reliable source of news , or a trustworthy place to exchange opinions . 
It is too easily taken over by special interests . 
CNN should remove the `` Report abuse '' button until it is resolved . 
All libyan news bloggs have simply become propaganda threads for Gadhafi . 
May 27 , 2011 at 10:44 pm | Reply May 29 , 2011 at 1:59 am | Reply I 'd suggest committing to the power of Satyagraha or `` truth force . '' 
This showed up in the largely nonviolent resistance strategies recently in Egypt and Tunisia , but also against hostile rulers that used violence to repress in the Phillippines -LRB- Marcos -RRB- 1986 , Serbia -LRB- Milosevic -RRB- 1999-2000 , India -LRB- British -RRB- 1930 's , and the numerous color revolutions . 
When it was attempted with Hitler , it also had success -LRB- Denmark , Norway -RRB- . 
Encourage and teach the uprising about a commitment to this kind of `` force . '' 
This is the best long-term strategy and best for becoming better humans . 
Gene Sharp has outlined at least 198 NV strategies and more exist if we commit our imagination to it . 
The Nonviolent Peaceforce -LRB- www.nonviolentpeaceforce.org -RRB- is also a resource . 
It 's sad that we often still get stuck in this framework of `` dialogue or use violence or just ` take care of our own . ' '' 
May 27 , 2011 at 10:49 pm | Reply only through peace talk that Libya problem will come to and , NATO stop , African union come in , am sure that gadafi will be ready for a talk to cease fire , gadafi is not a man to pull by force , i said this when the problem started , if NATO bomb the whole of Libya that will not make gadafi surrender , or make his men give up , their love him and he is a father to them , i have lived in Libyan as missionary and i can tell you more all i know that western world do n't know about Libya . 
i talk not in support of gadafi to remain in power , but for now lets talk peace so that he can leave in peace and pave way for democracy . 
thanks May 28 , 2011 at 6:51 am | Reply My assesment of the situation in Libya is that Gadhafi will not step down from power , nor will he accept any kind of ceasefire agreement where the rebels retain control of the eastern half of Libya . 
In that case , NATO will eventually have to commit ground forces to secure Misrata and push Gadhafi out of power . 
Even if that means a small US presence in Libya , I would prefer to leave it up to professionals as opposed to arming the resistance directly . 
May 28 , 2011 at 7:17 am | Reply I still have a difficult time understanding our country 's foreign policy strategy . 
Let 's take some examples . 
Iran , Syria , Sudan have been our shit list for ages . 
But when people in both countries rebelled and demanded democracy we did not stand by then . 
They were shot , tortured and massacred in hordes . 
But we stood by and watched it all happen . 
It is still happening in Syria . 
Have you seen the papers lately ? 
What have we done for the guys who are fighting for democracy in Syria . 
It seems our foreign policy is based on 1 -RRB- how do we benefit , 2 -RRB- how do we look good to the world 3 -RRB- what requires the least amount of USA human loss . 
If the answer to all these questions is YES , we go to war . 
I am not a big fan of Gadhafi , but this is a little extreme . 
First of all , we are not at war with Libya or the Gadhafi regime at this time . 
We are supporting a NATO action there . 
The situation in Syria is also very bad and should have been addressed already by the UN . 
I would support limited US involvment in Syria before it 's too late . 
I agree that our foreign policy is dubious , but I think that President Obama is doing as well as possible to improve foreign policy . 
However , if the man wants a second term he will have to work on domestic issues like the struggling economy and gradual decline in the quality of education in the United States . 
May 28 , 2011 at 11:24 am | Reply Quite right , Joy . 
Option 6 is the only decent one we can take . 
We have absolutely no business butting into Libya 's civil war . 
U.S. froeign policy is based on one thing only and that thing is sheer greed !!! With the U.S. and Great Britain leading the world , it 's a very small wonder that everthing is going down the drain in a big hurry and why we can not have peace !!! May 28 , 2011 at 5:57 pm | Reply At one moment I almost believe that rebel 's cause was honest but more and more evidences floating to surface proving that this `` little dirty war '' was well prepared show made by LIFG -LRB- Libyan Islamic Fighting Group -RRB- and French secret service -LRB- with help of MI6 and maybe CIA\/NSA -RRB- . 
So well coordinated action is hard to be prepared ad-hoc as result of some `` poetic '' movement called `` Arab spring '' and present level of media support to `` rebel cause '' and agility of UN is so suspicious , not to mention `` burnt bridges '' that French diplomacy made so promptly leaving no space for coalition to make any peace deal with current Libyan government . 
Level of hypocrisy was so high that I 'm afraid for freedom of Western civilization . 
Today conquering Libya , tomorrow personal freedom of European and American citizens will be in danger ! 
May 28 , 2011 at 3:39 pm | Reply No one would argue the defense of Benghazi was necessary , but to use Benghazi as a starting pistol for the unrelenting attacks on Gaddafi forces -LRB- at least 50 % made up of conscripts with little choice but to fight -RRB- , without at least a break for mediation , could be argued to be a drastic measure , and one that stretches the mandate given to NATO under Resolution 1973 to the extreme . 
Resolution 1973 clear purpose was to protect civilians not to support one side in a civil war , in this case an armed rebel force . 
We must find a better way to resolve conflicts in the 21st Century rather than bombing from 10,000 feet . 
We in the West have enormous political and military power , but the sign of truly Just and civilised nations are those that have power but choose only to use ultimate force when deemed the only possible solution . 
Clearly the Clinton administration failed abysmally over Rwanda and Bosnia , and that s not said in hindsight , it was obvious before the genocide really got going , but it is inappropriate to cite these two horrendous intent to slaughter with Libya . 
President Obama s , less than enthusiastic support of NATO s strategy , -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- is I think a sign of a man that is struggling to justify fully the actions currently being taken , and that is to be commended . 
We need a thinker in the White House . 
Last time I checked , Obama reluctantly cooperated with implementing a no-fly-zone for NATO . 
If the US wanted Gadhafi out of power , he would have been ousted already . 
May 29 , 2011 at 9:13 am | Reply THANK YOU !!!!!! I dont know why they dont realize that . 
If we want regime change , we get it . 
It has been proven time and time again . 
Trust me , this is a NATO intervention , not a US intervention . 
If it was a US intervention it would have been over May 31 , 2011 at 1:17 pm | Reply May 31 , 2011 at 2:19 pm | Reply There are political constraints to waging an all-out war . 
So you are buying the `` kinetic military action '' nonsense , huh ? 
Is jest a matter of time , do n't believe US been playing this game . 
May 30 , 2011 at 7:32 am | Reply Best not to sacrifice our special forces teams for that lame duck Gadhafi , he will be out soon enough . 
` Installing just and effective governments ' , as you say , is the real problem . 
What plans are there for when that murdering gang is gone ? 
Left up to the Libyans they will faultier , they only know dictatorship . 
The free would will need to guide them into a more fair and just system of government . 
May 31 , 2011 at 11:03 am | Reply There is only ONE OPTION for the US and its puppet NATO ... Get the Hell Out of Libya . . 
stop meddling in the internal affairs of others , have n't you learned your lesson yet . . 
the zionists have taken over your government , MSM , Federal Reserve bank ... etc. etc. . . 
Wake SHEEPLES ... May 31 , 2011 at 11:14 am | Reply 6th option . 
Level Tripoli w b-52 's if Ghadafi does n't surrender within a 1 week window . 
May 31 , 2011 at 11:18 am | Reply The BEST option would be to level the White House ... you American bastard son of a bitch ! 
Why do n't you tell your queer military to come down and fight us like men you criminal cowards . 
June 4 , 2011 at 12:15 am | Reply Yep big bad American business taking over the world again . 
Hey guys it 's time to take off your tin foil hats and go get a job , seriously . 
American and proud of it ! 
May 31 , 2011 at 11:50 am | Reply Surgical Strike on all Command and Control points of the Libyan Military -LRB- more or less Shock and Awe 2.0 -RRB- then withdraw . 
If the Libyan Rebels have the drive they 'll be able to win their country from the current regieme and will -LRB- hopefully -RRB- remember that the United States and Friends helped them by crushing the upper echelons of their enemies . 
Arming them would be the worst option , see Soviet-Afghan War for the other time the west armed Rebels . 
Now that we 're in we must find a solution , to just `` sit on it '' would cost billions of dollars and probabbly thousands of lives -LRB- See Iraq -RRB- . 
Under no circumstances should we commit Ground Forces without first having a clear and defined objective coupled with the will to do what is necessary . 
May 31 , 2011 at 12:01 pm | Reply Nothing is more cowardly than bombing a defenseless country from the air by 40 countries . 
Just shows how the West is nothing but a bunch of terrorist cowards . 
One can not help but respect Gaddafi for his opposition to US terrorism . 
June 4 , 2011 at 12:26 am | Reply `` Public opinion polls explain Obama s reluctance to do more right now Americans take a dim view of the operation . 
A new Quinnipiac University Poll finds that 57 percent of Americans don t think that the United States should be involved in Libya . 
Democrats and Republicans are equally unenthusiastic . '' 
The author of this article , James Lindsay , is asserting causality -LRB- polls `` explain '' Obama 's reluctance -RRB- without establishing it . 
The president 's stance of sitting tight and the public 's opinion of not favoring involvement are CORRELATED and not necessarily causally related , i.e. , public opinion need not be CAUSING the president to do or not do something in Libya . 
It could be -LRB- a -RRB- the president 's stance is causing public 's view or , more than likely , -LRB- b -RRB- there is a third factor -LRB- perhaps , DUH , -LRB- further -RRB- involvement is considered a BAD IDEA on some rational , tactical , practical basis -RRB- which is causing BOTH the president 's stance and the public 's view . 
May 31 , 2011 at 1:26 pm | Reply Option # 6 . 
Get the F@uck out of Libya , that may help Obama to win on 2012 . 
May 31 , 2011 at 1:34 pm | Reply Japanese General after the Bombing of Pearl Harbor . 
You really want to wake me up again ? 
May 31 , 2011 at 2:22 pm | Reply Pearl harbor was just a movie which was created as an attempt to make the Japanese look like they were at fault , a form of propoganda , but yes , the giant is awake . 
May 31 , 2011 at 3:32 pm | Reply Wow , people these days are crazy as hell , half yall deserve to be in `` happy farm palace '' . 
Oh , and btw US has not even done a draft yet and has not put its economic power into action either . 
The giant is very very much asleep . 
May 31 , 2011 at 7:51 pm | The USA five options would be to convince itself and four other members of the security council to do the right thing in North Africa and the Middle East ! 
May 31 , 2011 at 3:17 pm | Reply `` 57 percent of Americans don t think that the United States should be involved in Libya '' LOL , looks like some people learned their lesson the hard way in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
However , i fully support NATO in their appreciated attempts to free a nation from a tyrant . 
May 31 , 2011 at 5:01 pm | Reply \*\* Several loud explosions were heard over Tripoli as jets were circling above . 
Tripoli residents could be heard cheering and whistling on the rooftops . 
\*\* Sky News sources reporting more army defections over tunisian border . 
May 31 , 2011 at 5:11 pm | Reply Goldman Sachs invested more than $ 1.3 billion from Libya s sovereign-wealth fund in currency bets and other trades in 2008 and the investment lost more than 98 percent of its value , the Wall Street Journal reported , citing internal Goldman documents . 
When the fund , controlled by Col. Muammar Gaddafi , made huge losses Goldman offered Libya the chance to become one of its biggest shareholders , the Journal said , citing people familiar with the matter . 
Among the different proposals put forward by Goldman Sachs to recoup the losses was one in which Libya would get $ 5 billion in preferred Goldman shares in return for investing $ 3.7 billion into the securities firm , the paper added . 
May 31 , 2011 at 5:15 pm | Reply @ Dr. James M. Lindsay Option 5 is not an option . 
Sending in the SF\/Navy Seals to kill a president of a country is not the same as sending them to kill the head of a terrorist organization . 
It is not a Hollywood action movie you do know that right ? 
May 31 , 2011 at 5:39 pm | Reply If we actually knew where Muammar is hiding , do n't you think a cruise missle would have done the job ? 
May 31 , 2011 at 5:40 pm | Reply Maybe a person could be delegated to request the Gadhafi strongman to meet in a discreet location and convince him to step down in a public , orderly and courteous manner . 
But that is simply my opinion . 
-LRB- It may seem like a sugar coated and naive conviction , but I see it as something handy . -RRB- 
I bet there is a motivational speaker out there that could change the old guy 's mind about maintaining his power in Libya . 
Diplomacy is always an effective prerogative when it comes to politics . 
Treaties and Accords and talks have ended a number of armed conflicts in past times . 
I can not envision how something of the kind can not operate in this type of setting . 
Please send replies of a respectful kind if you feel so willing to concur , rebuke , or mention a deferred comment . 
Someone out there must happen to know exactly what to say in a most firm , composed and respected manner to Mr. Gadhafi to sway his thoughts amongst ruling a militarist dictatorship in this North African domain , Libya . 
May 31 , 2011 at 7:35 pm | Reply I agree with you . 
It s a good idea . 
and I might ad , let the same be done to NATO and the US government , to help them see that bombing Libya and forcing civil war is NOT in the best interests of the MAJORITY of the Libyan people and is in fact WAR CRIMES . 
You seem to think Gaddhafi a strong man , but what would you call a Bush who ordered the destruction of a whole country on false charges ? 
We are being brainwashed against Goddafi by the media , when the majority of Libyans love him for what he has done . 
The real criminals are in Israel , the US , Saudi , who do NOT care for civilians and use the word democracy to tweak and manipulate our sense of justice . 
May 31 , 2011 at 9:12 pm | Reply I was saying ` strongman ' mostly because the reporter said it . 
Think of it as objective analysis , in a sense . 
June 1 , 2011 at 3:01 pm | The audacity of NATO and the US and the Media painting the Libyan government as terrorists is typical of Nazi and Communist brainwashing . 
Tell big enough lies and the people will believe anything . 
glorifying a bunch of terrorists attacking the government of Libya and calling them the legitimate government ? 
is supporting terrorism , the very thing the US destroyed Iraq and Afganistan for . 
Who are the real terrorists ? 
America is NOT the America that once stood up for what is right but has become a tool in the hands of the big money boys . 
The US presidency is compromised . 
America , , take back your country . . 
May 31 , 2011 at 9:06 pm | Reply Here is the 6th Option . 
Every bomb that falls on lIbya is financed by debt and it represents a nail in our coffin . 
We have wasted $ 5 Trillion in 10 years to fight Osama 's few hundred followers . 
Osama 's plan was to banrupt America by drawing it into war in Muslim countries . 
America 's fatal love affair with Israel and the $ 3.5 billion debt dollars that it gives it in aid , got us involved in the Israeli-Muslim conflict . 
In my blog I explain how over 50 % of American military forces are war contractors and have the official government statistics . 
Two third of the war contractor employees are foreigners . 
How well will they fight in a real hot war like Vietnam ? 
In my blog I tell the truth about the war contractor multi-Trillion dollar business Note that as Congress has not issued a declaration of war as required by Art . 
8 of the Constitution , this war is illegal in the first place . 
Obama 's excuse has been that it 's not a `` real war '' because there are no ground troops , which has no legal basis . 
Sending in ground troops without Congressional authorization would be grounds for impeachment . 
June 2 , 2011 at 11:23 am | Reply It is my position the the Arab Spring is potentially the greatest chance for peace in the entire region in decades . 
It is indeed the `` Arab '' Spring not the Tunisian Spring or the Egyptian Spring nor even the Syrian Spring . 
In every country the long term goals are primarily two . 
Greater political freedom and greater economic opportunities for millions of unemployed . 
As it stands now some countries are on the edge of being able to deliver on the promise of the first . 
As for the second , substantial economic progress , this is currently a distant goal at best for all countries involved . 
As long as their is no clear idea of what the endgame will be in Libya , Palestine and Syria , there will never be the investment needed to fulfill the needs of those countries as well as Egypt and Tunisia . 
Thus the `` Arab '' Spring is in danger of being still born . 
There is also the reality that the major parties on both sides of these `` revolutions '' are going to have to make peace to make any progress going forward . 
Not an easy task . 
The solution to this problem may also be Israels chance to solve it 's long standing impasse with the Palestinians . 
The only way any one country involved in the Arab Spring will be able to deliver dramatically on BOTH goals demanded of their citizens is for all those countries to become one . 
Tunisia needs to vote to join the Libyan rebels , not as allies , but as fellow long term countrymen . 
The same is true for Egypt . 
Together the first step can be reached . 
A non NATO led liberation of the three as one . 
A gesture such as agreeing to put the combined capital of the three in Al Bayda Libya is the type of compromise needed time and time again going forward . 
However , the ability to also transfer various members of armed forces , civil servants and such to other parts of the combined country will ease tensions among the recently warring parties for years to come . 
The combined economic expertise , natural resource revenues and large potential domestic markets for goods , backed by direct foreign investment should spur growth as never before in the combined region . 
Just as countless Arab governments have for millennium , the drafting of outside leadership to come and rule a country as capable but neutral parties could rarely be needed more than in this case . 
Thus , while not in anywhere near the brink of chaos as it 's neighbors , the obvious choices to lead the newly formed combined countries , and indeed to join the new entity would be King Abdullah II of Jordan and the likes of Munib R. Masri of Palestine as the original Prime Minister could form the type of government needed to both provide long term stability as a constitutional monarchy but also with a leader of government respected throughout the entire combined countries of the region . 
The over riding theme of the unification is the willingness of each national sovereign nation to re identify themselves as members of a new country for the good of the common whole . 
The new theme of `` I am doing this not only for me but for the good of countless millions of fellow countrymen so that I might provide political and economic equality for myself and my extended family and tribe '' has not had such an opportunity for perhaps decades . 
Which leads , if one has not already surmised , the unique opportunity to bring millions of Palestinians to the same goal . 
`` If we wish a better life we are now Libyans -LRB- or whatever the agreed upon name -RRB- and Arabs and we have a chance to move forward under new leadership to create a new future for ourselves and our future generations '' . 
Thus a united Tunisia , Libya , Egypt , Jordan and Palestine could become the model for other `` endgames '' to other nations of not only the Arab world but for sub Saharan Africa and other regions of the world . 
June 8 , 2011 at 6:01 pm | Reply why do n't u shove all that crap up your ass u little prick ... fucking Pentagon agent son of a bitch ! 
June 10 , 2011 at 3:37 am | Reply Its a nice thought but wishful thinking . 
It will not last . 
Maybe in 50 years it 's possible . 
For now Come home let them settle it on their own -- Fix America first . 
In 20 years Afghanistan will be controlled by radicals and we will be 1.5 trn poorer for our effort . 
When we captured Sadam and his cronies we needed to come home . 
If the Iraq people want freedom they need to do it themselves or they do not deserve it . 
If they earn it they will hang on to it as we did . 
July 16 , 2011 at 4:52 pm | Reply December 18 , 2011 at 7:59 pm | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
