MOSCOW | Tue Jun 28 , 2011 10:21 am EDT MOSCOW -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Exiled Syrian opposition figures urged Russia on Tuesday to persuade Syria 's President Bashar al-Assad to resign , warning that Moscow risked being left behind by history unless it withdrew its support for the leader . 
Senior Russian officials , who have thwarted Western attempts to condemn Assad for crushing protests against his rule , held a meeting with some of Assad 's most vociferous critics in Moscow . 
The meeting was seen as a possible sign the Kremlin might be hedging its bets and trying to ensure its clout in the Middle Eastern country if Assad is toppled . 
Russia 's foreign ministry said the Syrian opposition representatives came at the invitation of a regional cooperation society and that no official meetings were planned . 
Rights groups say 1,300 civilians have been killed during a three-month revolt against the Assad family 's 41-year rule , partly inspired by uprisings across the Arab world . 
Syrian authorities say more than 250 soldiers and police have died in clashes they say were provoked by militant groups . 
`` Russia should help Syria to reach freedom and democracy by putting more pressure on the Syrian President to resign , '' Mulhem Droubi , a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood , told journalists . 
`` The president should resign if he has any feeling for Syrian people , '' he said after talks with the Kremlin 's special envoy for Africa , Mikhail Margelov . 
Russia has urged Assad to move faster on promised reforms , but has opposed Western efforts to condemn his crackdown in the U.N. Security Council and echoed his claims that extremists are to blame for some of the violence . 
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin , who most diplomats believe is Russia 's paramount leader , tried to play down Moscow 's ties with Syria last week , saying that Russia had no special relationship with Damascus . 
Putin said any leader of a nation plagued by unrest should face international pressure to stop the bloodshed . 
`` Russia has only one friend - the Syrian people , '' Margelov , told reporters after the talks . 
About 50 Assad supporters held a demonstration outside a news conference given by the Syrian opposition on Tuesday . 
Margelov , appointed by Medvedev to mediate in North Africa and the Middle East , said Russia wanted political dialogue to prevent Syria from following the path of Libya , which has descended into civil war . 
The Syrian activists , based in Russia and other countries , said Russia had to correct its policy toward Assad . 
`` Russia should be on the right side of history , otherwise it will be much harder for it to build relations -LRB- with Syria -RRB- in the future , '' Russia 's Kommersant newspaper quoted delegation leader Radwan Ziadeh , head of the Damascus Center for Human Rights , as saying . 
`` By opposing a U.N. Security Council resolution on Syria , Russia is supporting a criminal regime , '' he said . 
Syria 's government has announced it will invite opposition figures to July 10 talks to set the framework for a dialogue promised by Assad , and that constitutional changes would be on the agenda . 
