Saturday 21 May 2005 00.37 BST George Bush yesterday intervened in the furore surrounding the photographs of Saddam Hussein in his underpants leaked to the Sun newspaper , saying he supported the `` aggressive '' investigation to find out how they got into the public domain . 
The White House and Pentagon reacted with anger to publication of the pictures - apparently taken more than a year ago - claiming they violated military guidelines and possibly the Geneva convention . 
A White House spokesman said the president had been briefed by aides and `` strongly supports the aggressive and thorough investigation that is already under way '' . 
Kalil al-Duleimi , Saddam 's lawyer in Iraq , told the Guardian : `` If these photographs are authentic , then they represent a clear and blatant violation of all moral and human rights principals . 
They are a flagrant violation of the Geneva conventions concerning prisoners of war and my client is a war prisoner . '' 
But the Sun defended its decision to publish . 
`` This is a man who breached the Geneva convention more times than you 've had hot dinners , so please do n't talk to us about the Geneva convention , '' the managing editor , Graham Dudman , told MediaGuardian . 
`` I would defy any newspaper that got these photographs and knew they were genuine not to publish them . '' 
The Sun 's front page , headlined Tyrant 's in His Pants , showed Saddam , dressed only in baggy white Y-fronts . 
Other grainy pictures inside showed him sleeping and sitting in a red plastic chair washing his trousers . 
The newspaper claimed the pictures were taken at the `` top secret location '' in Iraq where the former dictator is being held while awaiting trial for genocide . 
It said Saddam was constantly monitored by three CCTV cameras to make sure he does not commit suicide . 
It is unclear whether the pictures were taken from that footage . 
The New York Post , which like the Sun is owned by Rupert Murdoch , also ran the pictures in later editions under the headline Butcher of Sagdad . 
The Sun refused to say how it got hold of the pictures , insisting it needed to protect its sources . 
It also took the unusual step of writing to rival news organizations saying they owned the worldwide syndication rights . 
News International , the company that owns the newspaper , is said to be demanding # 20,000 a photo . 
It is thought the military has been able to date the pictures because Saddam began growing a beard about 12 months ago . 
In the pictures he is clean-shaven . 
In its story the Sun cited military sources saying they handed over the pictures showing Saddam as `` an ageing and humble old man '' in the hope of dealing a blow to the resistance in Iraq . 
`` It 's important that the people of Iraq see him like that to destroy the myth , '' the paper 's source was quoted as saying . 
But Lieutenant Colonel Steven Boylan , a senior US army public affairs officer in Baghdad , told the Guardian : `` The photographs were definitely not released by multinational forces in Iraq . '' 
Fears were voiced in the US that the publication of the pictures would further inflame hostilities towards US forces . 
But at a press conference Mr Bush said : `` I do n't think a photo inspires murderers . 
I think they 're inspired by an ideology that is so barbaric and backwards that it 's hard for many in the western world to comprehend how they think . '' 
In Baghdad , the photographs were broadcast on the al-Arabiya satellite channel , but appeared to have little immediate impact . 
Jamal Hussein , a student at Baghdad University , said : `` Who wants to look at pictures of old men in their underwear ? '' 
Saddam was captured in December 2003 while hiding in a hole in the ground near his home town of Tikrit , 80 miles north of Baghdad . 
No date has been set for his trial . 
