International Criminal Court 's -LRB- ICC -RRB- chief prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo arrives at a news conference to comment on the arrest warrant issued for Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi -LRB- L -RRB- in The Hague in this June 28 , 2011 file photo . 
THE HAGUE | Fri Oct 28 , 2011 7:48 pm BST THE HAGUE -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - From deep in the Sahara , fearing that he will share his father 's bloody fate at the hands of vengeful Libyans and calling in old favors bought with oil from desert tribes and African strongmen , Saif al-Islam Gaddafi may be bartering a future . 
The International Criminal Court at The Hague confirmed on Friday that the 39-year-old heir-apparent to Libya 's slain former leader had been in touch . 
It urged him to turn himself in , warning it could order a mid-air interception if he and his mercenary guards tried to flee by plane for safe haven abroad . 
Though details remain sketchy of the whereabouts and state of mind of Saif al-Islam , the London-educated would-be reformer now indicted for crimes against humanity , the ICC offered some corroboration of reports from Tripoli 's new leaders and African neighbors that he has taken refuge with Tuareg nomads in the borderlands between Libya and Niger , seeking a way to safety . 
`` Through intermediaries , we have informal contact with Saif , '' ICC Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo said in a statement . 
`` We have learned through informal channels that there is a group of mercenaries who are offering to move Saif to an African -LRB- state -RRB- not party to ... the ICC . 
The Office of the Prosecutor is also exploring the possibility to intercept any plane within the air space of a state party in order to make an arrest . '' 
Officials with Libya 's National Transitional Council told Reuters earlier in the week that monitoring of satellite calls and other intelligence indicated Saif al-Islam was considering turning himself in to The Hague , and trying to arrange an aircraft to get him there and out of reach of NTC fighters , in whose hands Muammar Gaddafi was beaten and killed a week ago . 
However , surrender is only one option . 
The Gaddafis made friends with desert tribes in Niger , Mali and other poor former French colonies in West Africa , as well as farther afield in countries like Zimbabwe and Sudan , some of them also recipients of largesse during the 42-year rule of Colonel Gaddafi , a self-styled son of the desert and African `` king of kings '' . 
France , a key backer of Febuary 's revolt , reminded Africans of obligations to hand over the surviving ICC indictees - former intelligence chief Abdullah al-Senussi and Saif al-Islam : `` We do n't care whether he goes on foot , by plane , by boat , by car or on a camel , the only thing that matters is that he belongs in the ICC , '' said Foreign Ministry spokesman Bernard Valero . 
`` We do n't have many details , but the sooner the better . '' 
Despite reduced circumstances since his father 's overthrow in August , the younger Gaddafi , whom some have described as a playboy in his days at the London School of Economics , may have access to portable wealth in the form of bundles of banknotes and gold bars , as well as to secret , unfrozen foreign accounts . 
Niger , Mali , Chad and Burkina Faso , a swathe of arid states to the south of Libya , are all signatories to the treaty that set up the ICC , established to give a permanent international tribunal for crimes against humanity after ad hoc bodies set up for Rwanda , the former Yugoslavia and Sierra Leone . 
`` If we reach agreement , logistical measures for his transfer will be taken , '' ICC spokesman Fadi El Abdallah said . 
`` There are different scenarios , depending on what country he is in . '' 
Without its own police force , the ICC depends on cooperation from member states -- which do not include world powers the United States , Russia and China . 
Its focus so far on Sudanese , Congolese and Kenyans has left some Africans disgruntled . 
Powers on the continent like South Africa and Nigeria are signatories . 
But Algeria , which took in Saif al-Islam 's mother , sister , brother Hannibal and half-brother Mohammed , is not . 
Nor are Sudan , Robert Mugabe 's Zimbabwe and a number of other nations where leaders might see advantage in giving him a haven . 
As well as enjoying protection from Tuareg allies who traditionally provided close security for the Gaddafis , Saif al-Islam may still be in the company of mercenaries from elsewhere in Africa , including possibly South Africa , NTC officials say . 
A South African newspaper , in an unconfirmed report , said South African mercenaries were working to fly him out . 
Living conditions in the desert are spartan , though the autumn climate is relatively temperate . 
Smugglers and others who make a living in the desert travel in 4x4s and trucks , watching fuel gauges closely , as well as by horse and camel , resting in tents as well as simple shacks scattered close to oases . 
Communications are provided by satellite phones powered by car engines and generators , but also networks of nomads . 
A bodyguard who saw Saif al-Islam as he fled last week from one of the Gaddafi clan 's last bastions near the capital told Reuters that Saif al-Islam , eldest son of Gaddafi 's second wife Safia , seemed `` nervous '' and `` confused '' . 
He escaped even though his motorcade was hit by a NATO air strike as it left Bani Walid on October 19 , the day before his father died at Sirte . 
Three of Saif al-Islam 's brothers were killed in the war . 
Another , Saadi , has found refuge in Niger . 
The arrest or surrender of Saif al-Islam would bring a new prominence for the nine-year-old ICC , whose highest profile suspect to date is Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir , who remains defiantly in office , defended by many fellow Africans . 
Following the killing of Muammar Gaddafi , most probably at the hands of the fighters who filmed themselves battering and abusing him , Western allies of Libya 's new leaders had urged them to impose respect for human rights , even for those accused of scorning the rights of others down the decades . 
NTC leaders would like to run their own trials , but acknowledge that their writ barely runs in the deep south . 
Their NATO allies , now winding up a mission that backed the revolt , have expressed little enthusiasm for hunting a few individuals across a vast tract of empty continent -- though French troops based in West Africa might be the best placed to step in with transport if Gaddafi did choose to surrender . 
Richard Dicker of the New York-based Human Rights Watch said the killing of his father made it all the more important that Saif al-Islam end up on trial in the Netherlands : `` The gruesome killing of Muammar Gaddafi last week underscores the urgency of ensuring that his son , Saif al-Islam , be promptly handed over to the International Criminal Court for fair trial in The Hague , '' Dicker said . 
`` This will best ensure that justice is done . '' 
The ICC 's Moreno-Ocampo said in his statement : `` If he surrenders to the ICC , he has the right to be heard in court , he is innocent until proven guilty . 
The judges will decide . 
`` If the judges decide that Saif is innocent , or has served his sentence , he can request the judges to send him to a different country as long as that country accepts him . '' 
Saif al-Islam was once seen as a liberal reformer , architect of a rapprochement with the oil-thirsty Western states on whom his father waged proxy guerrilla wars for decades . 
But he ran into opposition from hardliners among his brothers and had taken a lower profile before bursting back onto the world 's television screens with belligerent win-or-die rhetoric after the revolt . 
The ICC accuses him of hiring mercenaries to carry out a plan , worked out with his father and Senussi , to kill unarmed protesters inspired by Arab Spring uprisings elsewhere . 
However , even if arrested on charges relating to his role in attacks on protesters in February and March , Saif al-Islam could make defense arguments that might limit any sentence , lawyers said -- possibly a tempting alternative to death in Libya . 
For now , some of the few tens of thousands of people who eke out a living in the deepest Sahara , a borderless expanse roamed by smugglers and nomadic herders , say there would be a welcome for the younger Gaddafi , who in better times exhibited paintings he said were inspired by his love for the desert landscapes . 
`` We are ready to hide him wherever needed , '' said Mouddour Barka , a resident of Agadez in northern Niger . 
`` We are telling the international community to stay out of this business and our own authorities not to hand him over -- otherwise we are ready to go out onto the streets and they will have us to deal with . '' 
Niger 's government in the capital Niamey has vowed to meet its ICC commitments . 
But 750 km -LRB- 400 miles -RRB- north in a region where cross-border allegiances among Tuareg nomads often outweigh national ties , the picture looks different . 
`` I am ready to welcome him in . 
For me his case is quite simply a humanitarian one , '' said Mohamed Anako , president of Agadez region , itself the size of France . 
`` Libya and Niger are brother countries and cousins ... so we will welcome him in . '' 
Libya 's southern neighbors accepted Muammar Gaddafi 's largesse despite exasperation at his vision of a trans-Saharan people , which prompted concern over their territorial integrity . 
For northern communities in both Niger and Mali , the NATO-backed Libyan war that removed him has brought nothing but trouble , with thousands of African migrant workers and armed Tuaregs who fought for Gaddafi turning up at their door . 
