A congressional panel overseeing the government 's financial bailout has concluded that the economic crisis could have been prevented with better regulation and called for a raft of proposals to overhaul government oversight of the financial sector . 
`` The current crisis should come as no surprise , '' the panel wrote in a draft of the report , which is scheduled to be released today . 
`` The present regulatory system has failed to effectively manage risk , require sufficient transparency , and ensure fair dealings . '' 
The group urged creating a regulator with the authority to oversee financial firms whose failure poses a risk to the overall financial system . 
The panel also called for further regulation of the mortgage industry , hedge funds and derivatives , as well as limits on excessive borrowing by financial institutions . 
The recommendations came from the Congressional Oversight Panel for the Troubled Assets Relief Program -- the formal name of the $ 700 billion government bailout -- with the five members splitting on partisan lines . 
The three members appointed by Democratic lawmakers , including its chairman , Harvard Law School professor Elizabeth Warren , voted to approve the report , while the two Republicans voted against it , according to a spokesman for the panel . 
The Republicans plan to release a separate dissenting report , which says that some of the majority 's recommendations are `` rife with moral hazard and the potential for unintended consequences '' and that others might be `` impossible to implement outside the walls of academia . '' 
`` Before embracing more government regulation as the only answer , such advocates should consider the many ways in which government regulation itself can be part of the problem , '' the Republican report said . 
In the majority report , the panel attributes the faulty regulation to the success of programs put in place after the Great Depression . 
Before , the United States suffered a major economic crisis roughly every 15 to 20 years , as far back as the panic of 1792 . 
But post-Depression regulations were so successful , the report concluded , soon `` a financial crisis was seen as a ghost of the past . '' 
`` After fifty years without a financial crisis -- the longest such stretch in the nation 's history -- financial firms and policy makers began to see regulation as a barrier to efficient functioning of the capital markets rather than a necessary precondition for success , '' the report said . 
