For one day only , I 'm a Lib Dem We must take the politics of the anti-war front into the electoral arena Saturday 26 March 2005 00.35 GMT The crucial events that led to the occupation of Iraq by the US and Britain are now classified , proven and documented . 
Tony Blair and his New Labor cohorts , backed by their Conservative allies , lied without shame to drag a reluctant country to war . 
A dung-heap of `` facts '' was manufactured by Alastair Campbell and hurled at television and the print media . 
Those who questioned them were traduced and harassed . 
The million and a half who marched to try to prevent the war were ignored . 
Despite the rushed and half-baked elections , a savage chaos still grips the country . 
The Archbishop of Canterbury remains silent . 
After the 2001 election , but well before 9\/11 , Rowan Williams offered the following advice to the nation : `` Without the perspective of religion our whole politics is likely to be in deep trouble . '' 
The cost of the Iraqi adventure was heavy . 
According to a team of medical investigators sent by Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore , more than 100,000 Iraqi civilians died . 
Torture , encouraged from above , became a fact of life . 
Perhaps some good liberal apologist for Blair will soon explain how democratic torture is much nicer than authoritarian torture . 
Perhaps the belligerati could take this further . 
Ian McEwan 's next novel could sensitively depict dilemmas of a liberal torturer faced with the barbaric Orient . 
We live , after all , in a world where illusions are sacred and truth profane . 
Meanwhile , as some -LRB- non-Labour -RRB- MPs contemplate impeaching Blair for lying and other misdemeanors , a general election draws near in Britain . 
What are we going to do ? 
If Blair wins this election -LRB- as appears likely -RRB- , he will claim , like Bush , that the country supports him in these difficult times . 
It is for this reason that those who opposed the war must think carefully before they cast their votes . 
Abstention is not a serious option . 
The aim should be to return an anti-war majority to the House of Commons . 
This requires tactical\/intelligent voting in every constituency . 
Normally , people vote to assert their political sympathies . 
But this is not a normal general election . 
It will be the first opportunity to punish the warmongers and , given the undemocratic voting system , the votes cast for the Greens , Respect and others will have no impact , with a possible exception in Bethnal Green and Bow , east London , where George Galloway confronts the warmonger Oona King . 
It is possible that in some constituencies the Green\/Respect vote could ensure the return of a warmonger , as we have seen in the odd byelection . 
So why not treat this election as special and take the politics of the broad anti-war front to the electoral arena ? 
If the result is a hung parliament or a tiny Blair majority , it will be seen as a victory for our side . 
Blair has led this country into more wars than Thatcher and Major combined . 
He is responsible for more deaths than his Tory predecessors and with fewer popular votes to back him . 
In 1992 , the year Neil Kinnock was defeated by John Major , the Labor vote was 11.5 million . 
In 2001 , New Labor 's indecent majority was based on a popular vote of 10.7 million . 
Turnout dropped from 71 % in 1997 to 59 % in 2001 . 
The rival claimant to the throne , Gordon Brown , provided a hallucinatory explanation : people were so relaxed and happy under New Labor that they could n't be bothered to vote . 
Psephology beckons , Gordon . 
In reality , it was the collapse of the Tories that distorted the results . 
New Labor 's massive majorities have been based on mass abstentions and a blatantly undemocratic electoral system . 
The assault on civil liberties mounted by Blair and Blunkett is far more serious than the appalling internment without trial that Edward Heath instituted during the Troubles . 
The tribal notion that New Labor is somehow qualitatively better than the Tories is pure sentimentality . 
It is not supported by the facts . 
With the abandonment of anything resembling traditional social democracy , New Labor has concentrated on intrigue , treachery and infamy . 
How else can one characterise the long Blair-Brown struggle for mastery of No 10 ? 
Despite the fact that politics has evaporated inside New Labor , the demonstration had its impact . 
A total of 139 Labor MPs voted against the war . 
Robin Cook resigned from the cabinet . 
Clare Short was pushed out . 
George Galloway , the most consistent opponent in parliament , was expelled from the Labor party . 
The Liberal Democrats , Scottish Nationalists and Plaid Cymru voted against as well . 
In constituencies where there are MPs belonging to the anti-war faction , one should vote for them despite disagreements on many other issues . 
In the warmonger constituencies we should vote tactically . 
In my north London constituency , the MP is Barbara Roche : pro-war and pro everything else this wretched government has done . 
I do n't simply want to vote against her . 
I want her to be defeated . 
That is why I will vote Liberal Democrat . 
A version of this article appears in the April issue of Red Pepper Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Tariq Ali : For one day only , I 'm a Lib Dem This article was published on guardian . 
