On Monday , Marie Fatayi-Williams stood near Tavistock Square , where her son Anthony is feared to have been killed in last week 's bus bombing , and delivered a lament of extraordinary power for her lost son . 
Tim Collins , the British army colonel who himself gave a historic speech on the eve of the Iraq war , says such genuine emotion is rarely forgotten Caught in the spotlight of history , set on the stage of a very public event , Marie Fatayi-Williams , the mother of Anthony Fatayi-Williams , 26 and missing since Thursday , appeals for news of her son . 
Her words are a mixture of stirring rhetoric , heartfelt appeal and a stateswoman-like vision , and so speak on many levels to the nation and the world . 
Her appeal is a simple one - where is my son ? 
If he has been killed , then why ? 
Marie has found herself , as I did on the eve of the invasion of Iraq , an unwitting voice , speaking amid momentous events . 
Her appeal , delivered on Monday not far from Tavistock Square , where she fears her son died in the bomb attack on the number 30 bus , gives a verbal form to the whirlpool of emotions that have engulfed society as the result of last week 's bombings . 
I suspect Marie , like myself , had no idea that her words would find such wide recognition , have fed such an acute hunger for explanation , have slaked such a thirst for expression of the sheer horror of Thursday 's events . 
This kind of speech is normally the preserve of the great orators , statesmen and playwrights , of Shakespeare , Churchill or Lincoln . 
It is often a single speech , a soliloquy or address from the steps of the gallows , that explains , inspires , exhorts and challenges . 
But always such addresses are crafted for effect and consciously intended to sway and influence , and often , as in the case of Shakespeare 's Henry V , they are set in the mouth of a long dead hero or delivered by wordsmiths who are masters of their craft . 
It is rare in history that such oratory is the genuine article , springing from the heart and bursting forth to an unwitting audience . 
In Marie 's case , her speech gains its power as a vehicle of grief and loss , and of the angst of a mother who yearns for her beloved son . 
In my case it was the opposite emotion from which I drew inspiration - an appeal to understand , to empathise , to give courage and purpose . 
I was motivated by a need to warn and teach as well as to encourage . 
Marie 's motivation is a reflection on loss and that most powerful of all emotions , a mother 's love . 
The form the address takes is as poignant as the language used . 
There is an initial explanation of the extraordinary circumstances of the loss , a cri de coeur for the innocent blood lost , a rejection of the act by its comparison to the great liberators , and the assertion that her loss is all our loss in the family of humanity . 
It ends with her personal grief for her flesh and blood , her hopes and pride . 
The language echoes verses of the Bible as well as from the Koran . 
It has raw passion as well as heart-rending pathos . 
With only a photograph of her son and a sheet of paper as a prompt , Marie 's words burst out with as much emotion as anger . 
Her speech stands in stark contrast to the pronouncements of politicians , prepared by aides and delivered from copious notes . 
It is indeed the raw originality and authentic angst that give the delivery such impact , the plea such effect . 
No knighted veteran of the Royal Shakespeare Company could deliver such an address without hours or even days of rehearsal . 
I know from my own experience that only momentous events can provoke such a moment , only raw emotion can inspire such a spontaneous plea . 
I am often asked how long it took me to write my speech , delivered to my regiment , the Royal Irish , on the eve of the invasion of Iraq on March 19 2003 at Fort Blair Mayne camp in the Kuwaiti desert . 
My answer is simple - not one moment . 
There was no plan ; I spoke without notes . 
For me there was only the looming spectre of actual warfare and the certainty of loss and killing , and I was speaking to myself as well as to my men . 
I suspect for Marie there was only the yawning black void of loss , the cavern left behind in her life caused by the loss of a son who can never be replaced . 
What , then , can we take from this ? 
Marie 's appeal is important as it is momentous . 
Her words are as free from hatred as they are free from self-interest ; it is clear that no man can give her her heart 's desire - her son . 
I was also struck by the quiet dignity of her words , the clarity of her view and the weight of her convictions . 
She does not condemn , she appeals ; her words act as an indictment of all war and violence , not just acts of terror but also the unnecessary aggression of nation states . 
Her message is simple : here is a human who only wanted to give , to succeed and to make his mother proud . 
Where is the victory in his death ? 
Where is the progress in his destruction ? 
In her own words : `` What inspiration can senseless slaughter provide ? '' 
I am certain that Marie 's appeal will go down as one of the great speeches of our new century . 
It will give comfort to the families and friends of the dead and injured , both of this act and no doubt , regrettably , of events still to come . 
It should act as a caution to statesmen and leaders , a focus for public grief and , ultimately , as a challenge to , as well as a condemnation of , the perpetrators . 
Marie is already an icon of the loss of Thursday July 7 . 
Having traveled from Africa to find a better life , Anthony Fatayi-Williams carried the hopes and pride of his family . 
Now , as his mother has traveled to London , arguably one of the most cosmopolitan and integrated cities in the world , and standing nearby a wrecked icon of that city , a red double-decker bus , she has made an appeal which is as haunting as it is relevant , as poignant as it is appealing . 
It is a fact that such oratory as both Marie and I produced is born of momentous events , and inspired by hope and fears in equal measure . 
But Marie 's appeal is also important on another level . 
I have long urged soldiers in conflict zones to keep communicating with the population in order to be seen as people - it is easier to kill uniforms than it is to kill people . 
On July 7 the suicide bombers attacked icons of a society that they hated more than they loved life , the red London bus and the tube . 
Marie 's speech has stressed the real victims ' identities . 
They are all of us . 
`` This is Anthony , Anthony Fatayi - Williams , 26 years old , he 's missing and we fear that he was in the bus explosion ... on Thursday . 
We do n't know . 
We do know from the witnesses that he left the Northern line in Euston . 
We know he made a call to his office at Amec at 9.41 from the NW1 area to say he could not make -LRB- it -RRB- by the tube but he would find alternative means to work . 
Since then he has not made any contact with any single person . 
Now New York , now Madrid , now London . 
There has been widespread slaughter of innocent people . 
There have been streams of tears , innocent tears . 
There have been rivers of blood , innocent blood . 
Death in the morning , people going to find their livelihood , death in the noontime on the highways and streets . 
They are not warriors . 
Which cause has been served ? 
Certainly not the cause of God , not the cause of Allah because God Almighty only gives life and is full of mercy . 
Anyone who has been misled , or is being misled to believe that by killing innocent people he or she is serving God should think again because it 's not true . 
Terrorism is not the way , terrorism is not the way . 
It does n't beget peace . 
We ca n't deliver peace by terrorism , never can we deliver peace by killing people . 
Throughout history , those people who have changed the world have done so without violence , they have -LRB- won -RRB- people to their cause through peaceful protest . 
Nelson Mandela , Martin Luther King , Mahatma Gandhi , their discipline , their self-sacrifice , their conviction made people turn towards them , to follow them . 
What inspiration can senseless slaughter provide ? 
Death and destruction of young people in their prime as well as old and helpless can never be the foundations for building society . 
My son Anthony is my first son , my only son , the head of my family . 
In African society , we hold on to sons . 
He has dreams and hopes and I , his mother , must fight to protect them . 
This is now the fifth day , five days on , and we are waiting to know what happened to him and I , his mother , I need to know what happened to Anthony . 
His young sisters need to know what happened , his uncles and aunties need to know what happened to Anthony , his father needs to know what happened to Anthony . 
Millions of my friends back home in Nigeria need to know what happened to Anthony . 
His friends surrounding me here , who have put this together , need to know what has happened to Anthony . 
I need to know , I want to protect him . 
I 'm his mother , I will fight till I die to protect him . 
To protect his values and to protect his memory . 
Innocent blood will always cry to God Almighty for reparation . 
How much blood must be spilled ? 
How many tears shall we cry ? 
How many mothers ' hearts must be maimed ? 
My heart is maimed . 
I pray I will see my son , Anthony . 
I need to know , Anthony needs to know , Anthony needs to know , so do many others unaccounted for innocent victims , they need to know . 
It 's time to stop and think . 
We can not live in fear because we are surrounded by hatred . 
Look around us today . 
Anthony is a Nigerian , born in London , worked in London , he is a world citizen . 
Here today we have Christians , Muslims , Jews , Sikhs , Hindus , all of us united in love for Anthony . 
Hatred begets only hatred . 
It is time to stop this vicious cycle of killing . 
We must all stand together , for our common humanity . 
I need to know what happened to my Anthony . 
He 's the love of my life . 
My first son , my first son , 26 . 
He tells me one day , `` Mummy , I do n't want to die , I do n't want to die . 
I want to live , I want to take care of you , I will do great things for you , I will look after you , you will see what I will achieve for you . 
I will make you happy . ' 
And he was making me happy . 
I am proud of him , I am still very proud of him but I need to now where he is , I need to know what happened to him . 
I grieve , I am sad , I am distraught , I am destroyed . 
He did n't do anything to anybody , he loved everybody so much . 
If what I hear is true , even when he came out of the underground he was directing people to take buses , to be sure that they were OK . 
Then he called his office at the same time to tell them he was running late . 
He was a multi-purpose person , trying to save people , trying to call his office , trying to meet his appointments . 
What did he then do to deserve this . 
Where is he , someone tell me , where is he ? '' 
