Republican senator says military mission should oust Gadhafi U.S. to hand over leadership of mission in coming days Coalition forces took out most of Libya 's air defense systems , Mullen says Washington -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- A U.S.-led military mission in Libya has effectively imposed a no-fly zone and blasted some of Moammar Gadhafi 's ground forces outside the rebel stronghold of Benghazi , Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Adm. Mike Mullen said Sunday . 
The coalition forces , including U.S. , British and French aircraft , have taken out most of Libya 's air defense systems and some airfields , Mullen said in interviews on CNN 's `` State of the Union '' program and other networks . 
In addition , Libyan ground forces in the vicinity of Benghazi were hit in an effort to prevent attacks on lesser-armed rebel fighters and civilians , said Mullen , who called the start of the mission a success . 
`` I would say the no-fly zone is effectively in place , '' Mullen told CNN , adding that the strategy now is to cut off logistical support for Gadhafi 's forces that are `` pretty spread out '' from Tripoli to Benghazi . 
Mullen also said Gadhafi 's forces had shown little ability to take on the coalition firepower so far , and he made clear that the scope of the mission was limited , involving creation of the no-fly zone , stopping attacks on civilians and allowing humanitarian operations to proceed . 
He acknowledged on NBC 's `` Meet the Press '' that the military mission could be completed with Gadhafi still in power . 
Fighter jets hit Libyan army convoy Action taken to stop Gadhafi Obama : No ground troops in Libya `` He 's a thug , he 's a cagey guy , he 's a survivor . 
We know that , '' Mullen said of Gadhafi on the CBS program `` Face the Nation , '' noting that the Libyan leader has access to large quantities of mustard gas that concern the United States . 
`` It 's something he could do a lot of damage with , '' Mullen said , adding that coalition forces were closely monitoring the situation and , so far , `` have n't seen him move in that direction . '' 
U.S. President Barack Obama had been under mounting pressure from Republican critics and some Democrats to take steps against Gadhafi . 
On Sunday 's talk shows , all U.S. politicians interviewed welcomed the new military mission , but some worried it was too late or too limited to do the necessary job of taking out Gadhafi . 
`` Isolate , strangle and replace this man -- that should be our goal , '' Republican Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina told `` FOX News Sunday . '' 
In particular , Graham took issue with Obama 's insistence on getting a U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing the mission as well as Arab League endorsement as a strategy to prevent accusations of a U.S. vendetta against the Islamic world . 
`` I think the president ` caveated ' this way too much , it 's almost like it 's a nuisance , '' Graham said . 
`` This is a great opportunity to replace a tyrannical dictator who is not a legitimate leader , who is an international crook . 
And we should seize the moment and talk about replacing him , not talking about how limited we will be . '' 
However , Mullen and Democrats said gaining international consensus for the mission was crucial , and Mullen made clear that the U.S. role would be limited , telling NBC that `` we 're not going to put any boots on the ground . 
This is n't about occupation in any shape or form . '' 
Democratic Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island told reporters that the best outcome `` would be for Gadhafi and his family to recognize that they are illegitimate rulers of the country and to depart the scene , allowing the United Nations , politically , to organize a popular referendum or some democratic means to establish a new government . '' 
`` If Gadhafi chooses not to go , then , I think , there will be a longer period of conflict , '' Reed said . 
`` But I just sense that given this incredible unified opposition to him , particularly the Arab League , that the signal has to be clear that his days are numbered . '' 
For now , Mullen told CNN , `` we would like to see him withdraw his forces across the country back into garrison '' and stop attacking his people . 
When told that Gadhafi was claiming women and children had been killed in the coalition air strikes , Mullen said on CNN that the targets were selected carefully , adding : `` I 've seen no reports of significant civilian casualties . '' 
On other networks , he said he was unaware of any civilian casualties so far . 
As part of the no-fly zone , coalition combat aircraft will be patrolling over Benghazi at all times , Mullen told CNN . 
Coalition forces also are looking to jam communications of Gadhafi 's forces in what Mullen called the `` first phase of a multifaceted '' operation . 
`` While we 're leading it now , we 're looking to hand off that leadership in the next few days , '' Mullen said on NBC . 
On the same show , Democratic Senator Carl Levin of Michigan , the chairman of the Armed Services Committee , said Britain , France and Arab nations would assume control of the mission . 
Mullen said he expected Arab countries that supported the mission to begin contributing military help . 
On Sunday , the French Defense Ministry announced that Qatar has offered to contribute four fighter planes to the coalition effort . 
House Speaker John Boehner , R-Ohio , issued a statement Sunday calling for Obama to provide more explanation on the military mission . 
`` Before any further military commitments are made , the administration must do a better job of communicating to the American people and to Congress about our mission in Libya and how it will be achieved , '' Boehner 's statement said . 
To Republican Senator John McCain of Arizona , Obama waited too long to take action in Libya . 
`` We need now to support him and the efforts that our military are going to make , '' McCain told CNN in an interview taped Friday and broadcast Sunday . 
`` And I regret that it did n't -- we did n't act much more quickly , and we could have . '' 
McCain , the ranking GOP member of the Senate Armed Services Committee , said if the United States had acted a few weeks ago , a no-fly zone `` would probably have been enough '' to prevent the situation in the African country from deteriorating . 
Even so , he said , time is now against Gadhafi . 
`` If he -LRB- Gadhafi -RRB- does n't succeed in a relatively short period of time , he 'll be driven back and , over time , I believe , defeated , '' McCain said . 
`` I have great confidence in our capabilities that the most mightiest nation in the world is now matched up against a third-rate or fourth-rate power . '' 
Asked if the United States waited too long , Mullen answered that it was impossible to say what might have changed if there had been earlier U.S. action . 
He emphasized the importance of gaining international consensus and assistance for the military mission launched almost exactly on the eighth anniversary of the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq in 2003 , saying : `` This was n't something the United States ginned up . '' 
CNN 's Joana Godinho and Gabriella Schwarz contributed to this story 
