2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Read our complete story and check out our full coverage on unrest in the Arab world . 
Also , do n't miss a gripping , high-resolution gallery of images from Libya . 
-LRB- 11 p.m. Monday ET , 5 a.m. Tuesday in Libya -RRB- The United States fired 20 Tomahawk cruise missiles into Libya in the past 12 hours , a military spokeswoman said early Tuesday morning from the Mediterranean Sea . 
A total of 159 Tomahawks have been fired by the United States and the United Kingdom since an international coalition started Operation Odyssey Dawn on Saturday . 
Cmdr. Monica Rousselow , a spokeswoman for the task force , also said one of the three U.S. submarines that participated at the beginning of the operation has since departed the area . 
She declined to say which submarine . 
-LRB- 8:59 p.m. Monday ET , 2:59 a.m. Tuesday in Libya -RRB- In a rare public spat , Russian President Dmitry Medvedev criticized his political mentor , Prime Minister Vladimir Putin , for Putin 's comments over the use of force against Libya . 
Putin on Monday said the U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing a no-fly zone over Libya was `` obviously incomplete and flawed . '' 
He added that it `` resembles a medieval appeal for a crusade in which somebody calls upon somebody to go to a certain place and liberate it . '' 
A few hours later Medvedev weighed in , scolding Putin 's comments , without using the prime minister 's name . 
`` It is absolutely inexcusable to use expressions that , in effect , lead to a clash of civilizations - such as ` crusades , ' and so on . 
That is unacceptable , '' Medvedev said . 
-LRB- 8:10 p.m. Monday ET , 2:10 a.m. Tuesday in Libya -RRB- CNN correspondent Nic Robertson has rejected a Fox News report that he and other journalists were used as human shields by the Libyan government to prevent a missile attack on Gadhafi 's compound . 
Libyan government officials brought CNN and other news crews to the compound to view a building that was damaged late Sunday in a coalition air strike . 
The Fox story , posted on the outlet 's website Monday , says the journalists ' presence forced a British aircraft to call off firing seven missiles at the area that already had been hit . 
Robertson , who was part of the CNN crew cited in the Fox story , called the rival network 's report `` outrageous and hypocritical . '' 
Robertson said a Fox staffer was among the journalists on the trip - which was not mentioned in the Fox report - and that the journalists in the group were hurried through their trip by their minders . 
`` If they wanted to use us as human shields ... they would have kept us there longer , '' Robertson said . 
`` That 's not what happened . '' 
-LRB- 7:49 p.m. Monday ET , 1:49 a.m. Tuesday in Libya -RRB- More U.S. legislators are expressing concern about the country 's involvement in the coalition military operation in Libya . 
Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton , D-District of Columbia , says the president is `` stirring up a lot of controversy . '' 
`` We 're not coordinating with the rebels . 
Are we going to leave them surrounded , and with the mercy of Gadhafi ? 
I 've never seen anything so confused in my life , '' Norton told CNN . 
On the right , lawmakers are demanding the president better explain the U.S. mission in Libya to Congress and the American people , CNN 's Dana Bash reports . 
`` The president should come home and call the Congress back into session and to make his case . 
He needs to define what the United States ' vital mission is here , what is our vital interest , how does he see the potential cost unfolding here , '' said Rep. Candice Miller , R-Michigan , in an interview from her home district . 
-LRB- 6:32 p.m. Monday ET , 12:32 a.m. Tuesday in Libya -RRB- Frances Fragos Townsend , once President George W. Bush 's chief counterterrorism adviser and now a CNN commentator , recalls her 2007 visit to the Gadhafi compound in Tripoli where coalition missiles heavily damaged a building on Sunday . 
-LRB- 5:25 p.m. Monday ET , 11:25 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- CNN 's Ed Henry offers a deeper look at U.S. President Barack Obama 's comments in Chile regarding Libya on Monday afternoon : Obama repeated Monday that Moammar Gadhafi `` needs to go , '' but he acknowledged the Libyan dictator may remain in power for some time because the allied military mission in North Africa has a more narrow U.N. mandate of just protecting civilians . 
Still , Obama noted : `` I also have stated that it is U.S. policy that Gadhafi needs to go . '' 
Obama said he 's still hopeful that other `` tools '' the administration has used , such as freezing billions in Libyan assets , will eventually help the Libyan people push Gadhafi out . 
-LRB- 5:10 p.m. Monday ET , 11:10 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- U.S. Sen. Mark Begich , D-Alaska , has expressed `` apprehension '' and `` concerns '' about U.S. involvement in Libya . 
`` Specifically , Congress needs to understand the risk involved to the lives of our service members , how long the administration anticipates U.S. involvement , the impact of our involvement on our other national security priorities like Afghanistan , and what the ultimate objective is , '' Begich , a member of the Senate 's Armed Services Committee , said in a statement Monday . 
-LRB- 4:52 p.m. Monday ET , 10:52 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- U.S. Sen. Richard Lugar , who already had expressed concern about U.S. and allied air strikes in Libya , has amped up his criticism of the operation , saying `` there are no guidelines for success . '' 
In an interview set to air Monday on CNN 's `` John King , USA , '' Lugar , the ranking member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , said the operation has not been clearly defined . 
`` I do not understand the mission because as far as I can tell in the United States there is no mission and there are no guidelines for success , '' Lugar , R-Indiana , told CNN 's John King . 
`` That may well be true with our allies although conceivably they may have other missions in mind and simply try to get Security Council clearance to proceed . '' 
-LRB- 4:46 p.m. Monday ET , 10:46 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's momentum has stopped and rebels have been able to hold onto areas that government forces had been poised to capture just a few days ago , a U.S. official said Monday . 
However , an opposition spokesman said Gadhafi 's forces have continued to fight in Mistata , the last city in western Libya under rebel control , despite the Libyan government 's declaration of a cease-fire . 
`` There is no cease-fire in Misrata , '' said Mohamed , who would not divulge his last name out of concern for his safety . 
`` The destruction is unimaginable . '' 
Late Monday , state television reported that Misrata was firmly in the hands of Libyan government forces . 
-LRB- 4:42 p.m. Monday ET , 10:42 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- The U.N. Security Council has decided to not take action Monday on Libya 's request for an emergency meeting on attacks . 
Discussions will likely continue at a planned Thursday briefing on Libya by U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon . 
Libya 's government is pressing for an end to what it calls an aggression against the country . 
-LRB- 4:08 p.m. Monday ET , 10:08 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- Oil prices surged in electronic trading Monday after coalition forces launched an attack on Libyan military targets over the weekend , CNNMoney reports . 
The benchmark U.S. contract , West Texas Intermediate , gained as much as $ 2.28 to top $ 103 a barrel for April delivery . 
It later dropped back to settle $ 1.26 higher at $ 102.33 a barrel . 
The more active May contract jumped $ 1.24 to settle at $ 103.09 a barrel . 
It briefly topped $ 104 in earlier trading . 
-LRB- 3:47 p.m. Monday ET , 9:47 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- U.S. President Barack Obama is getting heat from a member of his own party regarding the military action in Libya . 
Rep. Dennis Kucinich , the seven-term liberal Democrat from Ohio who has twice run for the White House , says Obama committed an `` impeachable offense '' in deciding to authorize U.S. airstrikes over Libya Saturday without the consent of Congress . 
`` President Obama moved forward without Congress approving . 
He did n't have Congressional authorization , he has gone against the Constitution , and that 's got to be said , '' Kucinich told the web site Raw Story on Monday . 
`` It 's not even disputable , this is n't even a close question . '' 
-LRB- 3:33 p.m. Monday ET , 9:33 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- Below is a video of CNN 's Nic Robertson , reporting on explosions that he heard this afternoon in Tripoli . 
He says he heard at least two blasts , apparently coming from the direction of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's compound . 
Antu-aircraft gunfire followed the blast . 
Robertston , who is in Tripoli , said anti-aircraft gunfire has followed the explosions . 
-LRB- 3:08 p.m. Monday ET , 9:08 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- President Barack Obama , addressing the situation in Libya during a trip to Chile , told reporters that a condition for the United States to step back from leading the Libyan military mission is the disabling of Libya 's air defenses . 
This is so that NATO allies and other coalition partners can effectively enforce a no-fly zone , he said . 
`` We anticipate this transition to take place in a matter of days , not weeks , '' Obama said . 
-LRB- 2:58 p.m. Monday ET , 8:58 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- U.S. President Barack Obama , addressing the situation in Libya during a trip to Chile , said that `` it is U.S. policy '' that Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi `` has to go . '' 
Obama said the core principle of the military mission is that the international community `` ca n't stand by with empty words '' in the face of an imminent humanitarian catastrophe such as a leader using military force against his own people . 
-LRB- 1:45 p.m. Monday ET , 7:45 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- Four New York Times journalists who were reported captured by pro-government forces in Libya last week have been released and have arrived safely in Tunisia , the paper 's Executive Editor Bill Keller said Monday in an e-mail obtained by CNN . 
`` We 're particularly indebted to the Government of Turkey , which intervened on our behalf to oversee the release of our journalists and bring them to Tunisia , '' Keller said in the e-mail which was sent to New York Times staff . 
`` We were also assisted throughout the week by diplomats from the United States and United Kingdom . '' 
-LRB- 12:44 p.m. Monday ET , 6:44 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- There is no intent to destroy the Libyan military forces , Gen. Carter Ham , a top U.S. commander said Monday , but the coalition will strike against forces that are threatening or attacking civilians , he said . 
-LRB- 12:30 p.m. Monday ET , 6:30 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- The coalition flew 70 to 80 sorties over Libya on Monday , up from 60 on Sunday , said Gen. Carter Ham , commander of U.S. Africa Command . 
The United States flew fewer than half of the Monday missions and about half of the Sunday sorties , Ham said . 
Canadian and Belgian air force planes flew for the first time Monday . 
`` We are hopeful that other nations will continue to join us , '' Ham said . 
`` Some have made very firm offers . '' 
-LRB- 12:26 p.m. Monday ET , 6:26 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi may remain the leader of Libya after the coalition mission has ended , the commander of U.S. forces said Monday . 
`` I could see accomplishing the military mission which has been assigned to me and the current leader would remain the current leader , '' Gen. Carter F. Ham , commander , U.S. Africa Command , said . 
`` Is that ideal ? 
I do n't think anyone would say that that is ideal , but I could envision that as a possible situation - at least for the current mission that I have . '' 
-LRB- 12:19 p.m. Monday ET , 6:19 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- Coalition strikes not designed to kill Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi , Gen. Carter Ham , commander of U.S. Africa Command , says . 
-LRB- 12:10 p.m. Monday ET , 6:10 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- There are no U.S. or coalition forces on the ground in Libya , Gen. Carter Ham , commander of U.S. Africa Command , says . 
-LRB- 12:05 p.m. Monday ET , 6:05 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- Coalition mission does n't include protecting forces opposed to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi , Gen. Carter Ham , commander of U.S. Africa Command , said Monday . 
-LRB- 11:32 a.m. Monday ET , 5:32 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- Coalition members were still working out Monday how the ongoing of maintaining the no-fly zone over Libya would be commanded , U.S. officials said . 
NATO could command the coalition 's no-fly mission in Libya , but some Arab nations are hesitant to fly under a NATO banner , which has held up the move , said one official , who asked not to be identified due to the sensitivity of negotiations . 
The coalition has 10 announced partners : Belgium , Britain , Canada , Denmark , France , Italy , Norway , Qatar , Spain and the United States . 
-LRB- 9:05 a.m. Monday ET , 3:05 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- The involvement of U.S. military aircraft in strikes on Libya has `` plateaued , '' a spokesman for United States Africa Command says . 
The U.S. conducted missile strikes overnight , spokesman Vince Crowley said . 
-LRB- 8:23 a.m. Monday ET , 2:18 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- Four New York Times journalists who were reported captured by pro-government forces in Libya last week have been released and are in the Turkish Embassy in Tripoli , Turkey 's ambassador to Libya , Levent Sahin Kaya , told CNN Monday . 
-LRB- 7:18 a.m. Monday ET , 1:18 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- Oil prices surged more than $ 2 a barrel in electronic trading Monday after coalition forces launched an attack on Libyan military targets on Saturday . 
The benchmark U.S. contract , West Texas Intermediate , gained $ 2.11 to $ 103.18 a barrel for April delivery . 
The more active May contract jumped $ 2.21 to $ 104.06 a barrel . 
-LRB- 6:32 a.m. Monday ET , 12:32 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- The British Ministry of Defense said it halted a mission to attack a target in Libya because of information about civilians in the area . 
`` As the RAF GR4 Tornados moved into the area , further information came to light that identified a number of civilians within the intended target area , '' the ministry said in a statement Monday . 
`` As a result the decision was taken not to launch weapons . 
This decision underlines the UK 's commitment to the protection of civilians . '' 
-LRB- 6:02 a.m. Monday ET , 12:02 p.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- A witness in the Libyan city of Misrata reported `` absolute destruction and carnage '' by forces supporting leader Moammar Gadhafi on Monday - despite the regime 's recent call for a cease-fire . 
`` Misrata is being flattened and razed to the ground as we speak , '' said the man , who was not identified safety reasons . 
`` He -LRB- Gadhafi -RRB- is using tanks and snipers to terrorize the city . '' 
He added , `` They are shooting people in the main street and on the back street . '' 
CNN could not independently confirm reports from Misrata early Monday . 
-LRB- 5:57 a.m. Monday ET , 11:57 a.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- A group of supporters of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi chanted `` Down with the USA '' and confronted UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon as he was leaving the Arab League buidling in Cairo on Monday , a UN spokesman said . 
Spokesman Khawla Mattar said Ban was `` fine '' and `` it was not a serious incident . '' 
`` They were not chanting anti-UN slogans . 
They were probably just trying to send a message through the UN , '' he said . 
-LRB- 4:21 a.m. Monday ET , 10:21 a.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- The French government disputed claims of civilian deaths in Libya from recent airstrikes . 
`` There is no information of killed civilians recorded by the French command , '' French government spokesman Francois Baroin said on the French TV channel Canal + Monday . 
Libyan ruler Moammar Gadhafi 's regime claimed that dozens of people - mostly women , children and clerics - have been killed in the international airstrikes that started Saturday . 
`` We must be cautious of communication campaigns and propaganda . 
... This is a military operation and a communications campaign battle , '' Baroin said . 
`` We have to trust what the international community is communicating . '' 
-LRB- 2:14 a.m. Monday ET , 8:14 a.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates said it would be `` unwise '' to set specific goals about targeting Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi directly during attacks . 
`` I think that it 's important that we operate within the mandate of the U.N. Security Council resolution , '' Gates told reporters Sunday while on a plane to Russia . 
`` If we start adding additional objectives , then I think we create a problem in that respect . 
I also think that it is unwise to set as specific goals , things that you may or may not be able to achieve . '' 
The Security Council resolution , which passed Thursday , allows member states `` to take all necessary measures to protect civilians under threat of attack in the country ... while excluding a foreign occupation force of any form on any part of Libyan territory , '' according to the United Nations . 
-LRB- 12:34 a.m. Monday ET , 6:34 a.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- A coalition military official has confirmed that Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's compound was targeted by airstrikes Sunday night . 
The compound was targeted , the official said , because it contains capabilities to exercise command and control over Libyan forces and the coalition goal is to degrade his military capabilities . 
Earlier , Western journalists , including CNN 's Nic Robertson , were brought inside the compound to survey the destruction . 
-LRB- 10:51 p.m. Sunday ET , 4:51 a.m. Monday in Libya -RRB- An announced list of the countries participating in the military coalition : The United States , Belgium , Britain , Canada , Denmark , France , Italy , Norway , Qatar and Spain . 
U.S. officials have said they plan to hand over operational control of the military mission in coming days . 
WE need to remember it is not the UN 's job to get Ghaddafi out , they do n't have any authority to do this it is the job of the UN to keep him from killing his own people . 
I know everyone is up in arms about us being in conflict with another arab country but this was a unanimous vote to help keep the civilians of Libya safe from their evil leader . 
And if this ever happens in your country , where ever you are from , I hope the UN steps in to help you too . 
Because I know that the US and its allies will , because it 's their job . 
Civil wars happen all the time and does n't usually need interventions from other countries until unarmed civilians are getting set up to be wiped out from the govt . 
IF UN WANTS TO FREE LIBYAN PEOPLE FROM THE ATROCITIES AND TYRANNICAL RULE OF COL. GADHAFI , STRIKING ALLIANCE SHOULD DEVICE SUCH A PLAN THAT EITHER ONLY GADHAFI IS CAPTURED OR DIRECTLY ATTACHED . 
IT SOUNDS INHUMAN BUT TO MINIMIZE THE DAMAGE , CIVILIAN 'S DEATHS AND SHORTEN THE WAR PERIOD , THIS IS THE ONLY SOLUTION IN SIGHT . 
BUT IT SHOULD BE DONE IN SUCH A TACTICAL WAT THAT IT SHOULD SEEM TO BE A PART OF WAR AND NOT PERSONAL ATTACH . 
AND THEREAFTER UN SHOULD CONDUCT FREE AND FARE DEMOCRATIC ELECTIONS WITH THE PARTICIPATION OF INDIA ALSO AS EARLY AS POSSIBLE AND HAND OVER THE REIGNS OF POWER TO THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY AND ALSO TAKE BACK THE MILITARY AS SOON AS POSSIBLE TO WIN THE CONFIDENCE OF LIBYAN PEOPLE AS WELL AS TO AVOID ANY MISCONCEPTION OR MISINTERPRETATION BEHIND THE ATTACH BY OTHER ARAB COUNTRIES . 
It all about oil . 
Why NATO did not invade Yemen , Ivory Coast ? 
Bahrain got problem , America support neighbouring forces invasion . 
Arabs being used by super power . 
Arabs are not united and will not united till the END . 
Shame shame shame on you . 
Arabs are the looser . 
We have problem that we can not solve . 
Leave other people alone . 
We should not take side in other country 's civil war . 
Stop spending money that we do n't have . 
Rosetta Stone Spanish Latin America Help our country first . 
Too many problem in the world . 
We can not solve them all . 
We should not choose between two evils . 
High horse Congressmen criticizing Obama 's decision to participate in the `` no fly zone '' over Libya . 
If he were a Republican , the Republican congressmen would n't be so critical . 
If he were n't so decisive as a commander in chief , the democrat congressmen would n't be complaining either ! 
Sorry folks , but we have one commander in chief and he has been very clear about his intentions all along . 
At least he is n't unilaterally taking on Libya -LRB- as our former president would have done -RRB- , but is acting on a United Nations resolution . 
I say he 's doing it right . 
So step back out of the lime light congressmen , and let the man do his job ! 
You can whine later about not being president yourself ! 
Im ALL for the U.S. in Libya even if it means ground forces , we should be helping people who are fighting for their Freedoms and preventing mass slaughters ! 
As for the ones in congress trying to ride on the popularity of fears of War and such , they are an embarrassment and hope they are voted out !! If Yeman needs helps so be it , I for one think we need to do something about Somalia , Clinton was right going in there but this time we should wipe it off the map !! This attack on Libya was planned out well and it shows how Smart our President is , I like that ! 
As for Iraq and Afghanastan all were very poorly planning which prolonged our objective . 
When you send in ground forces , you do not go in with a limited amount . 
If we would have flooded Iraq with ground foreces and Tanks it would have been over fast , same goes for Afghanastan . 
We want a Free World and a better world for our children , then we need to do what we can to rid it of terrorist and dictators who are a world threat . 
Libya 's Leader was nothing but a Terrorist . 
Then we have Korea whose leader is so unstable he could be the one to start a Nuclear War . 
We have to take these kind of leaders out , hiding under a rock and playing nice and flapping our lips will not take away the Problem !! One thing President Bush was right about , he said once Freedoms in the Middle East is establishest and leaders like Sadam is taken out , Freedom will spread , well , look whats happening now , there fighting for their Freedome , whats wrong with backing that ?? Your news cover is wrong . 
The plane shot down is a F-15E model . 
I have confirmed this by the photo description that it is infect this plane . 
I have studied the plane and have looked on several news sights such as BBC . 
Please review the statement made on CNN that the plane was a F-16 . 
Obama is hiding while caddafi lives up to his promise searching house to house to kill domonstrators in masarata . 
When you look at the countries involved in the Lybian war and you compare it in the 18th century with Napolean it is north surprising . 
The Western world like a olt of uglyness The Western World is constantly talking about terrorist attack . 
Who was responsible for bombing Martin Luther 's house in the United States , for sure it was not the Lybian leader nor Saddam . 
They seems to forget what they did to the blacks in America and Canada for four hundred years . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival in Merida , Mexico seems like they favor throwing candy instead of beads ! 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
