CNN Student News - 3\/21\/11 Download PDF maps related to today 's show : THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT . 
CARL AZUZ , CNN STUDENT NEWS ANCHOR : Military action is underway in the skies over Libya , and the U.S. is one of several countries involved . 
It 's our first story in the week 's first edition of CNN Student News . 
AZUZ : It 's called `` Operation Odyssey Dawn , '' and the goal is to enforce a no-fly zone over Libya . 
The United Nations Security Council voted for that no-fly zone late last week . 
The coalition responsible for enforcing it is made up of forces from the U.S. , Great Britain and France , among others . 
After the Security Council 's vote , Libya 's government declared a cease-fire in its fighting with rebel forces . 
And it invited representatives from other nations to come to Libya to make sure the cease-fire was real . 
Coalition forces were convinced that Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi was not following the rules of the cease-fire . 
On Saturday , the coalition attacked . 
You can hear the sounds of gunfire in the capital city of Tripoli . 
A U.S. commander said missiles landed near the capital and around other cities as part of these attacks . 
The fighting between Colonel Gadhafi 's forces and rebels raged on in other cities , like Benghazi . 
Here , you can see a fighter jet that was shot down over Benghazi on Saturday . 
Admiral Michael Mullen , the chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff , said on Sunday that coalition forces had taken out most of Libya 's air defense systems . 
But Admiral Mullen also said the U.S. role in `` Operation Odyssey Dawn '' would be limited , saying `` we 're not going to put any boots on the ground . '' 
He 's harshly criticized the other countries getting involved with the civil war in Libya . 
He called the coalition forces `` terrorists '' and promised a `` long-drawn war . '' 
But Sunday , a spokesman for the Libyan military called for another cease-fire . 
U.S. PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA : Today , we are both also delivering assistance and support to the Japanese people at their greatest hour of need . 
The ties that bind our nations to Japan are strong . 
In the United States , we forged an alliance of more than sixty years . 
The people of Japan are some of our closest friends , and we will pray with them , and stand with them , and rebuild with them until this crisis has passed . 
AZUZ : We 're starting to see some new effects of the nuclear crisis in Japan that resulted from a tsunami triggered by a 9.0-magnitude earthquake . 
Yesterday , the government health ministry banned the sale of spinach from the area near the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant . 
Officials made that decision based on radiation levels that were over the government limit . 
There were already bans on the sale of raw milk and restrictions on produce from the area surrounding the nuclear plant . 
Workers inside that power plant were starting to see some signs of progress over the weekend in their efforts to cool down these nuclear reactors . 
But officials say `` even in the best scenario , there will be a lot of bumps ahead . '' 
One they came across Sunday was the possibility that they might need to release radioactive gas into the air . 
They would do that in order to release some of the pressure that 's building up inside one of the reactors . 
The tsunami knocked out the plant 's cooling systems , and getting those back online is crucial . 
Allan Chernoff has a household comparison that helps explain why . 
ALLAN CHERNOFF , CNN SENIOR CORRESPONDENT , NEW YORK : To get a sense of the challenge confronting the Japanese at the Daiichi nuclear plant , consider this situation in a kitchen : a pot with no water on top of a high flame . 
Obviously , this dangerous situation could cause a fire in here . 
Well , stay with me . 
Those spent nuclear rods can generate tremendous heat , up to 2,100 degrees . 
Enough to melt them , burn them and send radioactive material into the atmosphere . 
They have to be kept under water , just like spaghetti when we 're cooking . 
Now , those rods are normally kept under 30 feet of water , but according to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission , in at least one of the pools in Japan , the rods are exposed ; there 's virtually no water or no water at all . 
So , how do we resolve this situation ? 
Well , if we do n't take the pot off the flame , we add water . 
And that is exactly what the Japanese are trying to do right now ; any way they can , even dumping it from helicopters . 
They are trying desperately to get water into that pool to avoid a nuclear disaster . 
Allan Chernoff , CNN , New York . 
AZUZ : There was some good news on Sunday when rescue workers found an 80-year-old woman and her 16-year-old grandson . 
They 'd been trapped in their home for nine days . 
The news gave hope to other people whose loved ones are still missing . 
But as Gary Tuchman explains , the search efforts are not easy . 
GARY TUCHMAN , CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT : Kesennuma , Japan . 
The scene behind me here is one of chaos , confusion ; it is surreal . 
If you see the video we took , you wo n't believe it . 
At least , we did n't when we saw it in person . 
So much debris , so much rubble . 
It is like a canyon . 
When we went down there , it 's like climbing a mountain . 
Cars , boats , houses : pushed out of different neighborhoods , pushed out of different areas and blocking fire officials , military officials . 
They 're looking for survivors , the possibility of survivors , or trying to find bodies . 
We met a woman today who told us her father was at the second floor of his house , made the decision to stay in the second floor when the tsunami siren sounded . 
Well , anyway , at this point , they ca n't get to the house . 
It appears the house is still there , but there 's so much rubble surrounding the house , there 's no way to check if this man survived . 
It 's just an absolutely incredible scene . 
It 's hard to imagine what the people here in northeastern Japan are going through . 
The death toll is rising rapidly . 
We know it will continue to rise . 
We ourselves , just myself and my crew , found a body in the back of a car . 
This is how they 're finding bodies , the officials . 
There 's so much rubble down there they ca n't get to . 
It 's very likely that it will be weeks or months before they come anywhere close to knowing what this death toll is . 
And the aftershocks continue . 
Last night , while we were sleeping , we felt at least six or seven sizable aftershocks , and that only increases the anxiety that people feel here in northeastern Japan . 
This is Gary Tuchman , CNN , in Japan . 
AZUZ : A lot of you have been asking on our Facebook page about how you can help the victims of this crisis . 
In the Spotlight section on our homepage , that 's CNNStudentNews.com , click on `` Impact Your World . '' 
You 'll get a list of the organizations helping out with relief efforts and learn how you can be part of them . 
For more information about what 's going on in Japan or about any of the stories we cover in our show , you can always check out the In-Depth section at CNNStudentNews.com . 
AZUZ : Haiti : a nation still struggling to recover from a devastating earthquake that hit it more than a year ago . 
It 's also trying to resolve a presidential election from last November . 
None of the candidates got enough votes for an outright victory . 
Yesterday , Haitians headed to the polls to vote in a runoff election . 
One candidate is a former law professor and first lady . 
The other is a Haitian entertainer . 
There were some problems early on at a couple polling locations : missing ballot boxes , and not enough ink to mark who had voted . 
But officials said those issues were resolved by later in the morning . 
The final results of the runoff are scheduled to be released in mid-April . 
TOMEKA JONES , CNN STUDENT NEWS : A big Gilles-Sweet Shoutout today is dedicated to Mr. Schulenberg 's class in Fairview Park , Ohio ! 
Which word best describes the moon 's orbit around the Earth ? 
You know what to do ! 
Is it : A -RRB- Circular , B -RRB- Helical , C -RRB- Elliptical or D -RRB- Square ? 
You 've got three seconds -- GO ! 
The moon moves around the Earth in an elliptical orbit . 
That 's your answer and that 's your Shoutout ! 
AZUZ : We had to do some digging to find today 's Before We Go segment . 
But it 's nothing compared to what these folks are going through ! 
It 's the 33rd International Intercollegiate Mining Competition . 
Three days of hauling , pounding , drilling , all to show off a mastery of mining . 
33 teams come from colleges all over the world for the annual event . 
How do you get through three days of intense , physical competition ? 
AZUZ : It 's simply a case of mine over matter . 
We 're gonna cart ourselves out of here . 
But CNN Student News returns tomorrow . 
You know the drill . 
We 'll see you then . 
