A bolt from the blue Once in a blue moon Until you are blue in the face Tell me about a piece of news which came as a bolt from the blue . 
What happens once in a blue moon ? 
Send me a sentence using one or more of these idioms and I 'll put my favorites on this page . 
This topic has now closed . 
Thanks for all your homework . 
Last week a close friend of mine told me that he was one to get married that week . 
It really came as a bolt from the blue because I thought that my friend was going to be a kind of eternal bachelor . 
At first I have to say that I didnt believe him . 
Well , these things only happen once in a blue moon so I finally made up my mind to go to the ceremony ... Two years ago , my father had a heart attack , it was a bolt from the blu for me and my family , because he 's a young man -LRB- he 's 50 years old -RRB- and he has always had an excellent health : he was ill once in a blue moon ! 
Doctors have explained that the cause was smoking ... I am very angry because I always said to my father : `` do n't smoke ! '' 
, until I was blue in the face ! 
once in the blue moon , I would like speak English with my a friend . 
but I can , t meet her who just deid recently and she like be talkative with me when we went school sometime i don , t get her speak ... just now i try learn to Englis . 
I miss U very much . 
In our office , my manager use to work in his laptop all the day I was amazed to see that he 's working all the day to make our organization the world 's best but i was surprised to see one day that he use to play on his laptop and once in a blue moon he went to the field that surprise me alot . 
It 's really a bolt from the blue to hear a Chinese unknown maker of heavy industrial machinery buy the Hummer from GM . 
It 's once in a blue moon . 
Last night , my two young brother played game and at 11 : pm , their mother called them went to sleep , but they did n't go . 
And a few minutes later , she said again : `` go to sleep ! '' 
, she called 5 times until she 's blue in the face . 
She was very angry : -LRB- , two children had never seen that any time , it like a bolt from the blue and they went to sleep ... When my sister announced she was pregnant it was a bolt from the blue for me . 
But afterwards all my relatives got together to celebrate the good news , and this made me really happy because in my family it happens once in a blue moon . 
Summer , hot summer . 
People are languid with the heat , sitting in the shadows of trees and buildings . 
And all at a sudden it begins snowing ! 
How can it be ? 
It 's a bolt from the blue ! . . 
Everybody are in rapturous . 
Of course , snow is not once in a blue moon in Russia , but in winter ! 
But now it 's very June ! 
Actually , it 's a fantasy . 
And I can imagine this lovely picture until I am blue in the face ! 
However , I can become closer to my dream , taking some brushes , bright colors and snow-white paint , a leaf of paper and drawing snowflakes and scorching city background ! 
Nowadays , to receive a physical letter is once in a blue moon . 
So , when the mailman knocked in my door it was as a bolt from the blue . 
I 'd like to tell you a story which happened to me two years ago . 
I 'm a student of the Volgograd University . 
Every year different interesting competitions are organized in my University . 
That year I found out some information about the beauty contest . 
Fifteen girls were going to compete for the top-prize - the title of the beauty queen . 
All my nearest and dearest were trying to persuade me into my participating in this contest until they were blue in the faces . 
But I did n't succumb to their urging . 
Finally , I decided to take part in this competition . 
It was out of the blue for all my friends and relatives . 
And it also was a bolt from the blue when for me when I won this contest and became the beauty queen . 
All the girls were green with envy ! 
It was a red-letter day for me . 
Now I have a lot of admirers and I 'm their cup of tea . 
I 've never had news which came as a bolt from the blue . 
This date I will be never forget it . 
This is my first time to go to Taiwan by myself for further study . 
I can come to Taiwan for further study is a bolt from the blue already . 
Because , my parents always do n't support me and reject me to go overthere for further study . 
That day , I seen my parents cried in the airport . 
It is once in a blue moon ! 
I never seen my parents cried before . 
I 'm so sad . 
Until I am blue in the face , I could n't contact with my very close high-school friend . 
Actually , I just meet her once in a blue moon . 
Today , her visit to my house is really a bolt from the blue . 
I do my homework once in ablue moon . 
Expressing your feelings was a bolt from the blue . 
It was a bolt from the blue , he who was a famous star gave me many beautiful flowers , and kisses . 
Suddenly , I woke up . 
My teacher called me until she was blue in her face . 
I was a little bit scared by my teacher but then I continued my dream . 
Once in a blue moon , I have such a beautiful dream . 
I could n't skip it Someday a couple gave birth to twins , Jenny and Rachel . 
They played together when they were little . 
Luckily , they also went to the same school and studied in the same class at the age of 13 ~ 18 . 
Because Jenny and Rachel grew up together , they are like two peas in a pod . 
However , they entered in different universities . 
Furthermore , Jenny found that Rachel 's boyfriend , Carter was also her boyfriend after Rachel brought Carter to go home . 
The twins did n't want to share their boyfriend with each other , so they fought for this thing for so long . 
Finally , the problem still was n't solved . 
It 's really a hot potato . 
in recent parlimentary election congress party won the election . 
and came in the marority as bolt in the blue . 
I did not expect to see your naked body in the video it came as a bolt from the blue . 
As I am so lazy , I go to the gym once in a blue moon ! 
My husband is a bolt from the blue , he is a hardworking man so he pleases me with everything I want and loves me a lot and the best ... He just get angry once in a blue moon . 
Kindergarden kids are so mischievous that you shout to make them quiet until you are blue in the face . 
Being friends with someone is good , but it 's like a bolt from the blue when they betray you . 
Once in a blue moon we visit our relatives . 
When he knew that he lost all his money and that he was unfortunately brankrupt , it came as a bolt from the blue ... . 
He had to work again very hard to rebuilt all his dreams ... . 
The airplane accident from Brazil with destination to France was a bolt from the blue . 
I use my cellphone to make international calls once in a blue moon . 
I always defend my thearies until I 'm blue in the face when a topic crops up among a group of my friends . 
I told my brother 's to clean his room until I blue in face . 
One day I woke up and he was cleaned everything , which was a bolt from the blue but this is happen once in a blue moon . 
Thank you very much for your lessons you make the english quite easy to memorize speacially with your exprission . 
At 10 o'clock Last night , It was raining , I was watching a good football match on TV , Suddenly I heard a big noise in my TV with light , fire and terrible smell thenmy TV did not work because of the lighting and thunder : It is a bolt from the blue . 
\* In Vietnam , there are so many people sell lottery , and people buy them everyday . 
Last year , in September it was a rainy day the lottery sellers had so many slack lotteries and the lottery sellers kept their slack lotteries and at 4.30 pm they won those lotteries . 
it was once in the blue moon . 
i love my sister , really . 
sometimes i do n't put up with her attitude , but we quarrel once in a blue moon , just like last week . 
last week when she said me she 'd like to do a tatoo it was exactly a bolt from the blue !! i hope she 'll change her mind . 
When anyone got a work chance as a blot from the blue , he\/she must take it as it come once in the blue moon . 
But who can listen , so say that until you are blue in the face . 
I wanted to marry a girl whom i loved but i couldnt tell my mom . 
Suddenly the next day my mom came and told me that she has fixed my engagement to her so it was a bolt from blue to me . 
And i got very happy always say to my students do n't make noise in the class but they do n't obey until i am blue in the face , they stay quite in the class once in a blue moon . 
t Thanks a million for your awesome video !! Well , my older brother rarely get mad with me , so it was a bolt from the blue when he hit the roof as I had not cleaned up my room after he was blue with the face saying to do so thousands of times . 
Needless to say , it was a once in a blue moon though . 
My brother does his homework once in a blue moon . 
I did n't become the leader of the class last year . 
It was a bolt from the blue . 
In Italy we say that a Pope dies ... once in a blue moon Our company got a huge order from the local Shipyard . 
It is once in a blue moon fortune for our company . 
The goverment decision to impose service taxes came as bolt from the blue . 
We protested against the cecision until we were blue in the face No one had expected that the new strain of virus could acquire the ability to pass from person to person . 
It was a bolt from the blue . 
In fact , this kind of situation happens once in a blue moon . 
At one time , when i and my friends - from school - were politely sitting in the class , my teacher suddenly said : `` Take out your piece of paper . 
You will write the exam . '' 
We were completely unready . 
It was bolt from the blue . 
So we had started to beg him to did n't do it until we was blue in our faces . 
Naturally he was inflexible . 
We all had to write the exam . 
And i think nobody will get ' 5 ' - the best mark cause it happen once in the blue moon . 
I saw when the Airplane crushed . 
It was a bolt from the blue , bacause it happens Once in a blue moon . 
I looked at until I was blue in the face . 
Actually , it was a bolt form the blue that this video was so useful . 
Just once in a blue moon we can find such an easy way to memorize these expressions , without the teacher having to repeat them until he is blueing the face . 
: -RRB- Ronaldo Gaucho 's recent bad performance in Milan was a bolt from the blue . 
His goals are seen once in a blue moon . 
His fans are blue in the face . 
1 -RRB- I predict you 'll be blue in your face whereas your boss does n't pay attention to you .2 -RRB- Raining in that desert happens once in a blue moon .3 -RRB- I did n't expect that the Referee would be going to finish the game at that time . 
It was a bolt from the blue to me . 
Putra Wibowo , being known as a timid and shy boy amongst all of his friends , has attended driving lesson eight times , but he has never managed to get courage for driving by himself after end of lesson even though the instructor and his parents gave support until they were blue in the face . 
Unexpectedly , after he attended the lesson for nine times , it happened once in a blue moon that he finally can drive the car well and cautiously . 
It was a bolt from the blue for his friends to hear his accomplishment . 
When I left my first job it was a bolt from the blue . 
At school no one expected me to make such a decision . 
Actually a had an opportunity to promote as an education adviser . 
This kind of things do n't happen every day but once in a blu moon . 
However it was a very difficult choice because my friends told me until there were blue ein the face il could be very risky and they wanted to prevent me fron doing it . 
My younger sister never do her homework , so the teacher is blue in the face . 
Onece a time the teacher saw his student with a boy and he was a bolt from the blue because the boy was his son . 
That event was onece in a blue moon for the teacher . 
As usual , I often get up early on Sunday to be a waiter in restaurant . 
At 5 am on 16th November , a friend woke me up for preparing to work . 
while i had n't opened my eyes yet , he asked me : `` Where 's your motorbike ? 
Did you forget to take it into room ? 
Suddenly I feel cold all body . 
I thought he was just kidding but I looked around and did n't see any motorbike in room . 
It was stolen while I and my friend were sleeping . 
It was such a bolt from the blue . 
I was very sad in a long time . 
I ask girls out once in a blue moon becuase I feel embarassed in case I 'm rejeted . 
But i saw a beautiful girl in my hometown . 
It was a bolt from the blue . 
When I was studying in class . 
I heard the news that ex-president ` Roh ' had suicide . 
It was a bolt from the blue . 
My mother is visiting me today as a bolt from the blue ! 
Her visit is a once in a blue moon thing . 
But I 'm kind of happy because she 's coming here to go to a great hospital around here . 
I was asking her to do that until I was blue in the face . 
She has hyperthyroidism , but she hardly care about herself . 
I really hope her condition gets better this time . 
today we had guest in our home but i did n't know about the guest , then i met him after that i went into kitchen and saw a covered pan ... ! 
i thought there 's something special today ... But when i opened the pan . . ! 
that was A bolt from the blue because pan was empty ... To the best teacher in the world , our homework ! 
The reception announced that the class photos were done , this came as a bolt from the blue . 
We really did n't expect them to be ready so quickly . 
I went home to show my dad the pictures and he was happy , now this only happens once in a blue moon . 
I wanted to show them to my mother , but she was busy cooking . 
I asked her to look at them so many times , I got blue in the face . 
I was not born with silver spoon in my mouth and belonged to a noble but poor family . 
Once in a blue moon I was going to the market for purchasing some household stuff . 
Suddenly a speedy car came to the opposite direction and hit my left leg which was badly injured . 
A crowd has been gathered on the spot and some people brought to me hospital . 
The hospital condition in Pakistan is unsatisfactory and doctors were hesitated me to admit because all the rooms and beds were filled . 
But my admission would be possible due to my father silver tongued who reached the hospital at the eleventh hour . 
I had been admitted for two months after a major operation . 
It was bolt form the blue . 
Earlier I learned english once in a blue moon and my sister was always telling me to study hard until she is blue in the face due to I have passed TOEFL test with the great result ... . . -RRB- 
My girlfriend tell me that she will travel next month . 
It was a bolt from the blue . 
I 'm watching the lesson many times until I 'm blu in my face , but I ca n't learn ! 
I hope that once in a blue moon something happens to suddenly learn all English ... yes , if happens will be a bolt from the blue ... I 've sent a number of homeworks but as a bolt from the blue none was posted . 
That teacher will post my work once in a blue moon . 
I 'm an unlucky biology graduate but , because of the global crunch , I work once in a blue moon ! 
So I 'm trying to change my job : I would become steward , so I excercise myself every day until I 'm blue in the face ! 
... if one day I finally could reach my working targets , it 'd be a bolt from the blue ! 
I was living happy life with my Girlfriend . 
She asked me to be an investment banker . 
It was a bolt from the blue . 
I could not understand why she did . 
when I was driving back home acar came out as a bolt from the blue Ididnt see it at all so I hit it . 
and once in ablue moon there was apolice man standing by so he watched every thing . 
the other driver tried to convince him that it was my fault until he was blue in the face I study English once in the blue moon , but I like study with you . 
You 're a special teacher , you 're a bolt from the blue ! 
Thank you The north korean government decided as o bolt from the blue to make nuclear trials inside the earthMy husband can help me for making the home accounts once in a blue moon , he does not like it i went to a market i saw my school friend it was bolt from the blue yesterday , when i met my school friend after a long time . . 
it was once in a blue moon ... In May 22nd newspaper , there is a news about a groom dead right after his wedding party because of an over-drank of wine a beer . 
This is really a tregedy and definetly a bolt from the blue to the bride . 
When my childhood sweetheart girl friend broke off , it was really a bolt for me . 
I tried very hard in hope to win her heart again until I was blue in my face . 
Though such matter happens only once in a blue moon , it is painfull for younger lovers . 
In main situation the worst information which came as a bolt from the blue are about death of our friend . 
In the opposite the supernova is happens once in a blue moon Until I 'm blue in the face , I hardly remember English idioms . 
But a sexy English teacher with big spectacles came on this website as a bolt from the blue . 
So now , I only forget the idioms that he taught me once in a blue moon ! 
A few days ago , I can ` t find a house I 'd like to rent a house . 
I want to or can ` t find the house is rented , It can be said is that when I blind , At that time Until I are blue in the face Last year my brithday was a special day with me . 
that day , my parent was n't at home and I knew I had to be alone in my brithday . 
at 8pm I was watching TV , suddenly I heard the bell I saw out the door , I was amazed that was my parent with gato Cake in hand , that was a bolt from the blue . 
Now , i think again that still find happiness i 'm student of technicaluniversity but i 'm so bore about mystudy so i do my homework once in a blue moon . 
i just study when exmination test 's coming . 
It 's not a bolt from the blue if get badmark . 
i think i need chang mymajor to business what fit to me . 
I am very fat so my mother advices me to do some exercises . 
I do it once in a blue moon . 
After a month of illness , i lost my weigh and it was a bolt from the blue because i have never been in this condition before . 
Until my mother was blue in the face i accepted to do exercises regularly . 
I personally believe that a good opportununity comes once in a blue moon , so the intelligent person is that who gets profit from it . 
And mine came as a bolt from the blue ! 
I was really lucky to have such an opportunity I will tell you about my father 's story . 
Once upon at time , my father bought a lot of lottery tickets until he was blue in the face . 
Unfortunately , he 'd never won the prize but he did n't give up . 
One day , someone called to our home and told the news that came as a bolt from the blue . 
It was my father won the 1 million prize . 
It happened once in a blue moon . 
The End When I was a little girl , my dad bought me a bike for my birthday . 
It was a bolt from the blue , because I did n't expect such a gift and either I could n't ride ! 
After some days I could bike perfectly ! 
Of course I tried to learn until I was blue in the face ! 
Once my loveable bicycle separated into two parts suddenly ! 
Yes ... high speed ! 
Do n't you think it happens once in a blue moon ! 
: -RRB- I 'm a student in Sharjah Women 's College where they have strict rules . 
They give us too much homework , and I do it until I 'm blue in the face . 
I get full marks once in a blue moon . 
They also have a lot of events and they come like a bolt from the blue ! 
We never know about them before they happen , so they are unexpected . 
Once in a blue moon while I was reading a book for the examination , my friend came to me as a bolt from the blue with a his tongue stick out , and told me I read the wrong book . 
He continued to persuade me until he was blue in the face , but however I did n't believe him . 
Finally I found out he was right !!! Fo n't ask me about the score anyway . 
Sangela , Mauritius -LRB- but hasstaying in the UK for t I am Sangela from Mauritius , and I have been staying in the UK for the last 7 years now . 
I do n't like studying too hard , but i like persisting in doing the same . 
Couple of weeks ago while submitting my assignment , with much effort , I got 100 % for this IT Assignment and this really came to me as a bolt from the blue . 
I had two friends , Sam and Mark , who were twins in elementary school . 
They are very similar and like two peas in a pod . 
We always confused about their appearance and special qualities , for example , the same interests , the same voice and the same color of their hair and skin . 
Although they were cute and energetic , they made a lot of trouble and let teachers headache . 
The troublesome they made was a hot potato . 
Even if communicated with their parents to think the solution to what to do , but also did no good for resolving the problems . 
So , the teachers were in order to calm them down , teachers used a carrot and stick strategy to treat them . 
When the twins performed well and were peaceful , teachers gave them gifts or packs of candy . 
If they were mischievous and made fun of other students , teachers would punish them and blame for wrong actions . 
After teachers put into effect , the twins could understand teachers ' intention and become intelligent gradually . 
Teachers were happy and glad to see the maturity from the twins . 
yesterday was my holiday it was once in a blue moon in the month . 
I woke up at 0930 morning and swithc on my TV and set my favorite channel Starmovies . 
According to the newspaper schedule i excepted that i would enjoy the movie `` hard target '' which is my favorite movis but a bolt form the blue a saw a home alone which is children movie . 
i tried to my wife to wake up and perpare breakfast for me but she sleep soundly and i blue in the face . 
i always say to my students do n't make noise in the class but they do n't obey until i am blue in the face , they stay quite in the class once in a blue moon . 
today i went to my coaching center but that was a bolt from the blue i came to know that my coaching was closed today . 
Our teacher of Russian always gives us satisfactory marks as she thinks we do n't know anything . 
She gives somebody a good mark once in a blue moon . 
The previous semester I was trying to work as hard as possible until I was blue in my face . 
When the session came , I was deeply surprised that she gave me an excellent mark . 
It was a bolt from the blue ! 
The annual health check-up always comes as a bolt from the blue . 
My nurse asked me if I drank , and I told her that I do once in a blue moon . 
No one has ever succeeded in pressurizing me into smoking or drinking - they can try until they 're blue in the face , lol ! 
Agustin & JJ , La Serena , Chile Dear teacher , Getting the swine flu in our city was quite a bolt from the blue . 
I told my friends about it - until I was blue in the face - but they just could not believe it . 
You know , we are at the bottom of our planet , so this things happen once in a blue moon . 
My girlfriend asked me to buy a new pair of glasses for her . 
I had protested until I was blue in the face , because she would n't take any excuse or no for an answer . 
i told my friend every time that he could not fly up to the sky until i was blue in the face . 
i said that if anyone really could fly , it is just once in the blue moon . 
he tried and tried and he really could fly up to the sky . 
so it came up to be a bolt from the blue . 
My father saya always that I have to learn more english until he are blue in the face . 
But now I want to become an air traffic controller . 
For this Job I have to increase my English skill . 
I think for my father is that a bolt from the blue . 
The attack of robber was like a bolt from the blue . 
But when I said be cool . 
What do you want ? 
I will help you to get a job . 
They stopped as blue moon . 
Hello very interesting and intelligent man !!! One evening we were sitting in a library studing hard . 
We were looking up for some information about the econimical crisis in Ukraine . 
There was not enough information there . 
But suddenly we found an article that we really needed ! 
that was like a bolt from the blue ! 
But our teacher was not satisfy with our report . 
He had another idea of what is going on in Ukrane and tryed to prove it until he was blue in the face . 
he is usualy very calm . 
And he is irated once in a blue moon . 
Hello everybody !!! If we get `` A '' at Economical history exam tomorrow , it will be like a bolt from the blue , because our teacher gives excellent marks once in a blue moon when her students learn history until they are blue in the face !!!! : D se ... !!! When German ` Werder ' lost a game at the UEFA cup championship it was like a bolt from the blue for me , 'cause I was sure that Germany almost always wins . 
And I told everyone that German football was the best until I was blue in the face . 
So I was very upset because of that failure . 
But I think Germany loses footbal games once in a blue moon , so I hope that the next UEFA cup will be won by Germany : DLove German footbal very much ^ ___ ^ Thanks to ` the Teacher ' for his great educational and funny lessons ! 
You know , my friends ' visit to my place was like a bolt from the blue yesterday . 
She kept on telling something until she was blue in the face , cause she spoke so quickly that i could n't understant anything ! 
She shouted that i help her once in a blue moon ! 
I was really shocked , but anything can happen -RRB- Some days ago , my friend passed the exam . 
He does bad at school and he does his homework once in a blue moon . 
But when we found out the results of the exam it was like the bolt from the blue , because he got 180 out of 200 points . 
He must have been blue in the face getting ready for the exam . 
: -RRB- My younger son does n't like to do his homework so I always remind him until I am blue in the face . 
Once in a blue moon , he does his homework without me reminding him . 
it is always a blot from the blue . 
I live in a flat-sharing community and it happens once in a blue moon , that my flat mate cleans the bathroom . 
And when he does , it comes as a bolt from the blue . 
I was pressing my parents to allow me to do business . 
Until i was blue in the face they did not allow me . 
And in my current job salary hikes once in a blue moon . 
After certain time my parents ask me to go for my logistics business and earn money like anything and that is a bolt from the blue . 
I have been studing it in order that my public office test pass since one years ago . 
somtimes my head is been a bolt frome bule beause my test result is very humble . 
So I study my subjects very hard again until I am blue in the face . 
If i pass the test , it happens once in a blue moon I do my homeworks once in a blue moon , but this kind of teaching come as a bolt from the blue and i liked it , so that is why i am going to do homeworks untill i get blue in the face . 
: -RRB- Yesterday was an unusual day , my best friend called me early in the morning telling me that she is traveling to my country That was A bolt from the blue . 
I was thinking all the day with meeting her , thinking and thinking Until i was blue in the face . 
Today the weather man said there will be a blue moon , minutes after my friend called me telling me that she has already arrived , that was another bolt from the blue . 
TO BE CONTINUE ... Thx TEACHER ! 
I met a girl playing perfect world swordman , she was born in UK . 
Now she is studying in Philipines , we talk a lot ! 
until we are blue in the face . 
I could say that she is best friend i never knew . 
But yesterday something happend while we were talking , she told me That she is fallen to me O_O !? that was A bolt from the blue . 
I told her the same . 
I hope that one of these years Once in a blue moon , i could finally meet her in real life : p . 
Finally , thanks teacher to posted my entrie , that really came as a bolt from the blue , This things only happen Once in a blue moon . 
Or just b ` coz i wrote a lot of entries until i was blue in the face . 
Andrew and Alyona , Sevastopol , Ukraine Winning of UEFA Cup by Ukrainian football team Shahtar was like a bolt from the blue for everybody !!!!!!!!! Students take their exams until they are blue in the face . 
Yesterday I tried to have a ride on a bycicle . 
It usually happens once in a blue moon . 
I fell off the bike a lot of times times and that was rather painful . 
But I started again and again until I was blue in the face . 
It countiniued till I realized that I wanted to buy a car . 
This idea was like the bolt from the blue for me ! 
Jane & Kate , Sevastopol , Ukraine Hello !! You are a very interesting man , who can be met once in a blue moon . 
You do n't have to repeat to do our homework until you are blue in the face , because we know how it 's important at the end of university term when exams start like a bolt from the blue . 
Thank you for a great lesson !!! I was born in the middle of the Atlas mountains . 
When I turned 7 years old it came as a bolt from the blue that day when my father agreed that I could go to school , . 
It was my eldest syster , many thanks to her , who tried to convince him to change his mind , she did until she was blue in the face . 
When I began my school studies , I liked it and was very happy then I expected from my father that he would encourage me but unfortunatly it was once in a moon when he would ask me about how I was doing in my studies . 
Afterwards , I realized that my father wanted me to take care of his goats instead of going to school ! 
However , my strong will to learn and my teachers support stoped my his intention . 
I m gonna describe you what happened to me today at school . 
Our teacher came to the class and we didn t expect any test , so it was as a bolt from the blue when she told us to take a piece of paper to write a revision from the previous class . 
It was surprising because we write tests just once in a blue moon . 
Everybody tried to remember the information from last week until they were blue in the face . 
: - -RRB- Hello very interesting and intelligent man ! 
Our friends Natasha and Ann come to English courses on time once in a blue moon , because they are absent-minded . 
And when we work hard doing our exercises until we are blue in the face they enter the classroom and say . 
- Hello , sorry we are late . 
But yesterday they got on time , wow , it was like a bolt from the blue . 
Hello a very interesting and intelledgent man ! 
When I and my parents went to the city center we saw a stage where there was a concert . 
My favorite singer was there sining my favorite song . 
It was like a bolt from the blue because he comes to city once in a blue moon . 
I have to work blue in the face in the company . 
but my salary is not more than colleague . 
Meanwhile the policy increase salary is one in a blue moon . 
One day My boss called me in his room . 
He said that I had worked very well and professional skill . 
And my salary was going to increase . 
That is a bolt from the blue with me I was very curious about what this video is about . 
I 've never expected that it would be this funny . 
A teacher turned up as a bolt from the blue and taught us in a different way that ordinary teachers do the way once in a blue moon . 
= -RRB- My mom finally lets me to go on a date ! 
That 's a bolt from the blue . 
It happens once in a blue moon . 
In the past , i ask her to let me go on a date until i am blue in the face . 
My younger brother used to prefer going outside with his friends than staying at home and doing homework . 
As a result , he often got bad grades . 
My parent were so sad about this . 
They advise him a lot until they 're blue in their face . 
Suddenly , he started to pay attention to his study . 
This likes a bolt from the blue , but it 's happiness with my parent at that time . 
It happens once in a blue moon that Italy wins yhe Football World Cup . 
It was like a bolt from the blue when I heard that Yolanthe and Jan Smit had broke up ! 
I did n't expect it ! 
It is once in a blue moon that I do n't expect anything , because I know that my grades are n't good but lots of persons that I know say until they are blue in the face that I can do it . 
But I do n't think so . 
It does n't matter . 
But when I least expected it . 
Winih the pooh was in the classroom , he gave me hope ! 
Now I know that I can do it . 
Yes I know I , my story does n't really make any sense . 
A girl was in love with a boy , but she thought that he did n't like her . 
She was very sad about it , so she did everything to show the boy that she was a sweet and nice girl . 
It did n't work , but then as a bolt from the blue he asked her for a date . 
She thought : this ca n't be true , this only happens once in a blue moon ! 
She of course said yes and the rest of the school day she did n't listen to the teachers . 
They could say what they wanted until they were blue in the face . 
She was dreaming about the boy . 
This was in the newspaper this morning : Yolanthe Kabau van Katsbergen and Jan Smit broke up !! It came as a bolt from the blue . 
They never had a fight , maybe once in a blue moon . 
At first , I did n't believe it . 
I could read it until I was blue in the face . 
But oh well , it does n't matter I guess . 
I do n't like Jan Smit anyway . 
My parents tell me that I have to clean my room until they are blue in the face , but I do it once in a blue moon . 
So if I clean my room it comes as a bolt from the blue . 
One day I was sailing on a boat , suddenly there was a tsunami . 
It was a bolt from the blue . 
This only happens once in a blue moon . 
My mother always said ; `` watch out for a tsunami '' she always said that when I went sailing , until she was blue in the face . 
Authorities warn people for earthquakes until they 're blue in the face , but earthquakes only happen once in a blue moon . 
When they do happen however , they 're like a bolt from the blue . 
One of my Humorus friend he used to tell funny story and jokes once in the blue moon . 
If he repeats frequently his stories , it is bolt from the blue . 
Once in a blue moon I visited to London . 
When our Plane landed to the airport the weather was mild and sunny . 
abroptly it changed and heavy rain started we face bolt form the blue . 
we approached to the nearest taxi but the driver demanded huge amount of fare so we are blue in the face . 
A bolt from blue met my lover , her birthday in next month , once in a blue moon ask her marry with me . 
When my girfriend told me I was going to be dad it was like a bolt form the blue . 
She is very interested in traveling but her parents never allow her to go any further place than her school . 
It came as a bolt from the blue , her parents had to go abroad to visit a relative for a month . 
This happened once in a blue moon and although her parents asked her not to go anywhere until they are blue in the face , she intermediately used this time for going anywhere she likes . 
My father is a pilot and he visited us a once in a blue moon . 
Two years ago on the 23rd of April was my birthday and I wanted my father stay with me that day . 
I did n't know what would be my best present . 
A bolt from the blue my father visited us for my birthday . 
I could n't believe it . 
That day was the best day of my year : -RRB- my cousin Sarah is very much introvert . 
she likes to spend her time alone . 
she talks a very little . 
yesterday i went to their house and saw that she was chatting with her friends-laughing loudly . 
I was very much surprised . 
It was just like a bolt from the blue ! 
she smiled at me . 
tell me to stay with him for some days !!!! It really happens once in a blue moon !!! My sister is very lazy to learn English so I tried to force her to study because she had to take the exam from English . 
I used to say to her : ` Study right now ! ' 
I did it until I was blue in the face . 
When one day I arrived at home , my sister was studying in a kitchen , it was like a bolt from the blue . 
After that , I found out that it was once in a blue moon . 
To sum up , she failed her exam . 
However , we expected as much . 
When the swine flu started three weeks ago , this was a bolt the blue . 
-- I told my friends until I was blue in the face that I worked hard to get the highest mark in my job assessment . 
-- When my friend told me he studies maths once in a blue moon , realy it was a bolt from the blue to me . 
He found a problem , he asked me and i told him the solution of that problem until I was blue in the face . 
The sky in Nottingham is blue . 
I saw a wonderful carriage in the street when I first came here . 
What a bolt from the blue ! 
That happen once in a blue moon in China . 
My mum , until she is blue in the face , tells me to tidy up my room and so , like a bolt from the blue , I reorganized my clothes and books ... and it was a bolt from the blue ! 
Like bolt from the blue , the H1N1 flu virus hit the world unexpectedly . 
While we would usually use our thermometers once in a blue moon , we find ourselves using them in school every day before lessons start . 
Our teachers reminded us to bring our thermometers daily until they turn blue in their faces . 
My name came as a bolt in the blue . 
I did n't expect to win such a great prize . 
Inside me there were lots of feelings running through my body and mind . 
In fact , this situation only happens once in a blue moon . 
I thought , for a moment , that I was the happiest person in the world . 
I was sure that when I decide to return to my country my family and friends would recieve me like a star , and they would repeat me until they were blue in the face not to leave again . 
i was at my home , and a bolt from the blue happened . 
the ring started ringing and when I opened the door , my boss was there . 
he wanted to collect something that I had n't done yet . 
I got blue in the face telling him to mind his own business . 
i was at home having dinner with my boyfriend and my boyfriend comes home once in a blue moon . 
Yesterday , I was training my basketball team , and nobody was paying attention to me , until was blue in the face telling them to follow my instructions . 
They will have a punishment next training session . 
This is something I never do . 
Only once in a blue moon In my work , we have bad news , It took our a bolt from the blue , because was fired 4 co-worker : -LRB- Once I bought a chicken egg from the market . 
When I cracked the egg , I saw that there was a chick inside the egg and it was alive ! 
Seeing a chick alive inside an egg , which I was about to cook , was like a bolt from the blue and it happens once in a blue moon . 
I tried to keep that chick alive until I was blue in the face and it died . 
My entries will be never post atleast until once in a blue moon , which sounds really dificult to happen , this is my 4th entrie and any of the last ones were posted that came as a bolt from the blue . 
i will keep writting until im blue in the face . 
To win the lottery is something that happens once in a blue moon and I always say to my friends until I 'm blue in my face that they wo n't win it . 
But now , a friend of mine has won it and it came as a bolt from the blue to me . 
I did n't expect it . 
I LIKE YOOOOOOu !! p.s i tell such things very seldom . . 
once in a blue moon ... really !! : -RRB- good luck Many years ago ... Every day i told my little sister not to cry and to be obedient . 
I did it until i was blue in the face ! 
And it was as a bolt from the blue when one day she bacame calm and well-behaved child ! 
It 's a pity but it happened only once in a blue moon !! Today she is crying again ! 
In 2000 , I was in Rome , in a medical congress , and the they anouced , like as a bolt from the blue , that the Pope will make an anoucemnt in the congress . 
So he did , and it hapens once in a blue moon . 
It is not usualy he apears in situatins like that . 
Until she 's blue in the face , my mother always tells me that I have to tidy my room , that I do it once in a blue moon . 
I know that I should to do it more frequently , but I 'm lazy . 
Nevertheless , like a bolt from the blue , for her birthday , I cleaned all . 
At last weekend I was out for a meal with my friends . 
the weater was warm and wonderful , suddenly everything is changed . 
The blue sky was going to be Cloudy and then , it was raining cats and dogs . 
It was a bolt from the moon . 
Actually , you ca n't expect any thing about the weather in England , a good and sunny weather here is once in a blue moon . 
I hope u will put my sentences on this page ! 
Soon enough , before i become blue in the face . 
I have tried it many times in the past but i have only succeded once in a blue moon ! 
If u do so , that would be a bolt from the blue for me ! 
I 've ordered my cat not to hunt birds or lizards until I 'm blue in my face but she never listen to me . 
Once she killed a bigsnake and this was a bolt from the blue ... My friend used to drink a lot of coffee and my job was to warn her that it 's not healthy i told her that until i was blue in face , one day she read in a newspaper an interview with a scientist from Germany who discoverd that after drinking coffee your body energy decreases this was a blot from the blue to her i started to teas her by saying that iam always right she said it happend once in a blue moon . 
To better prepare my exam , I insisted not to go out at night until I am blue in my face . 
A blot from the blue that I passed the exam at the first trial . 
Thus , I hanged out with my friends last night . 
It happens once in a blue moon that I was immediately invited to the table with hot girls . 
We always drink synthetic juice once in a blue moon , but today my mom said - You can drink juice every day , so this statement came to me as a bolt from the blue . 
I work for a manufacturing company and last week I had a meeting with my boss . 
A salary increase came to me as a bolt from the blue because nowadays salaries are increased once in a blue moon . 
I was surprised and very happy and went home to tell it to my wife . 
We wanted to celebrate it , but suddenly it started to rain and we were waiting until we were blue in the face . 
Finally , we celebrated it at home . 
As a bolt from the blueI met him though I knew , It was simply impossible , But I told , `` I love you '' It was a bolt from the blue that we won Olympiakos , the most famous club from Greece in a friendship football match yesterday . 
Althought it is just a friendship match , we got many things from this match because it comes once in the moon . 
Thank you very much . 
Welcome to my country ! 
My boy friend gave a pretty necklace to me . 
It was a bolt from the blue . 
I was so surprised because it happened once in a blue moon . 
I asked severely for the reason until he was blue in his face . 
He said '' ... think about yourself . '' 
Then I realized that it was my birthday I just had forgotten . 
Today I 'm having an interview in English , which I 'm not very good at , such a bolt from the blue ! 
I 'm so worry about that . 
why did I decide to do ? 
I 've never been to any interview before , it happens once in a blue moon that I do n't know what I should do now . 
I ask myself untill I am blue in my face . 
But at last , I think I 'll go . 
I 'll try my best ! 
It was at subway platform , sudenly , a stranger man come unto me . 
It was a bolt from the blue . 
That happend once in a blue moon . 
He insist to approach to me and facing all the time , until I was blue in the face I got a trouble maker brother , he is in the university but always I told him not to stale the family 's car until I was blue in the face but noway , he is still doing this in spite of he does n't have driving license , if he stops doing this for one day it will be like once in the blue moon . 
Sorry , I never did my homework for your lessens , because I was not sure whether it is right . 
That ` s I was very , very mad at myself . 
But if I looked in the mirror my face was not blue , it was red . 
Have you got any blue blood ? 
Don ` t be angry , please ! 
When your 3 days boyfriend tells you that he wants to spend all his life with you , it comes as a bolt from the blue ! 
My boyfriend is n't demonstrative , the times when he says `` I love you '' happens once in a blue moon ! 
I was picked to be our class leader , this news came as a bolt from the blue . 
But my classmates listen to my orders once in a blue moon , so I order themagain and again until I 'm blue in the face . 
I am 38 years old and do n't have child . 
It comes as a bolt from blue , my wife was pregnent a month ago . 
Today , I feel refreshed in the morning , it happens once in a blue moon . 
I ask my wife to see doctors for many times , but she does n't listen to me until I am blue in the face . 
We were going outdoors to celebrate my husband 's birthday . 
It was a sunny weather ... But in a few minutes it was raining cats ang dogs !!! It was a bolt from the blue . 
We expected the weather was getting better . 
We waited untii we were blue in our faces . 
So we stayed at home . 
But the party was really excellent and all our friens came that happend once in the moon ... so , every cloud had a silver lining . 
His decision of getting married came as bolt in the blue . 
His parents tried to dissuade him from getting married until they were blue in the face . 
He should be really in love because not attending his parents wishes happened once in a blue moon . 
Like a bold from the blue , a flying pig appeared and all the dwarves were surprised by this phenomenon , because it happened only once in a blue moon . 
It is a bolt from the blue that my good friend will go to live in another country which is so far from me , maybe we can see each other once in a blue moon . 
i used to live in Indaiatuba and to study in Campinas . 
it was 2006 , it was a rainny day but it was not a simple rain ... a tornado appeared in Indaiatuba as a bolt from the blue ans since it 's not normal to have this in this part of brazil it also happen once in a blue moon . 
that was the first and last tornado in Indaiatuba ever . 
I go to the gym once in a blue moon because I am very , very busy at work . 
Mary and Lucy , Sicily , Italy yesterday I made a walk on the street and I saw in a shop a strange beautiful peluche monkey so I wanted to buy it . 
Next day , first I took my money , then I went to the shop to buy the peluche . 
I opened the door , I said `` good morning ! '' 
but nobody answered to me . 
I screamed again saying `` g-o-o-d m-o-r-n-i-n-g ! 
Is there anybody ? '' 
While i was going out , the costumer appeared to me and he asked me `` ooooohh , sorry !!! Someone comes here once in a blue moon ! 
Can I help you ? '' 
I answered `` yes , please . 
I 'd buy the peluche monkey '' and he told me `` oh ! 
it 's as strange as a bolt from the blue ! '' 
There was only a problem : the monkey was very expensive , it was ugly too so i decided to come back home . 
Today my schoolmates and I are in the informatic lab once in a blue moon . 
A bit of relax , after a boring day and an interrogation that was for me a bolt from the blue . 
Another day at school !!!!! Stop !!!! I 'll say it until I 'm blue in the face !! Last summer holidays , something happened to me . 
It is something that only happens once in a blue moon . 
I was in Milan for a study holiday when , like a bolt from the blue , Zlatan Ibrahimovic appeared in front of me . 
I was very surprised and excited ! 
I said to him many times that he was the gratests footballer I 've ever seen , until I was blue in the face . 
He did n't listen to me . 
But I felt happy to see him in Milan . 
I have a first free day at work from ages . 
My boss gives me holiday once in a blue moon and it 's always like a bolt from the blue . 
I think I should change my job ... I was at subway platform , sudenly , a stranger man come unto me It was a bolt from the blue . 
That hanppend once in a blue moon . 
He insisted approach to me and facing all the time , until I was blue in the face I am explaining to one of my collegues work until I get blue in the face , though she does listen once in a blue moon . 
Today I got news as bolt from the blue that van at work did n't have MOT for over 1 month . 
Yesterday I was goiing to the supermarket . 
I bought three things ; a toothbrush , toothpaste and an head of lettuce salad . 
Then I go home and put the salad in the fridge . 
One hour later I will make the salad ready for the meal . 
But when I was open the fridge , I saw a very big frog . 
I fill in the fridge . 
It came as a bolt from the blue . 
I was running back to the supermarket and screamed there was a frog in my fridge . 
They did n't believe me . 
So I said it many times . 
I was blue in my face . 
After my screaming they believe me and they say to me they feel so sorry for me . 
It happens once in a blue moon . 
They send me a men who was take the frog out of my fridge . 
From the supermarket I got an new head of lettuce salad . 
It was once from the blue moon last year , I spent my time to fitness studio twice time . 
Since , my mother have said until she is blue in the face . 
So what can i do ? 
When China said it 's the time for countried to reduce thier reliance the US dollars as a currency reserver , it was like a bolt from the blue . 
I heard a piece of news recently , which came as a bolt from the blue . 
Several of banks are facing the peril of bankrupcty , it ; s like a bolt from the blue to the citizens in Hong Kong . 
Annie is completely mean to everyone , demanding her to donate money to the charity is once on a blue moon . 
Last time , I played football and the sun left us for the rain . 
It was a blot from the blue . 
After that , the sun went back , and I scored for once in a blue moon . 
I told to my friends I scored until I was blue in my face . 
I 've got two boys , they really enjoy playing computer games . 
And they always do n't stop doing it until i am blue in the face . 
However , today it was a bolt from the blue , because they kept their time that playing games . 
This situation happen once in a blue moon . 
Annemarie and Karlijn , The Netherlands This morning , I woke up , and felt really relaxed . 
That happens once in a blue moon ! 
I walked down the stairs , and made my breakfast . 
I ate it in front of the TV . 
My mother was n't really pleased about that ! 
When I finished my breakfast , I walked to my bedroom to grab my clothes together . 
I washed my face , and walked to the bathroom . 
When I arrived at the bathroom , I saw a big black spider ! 
I was so growse ! 
It came as a bolt from the blue ! 
I screamed , and shouted . 
My mother ran to the bathroom , and asked me what was going on -LRB- What is going on in here ? '' -RRB- 
I pointed with my finger -LRB- always use the finger -RRB- to the big black spider . 
My mother looked , and screamed too . 
Then , my dad came . 
He looked really tired . 
He said : `` I always tell you , not to wake me up in the morning ! 
But I 'm saying it , and saying it , until I 'm blue in the face ! '' 
My dad grabbed the spider , and threw it out of the window . 
We were really happy , that the big black spider was gone . 
I thanked my dad , and went to school . 
What a weird morning was that ! 
hi this is my first homework on BBC . . 
once in a blue moon i getup early in the morning . . 
I work in a hospital , where working there is useless , you work and work until you are blue in the face , it is a total mess . 
It came like a bolt from the blue that they will increases our salaries as they do this once in a blue moon . 
Finally they did not . 
it was a bolt from the blue when i was chossen as the class president . 
i eat ice cream once in a blue mooni ask the children to keep quiet until i was blue in the face . 
There was a sweet pretty girl living in a hole under her bed . 
A summer morning , her horse gave her a beautiful bee called Soko . 
That was a bolt from the blue because her horse was dead since 1954 . 
But now , she could only think about her beautiful Soko . 
Once in a blue moon the girl got out of the hole to see Soko 's friends and made her fly for a while . 
So one of these special days , the both died . 
THE END : Not very often , only once in a blue moon , someone is born with special powers . 
Maybe someone can fly or travel in the time . 
Do n't you think this type of peple are heroes ? 
They could change the world if they want . 
In the course of our story , like a bolt from the blue , some of these heores appear . 
For exemple Morgana or Joana of Arc . 
Why their finishes are so bad ? 
Could be that the humanity do n't let them change the world ? 
Could be that we are so afraid of them ? 
Yesterday I was watching TV and happened a bolt from the blue ; my cat started to miaow and jump . 
Until it was blue in the face I started to listening to it and I turned to pay atention . 
I saw something once in a blue moon threw the windows ... There was a UFO !! You know what 's that , right ? 
Dreams come to me once in a blue moon . 
When I was a kid somebody stole my fantasies . 
No hope , no fear , anything . 
And then , suddenly , a bit of imagination dust , a dream striking on my head like the only blooming flower alive . 
And I ca n't find the reason why . 
Maybe I still keep a bit of dreaming inside , maybe it 's just me dreaming all the time . 
We were saying to our mother that we wanted to go to a fabolous concert that only happened once in a blue moon . 
She said to us that going to the concert alone was very dangerous but we said to her `` We can take care of ourselves ! '' 
and we repeat it to her ultil until we were blue in the face but she does n't listened us . 
Finally we left our house and we went to the concert without our mother 's permission . 
Now she is very angry with us ... but we enjoyed the concert very much ! 
Last holidays , something happened to me . 
It is something that only happens once in a blue moon . 
I was in Barcelona practising skate when , like a bolt from the blue , Tony Hawk appeared in front of me . 
I was very surprised and excited ! 
I said to him many times that he was the gratests skater I 've ever seen , until I was blue in the face . 
He did n't hear to me . 
But I felt happy to see him in Barcelona . 
once there was a stupid kid , who always said `` pink floyd sucks '' . 
one of his friend told him , untill he was blue in the face , `` pink floyd do n't suck , actually i think you suck '' . 
then one day the annoying kid said `` pink floyd does n't sucks that much '' , and his friend said `` ooh that was once in a blue moon '' Always when I 'm talking with Llui s I finish blue in the face , because he answer my questions once in a blue moon . 
One day in the zoo i was looking at a monkey was pooping , his zookeeper was suprised becouse this monkey poops three times a day and this day he only poops one time , he say `` Oh this happens once in a blue moon `` Then the zookeeper says , poop , poop , poop until he was blue in the face . 
I argue with my brother once in a blue moon but when I do I keep telling him to leave me alone until I 'm blue in the face . 
He gets blue in the face telling me let me use your ps3 . 
Once in a blue moon , i loved a girl , she left me , it was a bolt from blue for me . 
I have told her '' i love you so much '' until i was blue in the face Once in a blue moon i visit bbc . 
co. uk , i watched that nice video , and read that phrases until i was blue in the face , but i am sure , i know doing homework is a bolt from the blue for me . 
Once in a blue moon I go to swim although I do work out regularly . 
I told my boyfriend to care more about me until i am blue on the ace . 
I was talking about the holiday to him last night , and he gave me the elbow all of a sudden . 
It was completly a bolt from the blue . 
I 've never written anything in this website . 
But today , the idea that I can write something here came as a bolt from the blue . 
I do this once in a blue moon . 
I am writing about music and movie piracy , focusing on the quote after some time all the CD readers show harm and do not work properly . 
Here in Brazil you can request a replacement but in this case once in a blue moon and requesting a refund it is impossible . 
It is a chaotic situation if you consider the loss in taxes that the goverment has had due to these criminals and the many more things that could have been done for all the population in the education area and health . 
I have recently resieved a letter from danish emigration servise telling that they are completing my documents to find iut whether I am going to stay in the country or not . 
I 've spent hell of a lot of time looking for a job untill I was blue in my face . 
And unexpectedly got ruther good one . 
It heppens ones in a blue moon , but now it 's something I can be proud and happy about . 
This bolt from the blue was a the best bolt I 've ever twisted in . 
Once I was writing an essay as my homework when suddenly the electricity was disconnected . 
It was really a bolt from the blue !!! I had been trying to write my wark in the dark 40 minutes until i was blue in the face ... Usually such troubles happen with me once in a blue moon so that i was very sad and decided to go sleep ... One day I was walking in the forest , and when I returned , my mother told me my dear hamster , Tyopa , had died . 
It was as a bolt from the blue for me . 
I loved him as a son . 
But next day we bought Rizhella , who is so clever and pretty ! 
It ` s unreal ! 
She can speak four `` languages '' : as a bird , as a pig , as a dog and as a hamster ! 
A hamster like she is born once in a blue moon . 
Hoping my twenty years old son cook dinner for me is a bolt from the blue , however he did yesterday . 
It is once in a blue moon . 
Before that , I called him to prepare dinner if he was at home , but until I am blue in the face ; he never do that at all . 
TODAY MY FRIEND HAD TAKEN ME TO RESTAURANT , IT HAPPENS ONCE IN A BLUE MOON It came as a bolt from the blue when our English teacher told us that we had won a trip to New York . 
She insisted until she was blue in the face for us to finish the project . 
Poor teacher but she was right and it was worth it . 
I was having a bad day . 
I could n't score any point in my basketball match . 
I tried it until I was blue in the face . 
When the match finished , I was walking home looking down the ground . 
While I was walking , I found a 50E note ! 
I thought that this only happens once in a blue moon , and I was very happy . 
But , when I was in a zebra crossing , like a bolt from the blue , a lorry which was driving so fast appeared and pulled the note away from me . 
Definetely I had a bad day . 
I never do my homework , so doing my homework is something that happens once in a blue moon . 
But when I do it , my teacher says that it 's like a bolt from the blue , so please , If you want to make her happy and you do n't want to win an enemy , publish it on your web page until I am blue in my face !! I was walking down the street , lonely , and as a bolt from the blue somebody looked at me , It was an irreal face and I ca n't forget this image ... My parents insist that I have to study more until they are blue in the face , but I do it once in a blue moon . 
One day when they arrived home I was studying and they suddenly shouted `` It comes like a bolt from the blue that you study '' . 
the politicians in my country have the opportunity right now to be once in a blue moon to help the citizens to return to their lands after the guerrillas took them My mum bought me clothes once in a blue moon . 
She say me that I have a lot of clothes until she 's blue in the face . 
my husband work really hard all the time . 
Once I advise him to go on vacation because he leave the country once in blue moon . 
He went in Kenya where he was supposed to stay for 2 weeks .2 days later when I was thinking to receive his call , I heard some noise in the living room as if somebody was watching tv . 
It was as a bolt from the blue to see him watching his favorite soap as ussually . 
the people at my company decide to review the salaries once in a blue moon . 
I 've a friend who is a droug addict . 
For him , joins were a thing that once he first try , was once a blue moon to once a blue sky . 
Now , she bold from the blue when I advise him that it 's unhealthy . 
I 'm aware that he recognize that he is hooked . 
This morning I came to high school . 
When I opened the door of the classroom , there was n't anybody . 
It was a bolt from the blue for me . 
I thought that they were in another class . 
When I started looking for them , a teacher said to me that my teacher did n't come today and my classmates knew it . 
Tomorrow I 'll talk to my classmates about it but I know that I 'll be blue in the face because they wo n't explain to me nothing and I wo n't get any results about what has happened ... Once in a blue moon I wait for a shooting star until I 'm blue in the face , and when it appears it 's always a bolt from the blue ! 
If F.C. Barcelona wo n't win the Champions , the players will be sad until they are blue in the face . 
yesterday I found 50 euros on the beach as a bolt from the blue while I was building a sand castle . 
My sister helped me with the castle , which happens once in a blue moon , it was amazing ! 
I spent an hour trying to build the castle 's gate , i tried until I was blue in the face ! 
In the end of Last year was the time when my friends and I separated because each of us chose a different Batchillerat that we liked . 
However , I am now in the same school as the most of my friends but we are n't in the same class . 
And last December , when we saw our notes , it was a bolt from the blue because my friend got incredible marks . 
In junior high school , he never studied seriously and he was very lazy . 
He studied once in a blue moon . 
His parents always said him to study more . 
But , he never listened to them until they were blue in their face . 
Yesterday I was really bored . 
My best friend told me he was going to the casino . 
Actually I gamble once in a blue moon ... However , I had a premoniton . 
I bet 20E in the number 0 in the rulette . 
And ... I won ! 
It was a bold from the blue ! 
Once in a blue moon I want that F.C Barcelona will win the triplet -LRB- The league , The Champions and `` La Copa del Rey '' Last day , my most hated teacher said to us that he would have to be in a trip for a month because of family matters . 
That only happens once in a blue moon ! 
I was really happy , so I would n't have to listen to him telling me off until he was blue in the face . 
Unfortunately , he came back the next day saying that his problem had been solved without him and he did n't have to go . 
I felt it like a bolt in the blue . 
I had to go on a trip to Beijing during the summer . 
I told my mom repeatedly that I did n't want to go until I was blue in the face . 
It did n't make the tiniest bit of difference . 
I still had to go ! 
my brother 's confession of dropping from school come was a bolt from the blue for me . 
i did not expect it . 
but is serves her right after advice upon advice until i was blue in the face , she missed a golden opportunity which comes but once in a blue moon . 
my father is so strictly that praise me once in a blue moon ! 
I am an obedient daughter in my parent 's eyes , but I refused to follow my mother 's road as an accoutning . 
I think it is certainly a bolt from the blue to my parent . 
They persuade me to accept their suggestion until they are blue in the face . 
It is really once in a blue moon to them . 
Recently my mom told me about our dog Harry . 
She said there seemed to be something the matter with him . 
The news is a bolt from the blue . 
I 'm so worried about him . 
I seldom feel happy in the rush world , and without doubt , the news adds frost to snow . 
My truly smile happens once in a blue moon . 
This morning I came across a bolt from the blue as I heard from the radio that there was a person who walked across the high way . 
This caused a severe accident and one motorist was dead . 
In fact , there are two fences along the high way , so it is quite difficult for a person to climb over . 
Surprisingly , the person who had acrossed the fences was drunk . 
This really happens once in a blue moon . 
So far , the traffic security authority was consistently arising the awareness of the traffic rules of pedestrians through the public media . 
However , some people were still ignoring the message and kept acrossing the road anywhere and without paying enough attention to the traffic . 
To these people , you will say until you are blue in the face . 
This is my first time to learn english on BBC . 
I wanna say ` Hello ' to everybody . 
My homework is as below : today of last year , Sichan of China happened 8.0 earthquake , it come as a bolt form the blue , i was quaked when i heard that news , for my parents are in there , furtunately , my parents were on the safe area . 
It happened once in a blue moon , so many people did not be rescued ! 
Let 's pray for them ! 
Once in a blue moon my boyfriend arrive late at his job . 
The news about the sudden death the politician has just come has a bolt from the blue . 
No one expected it at all ! 
Well , though such news strike once in a blue moon , they leave us gaping into the air without any solution . 
Spring comes too late in my region . 
In May it is usually snows , but this year , on 10th May it was sunny and very warm like a bolt from the blue ! 
Such things happen once in a blue moon ! 
When i called my friends to share my surprising news , they did n't believe me . 
I tried prove them i was not kidding till i was blue in the face ... At last they saw it through my web-camera and ... believed ! 
Hi very interesting and intelligent man ! 
My question is : Is there a difference between `` once in a blue moon '' and the almost similar expression `` once in a VERY blue moon '' which I know from a lyrics ? 
Do n't let me wait -LRB- to long -RRB- to an answer until I 'm blue in the face . 
Even if I never use your lesson and my anger will come over you like a bold from the blue . 
-LRB- It 's a joke , I like your lesson . 
Great job !!! -RRB- Yesterday I found out that my best friend fell in love with a new boy . 
For me this news was a bolt from the blue . 
Especially after I knew he is very mean and gives her presents once in a blue moon . 
I 'm trying to explain he is not the one she needs until I 'm blue in the face . 
When I suddenly came across my old friend he paid so much compliments on my appearance , it came as bolt in the moon because he always induldges himself by cracking brute jokes concerning me . 
Besides he persuaded me into going out with him . 
I could n't resist a temptation to take a revenge on him and accepted his invitation . 
It happens once in a blue moon . 
How lucky I was when he tried to kiss me on cheek until he was blue in the face but received a flat refusal . 
My sister is a mess when somebody tell her please to tide your shoes , so her mother tell her until she are blue in her face and she will once in a blue moon . 
I was such good and hard worker so I was jobless likes once in a blue moon , I thought . 
But unfortunately , a bolt the from blue occurred to me that I was dismissed by my boss last month because the company did n't get any more project . 
I have been waiting for job until I am blue in the face . 
So now , I am trying to learn English to get a new job . 
Your teaching style is almost absured , but this time , you teach me reasonably once in a blue moon . 
You say `` Do your homework '' until you are blue in the face . 
This video is a bolt from the blue for me . 
From now on , I have to do my homework ... It is said that true love comes once in a blue moon , I meet my husband many years ago but at bigining I did not believe in true love because I thought the true love comes as bolt from the blue . 
Nowday I have a son and I asked him to take a shower until I am blue in the face Waking early in the morning for me is once in a blue moon , my mum always keep noticing me to wake up early until she 's blue in the face . 
But today my mum is absolutely a bolt from the blue because her daughter woke up early and prepared breakfast . 
That 's all because it is Mother 's day !!!!!!!!!! love u mum ! 
I am not a social person . 
It happens once in a blue moon that I took to my classmates . 
One day I return home with the new classmate . 
My father saw him and said never go with that boy , his father is a drug addict . 
It is a bolt from the blue . 
My anty keep my money and don , t want to give me back . 
for me is a bolt from the blue . 
My parants told me don , t go to CASINO until they were blue in the face . 
BUT don , t worry . 
i always be contite now . 
I share my bedroom with my sister . 
Once , I told her to go to sleep until I was blue in the face but she still kept on jumping on her bunkbed . 
She said that she would go to France . 
It was a bolt from the blue for me . 
I tried to persuade her not to go , until I was blue in the face . 
I knew that she changed her mind once in a blue moon , and she went to France . 
Recently , I frequently help my parents to lighten their burden . 
Well though I ca n't do much , at least It 's useful them afer all . 
Of course , It 's just like a bolt from the blue . 
In the past , It was like once in a blue moon for me to do that although they had asked me many times until they were blue in the face . 
But thanks God , now I have realized my mistakes . 
I have a little sister . 
She was very diligent . 
I never needed to ask her to do her assignments or study . 
She could just do it by herself . 
Her scores were always good . 
I was very proud of her . 
However , recently I 've found that her scores are very bad . 
It is really a bold from the blue for me . 
She used to get bad scores once in a blue moon , but now everything has changed . 
Everyday I need to ask her to do her assignments until I am blue in the face . 
I do n't know what has happened to her but I hope this will end soon . 
Last year was the time when my friends and i separated . 
Each of us chose a different high school that we thought was the best for us . 
However , i am still in the same high school as one of my friends but we are n't in the same class . 
And last December , when we took our report books , it was a bolt from the blue because my friend got third rank in his class . 
In junior high school , he never studied seriously and he was very lazy . 
If he studied , it just happened once in a blue moon . 
His parents always reminded him to study more . 
But , he never listened to them until they were blue in their face . 
So , with his good result now , it is really a bolt from the blue . 
Once in a blue moon rita 's husband gave her a gift . 
Four months ago we suddenly discovered that two members of my family were seriously ill : it came as a bolt from the blue ! 
Saturday I finally heard my sister on the phone : it happens once in a blue moon , because she lives far from me in France . 
I would like to find another job , because I 'm tired to repeat always the same things to my students , until I 'm blue in the face ! 
At first when I joined this Idiom Lesson from BBCLE I got a bolt in the blue that the presenter is handsome and humorist . 
I think this really once in a blue moon , and then I told my friends to join this lesson until I am blue in the face . 
Somehow they have their response relactantely . 
I lost my key to the dorm when I was heading back . 
It was a total bolt from the blue . 
Because I had never lost anything , so this time it happened all once in a blue moon . 
I comlained and complained to my roomies until I was blue in the face . 
I advised my sister to work hard for her semester exam . 
But she took her book once in a blue moon . 
I asked her to study until I was blue in the face . 
Finally semester exam result came . 
It came as a bolt from the blue . 
She flunked in 3 subjects . 
Though she did n't study hard , she is not too poor student to fail . 
The World War II was a bolt from the blue for the mankind . 
There were a lot of battles in Europe , but in America was a once in a blue moon . 
A few years ago , I read a variety of books and dictionaries to learn English idioms . 
However I used the idioms once in a blue because I could not remember . 
I learned until I was blue in the face . 
Everything changed when `` a very interesting and intelligent man '' appeared in 2008 . 
The Teacher has given lessons which are always bolts from the blue . 
He helps me to remember English idioms easily . 
To The Teacher : Thank you very much for unheard-of and useful lessons on English idioms ! 
Is the financial crisis a bolt from the blue ? 
I do n't konw , but it is once in a blue moon really My brother is very lazy . 
He often sleep or play computer games in his free time . 
My parents tell him to learn English until they are blue in their face . 
The lessons are very interesting and I love them . 
However , the new lesson is coming once in a blue moon . 
I hope the new lesson is coming more often . 
The flood in November in Hanoi is extremely big . 
I have never seen a big flood like it before . 
Some people were killed by a bolt from the blue . 
i and my friend in US used to get to gather once in a moon . 
and my passed result in intermediate was a bolt from the moon I fell a love with one beautiful giri . 
and it 's a bolt from the blue cuz i have never seen such a gorgeous girl . 
it happens once in a blue moon . 
I confess my feeling to her until i am blue in the face . 
I studied English very hard until I was blue in the face . 
My brother is 11 years old , he uses to bother me all the time when I visit him , putting his finger in front of his mounth making a noise like Shhhhhhhh , for me to be quiet , no matter what I say until I am blue in the face ! 
Eventhough I saw him once in the blue moon . 
My father get angry only once in a blue moon but when he does its like a bolt from the blue . 
One time my younger sister went home very late at night . 
He scolded her , yet my sister did n't mind his words , my father was very angry until i saw he is blue in the face . 
I am from Somalia and the situation has been a bolt from the blue because of the many problems that is going on in Somalia , but my girlfriend called me from America saying that I will join her in America in a family reunion case , I am really really pleased that news , you often do n't expect such a news ! 
It 's very rare it 's like once in a blue moon ! 
I always promise myself to learn English regularly , but I can repeat it until I am blue in the face . 
Somehow I constantly find something else to do . 
Ok , but this time I am serious , I start today . 
Or tomorrow , today is such a nice weather and it is Sunday . 
So , let 's start tomorrow , promise . . 
Once in a blue moon , as a bolt from the blue , your students do what you 've told them until you are blue in the face . 
My old friend 's return has been as a bolt from the blue . 
We did n't expect she would ever come back . 
She used to phone us once in a blue moon . 
That 's the reason I thought she forgot us as soon as she left . 
I would send lots of letters to her until I was blue in the face , because she never answered them . 
That 's why it happened to be such a surprise . 
The Internationally Monetary Fund transfers the second tranche estimated nearly 3 billions of dollarsto Ukraine . 
It happens once in a blue moon , especially in our country . 
The politicians persuaded The IMF untill they were blue in their faces that all the money were needed to supply the budget ` s deficit . 
However , many ukrainians are considered that the money will not be used efficiently . 
My best friend 's parents are so queer that always quarrel and when she tell us about her parents did n't dispute , it really a bolt from the blue for all of us , it truely once in a blue moon that they forget their problems and think about their children , she often blue in the face while talking about them . 
you try to think how God makes human being until you are blue in the face ! 
i can not believe during this good weather , snow begins to fall like a bolt from the blue ! 
eclips solar appears when sun and moon were in the same direction ; that 's why the event comes once in a blue moon ! 
SUCH a bolt from the blue happened to me when I only got 6 mark on maths semester test . 
That was due to a mistake of my tacher , I have told her until I WAS blue in my face , but she do n't admitted it Last week in Tokyo , there was a really big rainbow in the evening . 
It was once in a blue moon . 
Tokyo is pretty big and has a lot of high-rise buildings in the small space , so we can not see a rainbow here . 
I stayed at home then , but my friend could see it from a train . 
She said it made her happy . 
it is a general knowledge that immigration process takes a nail-bitting period of time until the applicant turns blue in the face , but it is an exception in my case since my file was processed much earlier thatn i expected which it came to ma as a bolt from the blue . 
fantastic , isn ` t it ? 
such rare events occur once in a blue moon . 
My boyfriend 's arrival came as a blot from the blue . 
I did n't expect him to come all the way from Singapore to Japan just to celebrate Christmas withe me . 
In the last April fool , i invented a story to my friend about our favorite football club - manchester united . 
i told him that cris ronaldo was a bolt from the blue to moved to Chelsea FC which is one of the biggest opponent of MU . 
Firstly , he felt true shock but after not , he told that ronaldo had played for manutd until he is blue in the face and a best player in the world had been once in blue moon to do that ... When the brainy people will be able to predict the occurrence of the bolt it will not be bolt from the blue anymore . 
When the brainy people will be able to export life to the moon an so it will get bluer like our earth things happen once in a blue moon might happen not so rarely anymore . 
Yesterday evening one person inveted me to go for a walk , I did not expected it , it was a bolt from the blue ! 
Today I have time and will to learn English . 
I 'm happy , because it happens once in a blue moon . 
Sometimes people do n't understand what I 'm talking about and I have to tell the same story again and again until I 'm blue in the face ! 
The Vice-Chancellor is meant for administration of the university but his appearance to teach students on that day came as a bolt from a blue . 
Jack is usually an absentee appeared in that particular claass as once in blue moon I have a company working on IT industry . 
My employees are very passive , I told them to be more active in work until I am blue in the face . 
Once in a blue moon , they done something without my instruction . 
But in the latest project , it likes a bolt from the blue when they 'd accomplished the tasks very well even when I absented . 
in Egypt , we go to the polls once in a blue moon because we do not expect a bolt in the blue and all our people stay at home until they are blue in the face on election day In my life , there is always a bolt from the blue . 
Sometime it 's funny , happy but sometime it is very sad . 
And I do not understand why my homework sent many times but it is ever posted , it almost happen once in a blue moon even though I think It is not bad . 
Still I say this until I am blue in the face I never get good marks at biology . 
It is very boring subject so once in a blue moon I study it . 
My teacher always reminds me until he is blue in his face . 
Just once in my life , I learned it carefully in order to pass the most important exam . 
I have a talent for biology , do n't I ??? I thought that your newsletter should never misses in my mail I thought it should be bolt from the blue . 
But it is happening as I hoped once in a blue , but please send it again before I am in the blue face . 
When I found a good job , in my country is once in a blue moon to happen this . 
I studied very hard to recieve a 2 in Math , but for me it was not a bolt from the blue because I 'm not very good in this asigment : D The most recent polls came as a bolt from the blue for me , I did n't expect that our president has so hight popularity after so many scandals , well it seems that I 'm going to be blue in the face before people here pay attention to my warnings ! 
I 've been to the doctor 's and he said that I was sick and that was a real blue from the bolt for me because I felt great , perthaps he said that to me because I go to the doctor once in a blue moon . 
It 's been the first time I 've visited this website , and it 's really been a bolt from the blue . 
I had never been able to imagine that this video could be so amazing and amusing in the meantime . 
I hope it doese n't happen once in a blue moon ! 
I was so surprised when the Teacher said `` as my students . 
They never do their homework '' . 
In fact , here in Brazil and with my students , once in a moon they do their tasks . 
I supposed just with me they did not used to do . 
Also in England ... 1 -RRB- It is a bolt from the blue .2 -RRB- Once in a blue moon I do my homework t0 day Or I can sai My homework is once in a blue moon .3 Uniti you are blue in the face maens neither . 
dear teacher , i send you my homeworks until i 'm blue in the face . 
they displays once in a blue moon and as a bolt from the blue . 
I always go to fishing but i never catch any fishes until i 'm blue in the face . 
Once in the blue moon , I catched a big fish as a bolt from the blue because this fish was hurted shark . 
I have met a very good guy and it was as a bolt from the blue because I usually meet trouble makers . 
It is nice altough it happens once in a blue moon . 
Sorry guys : -RRB- Many american now is considering the Obama 's presidency as a bolt from the blue . 
People could not believe today that the first amreican family is black and think that this event will never happen in their lifetime . 
This is an event that happens once in a blue moon . 
I will be happy if you will put my example because i do my homework once in a blue moon . 
do n't you want to put it until i will be blue in the face ? 
Politicians do something good for people once in a blue moon . 
I usually say to people please do n't believe in politicians until I 'm blue in the face , in fact a good politician with good intentions is like a bold from the blue . 
My sister and i share the bathroom , so when she use it , always let the floor wet and i always repeat until i 'm blue in the face : please let it clean ... is once in a blue moon if she decide to listen my advice . 
I did n't sleep owing to a terrible nightmare . 
One of my friends came up into my dream like a bolt from the blue and tried to take me to go somewhere without any smile . 
I was a little bit scared of her doing this because it is generally once in a blue moon to her . 
Even though I was telling her to stop this until i was in my blue face , she had not let me go and then my mum made me woke up . 
`` Get up ! '' 
I 'll take a vacation once in a blue moon . 
I told my boss to grant me afew weeks as a vacation until i am blue in the face , i wish he 'll surprise me and give me a long rest , if this happen it would a bolt from the blue . 
A monkey , jumped on my bike , was a bolt out of blue . 
The thief kept repeating lie , untill he was blue in his face . 
How to become a millionaireOnce in a blue moon , I went to a bar . 
A shabby man sitting beside me handed me a millione pound note and said `` it 's yours '' . 
This came as a bolt from the blue . 
I assumed something fishy about it , so I refused . 
However this man insisted asking me to take that note . 
I firmly refuse his favor . 
At last he was blue in his face , so I have to take that note . 
Thus I become a millionaire . 
When a local newspaper reported this story , I find many people like to go to that bar . 
The news of her marriage came as a bolt from the blue because it 's once in a blue moon when a woman of that age get married . 
She persisted in her decision although her friends had tried to discourage her till they 're blue in the face . 
Things happenning once in a blue moon may turn into a bolt from the blue and tears your heart apart : I once loved a boy who had a girlfriend . 
years later , he broke up with her . 
Then I told him that I loved him . 
unexpectedly , he agreed to be my boyfriend and I became the happiest girl in the whole world , only for ten days . 
On the eleventh day , he ended our relationship with a `` I am still thinking about her all the time `` and a suspension points I always tell to my son to eat less and I have been reapeting it until I 'm blue in the face . 
He obeys me once in a blue moon . 
Mumbai terrorist attack was a bolt from the blue , for us . 
now days terrorisom is not once in a blue moon and every country having the same problem . 
we have to take a strick decision until we are blue in the face . 
As for me , doing English exercise seems to be a bolt in the blue . 
Despite of my teacher talking until he is blue in the face , I 'll still not do it . 
For this reason , it only happens like this once in a blue moon ! 
When Chelsea lost to Barcelona last week , it cam like a bolt from the blue . 
Pierre , Paris it was once in a blue moon when the famous english football team Chelseahas been defeated by Barcelona and i 'm sure they were all blue in the face , what an amazing night came like a bolt from the blue whenever some one dont listen to me , then i come blue in the face . 
It was six in the morning . 
I was too lazy to get up . 
My mother waked me up for three times untill I was blue in the face . 
When I had breakfast , I found pest in the dish . 
I really became blue in the face . 
It was eight o'clock . 
I was a little hungry since I could not eat anything . 
I took bread and bananas from my bag though we had class at that time . 
I throwed the skin of banana onto the floor . 
My teacher got a little angry and came to me . 
It was too late for me to say `` Oh , no ! '' . 
My teacher fell down because of the skins . 
She was blue in the face . 
It was four pm . 
I won my lottery and got RMB one billian . 
It was a bolt from the blue . 
my whole life untill the last moment spent with every one with a smiling face and i always handle hardships of life confidently , but when i comes to know about my brain tumor its a bolt from the blue for me , but its a reality death is not once in a blue moon but my friends dont believe untill i were blue in the face . 
This day , i get a letter from my mom . 
It ` s really a bolt from the blue , since she used to call me , not send me a letter . 
She asked me to celebrate next idhul fitri at home . 
Actually , i do it once in a blue moon , since i worked in another city . 
My mom also asked me to find a job in my hometown . 
She do it many times until she is blue in the face . 
i ` ve said her , i can ` t right now . 
i try to persuaded my boss until i were blue in face The news of the earthquake in Abruzzocame as a bolt from the blue . 
My girlfrien and I went to the cinema , las week , when we arrived it , all the parking was full , it was a bolt from the blue , I told her . 
She said to me , why don t we go to the theater and after that we have dinner . 
it is O. K , I said to her and we went to the theater . 
I thought Sara was ill . 
It was like a bolt from the blue for me when she stopped by . 
the suin flu in the world is a blu moon for all people I asked my son to always clean and tidy up his room before he left home until I am blue in the faceMy colleague once in a blue moon make progress report about his students . 
The manager kept on ask him to do it until he is blue in the face A student of mine does n't have a habit to wirte his homework and I have been talking to him for many times until I am blue in the face . 
If he writes his homework once in a blue moon that is because I said I would buy them some drinks for encouraging them . 
Although it happens once in a blue moon it makes me feel a blot from blue . 
My best friend told me , she gonna move her family to England that is a big move . 
it was a bolt from the blue . 
Once in the blue moon , certain news come as a bolt from the bule until the people are blue in the face . 
A colleague of mine at work has been recently dismissed by the company . 
Actually , this happens only once in a blue moon , but the manager kept telling him to improve his punctuality until she 's blue in the face . 
I used to go so often to cinema , but now I only go once in a blue moon . 
Swaine flu came to Mexico as a bolt fromthe blue , fortunatelly it happens once in a blue moon My sister told me to marry a friend of mine . 
It was a bolt of blue for me . 
This also means that my friend is my young brother-in-law . 
This case is once in a blue moon . 
my sister in law lives in Paris and comes to Caracas once in a blue moon , but last Christmas she dropped in my house like a bolt from the blue I 'd Known lots of females trying to get married with one of them till it happens once in a blue moon . 
Now i , ve a babyboy , a great resposibility , i 've sense of being blue in a face . 
This new strain of swine flu came as a bolt from the blue for everyone in the world . 
Although it 's a serious health problem it happens once in a blue moon . 
26\/11\/2008 terrorist attack in Mumbai was a bolt from the blue , which left the entire nation aghast and although such attacks take place once in a blue moon our security agencies should be well geared up to counter such attacks . 
When I realize i did n't pass the english exam it was a bolt from the blue . 
you will be astonished to know that in my school some students attend classes once in a blue moon . 
But when there is a test they come as a bolt from the blue . 
I keep talking about the matter to the headmaster until I am blue in the face Brian is my colleague . 
He had a project to do and needed some help . 
I had asked our boss to let me help him until I was blue in face . 
Brian did n't bring the project on time . 
This came as a bolt from the blue for the whole office . 
`` This happen once in a blue moon ! '' 
I know he is a true-blue boy , he would n't let us down , no matter the situation . 
He is quite a blue-eyed boy , here in the office . 
Next day , completely out of the blue , he showed up beaten black and blue . 
He had met a gang last night . . 
We found about this when the boys in blue came in the office to ask Brian for details of the incident . 
I think I must help him pass these bad moments . 
Last night , I was drunk and came home very late . ! 
My wife had waiting for me in front of the door with her lovely smile . 
After that she made me a glass of lemonade . 
She was n't angry with me as usual . 
This is a bolt from the blue ! 
After that night I asked her why she is n't angry with me as usual . 
And she said that she was tired of persuading me to stop drinking alcohol until she gets blue in her face . 
Now she should decide accepting me as I am . 
I felt very upset myself and promised myself I 'll stop drinking day by day . 
After five months , she said : '' you are getting better ! 
Once in blue moon you drink that why I love you more '' . 
Then we kissed each other ! 
My sister and i share the bathroom , so when she use it , always let the floor wet and i always repeat until i 'm blue in the face : Lorena please let it clean ... is once in a blue moon if she decide to listen my advice . 
One of my friends bought a new car . 
That was a bolt from the blue for me . 
Because I told her to get a job at firstuntil I was blue in the face . 
This economic downturn is once in a blue moon . 
today i heard sth about my financial aid , i might not get it on time . 
it 's like a bolt from the blue . 
actually , i always save up money for some sittuations . 
But my car is just broken , so i am out of money now , wow ! 
it happens once in a blue moon . 
i told my girlfriend about that , but until i am blue in the face , she wo n't believe me My teenage boy came home and requires me to buy him a mopel for it is new trend in season . 
he meaned that everybody have mopel , It likes once in a blue moon if he gets one . 
But i told him that would not be any mopel , so long as he is legally incompetent , he should be content to ride a bike instead . 
but he told me that he can buy it himself with all his savings , I just felt a bolt from the blue . 
It was a real bolt from the blue when I got that amazing colorful handmade octopus from him . 
I 'd never been so delighted like that coz I get this sort of present once in a blue moon . 
The latest news about first case of swine flu in Poland came as a bolt from the blue , because , what 's more , the ill woman is staying at contagious ward in my city ! 
It happens once in a blue moon that my city is on mouth of the whole country . 
But I think that within few days everybody forget about all this hum ; -RRB- One Sunday evening under a thrilling moon light , while we were having a family meeting , like bolt from the blues , two young frightened men approched us , telling us that an object flew past the sky over them which happens once in a blue moon and that the world was to come to an end . 
We tried to convince them that it was a natural phenomenom until we were blue in the face . 
When I heard that the first lady commissioned a naval ship , it was a bolt from the blue . 
This is once in a blue moon situation because it is unconstitutional . 
I tried to imagine what a mess we are in until I become blue in the face . 
One in a blue moon , our students can practice on the ramshakle computers of the school . 
I 've been telling the principal about buying decent computers till I was blue in the face . 
It was a bolt from the blue when he told me yesterday that he had the internet connection cut ! 
I told my friend to prepare his works until i were blue in the face . 
Last month I lost my grandmother , for me it was a bolt from the blue because she was not ill . 
Yes , I know that the death is not once a blue moon , every day people die , others are born . 
But I 'm happy because I never saw her until she is in the blue face . 
The recent flood in Brazil has came a bolt from the blue . 
Usually it happens in the countries of that region once in a blue moon . 
Last week we did n't have classes because of the flu . 
We were supposed to have final exams . 
That was a bolt from the blue , specially for teachers . 
No classes during almost two weeks , that happens once in a blue moon . 
Now students have to follow some recomendations and teachers have to repeat them to students , but students really do n't get it , the situation , so teachers are trying until they are blue in the face ... The appearance of pirates in the Gulf of Aden turned the World wide Eyes as a bolt from the blue . 
But before it occur once in a blue moon . 
Some people say that true love comes once in a blue moon , then we have to take anyone as it comes . 
True love comes as bolt from the blue , so , we 'll be there with arms wide open to hold our supreme love . 
Maybe I can ` waste ' my time to make people believe , but I do n't mind to do it until I 'm blue in the face . 
My niece is very lazy . 
I used to tell her to do her homework until I was blue in the face but she did n't do it . 
Because of this , she had good marks once in a blue moon . 
Unexpectedly , last night she said to me that she passed the entrance exam into university . 
This is a bolt from the blue , is n't it ? 
A bolt from the blue , could be know that Europe is in crisis now . 
6 years ego a lot of people traveled to Europe but now are unemployed , but one in a blue moon in this world all change ... but my grandmother said it when the people left , said to my sister , said to my uncle , until you are blue in the face . 
I receive my increment as teacher at school it happens once in a blue moon . 
And if i dont give some to my younger brother so i have to see him the blue in the face . 
The visit of president Barack Obama to Turkey came as a bolt from the blue . 
Our teacher gave a high point to us once in a blue moon . 
he sneezed many times so I said BLESS YOU until I was in the blue face , but he continued sneezing . 
Eunkyung Park , South Korea My best friend is getting married . 
She has been seeing her boyfiend jst for 2months . 
It was a bolt from the blue . 
I ca n't stand heights . 
Also I have a vertigo . 
Taking a plane is once in a blue moon . 
Yesterday I was in school . 
when I was in the toilet , I really need toiletpaper . 
i called my friend thousands times until I am blue in the face , but there was noone . 
My brother addicted of watching TV he studies once in a blue moon . 
well once I was passing through alley while i did not expect but i met my girlfriend , she came up as a bolt from the blue . 
then i had to go with her to shopping even though i tried to convinced her not to go there until i am blue in the face . 
One in a blue I 'm invited to a big party . 
Last month , I attended to my husband 's company 15 year aniversary . 
Unfortunately , I ruined everything as a bolt from the blue . 
I fell down from the stair near the stage and pushed the big cake off the ground right the center of the room . 
After that I tried to explain until I was blue in the face but no one seemed to care . 
Never mind , poor me . 
The day before yesterday , I just Skype my brother . 
My brother told me that father has to perform surgical operation within these days . 
This news was came as a bolt from the blue for me . 
I asked for more detail , and then I knew that is a small operation . 
So I feel easy in my mind . 
The Earthquake of the W China . 
Big damages , is n't it ? 
We 're still shopping at the supermarket . 
When we was out of the market , we saw people out of the tall building . 
When we went home , we switch the TV on , we saw the news channel keep showing the news about that earthquake . 
That 's a real ` bolt from the blue ' ! 
I take my nephew to KFC once in a blue moon . 
Last week we went to KFC and it was a bolt from the blue . 
As he fought with other big kids and he just could n't stop until I was blue in the face . 
As a result , he got punishment from his mom and going KFC is banned for six months . 
Today , in the way I went to my office , I picked a 100 $ bill , it came like a bolt from the blue , I have never had an big amount of money like that , once in a blue moon , I told that story to my colleague , and he tried to find anymore bill in the way , but he did it until he was blue in his face ... Every day I gently ask my mother not to prepare a large meal for me at lunch and I repeat it to her until I am blue in the face but she never changes her habits . 
Only once in a blue moon she listens to me . 
Recently there has been a terrible earthquake in Abruzzo with a lot of casualties . 
According to one scientist the quake did n't come as a bolt from the blue , he said that he had warned the local authorities some days before but unfortunately he was n't able to predict exactly where and when the earthquake would strike . 
i have a friend who hated English very much . 
whenever doing homework together , i had to ask him learning vocabulary more and more until i am blue in the face . 
seeing him learn English was really once in a blue moon . 
but now , i heard that he was an English teacher in our high school . 
it 's white - knuckle ride and unbelievable . 
One day in winter while I 've watched the TV I felt that somthing happened as a bol from the blue , it was an earthquake all things in my home moved even the tabe . 
I scared about it , but in our country it happens once in a blue moon . 
This Friday night Euro Millions ' jackpot would be 110Million ! 
If somebody win the jackpot which could be once in a blue moon . 
I never win the lottery . 
I suppose that God asks me work hard and do not expect the fortune come as a bolt from the blue . 
Recently , I received a new message from my friend who communicated to me she would work like a stewardess . 
I need to say it was like a bolt from the blue ! 
I thought it could be once in a blue moon because she always dreads to fly . 
I called and argued with her until I was in the blue face but she answered she was already on board . 
as a bolt from the blue i got into a job last week it was great . 
I think once in a blue moon mexicans do them homework . 
I told my brother not to bring his friends home until i m blue in the face . 
One day moring in 1997 , a news came as a bolt in the blue : my 30 years old uncle died in his sleep . 
My old grandmother tired to wake him up until she was bule in her face , but he was never awake . 
In fact , reservation happened once in a blue moon . 
I come home after many offshore working days on East Sea . 
And as a bolt from the blue , I saw a strange cat in my home . 
He is very friendly , but I can not catch it when I try until I am blue in the face . 
Once in a blue moon , the cat felt lonely and he tried to touch my leg by his head . 
It was just like a bolt from the blue when my teacher told me I 've got an A in the last maths examination . 
I could hardly believe that because my maths is miserably dire . 
THat is a real thing occuring once in a blue moon To tell the truth , I 'm always lazy of tidying my room . 
I think there is no problem because it is my own room , I feel comfortable and I can find anything I need . 
It can be told that my room is oderly mussy : D However , my mother does n't think so . 
She usually asks me to clean my room until she is blue in the face . 
So I try to arrange some things once in a blue moon to satisfy her . 
It is such a difficult work , not as any delicious pie T_T last night , I saw in TV at my father , he answered about Ecology in my country , came as a bolt from blue . 
He repeated it until he is blue in the face , this night happens once in a blue moon Love come as a bolt from the blue . 
you feel that you are living in a blue moon . 
And once in a blue moon happens , you are very happy . 
And when you have a blue face , you are getting angry with someone . 
The swine flu came to the world as a bolt from the blue . 
This kind of sickness comes once in a blue moon . 
I recommended my family no to visit crowded places to avoid catching this dangerous flu , until I am blue in the face . 
The guy I love said hurtful words to me . 
It was really a bold from the blue . 
I think I can complain till I 'm blue in the face , but he will ignore . 
Maybe our relationship break down out of the blue . 
I like traveling , but just once in the blue moon , because I have financial problems and firstly have to make ends meet . 
I 've asked my pupils to keep the handouts . 
Once in a blue moon , they listen to me . 
I had to reprint the handouts so many times . 
That 's why they made me blue in the face . 
Is the financial crisis a bolt from the blue ? 
I do n't konw , but it is once in a blue moon really . 
It made some bankers are blue in the face . 
now I 'm wona graduate and must looking for work . 
I do n't hope a good work will come to me as a bolt from the blue . 
Although global financial crisis , the work is not one in a blue moon and I think I can find a good job . 
But no thing come as you imagine , my friend have some refusal from some company and now she very disappoint . 
As the result of failing , he advise me should n't apply to any company now but I always keep my mind even my friend was blue in her face I tell my sister that she need to lose weight but she don ` t listen to me . 
I tell her untill I m blue in the face . 
Yesterday I had a bolt from the blue because I don ` t expect her reaction . 
My ex-boyfriend decided to split up after we were together for 5 years and planned to get married . 
I 've never win a public lottery so I think it 's time of once in a blue moon if I win . 
Ma Ham Chi , Hong Kong The disappearance of my money in this tsunami is just like a bolt from the blue . 
As being seen in human history , appearance of some man who can turn such a situation as did by Roosevelt is quite once in a blue moon . 
So , during the endless waiting , one would be blue in the face . 
Here , in Brazil we had a bolt from the blue , the floods at the north of the country , it 's a once in a blue moon , because the place is famous for the long-periods of drought . 
Actually I think it 's occuring because the changes in the world 's climate , something that meteorology experts have been warning until they are blue in the face since last century . 
When Obama was in Europe for NATO conference , before going back to USA , he visited Irak as a bolt from the blue . 
I never saw the rector of B.S.D. University , he appears publically once in a blue moon . 
When we went to Manchester to watch a football game , we thought that Park would come on that match definitely because the press predicted that he would come on . 
However a pressman who is one of my friends said he was n't on the starting line up . 
It was a bolt from the blue . 
As we were looking forward to seeing him , we disappointed so much . 
However , on the way to home , we finally met him ! 
It happens once in a blue moon ! 
We took a photo with him and gave his autograph . 
It was fantastic day . 
I 'll never forget that day in my life . 
It does n't occur once in a blue moon - our teachers always say us to do our homework until we 'll be blue in the face . 
It was n't a bolt from the blue to hear it from the Teacher . 
My new boss came from another company as a bolt from the blue ! 
It 's very difficult to find a nice boyfriend ... once in a blue moon ! 
In office they give me all their works until I 'm blue in the face ! 
My english teacher has a blog for us to comment ... but the truth is that even though he demands us to comment regularly , it just happens once in a blue moon ... However , he never gives up ... He repeats over and over until he 's blue in the face . 
So , do n't worry ! 
I think that all the teacher have the same problem with their students : homework ! 
A bolt from the blue would be to be able to go to New York but I really think that it would happen once in a blue moon because although I repeat to my parents : ' I want to go to New York ' until I am blue in the face they do nothing . 
Barcelona beat the Chelsea last night !!! it was the bolt from the blue ... i claimed for my salary until i was blue in the face . 
my boss , he payed it once in a blue moon , and it happened like a bolt from the blue . 
My boss is a tyran ... He pays me once in a blue moon . 
And then he expects me to get averything done as a bolt from the blue ! 
I 'll go on strike on day . 
And you 'll see how he beggs me until he 's blue in the face ! 
Actually at Contemporary Romanian Literature our teacher never gave us homework , but one day gave us a lot of homework as if we were on holiday . 
It was like a bolt from the blue . 
I mean after all it happens once in a blue moon . 
I saw a naked man running in my garden and it was a bolt from the blue . 
After 30 minutes police came and arrested him . 
Something like this happend only once in a blue moon . 
My dad came back home and in spite of that I tried to tell him everything until I was blue in the face , he did n't believe me . 
once in a blue moon I fell in love and that with my colleague ! 
Although he has a girlfriend he kissed me one night ! 
it was such a bolt from the blue . 
I just try to convince myself that he is just a colleague until I am blue in the face ! 
10 years ago , I used to wear a sweater while I was at school . 
Every student was wearing a different colored-sweater . 
Our skins and lips were dry . 
It 's an once in a blue moon incident . 
Because you guys know that Thailand has only 3 seasons . 
There are hot hotter and hottest . 
We can find a teacher likes ours , whose costume is always a bolt from the blue , once in a blue moon . 
When I found out that I was awarded in a poetry contest it was really a bolt from the blue . 
Unfortunately , such things happens to me once in a blue moon ... ; -RRB- Once my boyfriend and I went to spend a weekend in the country . 
And , as a bolt from the blue , he proposed to me . 
Nowadays we 've been happily married . 
When I went to a show here in Brazil , all the fans were waiting for the show , when appeared a guy and told the crowd that the band did n't come because the businessman did n't pay them , so it was a bolt from the blue . 
It was in 1998 . 
It happens only once in a blue moon , that my fiance raises his voice . 
One day I was so relaxed reading my favorite book , when suddenly , like a bolt from the cloud , he started to yell at me , until he became blue in the face ... I have put his white shirt to the washing machine with my read trousers ... My mother keeps telling me not to take her clothes , she tells me until she is blue in the face . 
Well if she wants me not to take her clothes she will have to buy me something , but that only happens one in a blue moon . 
The goal that Iniesta scored against Chelsea in the injury time was a bolt from the blue . 
These things just happen once in a blue moon . 
Thanks for your lessons ! 
I was really suprised when I came to my classes . 
it was a bolt from the blue for me to write a math exam ! 
Dear teacher , Today I got the letter from the project that the scholarship for me and others for a master course in Japan was cut since the budget of this year 's activities was reduced due to the economic crisis . 
It was really a bolt from the blue . 
This kind of things is happend once in a blue moon but unlucky it happens to me now . 
I started saying `` please get your letter back '' ... alot of time until I am blue in my face and I know I was trying in vain because the fact would not be changed ... Thank you very much for your help and I hope that there would be a smile now in your face since there are now some students are trying to do their homework given by you . 
ThaoThis may The appearance of swine flu in Mexico City and wide spread of the world came as a bolt from the blue . 
The recovery of the world economy happens once in a blue . 
A bolt from the blue I saw a person like my friend , I greeted him until you are in the blue face , but he did n't answer me . 
I happend to see a tiger in the woods as a bolt from the blue . 
I have a good idea once in a blue moon . 
I persuaded him to stay here until I was blue in the face , but he leaved anywhere . 
Everyday during our lesson time at school , our teachers always gives us homework just like a bolt from the blue . 
Only once in a blue moon , they will be kind enough to reduce our homework . 
Sometimes , if someone had not brought their homework , my teachers will remind them day by day . 
If the students still do not bring their homework , the teachers will be blue in the face . 
When a balloon had fall on my home it was a bolt from the blue . 
Once in a blue moon a saw my loved boy-friend by the first time . 
Be Anne started to go to piano lessons when she was six . 
Although , her mother told her to practice more until she was blue in the face , Anne would n't listen . 
She practiced onyl once in a blue moon . 
But then like a bolt in the blue , she became a professional pianist . 
Yesterday I had a bolt from the blue because I won a lottery prize . 
Halley 's Comet appears once in a blue moon . 
You can try to explain English grammar to me until you are blue in the face . 
Swine flu came to people all over the world as a bolt from the blue . 
I live very far from my grandmothers . 
I see them once in a blue moon I watched the teacher and he taught the color blue English idioms , it was a bolt from the blue . 
The teacher happens once in a blue moon . 
He always says '' Do your homework '' but I never do , he is blue in the face . 
Years ago when I was far away from home studying in my college , my mom called and said my dear grandma had passed away . 
At that time , I was studying in library and just could n't stop crying . 
It 's really a huge bolt from the blue . 
Always mother will give me some alerts if something bad in my family gonna happen but this time ... it happens once in a blue moon . 
I was actually brought up by my grandma , so I cried and cried and begged God to give me back my grandmama until I 'm blue in the face . 
One day a blue dog ran to me , it came as a bolt from the blue . 
I only see this color of dogs once in a blue moon . 
I told it to stop licking me until I am blue in the face . 
After reading the teacher 's explanation about color blue , after knowing how he was blue in the face , then I do this homework immediately . 
I 'm a teacher too , and many times too , I 'm blue in the face . 
Don ; t worry , my smart and intelligent teacher . 
This time , you 're not blue in the face . 
Very soon , you will have many pieces of homework , from all over the world . 
