Advert warns about the dangers of swine flu The government has appointed a swine flu `` tsar '' for England to deal with the threat of a pandemic . 
Ian Dalton , currently chief executive of NHS North East , will become national director for NHS Flu Resilience . 
He will ensure that the NHS `` is in the best possible position to protect the population , '' the health secretary said . 
The appointment came as the number of UK cases of the H1N1 virus reached 28 and information leaflets about the disease began dropping through doors . 
Mr Dalton , who will take up the post immediately , will coordinate the supply of anti-viral medication and the implementation of any future vaccination program . 
He said : `` The NHS is well-placed to deal with such an eventuality and I am looking forward to working with colleagues throughout England to ensure the NHS continues to respond appropriately to any developing situation . '' 
Health Secretary Alan Johnson said Mr Dalton would `` support the vital operational side of our plans '' for a major flu outbreak . 
On Tuesday , England 's chief medical officer Sir Liam Donaldson warned that it was too early to assume the swine flu outbreak was a mild infection just because no-one in the UK had died . 
`` We must not be complacent . 
We know that flu viruses can change their character very rapidly as they move through populations , '' he said . 
Sir Liam spoke after the latest case of swine flu , an adult from the Slough area of Berkshire , was confirmed . 
Most computers will open this document automatically , but you may need Adobe Reader It brought the overall totals to 24 in England and four in Scotland . 
Five UK schools remain closed after being hit by the virus . 
Three are in London - Alleyn 's School in Dulwich , Dolphin School in Battersea and South Hampstead High School . 
Downend in South Gloucestershire and Paignton Community and Sports College in Devon have also shut their doors . 
A spokeswoman for the Department for Children , Schools and Families confirmed that officials were working with schools and exam boards to put contingency plans in place for the summer exam season . 
`` Arrangements will be made on a case by case basis , so that all students are fairly treated , '' she said . 
Exam regulator Ofqual is due to hold a meeting on Wednesday to discuss plans , which could mean pupils sitting exams elsewhere , or receiving final grades based on other evidence , such as coursework or modules already completed . 
Members of the public can call 08001513513 for recorded information about swine flu . 
The number for NHS 24 in Scotland is 08454 24 24 24 . 
Have you or has anyone you know been tested for swine flu ? 
Has your school been affected ? 
Send us your comments and experiences using the form below : A selection of your comments may be published , displaying your name and location unless you state otherwise in the box below . 
The BBC may edit your comments and not all emails will be published . 
Your comments may be published on any BBC media worldwide . 
