Technology Reporter , BBC News , Silicon Valley 20,000 plus new samples of malware are detected every day , say experts Twelve million computers have been hijacked by cyber-criminals and detected by security vendor McAfee since January , the firm has said . 
It reports there has been a 50 % increase in the number of detected so-called `` zombie '' computers since 2008 . 
The true number of newly hijacked PCs is likely to be higher than those detected by McAfee alone . 
The figures come as a report from Deloitte said a global approach to cyber-security was needed . 
`` Doing nothing is not an option , '' said Deloitte 's Greg Pellegrino . 
Everything that depended on cyberspace face unprecedented risks , said Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu -LRB- DTT -RRB- . 
`` This issue is moving so quickly , and with so much at stake economically and in terms of safety and security for people , we do n't have 100 years to figure this out , '' explained Mr Pellegrino , who is a global public sector industry leader at DTT . 
McAfee also revealed that the United States now hosted the world 's largest percentage of infected computers at 18 % with China a not too distant second with just over 13 % . 
`` The massive expansion of these botnets provides cyber-criminals with the infrastructure they need to flood the web with malware , '' said Jeff Green , senior vice-president of McAfee . 
`` Essentially , this is cyber-crime enablement . '' 
The DTT findings revealed a growing awareness of the role the internet plays in so many different aspects of our lives from security to commerce and from transportation to communication . 
Better cyber-security measures will benefit global commerce , says the report `` We are seeing this change from protecting the internet to a conversation about how we succeed and prosper in cyberspace , '' Mr Pellegrino told the BBC . 
`` Security spending is growing at a rate never seen before while the threat environment is growing at a pace of 40 % a year . 
`` In terms of volume and severity of incidents , the math does n't work and we have to come up with a different approach that requires public and private sectors working together , '' Mr Pellegrino said . 
`` We are talking about daily living , '' said fellow author Gary McAlum , who is a retired US Air Force colonel and senior manager of security and privacy services at Deloitte . 
`` There is a lot of discussion about the economy and the military and the public and private sector , but we have now reached a sense of urgency about the interconnectedness of all these areas . '' 
That view was echoed by a member of the US military top brass who just gave evidence to a branch of the House Armed Services Committee . 
`` Our economy , the nation 's critical infrastructure , and many of our military operations depend on unfettered access to cyberspace , '' said Lt Gen Keith Alexander , the director of the National Security Agency -LRB- NSA -RRB- who also heads the Pentagon 's new Cyber Command . 
`` Maintaining freedom of action in cyberspace in the 21st Century is as inherent to US interests as freedom of the seas was in the 19th Century , and access to air and space in the 20th Century . '' 
He has called for the creation of a digital warfare force for the future and has stated that the US needs to reorganise its offensive and defensive cyber-operations . 
The Deloitte study included interviews conducted with government officials and industry experts from around the world . 
While it revealed a patchwork approach to the problem it also showed it was one that was gaining prominence . 
There are 32,000 suspected cyber-attacks every 24 hours , says the NSA `` We were very pleased that there was a similar tone and awareness and leadership effort coming from different countries across the world , '' Mr Pellegrino said . 
`` Clearly this particular issue has a different context depending on where you are in the world . 
We can not afford to go backwards . '' 
In America , President Obama has made the issue of cyber-security a priority . 
Shortly after taking office he ordered a 60-day review that has now been delivered to his desk . 
It is understood the release of the review has been delayed by the ongoing H1N1 swine flu crisis . 
When the report is made public , it is expected that the president will also announce his choice for cyber-security tsar to lead the charge . 
While the Deloitte research said security in Asia-Pacific needed to `` catch up '' it noted that the United Kingdom was in the process of writing a national cyber strategy with an emphasis on public-private partnership . 
On the continent , the European Commission has urged member states to co-ordinate on cyber-security measures , while in Latin America the report authors conclude that there is a `` diversity of approaches '' . 
Canada has completed its own cyber-security review and this year will be implementing the National Cyber-Security Strategy as well as creating a new Directorate of Cyber-Security with a mandate to engage closely with the private sector . 
Despite all these efforts , the Deloitte authors point out that time is of the essence . 
`` Not only do we have to take action , we do n't have enough time , '' warned Mr Pellegrino . 
Mr McAlum agreed and said mapping a clear strategy was crucial . 
`` We need to get our house in order first so that we can interact with the rest of the world with one voice , with clear roles and responsibilities aligned . '' 
