President Obama 's statement about BP 's compensation fund Oil giant BP is to put $ 20bn -LRB- # 13.5 bn -RRB- in a compensation fund for victims of the Gulf oil spill and will not pay shareholders a dividend this year . 
Barack Obama announced the compensation deal after talks at the White House with senior BP executives . 
Shortly afterwards , BP chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg said dividends would not be paid for the rest of this year . 
The payout fund is to be run by Kenneth Feinberg , a lawyer who oversaw compensation after the 9\/11 attacks . 
In his current role as Mr Obama 's `` pay tsar '' , Mr Feinberg sets salary limits for executives at firms in receipt of federal bailout funds . 
Mr Obama said a $ 120m fund would also be set up to compensate oil industry workers . 
He said he had heard growing concerns about the pace of compensation payments , and that the new fund would ensure all `` legitimate '' claims were paid . 
`` If you or your business has suffered economic loss as a result of this spill you will be able to file a claim , '' the president said . 
Although BP has agreed to fund $ 20bn - roughly equivalent to one year of BP 's annual profits - reports said there could be no cap on the amount BP might be asked to contribute to the fund . 
The company will pay $ 5bn into the fund , called an escrow fund , before the end of 2010 , plus $ 1bn per quarter for the following three years . 
Speaking after the talks , Mr Svanberg expressed regret over the spill , saying BP felt `` sorrow and sadness for the tragic accident which should never have happened '' . 
BP chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg after White House meeting `` Words are not enough . 
We understand we will and we should be judged by our actions , '' he said . 
`` We will live up to all our legitimate responsibilities . '' 
Mr Svanberg was also forced to apologise after telling reporters that BP was not a greedy company and that it cared `` about the small people '' . 
He later said he `` spoke clumsily '' . 
The last time that BP suspended a dividend payment was during World War II . 
The company was due to make a $ 2.6 bn dividend payment on Monday , which has now been canceled . 
In addition , BP said it would sell off `` non-core '' assets worth some $ 10bn in an attempt to cut costs in the coming year . 
BP 's chief executive , Briton Tony Hayward , and the boss of BP America , Lamar McKay , accompanied Mr Svanberg to the White House . 
Mr Hayward , who has come under heavy criticism for his handling of the crisis , is scheduled to give evidence to a US House of Representatives committee on Thursday . 
There remains some confusion over how far the definition of `` legitimate responsibilities '' should stretch . 
Earlier in the day UK Prime Minister David Cameron said BP was concerned the claims could be submitted `` three or four times removed '' from the spill . 
The company has been accused of failing to follow proper procedures in the run-up to the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig on 20 April . 
The blast led to the deaths of 11 people , caused the rig to sink and has since seen hundreds of thousands of barrels of oil spew into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Sets salary limits at financial firms on federal bailout funds Oversaw funds after 9\/11 terror attacks and 2007 Virginia Tech shooting Set fair market value of the `` Zapruder film '' of 1963 Kennedy assassination Assistant to Senator Edward Kennedy , 1977-1979 Some of that oil is now washing ashore in states along the Gulf coast . 
The fallout is affecting businesses and wildlife , as well as wiping billions of dollars off BP 's value . 
BP 's share price rose in US trading after an earlier slump as news of the funding deal emerged , but dipped as the day wore on and more details emerged . 
In its latest effort to contain the oil spewing into the Gulf of Mexico , BP announced on Wednesday morning that it had begun operating a second containment system designed to bring oil and gas to the surface for burning . 
BP managed to place a cap over the leaking oil pipe earlier this month , and is now collecting some of the oil . 
However , estimates of how much oil is gushing out of the well have again risen dramatically since the start of the crisis . 
A government panel of scientists now believes 35,000-60 ,000 barrels are leaking each day , up from its estimate last week of 20,000-40 ,000 . 
You can follow the testimony of BP chief executive Tony Hayward when he appears before a US Congress committee on the BBC News website on Thursday 17 June , from 1400 BST -LRB- 1000 EST -RRB- . 
Telegraph \* BP oil spill : costs could spiral up to $ 100bn - 2 hrs ago Canada.com to suspend dividend , sell US$ 10-billion in assets - 10 hrs ago Economic Times BP begins to ante up - 11 hrs ago USA Today OBAMA : BP plans $ 20B fund for oil workers - 11 hrs ago France24 OIL SPILL : BP chief Hayward vows to fix Gulf Coast spill - 12 hrs ago The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
