BP shares have closed up almost 7 % after it agreed to put $ 20bn -LRB- # 13.5 bn -RRB- in a fund to compensate victims of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
The increase halted falls that had led to the company 's stock value halving in recent weeks . 
Investors said BP 's agreement with the White House had `` removed some of the uncertainty '' surrounding the company . 
The rise comes despite the announcement that BP shareholders will not receive dividend payments this year . 
The year 's first dividend payment of $ 2.6 bn was due on Monday , but has now been canceled . 
It is the first time that BP has withheld the dividend since World War II . 
I am horrendously angry about this - we 're being dragged into US politics '' End Quote Sandy Lamb BP shareholder , Chester , UK BBC business editor Robert Peston said the increase in BP 's credit default swap -LRB- CDS -RRB- premium - the cost of insuring its debt - was an important factor in the board 's decision to suspend the dividend . 
The company also said it would be selling about $ 10bn worth of `` non-core '' assets in order to give it more available funds . 
One UK shareholder , who said he would lose # 600 in dividend payments on top of the declining value of his shares , told BBC News online he felt he had effectively been `` robbed by Barack Obama '' . 
`` If I was in the US , I could claim compensation for loss of income caused by the spill . 
But as it is , I 'm losing money because of the oil spill and no one 's giving me a helpline to call , '' said pensioner Sandy Lamb from Chester . 
The Gulf of Mexico debacle has increased the cost of insuring BP 's shorter-term debt by a factor of 50 '' End Quote Robert Peston BBC business editor `` The one thing investors hate is uncertainty , '' said Keith Bowman , equities analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown . 
`` A decision has been made on the dividend , and at least now we 've got a few more numbers to work with . '' 
BP has agreed to pay $ 5bn into the fund this year , followed by quarterly payments of $ 1.25 bn until the total $ 20bn is paid . 
Analysts said that the compensation fund and initial clean-up costs would be easily affordable for BP , but the threat of legal action and significant fines meant it needed to conserve cash . 
`` The big issue is that nobody knows what the extent of BP 's liabilities might be , '' warned Brian Tora , investment manager at JM Finn . 
`` BP is a huge company and it can certainly fund the cost of cleaning up the oil spill , but what the future holds is very difficult to tell . '' 
So far BP estimates it has spent $ 1.6 bn on containing and cleaning up the oil spill so far . 
Standard Chartered warned last week that the total cost to the company , including legal costs , could top $ 40bn . 
President Barack Obama has also said that BP 's compensation costs may not be limited to the # 20bn already planned for the fund , and individuals will still be able to sue the company . 
co. uk Investor mood lifts as BP survives spill grilling - Reuters - 1 hr ago Financial Times \* State funding gimmicks - 3 hrs ago Mirror . 
co. uk America 's double standards over BP - 11 hrs ago BusinessWeek BP Shares Rebound After Oil Fund Pact - 21 hrs ago Management Today Magazine BP cancels divi and pledges $ 20bn ahead of Hayward 's US grilling - 29 hrs ago The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
