By Jamie Robertson Presenter , BBC World News With its chief executive under fire during his appearence before US lawmakers this week , it ca n't be that much of a surprise that BP has lost its position , with its share price down by more than a third . 
Shell has taken its place , which has a certain irony since BP overtook Shell as Europe 's largest oil company just before the Gulf oil spill . 
BP was cutting costs faster and more aggressively and reaping the rewards . 
All that is rather academic now , and Shell 's investors are the happier bunch : for starters , they have a dividend , and they do n't have an oil spill . 
However , it is worth remembering that Shell is the second largest oil producer in the Gulf of Mexico , and although it and the other `` Big Oil '' brethren swear blind that the Gulf spill would never have happened on one of their rigs , offshore drilling could face serious obstacles . 
While the oil companies have been facing up to lower oil prices as the global economy makes its painful recovery , the miners have been ratcheting up their prices , thanks to China 's economy resuming its upward trajectory . 
The king of the commodities is gold , with the yellow metal regularly testing new highs . 
So Barrick Gold of Canada , the world 's largest gold miner , has stepped confidently into the Global 30 . 
Barrick 's profits doubled in the first quarter of this year , although the company claims it is not just the gold price that has pushed up its shares , but increased margins , reduced costs , and a pile of new projects ready to go . 
The market has also been rumoring it is ready for a big merger - possibly with Australia 's Lihir Gold . 
Rio Tinto also enters the index while BHP Billiton has moved out . 
There 's no dramatic change here . 
The two are evenly balanced ; both face the 40 % supertax being wielded by the Australian government , and both have massive international commodity operations , although Rio is bigger in iron ore and aluminium while BHP offers oil and gas exposure which Rio does n't have . 
All the same , Rio 's shares have outperformed BHP 's since it abandoned the sale of a $ US19 .5 bn -LRB- # 13.2 bn -RRB- stake to its Chinese customer Chinalco . 
It instead opted for a $ 15.2 bn rights issue and asset sales worth more than $ 10bn , which put its balance sheet on a more stable footing . 
But its expansion plans are less impressive than BHP 's . 
Rio expects to spend US$ 5-6bn compared with BHP 's US$ 11.5 bn . 
So BHP 's absence from the index may be short lived . 
The other big arrival in the Global 30 is Berkshire Hathaway in the financial sector . 
Warren Buffet 's investment vehicle is an anomaly : while it is one of the 20 biggest companies on the US market , the shares have been notoriously illiquid , not even meriting a place on the S&P 500 . 
But its biggest acquisition ever , of the US railway company Burlington Northern , forced it to split its B shares into 50 - Burlington shareholders would n't accept anything bigger . 
The surge in liquidity has given it an entree into global indices , and its value as an economic indicator , with its spread of business investments in everything from insurance to retail and manufacturing , is obvious : so optimists on the economy can take comfort from the fact that in the first quarter it bounced back from last year 's loss to report US$ 3.6 billion in net income . 
Diversification is a good bet in wild times . 
Mobile phone firm Nokia has lost out to competitors such as Apple The Australian Wesfarmers group has also been gathering together a broad range of businesses - retail , hardware , resources , insurance and chemicals . 
That 's protected the share price but it 's primarily in the Global 30 thanks to the turnaround of its Coles retail operation , which it bought back in 2007 in Australia 's biggest take-over yet . 
Now it 's thought to be looking for more acquisitions . 
The world slowdown does n't really seem to apply to electronics , where the pace seems as feverish as ever . 
Samsung is back in the Global 30 thanks to a rebound in chip sales as customers started to buy PCs again . 
Nokia is out as investors grow ever more impatient with its failure to find a credible competitor to Apple 's iPhone . 
Samsung came up with the Galaxy S , and it is staking much of its fortunes on tripling its 5 % smartphone market share this year . 
The competition is cut throat as ever and one gets the impression that no one gets to stay as top dog for long - something that may well apply to global markets as a whole next year as well as this . 
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
