Royal Bank of Scotland Posts Largest Annual Corporate Loss in British History A sign of Royal Bank of Scotland -LRB- RBS -RRB- at a branch in central London , in this Tuesday , Feb. 10 , 2009 file photo . 
The Royal Bank of Scotland has posted the largest annual loss in British corporate history of 24.14 billion pounds -LRB- $ 34.4 billion -RRB- for 2008 . 
The bank also confirmed in Thursday Feb. 26 , 2009 earnings report that it will offload toxic assets into a government insurance program . 
-LRB- AP Photo\/Sang Tan -RRB- -LRB- Sang Tan - AP -RRB- LONDON , Feb. 26 -- The Royal Bank of Scotland , a global giant whose spectacular crash has become a symbol of banking excesses of the past decade , reported the largest annual corporate loss in the history of the United Kingdom on Thursday . 
The bank , which is now 70 percent owned by British taxpayers following an unprecedented government bailout , reported that its 2008 losses were 24.1 billion pounds , or about $ 34.5 billion at current exchange rates . 
The RBS losses are the latest in a string of increasingly grim financial results in Britain , where -- as in the United States -- the global financial crisis has caused thousands of job losses and business closings and record numbers of home repossessions . 
Prime Minister Gordon Brown will discuss the global response to the financial crisis next week when he meets with President Obama at the White House and addresses a joint session of the U.S. Congress . 
The bank , in a statement , said it would seek government insurance for $ 465 billion in toxic assets through a new program designed to shore up teetering banks . 
Under that scheme , which is similar to a `` bad bank '' scenario in which financial institutions are able to separate performing assets from nonperforming ones , the bank would be responsible for the first $ 27.9 billion in losses on those assets . 
After that , taxpayers would be responsible for 90 percent of any new losses , the bank said . 
Lloyds Banking Group , which includes the merged Lloyds TSB and HBOS , is also widely reported to be planning to sign up for the scheme Friday , when it will report 2008 results that are also expected to show remarkable losses . 
`` We owe our continued independence to the U.K. government and taxpayers and are very thankful for their support , '' said RBS Chairman Philip Hampton , whose bank has been partly nationalized with an injection of $ 28.6 billion in government funds . 
The bank said Thursday that the government would inject an additional $ 18.6 billion in capital . 
The bank also has an option to seek $ 8.5 billion more . 
While the fall of RBS is a complex story combining both corporate hubris and the stunning misjudgments of the subprime mortgage crisis , former chief executive Fred Goodwin has emerged as the prime symbol of the bank 's failures . 
Goodwin 's hard-charging expansion of what began as a modest Scottish bank -- particularly the disastrous 2007 takeover of Dutch bank ABN Amro -- is widely seen in Britain as a key reason RBS collapsed under the weight of massive bad debt . 
So anger , both among the public and in the halls of Parliament , grew Thursday when it was disclosed that Goodwin , 50 , was awarded a lifetime annual pension of $ 931,000 . 
Multimedia reports on the struggle for equality around the globe . 
