THERE ARE many metrics for judging a president 's budget proposal . 
Is it honest in accounting for known costs over a reasonable time frame ? 
Would its approach put the country on a sustainable fiscal course ? 
Are its tax and spending provisions good policy -- and politically plausible ? 
In this dire economic climate , there 's another important question : Is the administration concentrating enough on the task at hand , which is helping to right the economy , or does it overreach in envisioning new taxes and programs ? 
On the honesty scale , President Obama 's budget offers some improvements . 
It acknowledges some huge expenses that Bush administration budgets studiously ignored , such as the cost of providing relief from the alternative minimum tax . 
It provides $ 130 billion in war funding for 2010 , a reasonable estimate . 
It provides for the contingency that the administration will seek another $ 750 billion -LRB- reflected as $ 250 billion on the budget books on the theory that some of the spending will be recouped -RRB- in emergency funding for financial stabilization . 
But the assumption that war spending will drop to $ 50 billion per year after 2010 is wildly at odds with Mr. Obama 's stated commitment to success in Afghanistan and Iraq . 
His self-congratulatory claim of having identified $ 2 trillion in `` savings '' relies almost entirely on the presumed lower war costs and a long-promised rollback of the Bush administration 's high-end tax cuts . 
Yesterday 's budget shows a gargantuan deficit of $ 1.75 trillion , 12.3 percent of gross domestic product , in this fiscal year . 
The budget projects deficits declining to around 3 percent of GDP from 2013 through 2019 , but they may be far higher if Mr. Obama 's projections of economic growth prove optimistic . 
Long-term fiscal stability will require more than getting rising health-care costs under control , as important as that is . 
Mr. Obama 's statement Tuesday that the country should `` begin a conversation '' about Social Security was disappointingly anemic . 
The conversation has been going on for a long time . 
It is action that has been , and remains , missing . 
Mr. Obama proposes a `` down payment '' of $ 634 billion over 10 years on expanding health insurance , about half of what he says is required . 
His outline leaves open for discussion with Congress big questions about the shape of the plan and the source of additional funding . 
His proposals to reduce Medicare costs by instituting competitive bidding among private Medicare Advantage programs , cutting payments for home health care and prescription drugs , and raising premiums for higher-income beneficiaries are certain to produce the usual howls . 
The same is true of Mr. Obama 's suggestion to pay for part of his health program by reducing the value of mortgage , charitable and other deductions for the highest-income taxpayers . 
Under the current fiscal circumstances , it is critical that Mr. Obama and Congress hew to the principle , set out in this budget , that health-care reform not add to the deficit . 
Mr. Obama proposes to pay for the additional tax credits he promised to lavish on 95 percent of Americans with revenue generated by a cap-and-trade system for carbon emissions -- a kind of indirect tax on oil , gas and coal . 
Since this will raise expenses for all Americans , marrying these two initiatives makes sense , philosophically and fiscally . 
Once again , however , the trick will be resisting the inevitable political demands to use the revenue to cushion the blow for polluting industries . 
Mr. Obama has reached for a lot in this budget ; he needs to make certain that he remains focused on the economic crisis and to adjust his ambitious aims if the recovery does not proceed as he hopes . 
