President Obama recently stated that he is a big believer in '' persistence , '' and he provided examples of how he will persist in many areas of economic policy . 
That word and his examples gave me more hope for the future of the U.S. economy than I have had in some time . 
We are experiencing the mother of all modern financial crises . 
Real and imaginary counterparty risk , policy uncertainty , and widespread panic have reduced purely private financial transactions to a trickle in many vital markets . 
Unfortunately , an already complex economic problem is being compounded by an awful political environment , and the prefrontal cortex of our political system is freezing up as well . 
Politicians and commentators from the left and right are in panic mode and have retrenched to their basic instincts , moving away from reasoned analysis . 
It is , frankly , scary to hear the right regurgitating the untimely liquidationist claims that Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon made during the onset of the Great Depression . 
It is also frightening to see the left going after Wall Street `` oligarchs '' and the financial institutions they have always hated , which finally are easy prey . 
Fortunately , some voices of reason remain , and the Treasury , Federal Reserve and Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. are among them . 
They have been persistent . 
It is true that the announcement made in early February by Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner lacked specifics , but it was not short on principles and general guidelines . 
These principles recognized the systemic nature of today 's crisis and the critical role that uncertainty has played in it . 
The announcement of the `` legacy assets '' program last month confirmed these principles . 
From this , one can get a sense of perseverance and determination , which are exactly what an economy needs during times of massive uncertainty . 
The basis of the U.S. financial system and economy is private capital . 
Policies must encourage rather than discourage private capital participation for the short run as well as the long run . 
One of the main problems behind the crisis is excessive leverage , which means too much debt relative to equity . 
We need more , not less , equity and more , not fewer , shareholders . 
Because it is the government 's responsibility to ensure a well-functioning financial system during episodes of panic , it is not anti-capitalist for the government to support private capital during these episodes , just as it is not anti-capitalist to charge for this service in advance and to regulate financial institutions of systemic importance . 
The U.S. financial system is worth preserving , and the only safe policy while investors are in panic mode is to preserve it with as few changes as possible , with the government providing the resources needed to get to a point where we can fix the structural problems that contributed to the crisis . 
Contrary to popular perception , providing this support has nothing to do with the `` zombie '' policies of the Japanese experience during the 1990s . 
There , the problem was that banks kept making loans to unproductive companies to avoid having to recognize the losses associated with old loans to those companies . 
As a result , good companies had less access to loans than they would have otherwise . 
But a policy of supporting the sale of troubled assets through public guarantees , loans and equity participation , complemented with a public-private program to strengthen the capital of systemically important financial institutions , is the opposite of the zombie strategy . 
Such a framework builds a solid foundation for new lending and does not create incentives for banks to lend to the wrong clients . 
If the administration 's economic team can keep a steady course , and if it is persistent , we have a good chance of getting out of this mess in the near future . 
The writer is head of the economics department at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . 
