June 16 : A drilling rig operates in the Gulf of Mexico at the site of the Deepwater Horizon disaster . 
AP WASHINGTON -- In a reversal , the Obama administration said Wednesday it will not pursue offshore drilling off the East Coast of the U.S. and the eastern Gulf of Mexico . 
A senior administration official told The Associated Press on Wednesday that because of the BP oil spill , the Interior Department will not propose any new oil drilling in waters off the East Coast for at least the next seven years . 
President Obama 's earlier plan -- announced in March , three weeks before the April BP spill -- would have authorized officials to explore potential for drilling from Delaware to central Florida , plus the northern waters of Alaska . 
The new plan allows drilling in Alaska , but officials said they will move cautiously before approving any leases . 
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar planned to discuss details of the decision later Wednesday . 
The eastern Gulf -- an area stretching from 125 to 300 miles off Florida 's coast -- was singled out for protection by Congress in 2006 as part of a deal with Florida lawmakers that made available 8.3 million acres to oil and gas development in the east-central Gulf . 
Under that agreement , the protected region is to remain off limits to energy development until 2022 . 
But the administration had entertained the idea of expanded drilling , until the BP spill that spewed an estimated 172 million gallons of oil into the Gulf . 
In order to open more of the eastern Gulf to drilling , the administration would have to ask Congress to lift the drilling moratorium . 
The new plan does not affect the Pacific seaboard , which will remain off-limits to drilling in federal waters . 
Officials for the major oil drillers and firms that service the industry did not immediately respond to requests for comment from The Associated Press . 
The decision to abandon offshore drilling along the East Coast follows questions raised by the president 's oil spill commission as to why top-level administration officials were not consulted before the drilling expansion was announced in March . 
At the time , Obama said he did not make the decision lightly and had looked at it closely for more than a year with Salazar and other administration officials . 
But in August , White House Council on Environmental Quality chairwoman Nancy Sutley and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration chief Jane Lubchenco told the commission that they were not directly involved in the decision . 
Florida has long banned drilling in its state-controlled waters -- those immediately off its shores , before federal jurisdiction takes over farther out -- because of fears that a spill would damage its beaches , the state 's biggest tourism draw . 
But even state lawmakers , including Gov. Charlie Crist , were considering opening those waters to drilling before the spill . 
On Wednesday , Crist called the decision `` wonderful news . '' 
`` That 's news that will be very favorably received by the tourist industry throughout the state , but also by the people , '' Crist said . 
He also said he 's not surprised that the BP spill would make the administration take another look at its management plan , considering it was one of the country 's largest environmental disasters . 
`` If that 's not a wake-up call , I do n't know what would be , '' Crist said . 
`` If that does n't have an impact on your thinking , you must not be thinking . '' 
Sen. Bill Nelson , D-Fla . 
, who has long fought for drilling bans off Florida 's Gulf coast , praised Obama for `` listening to the people of Florida . '' 
