There has been an outpouring of grief around the world There was no sign of foul play in the death of Michael Jackson , coroners who completed a post-mortem on the singer 's body have said . 
But toxicology and other tests have been ordered , and the cause of the 50-year-old 's death could take several weeks to determine . 
Police also want to speak to Jackson 's doctor who witnessed his collapse . 
Jackson 's body has been released to his family but no funeral details have been made public . 
Michael Jackson 's body moved to an `` undisclosed location '' Seven hours after the post-mortem examination was completed , Jackson 's family was allowed to claim his body , seemingly managing to elude the media crowd outside the coroner 's office . 
The body has been taken to an undisclosed location . 
Announcing the results of a three-hour autopsy , Los Angeles County Coroners spokesman Craig Harvey said there had been no indication of any external trauma or foul play , but he said the cause of death had been deferred . 
`` It means that the medical examiner ordered additional testing such as toxicology and other studies , '' Mr Harvey said . 
These would take between four to six weeks , he said . 
`` We know he was taking some prescription medication , '' Mr Harvey said , without specifying which . 
Unconfirmed reports suggest the singer had been taking a daily dose of Demerol , a painkiller also widely known as pethidine . 
Same drug class as morphine Given by tablets or injection Used post-surgery or for childbirth High doses can stop breathing or lead to delirium and seizures Jackson , who had a history of health problems , collapsed at his Los Angeles home around midday on Thursday . 
A recording of the telephone call made to emergency services has been released , in which the caller said Jackson was unconscious and had stopped breathing . 
His personal doctor - who witnessed his collapse - was trying to revive him , the caller said . 
The singer was pronounced dead two hours later at the UCLA medical center . 
Jackson 's brother , Jermaine , said he was believed to have suffered a cardiac arrest . 
Former Jackson family lawyer Brian Oxman told US TV that he had been concerned about the star 's use of pain relief medication . 
Born : August 29 , 1958 , Gary , Indiana , US Also known as : The King of Pop , Wacko Jacko Biggest hits : I Want You Back , Do n't Stop Til You Get Enough , Billie Jean , Bad , Black or White , Earth Song He told ABC 's Good Morning America program that Jackson took prescription pain relief for injuries sustained earlier in his career . 
`` It caused him great pain . 
He just did n't like to feel such discomfort . 
He started taking pain medication . 
It became part of his life , '' he said . 
A spokesman for the Los Angeles Police Department said investigators had briefly spoken to Jackson 's personal doctor , named by US media as Dr Conrad Murray , but they wanted to speak to him again . 
Police also said a car owned by a doctor had been towed away from Jackson 's home . 
A spokeswoman said the doctor was not under criminal investigation , but that the car could contain `` medications or other evidence that may assist the coroner in determining the cause of death '' . 
The star had been due to stage 50 concerts at the O2 arena in London , beginning on 13 July . 
Entertainers , world leaders and fans have continued to pay tribute to the star . 
Across the world , people have been voicing shock and disbelief at the news of his death . 
In Hollywood , thousands of people filed past his star on the Walk of Fame . 
Dr Murray witnessed Jackson 's collapse A White House spokesman said US President Barack Obama considered Jackson a spectacular performer , but said he felt parts of his life were `` sad and tragic '' . 
Former Beatle Paul McCartney described Jackson as a `` massively talented boy-man with a gentle soul '' . 
Jackson began his career as a child in family group The Jackson 5 . 
He went on to achieve global fame as a solo artist with smash hits such as Billie Jean and Bad . 
Thriller , released in 1982 , is the biggest-selling album of all time , shifting 65m copies , according to the Guinness Book of World Records . 
He scored seven UK number ones as a solo artist and won a total of 13 Grammy awards . 
`` For Michael to be taken away from us so suddenly at such a young age , I just do n't have the words , '' said Quincy Jones , who produced Thriller , Bad and Off The Wall . 
`` He was the consummate entertainer and his contributions and legacy will be felt upon the world forever . 
I 've lost my little brother today , and part of my soul has gone with him . '' 
The singer had been dogged by controversy and money trouble in recent years , becoming a virtual recluse . 
He was arrested in 2003 on charges of molesting a 14-year-old boy , but was found not guilty following a five-month trial . 
The star had three children , Michael Joseph Jackson Jr , Paris Michael Katherine Jackson and Prince Michael Jackson II . 
Jackson 's former wife Debbie Rowe is the mother of two of the children , and there is already speculation about who will gain custody of them . 
He is survived by his mother , Katherine , father , Joseph and eight siblings - including Janet , Randy , Jermaine and La Toya Jackson . 
