Fergus Walsh | 12:16 PM , Thursday , 28 May 2009 It 's good to see progress is being made towards a vaccine against the new influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- virus strain , more commonly known as swine flu . 
The Health Protection Agency has just announced that it has produced a strain of virus suitable for a vaccine . 
I reported on the start of this work earlier this month at the HPA laboratories in Hertfordshire . 
The team at NIBSC -LRB- the National Institute for Biological Standards and Control -RRB- is one of a small number worldwide working on producing a safe `` seed strain '' virus . 
This will now be sent to vaccine manufacturers who will get it ready for full-scale production as and when the World Health Organisation declares a flu pandemic or directs them that the time is right to switch from production of seasonal flu vaccines to a pandemic strain . 
NIBSC received its original swine flu virus from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention -LRB- CDC -RRB- in Atlanta which is co-ordinating the scientific response to this novel form of influenza . 
So it 's not surprising that the CDC is a few days ahead of scientists in the UK . 
Yesterday , Sanofi Pasteur , which has vaccine plants in France and the US announced that it had already received the seed virus from the CDC . 
Clearly this is not a race . 
For something of such potential importance as a pandemic flu vaccine , it 's good to know there are several teams working on it . 
At 9:08 pm on 28 May 2009 , avian_flu_messenger wrote : A 100 % effective H5N1 Avian Flu vaccine , developed by a small independent team of Indonesian scientists and a retired UN British vaccine expert , is already successfully being used to vaccinate large commercial poultry flocks in Indonesia . 
This new vaccine is a radical departure from traditional vaccines . 
The new vaccine , called Sialivac , works by blocking entry of the virus into the body . 
Traditional vaccines work by producing systemic antibodies to neutralise the virus once it is in the body . 
Sialivac contains a unique two pronged attack in one vaccine . 
It prevents ingress of the virus into the body and also removes any attached viruses already in the body , while stimulating an immune response against further virus infection and possibly cross reactive against all strains of influenza viruses . 
This means this single vaccine could be stockpiled against any future mutation of the virus . 
It has had extensive field trials in Indonesia where the disease is endemic , where it has proved 100 % effective in controlling HPAI H5N1 . 
The Sialivac vaccine is also effective 2-3 days following vaccination . 
Current vaccines can take up to 28 days to produce sufficient protective antibodies . 
The new vaccine is delivered by nasal drops , not needles , following the same path as the virus 's entry point into the body , stimulating the body 's natural innate mucosal immune system . 
A paper on the Sialivac vaccine by EE Worrall , Sudarisman and A. Priadi is published online by the journal ` Vaccine ' - search word ` Science Direct Sialivac ' At 5:34 pm on 29 May 2009 , paulmckeown wrote : Why is the coverage of this topic so poor - subdued would hardly describe it - in the British print and broadcast media ? 
I read in foreign media , that the British government does not want to cause panic in the citizenry - which is plausible as a standard civil servant tactic - say nothing - treat the people like fools - if they knew anything they would n't use the information correctly - we know best . 
I also read that 2 Greek students caught novel H1N1 in Edinburgh without being in contact with any known infected persons or anyone who had visited the North American continent , which experts -LRB- including British medical experts -RRB- say is a sure sign of community level transmission , something the government appears desperate to deny . 
Yet this has not been reported anywhere in the British media wheresoever . 
Furthermore it is widely reported in foreign media that the British government is pressuring the WHO to change its definition of `` phase 6 '' or `` pandemic '' so that British conditions will not cause the WHO to declare a pandemic . 
Again not reported in Britain . 
Seems important to me that the British people should be informed by the fourth estate if their government is trying to suppress relevant and important information of this sort ? 
It might all be rubbish and our government might well be right . 
But I would like to hear from our own media something of it , so that I could make my own judgement . 
Over to you , BBC News . 
-LRB- and try to update your interactive map a bit more frequently too - it 's laughably out of date -RRB- At 8:55 pm on 29 May 2009 , avian_flu_messenger wrote : I agree with paulmckeown over the dire state of the scientific media 's dearth of reportage , including the BBC , regarding Swine Flu , and indeed the greater threat of Avian Flu - which by the way has n't gone away , but is rapidly mutating in the hot house environment of industrial sized poultry houses in SE Asia . 
My father , a retired UN vaccine expert , and his Indonesian colleagues have developed a new vaccine that has proven 100 % effective against Avian Flu in poultry , and due to the radical new way in which it works , it is effective against all mutations of the influenza virus - including swine flu . 
It is a major step forward in the fight against this very serious virus and the threat of a world pandemic . 
The work and its results have been published in a renowned scientific journal ` Vaccine ' . 
Press releases have also been posted , but have any members of the medical , scientific or health press picked up on it ? 
The answer is no. . 
Support for the vaccine production work is desperately needed as the Indonesian team are working round the clock to produce the vaccine in a small underfunded laboratory . 
It needs the life blood of publicity - but can we get it ? 
To read the paper do a search for ` Sialivac ' where contact details can also be found . 
At 7:24 pm on 01 Jun 2009 , JJackson01 wrote : I assume this means they have a PR\/8 virus with H1N1 -LRB- 2009 -RRB- HA & NA but is there any information as to how well it grows in eggs as that did appear to be an issue with this virus . 
Not that there is likely to be appreciable quantities for the general public before the virus has run its course . 
Mercifully we seem to have got lucky and this pandemic is - at least in its initial form - not particularly virulent . 
Let us hope it stays that way . 
Thanks to paulmckeown and to avian_flu_messenger for your comments . 
Regarding your criticisms of the media coverage of novel flu viruses . 
I will do my very best with the blog and with my TV and radio reports to keep people informed . 
My colleagues are working on updating the interactive map . 
I 'm Fergus Walsh , the BBC 's medical correspondent . 
This is my blog for discussion of medical and health issues , especially research and ethics . 
Please get involved and leave a comment . 
For the latest updates across BBC blogs , You can stay up to date with Fergus 's Medical Files via these feeds . 
