Eton College had been due to re-open on Sunday after half-term Public school Eton will close for a week after a pupil tested positive for swine flu , a school spokesman has said . 
The Berkshire boys ' school , which was attended by Princes William and Harry , was informed on Wednesday that a 13-year-old boy had tested positive . 
Health authorities advised the school to shut until 7 June . 
It comes after health officials announced a further 17 people in the UK were diagnosed with the virus , taking the total number of cases to 203 . 
Fourteen of the new cases - 13 children and one adult - are part of an outbreak now totalling 64 cases linked to Welford Primary School in Birmingham . 
Welford is carrying out a `` deep clean '' while closed for half-term . 
Two adults in London and a child in east England make up the other new cases of the H1N1 virus , reports the Health Protection Agency -LRB- HPA -RRB- . 
The London cases involve one returning traveller and one linked to a previously confirmed case . 
Eton College , near Windsor , is currently closed for half-term and had been due to re-open on Sunday 31 May , but will now remain closed for another week . 
A school spokesman said the boy had a mild illness and was recovering at home . 
It 's a balance between minimizing the risk of a spread on the one hand - which is the national interest - with this all-important time for boys The school 's bursar , Andrew Wynn , told the BBC News website the decision to keep the school closed had , in effect , been taken by the Health Protection Agency -LRB- HPA -RRB- . 
`` The school is hardly likely to ignore the strong advice of the HPA . 
We have had long discussions all day with them , '' he said . 
`` Clearly they are wanting to stop the spread of it . '' 
Boys taking public examinations are being allowed to return to do so under controlled conditions . 
`` One of the things we have agreed is that boys be allowed back to take their exams , '' said Mr Wynn . 
`` So it 's a balance between minimizing the risk of a spread on the one hand - which is the national interest - with this all-important time for boys . '' 
He said it was too soon to have had any reaction from parents . 
Worldwide there have been 95 deaths reported from swine flu and an estimated 13,450 cases . 
Eton College was founded by King Henry VI nearly 570 years ago . 
It has 18 British prime ministers , including the Duke of Wellington , Sir Robert Walpole and Harold MacMillan , among its former pupils . 
