DAFNIYA\/AL-QAWALISH , Libya | Fri Jul 8 , 2011 9:30 pm BST DAFNIYA\/AL-QAWALISH , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Muammar Gaddafi threatened to take the war in Libya to Europe on Friday while rebels came under heavy fire as they renewed their push against his forces . 
Tens of thousands of Gaddafi supporters rallied in Tripoli 's Green Square for Friday prayers , underscoring his refusal to step down after four decades in power and five months of fighting . 
Large numbers also turned out in the desert town of Sabha , 800 km -LRB- 500 miles -RRB- to the south in an apparent attempt to show that Gaddafi still enjoys support in the areas of Libya he still controls . 
In a speech on Libyan television , Gaddafi threatened to send hundreds of Libyans to carry out attacks in Europe in revenge for the NATO-led military campaign against him . 
`` Hundreds of Libyans will martyr in Europe . 
I told you it is eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth . 
But we will give them a chance to come to their senses , '' the Libyan leader said in an audio speech . 
While the insurgents have advanced on two fronts in the past two weeks , they took casualties on Friday . 
At least six rebels were killed and 17 injured on the front line near Misrata , on Libya 's Mediterranean coast , according to local medical workers . 
Rebels there came under heavy artillery fire from Gaddafi 's forces and a Reuters team near the front saw a mortar shell land near a rebel unit . 
Five members of the rebel unit were wounded , two seriously . 
One fighter 's fingers were partly severed and left hanging from his hand after the explosion . 
A rebel sympathiser in Misrata told Reuters opposition forces had been moving closer to neighbouring Zlitan , one of a chain of government-controlled towns blocking their advance to Tripoli . 
As they advanced , pro-Gaddafi troops inside the city fired rounds of explosives to block their progress , the sympathiser said in an e-mail . 
`` The rebels are waiting for NATO backup or for Gaddafi forces to run out of ammunition to make a move to take the city center , '' he said . 
On the other major front , in the Western Mountains region southwest of Tripoli , NATO warplanes bombed forces loyal to Gaddafi several times in mid-afternoon , their bombs landing about 3 km -LRB- 2 miles -RRB- east of the village of Al-Qawalish , according to one rebel fighter . 
After weeks of static fighting , the rebels made significant advances on Wednesday : pushing west from Misrata to within 13 km -LRB- 8 miles -RRB- of Zlitan , where large numbers of pro-Gaddafi forces are based , and seizing the village of Al-Qawalish in the southwest . 
Taking Al-Qawalish brings them closer to having control of a major highway into the capital . 
Rebel advances over the last two weeks have allowed normal life to resume in towns no longer in shelling distance of Gaddafi 's troops . 
Rebels staged a military parade on Friday evening in Zintan , one of the main towns in the Western Mountains . 
Scores of children thronged the streets to watch the rebels drive through on tanks . 
People fired rifles in the air including one small boy who opened fire with a Kalashnikov assault rifle while perched on his father 's shoulders . 
Tens of thousands of Gaddafi supporters and tribal leaders rallied in Tripoli 's Green Square for Friday prayers and a sermon predicting a swift end to the rebellion . 
Preacher Ali Abu-Sowah told thousands of worshippers Libya could implement reform without the intervention of the West and accused the rebels of being Western stooges . 
`` How can we allow such meddling when we see what happened in beloved Iraq and Afghanistan ? '' 
In Sabha , the biggest town in southern Libya , organisers said 250,000 people representing most of the tribes of the south turned out to show support for Gaddafi . 
Britain , one of the main backers of the campaign against Gaddafi , predicted that `` the writing is on the wall '' for the Libyan leader . 
`` I think it 's heading towards a clear conclusion -- eventually , we do n't know when that will be , when Colonel Gaddafi realizes that his departure is essential to the future of Libya and its people , '' British Foreign Secretary William Hague told Reuters in an interview on Friday . 
`` I think the pressure on the regime is increasing all the time . 
We have intensified the military campaign , it will be intensified further . 
The economic pressure is intensifying also , and so is the diplomatic pressure , '' he said during a visit to Addis Ababa . 
In what may be the latest financial squeeze on Gaddafi , Turkey has frozen $ 1 billion of Libyan central bank reserves deposited in its banks , a Turkish newspaper reported on Friday . 
