U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article Gaddafi tracked heading south - Libyan official BENGHAZI , Libya\/AGADEZ , Niger | Wed Sep 7 , 2011 6:30 pm IST BENGHAZI , Libya\/AGADEZ , Niger -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Muammar Gaddafi was last tracked heading for Libya 's southern border , the man leading the hunt told Reuters , though Burkina Faso again denied on Wednesday any plan to offer the deposed leader refuge . 
After the arrival in neighbouring Niger of dozens of Libyan vehicles , including some which may be carrying gold and cash , the United States said the convoy included aides to Gaddafi and urged authorities in Niger to hold any war crimes suspects . 
Niger has denied Gaddafi is in the poor , landlocked former French colony . 
But a French military source has told Reuters that he and his son Saif al-Islam may have planned to rendezvous with the convoy in the Sahara , possibly via Algeria , before heading for Burkina Faso , which in the past had offered refuge . 
Hisham Buhagiar , who coordinates efforts by Libya 's interim government to find the ousted strongman , said he had evidence he may have been near the southern village of Ghwat , some 300 km -LRB- 200 miles -RRB- north of the border with Niger , three days ago . 
`` The last tracks , he was in the Ghwat area . 
People saw the cars going in that direction , '' Buhagiar said in an interview late on Tuesday . 
`` We have it from many sources that he 's trying to go further south , towards Chad or Niger . '' 
Burkina President Blaise Compaore denied discussing giving Gaddafi sanctuary . 
`` We have no information regarding the presence of Libyans on our soil since these events , and we have had no contacts with anyone in Libya about a request for political asylum , '' he told reporters in the capital Ouagadougou . 
Compaore has ruled for 24 years after taking power , like Gaddafi , in a military coup . 
And like other African states , Burkina benefited from oil-funded Libyan aid under Gaddafi . 
Niger has also tried to distance itself . 
Officials have confirmed that Gaddafi 's security chief Mansour Dhao had been let in but insisted it was a humanitarian gesture . 
Its interior minister denied on Tuesday a report from Niger and French military sources that 200-250 Libyan army vehicles had arrived via Algeria on Monday near the northern town of Agadez . 
As with all efforts so far to find Gaddafi , two full weeks after his Tripoli headquarters were overrun by the motley collection of rebel groups who rose up in February , the trail is hazy , in a region where people are few and far between . 
Buhagiar also said : `` He 's out of Bani Walid , I think . '' 
He was referring to the besieged tribal bastion , 150 km -LRB- 100 miles -RRB- south of Tripoli , where fighters of the National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- have been trying to negotiate the surrender of a hard core of Gaddafi loyalists . 
NTC commanders said last week they thought Gaddafi , 69 , was there planning a counter-strike with Saif al-Islam , his heir apparent , and intelligence chief Abdullah al-Senussi . 
But it appears the senior figures are not there now , officials say . 
All three are wanted by the International Criminal Court at The Hague for war crimes committed during the revolt -- though Libyans say they want to try them first , including for atrocities over the four decades before this year 's uprising . 
U.S. Defense Secretary Leon Panetta said he was unsure whether , as U.S. officials have said , Gaddafi was still in Libya : `` I think he 's been taking a lot of steps to make sure that in the end he could try to get out if he had to , but as to where , when , and how that 'll take place , we just do n't know . '' 
Gaddafi 's fugitive spokesman , Moussa Ibrahim , insisted in a call to Reuters on Tuesday that he had not left . 
`` He is in Libya . 
He is safe , he is very healthy , in high morale . '' 
NTC commanders have said this week they believe Ibrahim may be in Bani Walid , where a tense standoff continued . 
Outside the town on Wednesday , residents leaving through a sun-scorched NTC checkpoint set up around the nearby settlement of Wishtata painted an increasingly desperate picture inside Bani Walid . 
`` People are terrorised . 
There is no one in the streets , '' said Salah Ali , 39 . 
`` But many still support Gaddafi because they were paid by the regime , because many have committed crimes and are afraid of arrest . '' 
Inside Bani Walid , tucked away in a valley in barren hills south of the capital , residents said Gaddafi-era green flags still wave above houses and a portrait of the `` Brother Leader '' in military uniform towers above its central square . 
Shooting in the air and shouting insults from the back of their pick-up trucks , groups of Gaddafi loyalists regularly speed through its streets , residents said . 
They often shout `` Allah , Muammar , Libya , nothing else ! '' 
-- the principal slogan of the old regime , especially during this year 's civil war . 
`` I went to see my family there yesterday , '' said Imad Mohammed Ali , a 21-year-old supporter of the new leadership . 
`` There is no electricity , no cooking gas , no communications . 
There is n't enough food . 
People are using coal to make fire . 
There is no medicine . 
There are no people in the streets . '' 
Aid agencies have also raised concerns about conditions for civilians in the coastal city of Sirte , Gaddafi 's birthplace and another redoubt of tribal leaders still loyal to him . 
Libya 's southern desert is also not under the control of the NTC . 
-LRB- Reporting by Mohammed Abbas , Christian Lowe and Alex Dziadosz in Tripoli , Sherine El Madany in Ras Lanuf , Maria Golovnina near Bani Walid , Barry Malone , Sylvia Westall and Alastair Macdonald in Tunis , Sami Aboudi , Amena Bakr and Omar Fahmy in Cairo , Nathalie Prevost in Niamey , Abdoulaye Massalatchi in Agadez , David Brunnstrom in Brussels , Mathieu Bonkoungou in Ouagadougou and Richard Valdmanis and Mark John in Dakar ; Writing by Sylvia Westall ; Editing by Alastair Macdonald and Mark Heinrich -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
