UNITED NATIONS | Fri May 13 , 2011 6:04 pm EDT UNITED NATIONS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Recent U.N. resolutions on Libya broke new ground in backing international action to protect civilians , but the stalemated civil war that has ensued could roll back those advances , diplomats and analysts say . 
Russia , China and other powers have voiced dismay that the world body has appeared to take sides in an internal conflict , not just in Libya but also in Ivory Coast , where a Security Council resolution led to the ousting of an incumbent ruler . 
As a result , veto-holders Russia and China may not be as willing in future to permit sweeping endorsements for tough action , either by a coalition -- as in Libya -- or by U.N. peacekeepers -- as in Ivory Coast , diplomats say . 
No one contests the principle of protecting civilians during armed conflict , a theme that has been on the Security Council agenda for more than a decade . 
The skeptics ' concern is that it will be used as a cover by Western powers bent on overthrowing leaders they do not like . 
More generally , it raises the specter of `` interference in the internal affairs '' of sovereign states , a taboo for Moscow and Beijing for decades . 
In Libya , a March 17 Security Council resolution authorized `` all necessary measures '' to protect civilians as Tripoli looked set to crush rebels who had seized control of the east . 
Western air and missile strikes on the forces of leader Muammar Gaddafi drove them back from the rebel stronghold of Benghazi . 
It was the first time the Council had authorized a military response to protect populations in a non-consenting state . 
In Ivory Coast , a similarly worded resolution passed on March 30 resulted in military action by French and U.N. peacekeepers that culminated 12 days later in the arrest of Laurent Gbagbo , who had refused to cede power after a presidential election the United Nations said he lost . 
As a consequence , Gbagbo 's challenger , Alassane Ouattara , took over the West African country . 
Following the two resolutions , human rights groups were ecstatic over what they saw as a new willingness by the United Nations to enforce principles to which it had long paid lip service . 
Russia and China , faced with an Arab League call for U.N. action on Libya and West African support over Ivory Coast , had abstained in the first resolution and voted for the second . 
But both soon made clear they thought the United Nations was at risk of overstepping its authority -- not protecting civilians but backing one faction in a civil conflict . 
At a Security Council debate this week , Russian Ambassador Vitaly Churkin said it was `` unacceptable for U.N. peacekeepers ... to be drawn into armed conflict and essentially to take the side of one of the parties . '' 
Chinese Ambassador Li Baodong said , `` There must be no attempt at regime change or involvement in a civil war of a country by any party in the name of protecting civilians . '' 
Similar concerns have been expressed by Brazil , India and South Africa , which are also on the Security Council . 
The implications have not been lost on Western diplomats who had hoped the Council 's adoption of the Libya and Ivory Coast resolutions might set a precedent . 
`` There was a chance to create a model for the protection of civilians in Libya . 
But now it 's going to be very difficult in the future to persuade Russia and China to support such operations , '' a diplomat said . 
An immediate casualty could be a Western attempt to bring about Security Council action on Syria 's violent crackdown on anti-government protesters . 
`` Some people are cautious in the context of Libya , '' a diplomat commented . 
Protection of civilians is written into the mandate of at least seven U.N. peacekeeping forces around the world and has been the subject of regular reports by U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his predecessor , Kofi Annan . 
These , however , have tended to focus on the soft end of the subject , such as programs to train peacekeepers , rather than the sharp end of NATO bombing a government army , as in Libya . 
The subject also has become enmeshed with an arcane debate at the United Nations over whether the world body has a `` responsibility to protect '' -- or R2P in U.N. jargon -- populations threatened by genocide or other mass atrocities . 
That concept was launched in a 2005 summit of more than 150 world leaders in a belated response to a perceived U.N. failure to prevent massacres in Rwanda and Bosnia in the 1990s . 
A carefully crafted declaration said the responsibility began with the government of the country concerned . 
If that failed , it foresaw a sliding scale of international action ranging from advice through mediation to -- in a last resort -- intervention by force authorized by the Security Council . 
A General Assembly conference two years ago showed that most U.N. members broadly supported R2P , but envoys from leftist states in Latin America and elsewhere denounced it as a smokescreen for `` colonialism and interventionism '' by the West . 
Some diplomats say that if the Libyan insurrection had toppled Gaddafi in a couple of weeks , rather than extending into a drawn-out civil war , concerns about how protection of civilians was to be interpreted would have been far fewer . 
Supporters of R2P say that was never likely to happen and it was too soon to say the concept was fatally damaged . 
But Ramesh Thakur of the Australian National University said , `` The evolution of R2P , and prospects of its being authorized\/used again , will depend on how Libya turns out . 
If NATO respects its limitations and success is achieved , R2P stands vindicated . 
If -LRB- resolution -RRB- 1973 -LRB- on Libya -RRB- is abused and a messy stalemate ensues , the bar will be greatly raised . '' 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Did not NATO kill innocent citizens in trying to dislodge Gaddafi ? 
Then what about Syria ? 
Look at the mass killing going on there , why is not the UN doing more than they did in Libya ? 
This is very immoral and wicked of us to behave like this over Libya . 
There has to be a hidden agenda on Libya , and I think we all know it ! 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
