The media are minimizing US and British war crimes in Iraq The reporting of the Iraqi death toll - both in its scale and account of who is doing the killing - is profoundly dishonest We were told that the Iraqis do n't count . 
Before the invasion began , the head of US central command , General Thomas Franks , boasted that `` we do n't do body counts '' . 
His claim was repeated by Donald Rumsfeld in November 2003 -LRB- `` We do n't do body counts on other people '' -RRB- and the Pentagon last January -LRB- `` The only thing we keep track of is casualties for US troops and civilians '' -RRB- . 
But it 's not true . 
Almost every week the Pentagon claims to have killed 50 or 70 or 100 insurgents in its latest assault on the latest stronghold of the ubiquitous monster Zarqawi . 
In May the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff said that his soldiers had killed 250 of Zarqawi 's `` closest lieutenants '' -LRB- or so 500 of his best friends had told him -RRB- . 
But last week , the Pentagon did something new . 
Buried in its latest security report to Congress is a bar chart labeled `` average daily casualties - Iraqi and coalition . 
1 Jan 04-16 Sep 05 '' . 
The claim that it kept no track of Iraqi deaths was false . 
The report does not explain what it means by casualty , or if its figures represent all casualties , only insurgents , or , as the foregoing paragraph appears to hint , only civilians killed by insurgents . 
There is no explanation of how the figures were gathered or compiled . 
The only accompanying text consists of the words `` Source : MNC-I '' , which means Multi-National Corps - Iraq . 
We 'll just have to trust them . 
What the chart shows is that these unexplained casualties have more than doubled since the beginning of the Pentagon 's survey . 
From January to March 2004 , 26 units of something or other were happening every day , while in September 2005 the something or other rose to 64 . 
But whatever it is that 's been rising , the weird morality of this war dictates that it is reported as good news . 
Journalists have been multiplying the daily average of mystery units by the number of days , discovering that the figure is lower than previous estimates of Iraqi deaths , and using it to cast doubts on them . 
As ever , the study in the line of fire is the report published by the Lancet in October last year . 
It was a household survey - of 988 homes in 33 randomly selected districts - and it suggested , on the basis of the mortality those households reported before and after the invasion , that the risk of death in Iraq had risen by a factor of 1.5 ; somewhere between 8,000 and 194,000 extra people had died , with the most probable figure being 98,000 . 
Around half the deaths , if Falluja was included , or 15 % if it was not , were caused by violence , and the majority of those by attacks on the part of US forces . 
In the US and the UK , the study was either ignored or torn to bits . 
The media described it as `` inflated '' , `` overstated '' , `` politicised '' and `` out of proportion '' . 
Just about every possible misunderstanding and distortion of its statistics was published , of which the most remarkable was the Observer 's claim that : `` The report 's authors admit it drew heavily on the rebel stronghold of Falluja , which has been plagued by fierce fighting . 
Strip out Falluja , as the study itself acknowledged , and the mortality rate is reduced dramatically . '' 
In fact , as they made clear on page one , the authors had stripped out Falluja ; their estimate of 98,000 deaths would otherwise have been much higher . 
But the attacks in the press succeeded in sinking the study . 
Now , whenever a newspaper or broadcaster produces an estimate of civilian deaths , the Lancet report is passed over in favor of lesser figures . 
For the past three months , the editors and subscribers of the website Medialens have been writing to papers and broadcasters to try to find out why . 
The standard response , exemplified by a letter from the BBC 's online news service last week , is that the study 's `` technique of sampling and extrapolating from samples has been criticised '' . 
That 's true , and by the same reasoning we could dismiss the fact that 6 million people were killed in the Holocaust , on the grounds that this figure has also been criticised , albeit by skinheads . 
The issue is not whether the study has been criticised , but whether the criticism is valid . 
As Medialens has pointed out , it was the same lead author , using the same techniques , who reported that 1.7 million people had died as a result of conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo -LRB- DRC -RRB- . 
That finding has been cited by Tony Blair , Colin Powell and almost every major newspaper on both sides of the Atlantic , and none has challenged either the method or the result . 
Using the Congo study as justification , the UN security council called for all foreign armies to leave the DRC and doubled the country 's UN aid budget . 
The other reason the press gives for burying the Lancet study is that it is out of line with competing estimates . 
Like Jack Straw , wriggling his way around the figures in a written ministerial statement , they compare it to the statistics compiled by the Iraqi health ministry and the website Iraq Body Count . 
In December 2003 , Associated Press reported that `` Iraq 's health ministry has ordered a halt to a count of civilians killed during the war '' . 
According to the head of the ministry 's statistics department , both the puppet government and the Coalition Provisional Authority demanded that it be stopped . 
As Naomi Klein has shown on these pages , when US soldiers stormed Falluja -LRB- a year ago today -RRB- , their first action was to seize the general hospital and arrest the doctors . 
The New York Times reported that `` the hospital was selected as an early target because the American military believed that it was the source of rumors about heavy casualties '' . 
After the coalition had used these novel statistical methods to improve the results , Blair told parliament that `` figures from the Iraqi ministry of health , which are a survey from the hospitals there , are in our view the most accurate survey there is '' . 
Iraq Body Count , whose tally has reached 26,000-30 ,000 , measures only civilian deaths which can be unambiguously attributed to the invasion and which have been reported by two independent news agencies . 
As the compilers point out , `` it is likely that many if not most civilian casualties will go unreported by the media ... our own total is certain to be an underestimate of the true position , because of gaps in reporting or recording '' . 
Of the seven mortality reports surveyed by the Overseas Development Institute , the estimate in the Lancet 's paper was only the third highest . 
It remains the most thorough study published so far . 
Extraordinary as its numbers seem , they are the most likely to be true . 
And what of the idea that most of the violent deaths in Iraq are caused by coalition troops ? 
Well according to the Houston Chronicle , even Blair 's favorite data source , the Iraqi health ministry , reports that twice as many Iraqis - and most of them civilians - are being killed by US and UK forces as by insurgents . 
When the Pentagon claims that it has just killed 50 or 70 or 100 rebel fighters , we have no means of knowing who those people really were . 
Everyone it blows to pieces becomes a terrorist . 
In July Jack Keane , the former vice chief of staff of the US army , claimed that coalition troops had killed or captured more than 50,000 `` insurgents '' since the start of the rebellion . 
Perhaps they were all Zarqawi 's closest lieutenants . 
We can expect the US and UK governments to seek to minimize the extent of their war crimes . 
But it 's time the media stopped collaborating . 
