A name that lives in infamy The destruction of Falluja was an act of barbarism that ranks alongside My Lai , Guernica and Halabja One year ago this week , US-led occupying forces launched a devastating assault on the Iraqi city of Falluja . 
The mood was set by Lt Col Gary Brandl : `` The enemy has got a face . 
He 's called Satan . 
He 's in Falluja . 
And we 're going to destroy him . '' 
The assault was preceded by eight weeks of aerial bombardment . 
US troops cut off the city 's water , power and food supplies , condemned as a violation of the Geneva convention by a UN special rapporteur , who accused occupying forces of `` using hunger and deprivation of water as a weapon of war against the civilian population '' . 
Two-thirds of the city 's 300,000 residents fled , many to squatters ' camps without basic facilities . 
As the siege tightened , the Red Cross , Red Crescent and the media were kept out , while males between the ages of 15 and 55 were kept in . 
US sources claimed between 600 and 6,000 insurgents were holed up inside the city - which means that the vast majority of the remaining inhabitants were non-combatants . 
On November 8 , 10,000 US troops , supported by 2,000 Iraqi recruits , equipped with artillery and tanks , supported from the air by bombers and helicopter gunships , blasted their way into a city the size of Leicester . 
It took a week to establish control of the main roads ; another two before victory was claimed . 
The city 's main hospital was selected as the first target , the New York Times reported , `` because the US military believed it was the source of rumors about heavy casualties '' . 
An AP photographer described US helicopters killing a family of five trying to ford a river to safety . 
`` There were American snipers on top of the hospital shooting everyone , '' said Burhan Fasa'am , a photographer with the Lebanese Broadcasting Corporation . 
`` With no medical supplies , people died from their wounds . 
Everyone in the street was a target for the Americans . '' 
The US also deployed incendiary weapons , including white phosphorous . 
`` Usually we keep the gloves on , '' Captain Erik Krivda said , but `` for this operation , we took the gloves off '' . 
By the end of operations , the city lay in ruins . 
Falluja 's compensation commissioner has reported that 36,000 of the city 's 50,000 homes were destroyed , along with 60 schools and 65 mosques and shrines . 
The US claims that 2,000 died , most of them fighters . 
When medical teams arrived in January they collected more than 700 bodies in only one third of the city . 
Iraqi NGOs and medical workers estimate between 4,000 and 6,000 dead , mostly civilians - a proportionately higher death rate than in Coventry and London during the blitz . 
The collective punishment inflicted on Falluja - with logistical and political support from Britain - was largely masked by the US and British media , which relied on reporters embedded with US troops . 
The BBC , in particular , offered a sanitised version of the assault : civilian suffering was minimized and the ethics and strategic logic of the attack largely unscrutinised . 
Falluja proved to be yet another of the war 's phantom turning points . 
Violent resistance spread to other cities . 
In the last two months , Tal-Afar , Haditha , Husaybah - all alleged terrorist havens heavily populated by civilians - have come under the hammer . 
Falluja is still so heavily patrolled that visitors have described it as `` a giant prison '' . 
Only a fraction of the promised reconstruction and compensation has materialised . 
Like Jallianwallah Bagh , Guernica , My Lai , Halabja and Grozny , Falluja is a place name that has become a symbol of unconscionable brutality . 
As the war in Iraq claims more lives , we need to ensure that this atrocity - so recent , so easily erased from public memory - is recognized as an example of the barbarism of nations that call themselves civilised . 
Mike Marqusee is a co-founder of Iraq Occupation Focus Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Mike Marqusee : The destruction of Falluja was an act of barbarism that ranks alongside My Lai , Guernica and Halabja This article appeared on p32 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 23.58 GMT on Thursday 10 November 2005 . 
Like a MacBook Pro '' says @Mister_Solomon : Westminster Dog Show - live ! 
