Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal warned the spill threatened their way of life Bad weather hampered efforts to tackle the huge Gulf of Mexico oil slick , with high seas and winds keeping boats and planes away from the clean-up site . 
Reports suggest that the slick is growing rapidly - one report said it had tripled in size in a day . 
Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal warned that the spillage threatened the very way of life of people in his state . 
President Obama is due there on Sunday as is BP head Tony Hayward , who has been criticised over the BP response . 
Sheen from the spill has begun washing up on the Louisiana coast , fuelling fears of environmental disaster . 
Up to 5,000 barrels of oil a day are gushing into the sea after the British Petroleum-operated Deepwater Horizon rig exploded and sank last week . 
Mississippi , Alabama , Louisiana and Florida have all declared a state of emergency , and analysts say the spill could rival the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster as the worst in US history . 
Mr Jindal said on Saturday : `` This is n't just about our coast . 
It 's about our way of life in Louisiana : our shrimpers , our fishermen , our coast that makes Louisiana a sportsman 's paradise . '' 
As pressure mounted on BP , the governor continued : `` We certainly have passed the point of waiting for clean-up plans from BP or the incident commander . '' 
The state had started developing `` contingency plans '' , he added . 
Worsening weather conditions have been hampering efforts to contain the slick , now more than 130 miles -LRB- 200km -RRB- long . 
Military planes deployed to spray oil-dispersing chemicals have also been grounded . 
Rescue groups have been receiving their first patients - seabirds coated in oil - but a BBC correspondent in the area says that at the moment the wind is keeping most of the oil offshore . 
The high winds are also forcing some of it over booms meant to contain it , however , and forecasters say that strong winds on Sunday could push more oil onto the Louisiana shore . 
Wetlands off the Louisiana coast sustain hundreds of wildlife species , and a major seafood and fishing industry . 
The president of Louisiana 's Plaquemines Parish area , Bill Nungesser , said that the oil could cause enormous damage . 
`` We need to have something out there , '' he said . 
`` Once it gets into the marsh it is too late . 
Once it gets behind these islands , through these little canals , you will never clean it up . '' 
Reports suggest that the slick is growing rapidly . 
Experts from the University of Miami said that the slick had tripled in a day , citing satellite images . 
Two natural gas platforms in the Gulf of Mexico have halted production because of the spill and one of them has been evacuated as a safety precaution . 
The command center co-ordinating the response said that the percentage of gas production affected was less than one-tenth of one per cent of the Gulf of Mexico 's daily total . 
On Friday , Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano called on BP to commit more resources to tackling the catastrophe . 
By Joe Lynam , BBC business correspondent BP 's shareholders would probably prefer a few years out of the limelight after a five-year period in which the firm 's reputation has been blown about . 
The fire at a Texas City refinery , the leak of an Alaskan gas pipeline and the sudden departure of former boss Lord Browne , have all been PR disasters . 
But this Gulf of Mexico leak may surpass all of them . 
Apart from the environmental catastrophe , # 10bn -LRB- $ 15bn -RRB- was wiped off the value of Britain 's third-largest company this week . 
And now we learn that BP is not even covered by any external insurance and will have to meet compensation claims from its own resources - at a cost of billions of dollars . 
And that does not even put a price on the damage to the reputation of a company which describes itself as `` Beyond Petroleum '' . 
The British oil giant says it has begun using dispersants underwater in an attempt to break up the leaking oil at its source . 
It has dispatched remotely operated vehicles to try to shut off an underwater valve , so far without success . 
It is also having a relief-well drilled to slow the leak , though experts say that could take up to three months . 
In a statement , Mr Obama said BP was `` ultimately responsible ... for paying the costs of response and clean-up operations '' . 
The president said he had asked Interior Secretary Ken Salazar to conduct a `` thorough review '' of the catastrophe and report back in 30 days on ways to prevent a repeat . 
BP spokeswoman Sheila William told AFP news agency the energy firm was prepared to assume costs for the clean-up and for damages . 
BBC business correspondent Joe Lynam says that BP has no external insurance cover in the traditional sense , instead using a form of `` self insurance '' to cover major events like this . 
The company would therefore have to cover the full cost of any legitimate compensation claims from the oil spill from its own resources . 
The cause of last week 's blast , which left 11 workers missing , presumed dead , remains unclear . 
But it has emerged that BP last year downplayed the possibility of such a disaster at the offshore rig . 
In BP 's 2009 exploration plan for the well , the firm suggested an oil spill was unlikely or virtually impossible , AP news agency reports . 
