Gulf oil spill : plugging the leak BP engineers may try to bung up the Deepwater Horizon leak by pumping debris such as bits of tyres and golf balls into the well . 
It 's a long shot known as a ` junk shot ' , but it might just work The oil spill containment box aboard a barge in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP Since the Deepwater Horizon explosion two weeks ago , it has been hard not to view as primitive the efforts to contain the oil and prevent more of it leaking . 
Whether it is the containment booms drafted in to prevent the oil washing ashore or early efforts to set the oil on fire , or even the attempts to funnel the leaking oil via giant sunken towers , the somewhat low-tech containment efforts starkly contrast with the often hi-tech methods usually witnessed in deep-sea drilling . 
The latest BP plan being weighed up is similarly low-tech . 
Engineers may try to plug the well by pumping debris into it at high pressure , a method known as a `` junk shot '' . 
`` They are actually going to take a bunch of debris - some shredded up tyres , golf balls and things like that - and under very high pressure shoot it into the preventer itself and see if they can clog it up to stop the leak , '' the US Coast Board Admiral Thad Allen told CBS News yesterday . 
Tyres , golf balls , and `` things like that '' do not immediately inspire confidence , However Dr Simon Boxall , oceanographer at the National Oceanography center in Southampton , Hampshire , said the unique conditions of the Deepwater Horizon spill there has never been an oil leak at this depth before mean all traditional methods `` go out of the window '' . 
There have been blow outs in shallow water , but with those you 're looking at 100-metre-deep tops , where you can get divers down and you can get equipment down , '' he said . 
`` It 's nothing compared to doing it 1,500 m -LRB- 5,000 ft -RRB- down this goes beyond all our technological knowhow and experience . '' . 
Boxall said a junk shot has been tried before , although he was only aware of one incident , which took place at a much shallower depth . 
`` We 're working in completely new territory , but the idea is not quite as daft as it sounds , '' he said . 
`` Bear in mind the pressures at these depths are phenomenal , so what seems like an odd thing to bung a hole with at the surface can actually work quite well . 
Golf balls seem really quite hard but actually they 're quite soft . 
`` Certainly if you add a tonne of pressure per square inch to a golf ball then it starts to give . 
So I guess what they 're looking to do is use these things that are slightly plastic in their feel to bung into a hole which will help bung it up . '' 
The main problem for engineers is how to get the debris into the well almost a mile beneath the surface . 
The plan is to block the well beneath the semi-operational cut-off valves at the moment , the well is partly shut off , restricting the oil flow without making the spill worse . 
`` They 're planning to sort of try and insert them somehow magically before the cut off valve , but that does n't quite make sense , '' Boxall said . 
`` All these things you can imagine are perfectly feasible on land if you had whatever technology was available to bung them in the hole . 
`` But when you 're looking at some mechanism to fire them into a hole when you 're a mile down in seawater , I ca n't imagine what they would use , unless they 're using compressed air but that is difficult at those depths anyway because the pressures are so great . '' 
He added : `` There are one or two engineers out there who seem to be thinking : ` This is ok as long as we do n't cause more damage than we solve . ' '' 
BP 's ultimate solution to the leak is to drill a relief well , but that could take up to three months before that is completed . 
In the meantime , they will continue to try and position a cofferdam over one of the leaks today . 
