Revolution that began 18 days ago leads to Mubarak 's ouster February 11 , 2011 | By the CNN Staff The protesters first took to the streets of Egypt on January 25 . 
Inspired by a revolt in Tunisia and a page on Facebook , they demanded presidential term limits , a higher minimum wage , government reform and an end to police brutality . 
They also called for the resignation of President Hosni Mubarak . 
The nation 's young people have known only one leader in their lives . 
By late Thursday , they had hoped to hear an end to Mubarak 's 30-year autocratic rule . 
Instead , they heard Mubarak stubbornly hold on to the presidency . 
The crowd transformed from jubilant to angry . 
Protesters remained in Cairo 's Tahrir Square overnight . 
The crowds swelled by the thousands throughout the day Friday . 
Then , a one-sentence announcement by Egypt 's vice president -- Mubarak had resigned -- sent the streets into joyous celebration . 
`` We did it ! '' 
The drama that unfolded in recent weeks had been simmering for some time . 
A Facebook page called `` We Are All Khaled Said '' -- named after a 28-year-old Egyptian businessman from Alexandria who was beaten to death by police last June -- sprung up , calling for protests on January 25 . 
Word spread on the streets of Cairo that there would be demonstrations . 
No one knew exactly what to expect . 
As many as 20,000 protesters spilled into the streets in an unprecedented display of anti-government rage that first day . 
At one point , cheering protesters in the world 's largest Arab nation broke through riot police who had lined Tahrir , or Liberation , Square . 
Police lobbed tear gas and used water cannons . 
In fact , they became more galvanized . 
Even as the internet , text messages and phone services were shut down by the government in the days ahead , the people refused to be silenced -- although many were : Human Rights Watch estimated that more than 300 people have been killed since the protests began . 
And the man behind the Facebook page -- Wael Ghonim -- would emerge as a national inspiration after he was detained by authorities three days after the protests began . 
`` I want to say to every mother and every father that lost his child , I am sorry but this is not our fault , '' Ghonim said in a tearful message after his release this week . 
`` I swear to God , this is not our fault . 
It is the fault of everyone who is holding on to power . '' 
