By the CNN Wires Staff Not much is known about Mohammed Hussein Tantawi in the West U.S. Embassy cables released by WikiLeaks contain references to Tantawi Cables : Tantawi is `` intolerant '' of reform and is mocked openly by midlevel officers One cable says he has become `` increasingly intolerant of intellectual freedom '' -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Mohammed Hussein Tantawi is Egypt 's deputy prime minister , defense minister and commander-in-chief of the country 's armed forces . 
In the West , little is known about him , or how he intends to lead the Egyptian military , now that it 's in charge of the government . 
Former U.S. Defense Secretary William Cohen knows Tantawi and worked with him at the Pentagon . 
He told CNN 's Wolf Blitzer that `` the question is whether he will continue to be the head of the military , as such , or whether that will pass on to a younger generation . '' 
Tantawi , who holds the title `` field marshal , '' received his first military commission in 1956 , He was born on October 31 , 1935 , and fought in Egypt 's 1956 war against Britain , France and Israel . 
He also served during Egypt 's conflicts with Israel in 1967 and 1973 . 
Tantawi was only recently made deputy prime minister . 
Former President Hosni Mubarak appointed him to the position during the early days of the protest movement that eventually forced Mubarak from power . 
Since 1991 , Tantawi has held the position of defense minister , wielding near-exclusive decision-making power within the ministry . 
However , during that time , `` the tactical and operational readiness of the Egyptian Armed Forces has degraded , '' according to globalsecurity.org , a military analysis group . 
Protester ` not that worried ' about army U.S. Embassy cables released by WikiLeaks contain multiple references to Tantawi , his relationship with Mubarak and they way he is viewed by other Egyptian military officials . 
Another quoted an unnamed Egyptian officer , who joked that Tantawi `` looks like a bureaucrat . '' 
That cable went on to say he is openly mocked at clubs in Cairo where midlevel officers gather . 
The cable claimed these officers mock him openly as `` incompetent '' and as `` Mubarak 's poodle . '' 
The officers also say that Tantawi 's unwavering loyalty to Mubarak is `` running the military into the ground , '' according to the cable . 
Most significant for the hopes of democratic-reform advocates in Egypt , the cables say that Tantawi has always supported the centralization of power in Egypt . 
One cable says he has become `` increasingly intolerant of intellectual freedom . '' 
Another goes into greater detail on his position . 
`` Tantawi has opposed both economic and political reforms that he perceives as eroding central government power , '' according to the cable . 
`` He is supremely concerned with national unity , and has opposed policy initiatives he views as encouraging political or religious cleavages with Egyptian society . '' 
He has revealed a willingness to use the military to control political groups like the Muslim Brotherhood , the cables say , and opposes economic reform because it reduces the Egyptian government 's control over prices and production . 
That cable 's final assessment of Tantawi warned diplomats to `` be prepared to meet an aged and change-resistant Tantawi . 
... He and Mubarak are focused on regime stability and maintaining the status quo through the end of their time . 
They simply do not have the energy , inclination or world view to do anything differently . '' 
