February 11 , 2011 | By Sarah Hoye , CNN The first days of the protests in Egypt were torture for Hala Elnaggar . 
`` I waited two days and I finally heard my mom 's voice , '' says Elnaggar , who lives just outside of Philadelphia with her husband , Ahmed . 
`` And of course when I heard her voice I started crying , and screaming ` come home . ' '' 
Her parents , Nafissa and Farouk Osman , live half the year in New Jersey , and the other half in Cairo , just 20 minutes from Tahrir Square , the epicenter of recent protests . 
After days of not hearing from her parents , her worry turned to frustration . 
Random families answered her repeated phone calls because the telephones were getting crossed , she says . 
`` I kept calling and calling , '' says Elnaggar , the youngest of three children , and the only one of her siblings to be born in the United States . 
`` I had to purchase a calling card and that was the only way I could get through . '' 
Elnaggar 's parents immigrated to the United States with only $ 45 to their name more than 30 years ago . 
They were in Cairo when the protests broke out , and have decided to remain in Cairo . 
`` She does n't want to come home , '' Elnaggar says , referring to a recent phone conversation she had with her mother . '' 
` We need peaceful democracy Hala , ' that 's all she kept saying . 
` It 's a revolution and we want peaceful democracy . 
And I 'm going to stay until its finished . ' '' 
People across Egypt took to the streets on January 25 in demonstrations against corruption and failing economic policies partly inspired by similar January rallies that erupted in Tunisia . 
Since the protests began , President Hosni Mubarak -- in power since 1981 -- has appointed a vice president for the first time , reshuffled his Cabinet and announced that he wo n't seek a new term in September . 
Her concern increased after Mubarak 's speech on Thursday , which many expected him to announce he was stepping down . 
Instead he said he was transferring some powers to the vice president . 
His decision to stay in office has further enraged protesters . 
`` My mom said that now it 's getting really bad , and she has n't complained this entire time , '' Hala said . 
Hala says she does n't expect the protests to end any time soon . 
`` They are not going to get off the street , '' she said . 
`` If they can fast for 30 days and build the pyramids , they can do this . '' 
As the chaos continues in Egypt , Hala 's daughter , Rhonda , eagerly awaits her grandmother 's return . 
`` I just wish she was here . 
Even though it 's crazy , she does n't want to leave , I do n't get why , but she does n't want to go , '' she says . 
