2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
A day after President Hosni Mubarak stepped down , employees and businesses readied themselves for Sunday , the traditional start of the work week . 
The country 's stock market is expected to reopen Wednesday . 
Volunteers repainted black and white striped street curbs around a monument by the Egyptian Museum , which had been on the front line in street battles between Mubarak 's foes and supporters . 
-LRB- Update 10:15 p.m. in Cairo , 3:15 p.m. ET -RRB- Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak spoke to his Egyptian counterpart Mohammed Hussein Tantawi on the phone Saturday , according to a ministry spokesman . 
No other details were available . 
-LRB- Update 8:45 p.m. in Cairo , 1:45 p.m. ET -RRB- Adm. Mike Mullen , chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff , plans to visit key Mideast allies Israel and Jordan this weekend , a Pentagon official told CNN on Saturday . 
U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates spoke with Egyptian Field Marshal Mohammed Hussein Tantawi on Saturday , the sixth phone conversation with the minister since the situation began . 
-LRB- Update 7:42 p.m. in Cairo , 12:42 ET -RRB- Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu welcomed the Egyptian military 's intention to honor its peace treaty with Israel and said the agreement `` is the cornerstone for peace and stability in the entire Middle East . '' 
-- Saudi Arabia 's government said on Saturday it `` welcomes the peaceful transition of power in Egypt , '' the official Saudi news agency reported . 
-- Military forces in Cairo 's Tahrir Square on Saturday detained three people for allegedly harassing others , though those individuals are expected to be released later , CNN 's Frederik Pleitgen reported . 
-- Egypt 's military urged the population to help bolster the country 's economic condition , a sector that has been paralyzed in recent weeks by the country 's unrest . 
-- The military urged residents to cooperate with the country 's police forces , a reference to the animosity protesters had toward police that helped fuel the Egyptian uprising . 
-- Before a new Cabinet is formed , the Egyptian military called on people and the government to support the caretaker government . 
-- Egypt state television , citing a judicial source , reported that the country 's former prime minister and former information and interior ministers were banned from traveling abroad due to a lawsuit filed against them . 
Update 4:51 p.m. in Cairo , 9:51 a.m. ET -RRB- The head of the Egyptian stock market , Khaled Serry Seyam , said trading will resume Wednesday , February 16 , Egyptian state TV reported Saturday . 
-LRB- Update 4:43 p.m. in Cairo , 9:43 a.m. ET -RRB- Demonstrators brought into Tahrir Square a large marble statue whose purpose appeared to be to honor those killed in the unrest of the past 18 days . 
-LRB- Update 3:13 p.m. in Cairo , 8:13 a.m. ET -RRB- The Egyptian military called on people and the government to support the caretaker government before a new Cabinet is formed . 
The military government also said it will honor all international agreements , which would include Egypt 's peace treaty with Israel . 
-LRB- Update 3:06 p.m. in Cairo , 8:06 a.m. ET -RRB- A large number of soldiers entered Tahrir Square on foot and began clearing protesters ' barricades and taking up positions . 
Demonstrators cheered the soldiers and patted them on the back as they ran by , and one soldier was hoisted onto protesters ' shoulders . 
Protesters and soldiers worked together to clear debris and load it into dump trucks . 
-LRB- Update 11:03 a.m. in Cairo , 4:03 a.m. ET -RRB- State-run newspapers - which frequently ran the line of Mubarak 's government - published headlines such as `` The people have brought down the regime '' on Saturday . 
Many gathered in Cairo 's Tahrir Square on Saturday morning said they had stayed overnight amid the celebratory atmosphere . 
Many said they were happy with the military council taking over . 
Others said they would stay in the square until they get more concessions - such as the freeing of political prisoners . 
And some people said they would continue to protest `` until Egypt is ruled by a civil government - not a military one . '' 
-LRB- Update 10:10 a.m. in Cairo , 3:10 a.m. ET -RRB- Clean-up efforts began in the area in and around Cairo 's Tahrir Square Saturday morning . 
Crews towed away burned cars that had been used as barricades and collected garbage . 
Some people who spent the night in the square said they would continue to protest `` until Egypt is ruled by a civil government , not a military one . '' 
Others waved Egyptian flags and painted images of the flag on their faces . 
-LRB- Update 8:55 a.m. in Cairo , 1:55 a.m. ET -RRB- In a statement released late Friday , the Tunisian foreign ministry expressed `` total satisfaction '' over the announcement of Mubarak 's resignation , the Tunis Afrique Presse -LRB- TAP -RRB- news agency reported . 
Wael Ghonim , the Egyptian activist whose Facebook page is credited with triggering the uprising , wrote on his Twitter feed early Saturday , `` Dear Egyptians , Go back to your work on Sunday , work like never before and help Egypt become a developed country . '' 
Ghonim , on leave from his job as a Google executive , earlier wrote urging people to try to raise 100 billion Egyptian pounds -LRB- 17 billion U.S. dollars -RRB- `` to rebuild Egypt . '' 
Ghonim , who spent 10 days in custody after being seized by Egyptian security , also wrote , `` Soon the ugly face of the regime will be supported by documents and evidence . '' 
My praise is for the LORD JESUS who came to set the captive free ! 
Everyone should have freedom . 
May God bless the whole world . 
Also ; Thanks Warface , & keep up the good blogs . 
I hope these people are prepared that Having democracy does nothing to stop poverty , unemployment , high prices , and gov corruption , usa is a good example . 
Egypt and morocco is not part of the middle east , it is part of africa continent and their origins are black not arabs . 
arabs took over and middle east means look a world map in middle east and find the countries I really respect you ! 
u do n't deserve all this , and you know very well that millions and millions of Egyptians Respect u. Even if we want the change , still we LOVE YOU SO MUCH . 
February 13 , 2011 at 6:53 pm | Report abuse | @Muhammad , Hey Camel head , what 's up ? 
I got a joke for you my raghead friend : There are two Arabs in a bar -LRB- fruit bar ! -RRB- 
The first Arab takes out a picture of his kids and says , `` My pride and joy . '' 
The second Arab takes out a picture of his kids and says , `` My pride and joy . '' 
Then the first Arab says , `` They blow up fast , do n't they ? '' 
Hahahahahhhaah !!! @Muhammad , I 'm a bit short on Arab jokes , so how about a Jewish joke ??? ... Why did the Jewish family go to the sale ? 
... Because the sign said cheap ... . . 
How do you start a Jewish marathon ? 
Roll a quarter down the hill . 
Hahahahhahaah !!!! Cesar your grandmother just called me and asked me if I could fukk her , I told her that first I have to ask Cesar , she then told me that she will pay me if I do her azz . 
Cesar as you know your fukkin grandmother is very digusting and smell like crap , if she wants me to fuk her you will have to clean her up , and please tell your mother not to call me , I 'm not going to fuk her for free . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
