2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Mubarak remains the titular head of his country , but little else is clear . 
He delegated most of his powers to Vice President Omar Suleiman , whom he appointed just last week . 
The Egyptian Constitution reserves three particular powers for the president alone -- they can not be delegated to the vice president . 
Those are the right to dismiss parliament , to request constitutional amendments and to alter the structure of the government . 
Egypt 's ambassador to the United States , Sameh Shoukry , told CNN that while Mubarak was by law still the president , Suleiman was now `` the de facto president . '' 
Some protesters say they fear a bloodbath , and Egyptian opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei tweeted after Mubarak 's speech that Egypt would `` explode . '' 
Sentencing in Chandra Levy case -- Prosecutors say the man who killed intern Chandra Levy should spend the rest of his life in prison . 
Ingmar Guandique , an illegal immigrant from El Salvador , is scheduled to be sentenced in D.C. Superior Court . 
He faces a minimum of 30 years in prison and a maximum sentence of life . 
Levy , a 24-year-old California native , was in Washington working as an intern for the Bureau of Prisons when she was last seen on May 1 , 2001 . 
Her skull was found in May 2002 in Washington 's Rock Creek Park . 
But police did n't arrest Guandique until February 2009 . 
He had been serving a 10-year sentence for attacking two other women in the park and had reportedly spoken about killing Levy . 
Levy and then-U.S. Rep. Gary Condit , D-California , had an affair before her disappearance . 
Condit was never a suspect in the case , but he was questioned intensively for details about Levy 's whereabouts . 
GOP contenders at conservative conference -- Friday is the second day of the annual Conservative Political Action Conference , three days of speeches , strategy sessions and after-hours networking . 
Republican 2012 presidential contenders Mitt Romney and Tim Pawlenty make remarks Friday . 
Sen. Ron Paul also speaks , and the Tea Party holds a luncheon forum . 
Fifteen Republicans are on this year 's CPAC presidential straw poll ballot , including one whom Republicans consider a rock star : New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie , who says he has no interest in running . 
Balloting will be open to the 11,000 conference attendees until Friday evening , and the results will be revealed Saturday . 
Gibbs ' last day -- Friday is Robert Gibbs ' final day as White House press secretary . 
Gibbs leaves his position to become a Democratic consultant . 
Jay Carney , communications director for Vice President Joe Biden , will succeed Gibbs at the lectern . 
Gibbs announced his decision in January . 
He will continue as an adviser to the president after leaving the White House . 
It is barbaric that Ingmar , a member of a brutal gang , is still alive while Chandra is no longer with us ; perfect example for the death sentence . 
thanks to everyone who stood with Egypt throughout her struggly for freedom . 
If this revolution is truly won , historians will remember how close the world has come with your understanding that no one lives alone . 
Because we share one sky , one time , we share one story -- the legacy of certain generation . 
Egypt is happy and thankful to share this story with you . 
It was your thirst for equality that won this liberation !!! Dear Pres. Obama , this is your time to shine as a different American presidends . 
The way you and your administration answer this call from Egypt will define your legacy . 
The world expect acts of moral principle in these historic events . 
Please make us all proud and make good use of the American image . 
We can not keep siding with the wrong side this time forth . 
Remember why the world is against us and deviate from our usual strategics . 
Thank you , Tomas . 
Who cares what the ragheads in egypt do as long as they stay out of the USA ? 
The animal that killed Mz . 
Levy should be executed they same way her killed her . 
in dc , ssdd ! 
Nobama has more important things in the USA than whats happening in egypt . 
Nobama should be worjing on the economical recovery and trying to get people back to work . 
who cares what goes on in egypt ?! theyre not part of the USA ! 
`` who cares ? '' 
about other nations well being ? 
Europe and usa do care big time too ! 
Find out why it 's so important to keep people prisoners in their own homes , and why is it we take innocent men to cuba when they try to stand up for their rights and their family and countries dignity . 
Read history and sociology maybe u could gain a clue about who cares what happen to other nations . 
We all came from out there so we care . 
US can stand without the dream friend it had in mubarak . 
The western economy will fall without dictators and corruptions we plant in africa and the middle east . 
AMERICA LIKE MOST OF ITS EU ALLY HAS NOTHING OTHER THAN GUNS TO TRADE . 
REAL MATERIAL RESOURCES COMES FROM THOSE PLACES DONT CARE ABOUT . 
HOW DO U EXPLAIN BETTERING THIS ECONOMY OF OURS WITH EM ? 
The price of liberty is sufferance . 
Good morning New Egypt . 
Enjoy this sweet moment u paid for . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
