2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Mubarak resigns presidency : Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak stepped down Friday and handed over power to the military , his nearly three decades of iron rule ended by a groundswell of popular protests that began January 25 . 
Dad 's letter claims he killed twins , police say : The father of missing Swiss twins sent a letter to his wife saying he had killed them before committing suicide , police said Friday . 
` Dukes of Hazzard ' actress Peggy Rea dies : Actress Peggy Rea , possibly best known for her work on `` The Dukes of Hazzard , '' died of congestive heart failure on Saturday at her home in Toluca Lake , California . 
Facebook launches pages redesign : Facebook has begun rolling out a full redesign of Facebook Pages . 
The changes will make the Pages look and operate more like user profiles . 
Granddaughter wants share of Einstein profits : Albert Einstein made many contributions to modern science , but it 's the videos , bobblehead dolls and Halloween masks using his image that continue to generate millions of dollars long after his death . 
Developments , as confirmed by CNN , on the revolution in Egypt : -LRB- Update 5:30 a.m. in Cairo , 10:30 p.m. ET -RRB- Even as daylight neared on Saturday , throngs remained on the streets of Cairo celebrating the end of President Mubarak 's rule . 
Some areas near Cairo 's Tahrir Square remained packed , with Egyptian flags waving and sporadic fireworks firing into the air . 
-LRB- Update 4:18 a.m. in Cairo , 9:18 p.m. ET -RRB- Not everyone 's rejoicing over the developments in Egypt . 
iReporter W.J. O Reilly in New York says that Americans should be cautious in reacting to the events in Egypt : `` A far more destructive state of tyranny may only be in the first stages of beginning . '' 
-LRB- Update 3:25 a.m. in Cairo , 8:25 p.m. ET -RRB- So , now what ? 
`` Dear Egyptians , Go back to your work on Sunday , work like never before and help Egypt become a developed country , '' Wael Ghonim suggests on his Twitter account . 
-LRB- Update 2:45 a.m. in Cairo , 7:45 p.m. ET -RRB- A spokesman for the Muslim Brotherhood told CNN 's John King that his organization trusts Egypt 's new military leadership to transition to a free and open democracy . 
Essam El Erian said that the Muslim Brotherhood , which has vowed not to field a presidential candidate , expects to be represented in a new parliament but does not expect to win a majority of seats . 
El Erian added that reports that al Qaeda has a presence in Egypt are `` all rumor , '' one that he claims originated with Egypt 's interior ministry . 
-LRB- Update 2:10 a.m. in Cairo , 7:10 p.m. ET -RRB- Sarah Palin , a former Alaska governor and 2008 Republican vice presidential nominee , urged the media on her Twitter page to ask , `` Will Obama Admin exert as much ` constructive ' pressure on Iranian govt to change & allow freedom - as they just did for Egypt ? '' 
Palin , a popular figure among U.S. conservatives , has consistently criticized how U.S. President Obama has handled the effort to halt Iran 's budding nuclear program . 
-LRB- Update 1:45 a.m. in Cairo , 6:45 p.m. ET -RRB- Wael Ghonim earlier credited Facebook with helping the revolution get started online long before the January 25 protest that triggered the revolt -LRB- which was also organized with the help of a Facebook event page -RRB- . 
Facebook had this to say in response : `` Mr. Ghonim is a hero and , like all true heroes , he diminishes his own role and gives credit to others . 
We 've witnessed brave people of all ages coming together to effect a profound change in their country . 
Certainly , technology was a vital tool in their efforts but we believe their bravery and determination mattered most , '' spokesman Elliot Schrage said . 
-LRB- Update 1:00 a.m. in Cairo , 6:00 p.m. ET -RRB- `` Egypt today is a free and proud nation . 
God bless , '' Nobel laureate and leading Egyptian opposition figure Mohammed ElBaradei tweets . 
-LRB- Update 12:30 a.m. in Cairo , 5:39 p.m. ET -RRB- The head of Iran 's National Security Council compared `` the Egyptian Revolution with the victory of Iran 's Islamic Revolution , '' according to Iran 's state-run media . 
Saeed Jalili added , `` The United States and Europe must be answerable to the Egyptian people for supporting a dictatorship for 30 years . '' 
On the topic of U.S.-Egypt relations , U.S. Rep. Ron Paul , a Texas Republican known for his libertarian streak , said that American support of Mubarak over the past three decades is `` a big mistake . '' 
He urged the United States to maintain a friendly relationship with Egypt 's new government but said it should stop providing economic and military support . 
-LRB- Update 11:45 p.m. in Cairo , 4:45 p.m. ET -RRB- Many streets in Cairo , especially around Tahrir Square , remained full of revelers as midnight approached Friday . 
People stood atop cars , waved huge Egyptian flags , sang and danced to celebrate the end of Mubarak 's reign . 
iReporter Abdel-Maguid Ramzy , a professor at Cairo University Medical School , shot video of people praying and celebrating near the presidential palace in Heliopolis on Friday evening . 
`` It 's a very special moment for us , '' he said . 
`` We did n't know that it was going to happen that fast . '' 
Egyptians are n't alone - people around the world are celebrating . 
iReporter Jason Antos of New York City says people watched the developments in Egyptian-owned businesses and poured out into the street to celebrate after the annoucement Mubarak would step down . 
He says police allowed people to demonstrate in the streets for a little while . 
The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission issued the announcement in conjunction with Summer Infant , the Woonsocket , Rhode Island , company behind the monitors , which are made in China and sold at retailers nationwide . 
The federal commission noted that at least seven babies and toddlers nationwide have died since 2004 after being strangled by monitor cords , the last two involving Summer Infant items . 
That includes a 10-month-old girl from Washington , D.C. , killed last March after being strangled by a cord from a Summer Infant monitor that had been placed atop her crib rail , the commission said . 
Editor 's note : Nancy Grace 's new show on HLN , `` Nancy Grace : America 's Missing , '' is dedicated to finding 50 people in 50 days . 
As part of the effort , which relies heavily on audience participation , CNN.com 's news blog This Just In will feature the stories of the missing . 
This is the 20th case , and it airs Friday at 9 p.m. ET on HLN . 
What began as a family night at the bowling alley turned into an evening that the relatives of Teekah Lewis will never forget . 
The family took up two lanes in New Frontier Bowling Lanes in Tacoma , Washington , on a busy Saturday night in January 1999 . 
Relatives of 2-year-old Teekah took turns watching her while she played arcade games . 
An uncle turned away to watch another relative bowl , and when he turned his attention back to where Teekah was sitting , she was gone . 
The bowling alley made an announcement over the loudspeaker but it was too late . 
Police have only one clue -- a witness said they saw a 1980s Pontiac Grand Am pull out of the parking lot around the time that Teekah disappeared . 
The vehicle was maroon with dark windows and a large spoiler . 
When she disappeared , Teekah was wearing a green Tweety Bird T-shirt , white sweatpants and Air Jordan sneakers . 
She was carrying a clear fish-printed purse stuffed with Starburst candy . 
She would be 13 years old today . 
Jon Petrovich greenlighted funding for CNN.com in 1994 and became known as its `` Godfather , '' a title he relished as the site became the most-read news site in the world . 
Petrovich , a former CNN executive , died Thursday in New York after a battle with cancer and diabetes . 
He would have turned 64 at the end of this month . 
`` Jon was a big presence at our company and in the media industry , '' Jim Walton , president of CNN Worldwide , said in an e-mail sent to CNN staff . 
`` He was a builder , an innovator and a journalist , first and last . '' 
Petrovich was known for his impeccable tailored suits , his optimistic outlook on life and solid news judgment . 
He hobnobbed with the likes of Ted Turner . 
He just as easily struck up conversations with interns , entry-level staffers and the rank-and-file . 
Egyptians embrace on Friday night while celebrating President Hosni Mubarak 's resignation . 
Egypt 's revolution takes me back to the fall of communism in my native Bulgaria . 
The first breath of freedom , the joy in the heart and the high hopes for the future are simply overwhelming ! 
But in Bulgaria that joy was soon tempered by the realization that the battle for change had only just begun . 
If the country was to have true democracy , the system had to change , not just the leaders at the top . 
FULL POST Jerry Sloan caught the basketball world off guard Thursday when he abruptly resigned after 23 years as head coach of the Utah Jazz . 
Just days after signing a contract extension , the NBA s longest-tenured coach had a change of heart and decided to call it quits . 
Rumors quickly surfaced that Sloan s departure was due to a clash with Jazz star Deron Williams and that he could no longer stomach the rift between him and his best player . 
But Sloan , 68 , shot down the speculation in his farewell press conference , electing to take the high road on his way out of Salt Lake City . 
`` I had a feeling this time was the time to move on , '' an emotional Sloan said . '' 
-LRB- That 's -RRB- a long time to be in one organization . 
Again , I 've been blessed . 
Today is a new day . 
When I get this over with , I 'll feel better . 
My time is up and it 's time to move on . '' 
President Barack Obama made a surprise visit to the White House briefing room Friday to help mark Robert Gibbs ' last day as the president 's press Obama returned a tie to Gibbs he had borrowed to wear while delivering the keynote address at the 2004 Democratic National Convention in Boston . 
`` You could n't ask for anybody better in the foxhole with you , '' Obama said . 
`` I could n't have a better friend at the podium each and every day . '' 
-LRB- Update 4:50 p.m. -RRB- The USGS has revised the magnitude of the earthquake the struck off the coast of Chile on Friday to 6.8 . 
A magnitude 6.8 earthquake struck Friday afternoon off the coast of Chile , according to the U.S. Geological Survey . 
The estimated epicenter was 69 kilometers -LRB- 43 miles -RRB- from the Chilean city of Concepcion . 
The distressed humpback whale probably has scoliosis , or curvature of the spine , said David Schofield , marine mammal response coordinator for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , according to the Honolulu Star Advertiser . 
Gerry Charlebois , owner and instructor of Birds in Paradise Flight School , spotted the whale from the air Monday and suspected the marine mammal had been injured by a ship . 
`` They 're not like cartoon animals , '' he said , according to the Star Advertiser . 
`` They do n't hold the shape of the contusion . 
Sometimes they 'll have like a little imprint , but it 's just not too plausible to see that if the animal had been impacted there that the peduncle or the tail shaft would 've stayed that way . '' 
The animal 's pale , mottled skin and emaciated condition indicate it is in distress , but probably not from a ship collision , he told the paper . 
Much of the whale 's behavior described by Charlebois is normal , he added . 
Seven Somalis , including three boys under 15 years old , could face the death penalty if convicted on charges of firing on Malaysian armed forces while attempting to a hijack a merchant ship . 
The seven appeared before a Malaysia magistrate in Kuala Lumpur on Friday to hear the charges against them . 
They did not enter a plea and were transferred to a prison to await the next court action , set for March 15 , the Malaysian national news agency Bernama reported . 
The charges stem from an attack on the container ship Bunga Laurel in the Gulf of Aden on January 20 . 
Egypt developments -- Thousands of outraged protesters on Friday are packing Cairo 's Tahrir Square and moving on government buildings in Suez after Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak failed to resign as expected . 
Mubarak remains the titular head of his country , but little else is clear . 
He delegated most of his powers to Vice President Omar Suleiman , whom he appointed just last week . 
The Egyptian Constitution reserves three particular powers for the president alone -- they can not be delegated to the vice president . 
Those are the right to dismiss parliament , to request constitutional amendments and to alter the structure of the government . 
Ongoing coverage - Crisis in Egypt 9:00 am ET - CPAC 2011 - Today is the second day of the Conservative Political Action Conference in Washington . 
Today 's speakers include Mitt Romney -LRB- 10:30 am ET -RRB- , Sen. John Thune -LRB- 1:30 pm ET -RRB- , Tim Pawlenty -LRB- 3:00 pm ET -RRB- , Rep. Ron Paul -LRB- 3:30 pm ET -RRB- and Gov. Mitch Daniels -LRB- 7:30 pm ET -RRB- 12:15 pm ET - White House briefing - Robert Gibbs holds his final briefing as White House Press Secretary . 
Topics expected to be discussed include the crisis and Egypt and Gibbs ' future plans . 
CNN.com Live is your home for breaking news as it happens . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
