Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak stepped down Friday and handed over power to the military , his nearly three decades of iron rule ended by a groundswell of popular protests that began January 25 . 
In a somber , one-minute announcement on state television , Vice President Omar Suleiman announced Mubarak 's resignation and said the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces will `` run the affairs of the country . '' 
As Suleiman spoke , deafening cheers erupted among tens of thousands of Egyptians who thronged the streets of Cairo . 
It was a moment they had sought throughout long , often tense days of demonstrations -- some of them violent -- that demanded Mubarak 's departure . 
It was a moment that many in the Arab world 's powerhouse nation had not dared contemplate . 
Chants of `` Egypt is free ! '' 
and `` God is great ! '' 
rose from the crowds , dizzy in the honeymoon of their success . 
Some waved Egyptian flags ; others honked horns ; still others set off fireworks as they savored the scene . 
Two major bridges over the Nile River resembled congested parking lots , and partiers packed streets throughout Cairo . 
The state-run Middle East News Agency said some people had passed out from joy and others had suffered heart attacks . 
`` It was a sense of liberation for me , for every Egyptian , '' said opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei . 
`` For the first time , Egypt has a chance to be democratic , to be free , to have a sense of dignity , of freedom . 
So it 's amazing . 
It 's just like something we never experienced in our lifetime . '' 
A source with close connections to Persian Gulf government leaders said Mubarak , 82 , had fled to the Red Sea resort town of Sharm el-Sheikh , his presidency finished as abruptly as it had started in 1981 , when he ascended to power after the assassination of Anwar Sadat . 
The repercussions echoed far beyond Tahrir Square as the Swiss government moved Friday to freeze assets belonging to Mubarak and his family , said Norbert Baerlocher , a spokesman for the Swiss Embassy in Washington . 
In a speech to the nation Thursday night , Mubarak had indicated that he was delegating authority to Suleiman but made no mention of resigning . 
Disappointed crowds calling for his ouster grew in number Friday in Cairo and in other major cities . 
By Friday night , the protesters got what they were seeking . 
