They arrived ready to protest , but for demonstrators outside Egypt 's Embassy in London , chants soon turned to songs of celebration as news spread of President 's Hosni Mubarak 's resignation . 
Carrying flags and playing drums , around 150 anti-Mubarak protesters danced , sang and prayed in front of the embassy , in London 's well-heeled Mayfair area . 
After the bitter disappointment of Thursday 's speech when Mubarak vowed to stay in office , many thought today 's announcement would be a long time coming . 
Trader Ahmed Khalifa , 23 , has been demonstrating in front of the embassy for more than two weeks . 
`` This is what you call a sweet victory , '' he told CNN . 
`` Yesterday he -LRB- Mubarak -RRB- brought us all down , we thought he was never going to go . 
I came here today ready to protest and now it 's a celebration . '' 
Waving a placard , Salah Elsddek , a 31-year-old web designer , could n't contain his excitement . 
`` This is the best day of my life , '' he exclaimed . 
`` After eight years away from my country I will now go back to start a new life as a free man , without Mubarak . '' 
When asked if he was concerned about the future leadership of his country Elsddek replied , `` Yes , I 'm worried , but I 'm sure the Egyptian people will not stop now . 
`` We will try and get the best man for our country . 
The future is bright , the tyrant is gone . '' 
As protesters celebrated in the street below , Egyptian officials looked tentatively out of the embassy windows . 
Protesters waved back , making peace signs with their hands and calling on them to join the celebrations . 
Mohamed Ezeldin Ahmed , 22 , who spent last night watching Mubarak 's speech in a London restaurant with a small group of ardent anti-Mubarak protestors , explained the situation . 
`` We are asking them to come down and celebrate , '' he said . 
`` But they wo n't , they are the people who support Mubarak . '' 
For some of the young Egyptians living abroad , the change in leadership has renewed hopes that one day they will be able move back to a country with renewed opportunities . 
Student Mohamed Ibrahim , 22 , left Egypt three years ago . 
He told CNN : `` Under Mubarak the main hopes for the young people were to travel abroad , leave and get a decent job outside of Egypt . 
But now , from this moment , from this day , things will be different . '' 
But for most , this was not a day to speculate on the future . 
This was a day of celebration . 
College lecturer Khairy Eteiwy , 34 , summed up the mood : `` Tonight we have made history . 
`` We can now tell our children that we were here , we contributed , we 've done something amazing and that 's never happened before . '' 
