Here in Hong Kong it s after 2 am . 
Even on one of my wilder Friday nights , I d normally be tucked up in bed by now . 
But I m finding it almost impossible to tear my eyes away from the scenes on the streets of Cairo . 
Egypt s future is far from secure . 
But its present is rapturous , unbridled and ultimately momentous . 
No Friday night I have ever experienced equals that which Egyptians are experiencing now . 
It s not difficult to feel invested in these scenes when you ve spent 18 days writing Egypt s story without ever really knowing what the conclusion would be . 
We don t know it now but the unique images we have broadcast on CNN -LRB- horses and camels rushing through Tahrir Square , thousands praying as protesters threw rocks behind them , apparent innocents taking bullets to the head , and Mubarak s none-too-ambiguous podium appearance just last night -RRB- are indelible in the minds of viewers around the world . 
We have introduced various players -LRB- opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei , VP Omar Suleiman and protest talisman Wael Ghonim among them -RRB- , little knowing what their influence might be . 
Now we watch Egypt come under the guidance of its enigmatic military , and the next chapter will be just as beguiling to behold . 
The CNN team in Egypt has done a supreme job in telling this story and in attempting to represent the views of the entire Egyptian population -LRB- anti-Mubarak , pro-Mubarak and neutral alike -RRB- . 
And their efforts have been reflected in the words of a man who has influenced developments in an unbelievably News Stream - friendly way . 
Between Facebook page creation -LRB- and subsequent detention -RRB- , Twitter updates and a compelling interview with CNN s Ivan Watson , Wael Ghonim has been a worthy human face of this revolution . 
And his appreciation is humbling : You guys have played a great role in saving the lives of hundreds if not thousands of people . 
CNN did a great job . 
You guys deserve a great recognition from the Egyptian people and we are not going to forget your role . 
You guys are heroes as well . 
You are part of the revolution . 
You should be proud of yourself . 
Stay with News Stream and CNN as a whole as we follow Egypt s progress to an uncertain -LRB- but certainly intriguing -RRB- future . 
It 's hard to fathom how a company like Nokia has found itself in the position it now occupies . 
It 's not just that Nokia is the world 's biggest handset maker -LRB- it is -RRB- or the world 's biggest smartphone maker -LRB- it is -RRB- . 
It 's that Nokia used to get everything so right . 
How did they manage to get it so , so wrong ? 
There are several people in the CNN newsroom and elsewhere who refuse to accept my cynical standpoint on Christmas . 
I have grudgingly grinned and borne it , despite the following defenses for my dislike : The pressure . 
What bright spark decided that late December was the time of year when we MUST ENJOY OURSELVES OR ELSE ? 
Just because everybody has decided it s the season to be jolly , I must wait longer to get a drink . 
I m really jolly now . 
Pan pipe versions of Jingle Bells on loop in stores and stations . 
As far as I m aware , reindeer are not native to the Andes and probably do n't visit . 
Which brings me to ... Secret Santa . 
Oh wow , I really , desperately wanted a pair of Bart Simpson boxer shorts . 
How did you know ?! Santa generally . 
Lying to children is neither big nor clever . 
But while Christmas has its plus points -LRB- family togetherness and food chief among them -RRB- , I can not fathom why anyone would choose to celebrate Valentine s Day . 
I m not the cynical one here . 
The whole occasion is a cynically conceived and cynically executed exercise in fakery . 
Fascinating to see @CharlesHodsnCNN commentate on the #Pope 's resignation as both a #CNN anchor and an Anglican clergyman . 
1:24 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Back to earth with Katy Perry . 
I suppose `` Fireworks '' is at least apt . 
#hongkong #CNY #fireworks 12:21 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Well , you ca n't say the soundtrack is n't varied . 
Now we 're on Puccini 's `` Nessun Dorma '' . 
