Graeme Pacitti -LRB- right -RRB- became the rst to catch the virus from another person -- friend Iain Askham -LRB- left -RRB- . 
Photograph : PA Two Britons have now contracted swine flu within the UK , it was confirmed yesterday , as the total number of cases rose to 13 . 
Graeme Pacitti , a clerical worker at Falkirk Royal Infirmary , became the first person confirmed with the disease who had not visited Mexico . 
He is thought to have become infected after a night out with Iain Askham , a football team-mate who contracted the virus on his honeymoon in Canc n , Mexico . 
Late last night the Health Protection Agency confirmed that a 42-year-old from south Gloucestershire who had not visited Mexico had become infected in England . 
Sir Liam Donaldson , the government 's chief medical adviser , said : `` The first non-imported cases of swine flu have been confirmed in England and Scotland . 
The infection appears to have been acquired by person-to-person spread within the United Kingdom . 
`` Until now cases were confined to people who had recently come back from Mexico . 
The person in the south-west is being treated with Tamiflu . '' 
A 12-year-old girl was also among five new cases , prompting the immediate closure of her school in south Gloucestershire . 
The girl , a pupil at Downend School , was on the same flight as Askham and his wife , Dawn . 
Government scientists who are studying the virus said early analysis showed it was likely to cause only a mild epidemic , probably no worse than anything seen in a normal flu season . 
Biologists at the National Institute for Medical Research in London said that antiviral medicines such as Tamiflu would probably control the spread of the disease . 
Pacitti , 24 , was the 10th confirmed case of swine flu in the UK , while earlier yesterday a Merseyside woman who had recently returned from Mexico was confirmed as the ninth . 
Referring to Pacitti , the Scottish health secretary , Nicola Sturgeon , said : `` This is significant as it represents the first case in the UK of person-to - person transmission of this virus . 
The person had n't been in Mexico or any other affected area . 
He had been in contact with someone who had . 
`` I want to stress , however , that it does n't mean that there is more reason to worry . 
We 're working hard to try to disrupt this infection and stop it spreading . '' 
The Health Protection Agency said : `` We are working to ensure that any close contacts of patients who test positive for swine influenza are offered antivirals as a precautionary measure . 
At this stage close contacts who should be offered antivirals -LRB- are those -RRB- who have been exposed to a probable or confirmed case within the previous seven days for longer than one hour and within a distance of one metre . '' 
The agency advised people returning from affected areas in Mexico who become unwell within seven days of their return to stay at home and contact their GP by phone or ring NHS Direct . 
The agency said it was aware of head teachers and governors considering temporary closure of schools as a precaution when suspected cases of infection were still under investigation but had yet to be confirmed . 
But it advised these measures only when a case is strongly suspected or confirmed within a school . 
Earlier yesterday Gordon Brown offered reassurance that Britain was well-placed to deal with the outbreak . 
On a visit to an NHS Direct call center in Beckenham , south-east London , he said the advice line was coping well with demand . 
The government was increasing the number of face masks available to the NHS and looking at different vaccines , while stressing that the Tamiflu antiviral drug would deal with the disease . 
Brown added : `` This is happening in every country of the world , but we are better prepared . 
If people have the symptoms they should ask for advice as quickly as possible . 
`` We are finding with NHS Direct that they can both reassure people and give people advice about where to go . 
This is a system that 's working , it 's calm , it 's ordered , it 's giving people the right information . '' 
Brown said all the cases in the UK were mild . 
The Netherlands , France and Switzerland confirmed their first cases of swine flu yesterday , bringing the total number of countries affected to 12 . 
There have been 248 deaths linked to the virus in Mexico , with 12 confirmed . 
The other countries affected are the United States , Canada , New Zealand , Germany , Spain , Israel and Austria . 
