Syria crisis : Arab League postpones Syria talks As the fighting goes on , the UN and Arab League are debating how best to engage with Syria Arab League foreign ministers have postponed a meeting in Saudi Arabia to debate the crisis in Syria . 
The ministers had been due to discuss a new envoy to Syria to replace Kofi Annan , who resigned earlier this month . 
The US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has said the US and Turkey are working together on detailed plans to support the Syrian opposition . 
Fighting has continued in the Syrian capital , Damascus , and the second city of Aleppo . 
Speaking on a visit to Istanbul , Mrs Clinton said both the US and Turkey were making preparations to respond to the possible collapse of President Bashar al-Assad 's government , the use of chemical weapons and increases in the number of cross-border refugees . 
Mr Annan resigned from his position as UN-Arab League envoy to Syria earlier this month , after his proposed six-point peace plan failed to come into effect and violence escalated . 
His replacement had been due to top the agenda for foreign ministers who had been due to gather on Sunday in the Saudi city of Jeddah . 
But the Arab League 's deputy secretary general , Ahmed Ben Helli , told reporters the meeting has been postponed , and no new date had yet been set . 
He did not say why the meeting had been delayed . 
The man tipped by diplomats to be given the job is veteran Algerian diplomat Lakhdar Brahimi . 
The mandate of the United Nations observer mission in Syria - which now comprises some 150 observers - is due to run out in a week 's time . 
But UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon says there still need to be people on the ground to make impartial assessments of the military situation . 
Hillary Clinton : `` We are continuing to increase pressure from the outside '' The Security Council will discuss the issue on Thursday , but there is little consensus on the council , with Syrian ally Russia calling for an extension and the US sceptical about prolonging the mission . 
Instead , the US is taking steps outside the structures of the UN to support Syrian opposition groups , such as the setting up of the working group with Turkey announced by Mrs Clinton in her meeting with her Turkish counterpart Ahmet Davutoglu on Saturday . 
`` Our number-one goal is to hasten the end of the bloodshed and the Assad regime , '' she said . 
`` Our intelligence services , our military have very important responsibilities and roles to play so we are going to be setting up a working group to do exactly that . '' 
A `` range of contingencies '' was discussed , including the possible use of chemical weapons by the Assad government , Mrs Clinton added . 
Meanwhile , inside Syria , fighting is continuing . 
Syrian state TV said authorities were hunting `` terrorists '' who had set off a bomb in Marjeh , an exclusive district of Damascus near the central bank , and who were `` shooting at random to spark panic among citizens '' . 
At about the same time , another blast went off near Tishrin Stadium close by , reported state news agency Sana . 
Hours later , Sana reported that a bus had been attacked in a Damascus suburb , said AP news agency , with six passengers from the central province of Hama killed . 
It blamed the attack on the `` terrorists '' . 
Violence erupted again between the rebel Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- and government forces in the country 's largest city , Aleppo . 
Activists said the army pounded areas south-west of Salah al-Din , from which the rebels retreated on Thursday . 
Reports from Syria are difficult to confirm because of restrictions on reporters working there . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
