Hillary Clinton and Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu met Syrian refugees in Istanbul US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has said a working group will be set up with Turkey to plan a joint response to the Syrian crisis . 
She said after talks in Istanbul that she had discussed with Turkey 's foreign minister how best to support opposition to President Bashar al-Assad 's rule . 
The US , she said , was also increasing aid for Syrian refugees . 
Numbers of civilians fleeing violence in Syria have surged , according to the United Nations . 
Turkey , like all of Syria 's neighbors , is dealing with a growing humanitarian crisis as thousands of refugees flood across the border . 
Rebels in the northern city of Aleppo say they are preparing a counter-attack after withdrawing from the strategic south-west district of Salah al-Din under heavy bombardment . 
Turkey is currently supporting more than 50,000 Syrian refugees , with more arriving every day . 
In another development , Arab foreign ministers are to meet in the Saudi city of Jeddah on Sunday to discuss the Syrian crisis , Egyptian state TV reports . 
Mrs Clinton told reporters that she and her Turkish counterpart , Ahmet Davutoglu , had discussed how to support the opposition in Syria in its `` efforts to end the violence and begin the transition to a free , democratic Syria without Assad '' . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton : `` We are continuing to increase pressure from the outside '' `` Our number-one goal is to hasten the end of the bloodshed and the Assad regime , '' she said . 
`` Our intelligence services , our military have very important responsibilities and roles to play so we are going to be setting up a working group to do exactly that . '' 
A `` range of contingencies '' was discussed , including the possible use of chemical weapons by the Assad government , Mrs Clinton added . 
She said two million people were in need of humanitarian assistance in Syria . 
Mrs Clinton announced an extra $ 5.5 m -LRB- # 3.5 m -RRB- in help for displaced Syrians in Turkey , saying this would bring US aid to Syria to $ 82m . 
The US secretary of state later held talks with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and President Abdullah Gul , before leaving to return to Washington . 
Gunfire and bomb were reported in several parts of Damascus on Saturday . 
Syrian TV said security forces were pursuing a `` terrorist group '' after two bombs were detonated in central districts of the capital . 
One resident told Reuters news agency there was also fighting near the central bank . 
On the northern outskirts of the city , the army pounded al-Tal district where the government says gunmen kidnapped three journalists from a pro-regime TV station on Friday , AP news agency reports . 
Violence erupted again between the rebel Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- and government forces in the country 's largest city , Aleppo . 
Activists said the army pounded areas south-west of Salah al-Din , from which the rebels retreated on Thursday . 
On Friday journalists from Reuters news agency reported seeing residents fleeing Aleppo , taking advantage of a lull in the fighting . 
Such reports are difficult to confirm , because of restrictions on reporters working in Syria . 
President Assad is facing strong international pressure to step aside despite 17 months of anti-government protests and escalating violence . 
He has suffered a string of high-status defections , including his former Prime Minister Riad Hijab , who fled to Jordan earlier this week . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
