Wednesday 20 July 2005 09.33 BST Three British soldiers are - for the first time - to stand trial for war crimes against Iraqi detainees under the jurisdiction of the international criminal court -LRB- ICC -RRB- , the attorney general , Lord Goldsmith , said last night . 
In an unprecedented move that top military commanders have feared since the ICC Act 's introduction in 2001 , British soldiers face prosecution for the war crime of inhuman treatment of detainees , although the men will face court martial in this country rather than being tried in The Hague . 
Eleven servicemen face a range of charges in two separate cases arising from alleged incidents in the southern Iraqi city of Basra in September 2003 . 
The former commanding officer of the Queen 's Lancashire Regiment , Colonel Jorge Mendonca , is charged with negligently performing a duty . 
The charges come after a long build-up in which the Ministry of Defense was castigated by the high court for being too slow in getting the prosecution going . 
Senior military figures are seething that British soldiers will face charges under the legislation introduced by the then foreign secretary , Robin Cook , in the face of fierce military opposition . 
British defense officials last night said inhuman treatment would have been unlawful under existing statutes already enshrined in British law . 
But legal sources said the soldiers have been charged , on the advice of the Army Prosecuting Authority , under the ICC Act because that was the most recent legislation covering such allegations . 
In a written parliamentary statement , Lord Goldsmith said that the prosecuting authority has decided that in the first case , seven servicemen should stand trial by court martial . 
The case relates to alleged incidents that took place between September 13 and 15 2003 . 
They are alleged to have committed a number of offences against Iraqi detainees arrested following a planned operation . 
One of the detainees , Baha Da'oud Salim Musa , was allegedly inhumanely treated and killed by one of those charged , Corporal Donald Payne , 34 , of the Queen 's Lancashire Regiment . 
Cpl Payne is also alleged to have inhumanely treated other detainees . 
He faces charges of manslaughter , inhuman treatment of persons - the ICC Act offence - and perverting the course of justice . 
It is further alleged that two other servicemen inhumanely treated the internees , who sustained injuries following repeated assaults . 
Lance Corporal Wayne Crowcroft , 21 , of the Queen 's Lancashire Regiment , and Private Darren Fallon , 22 , of the Queen 's Lancashire Regiment , are also charged under the ICC Act . 
A fourth serviceman , Sergeant Kelvin Stacey , 28 , of the Queen 's Lancashire Regiment , is alleged to have assaulted a detainee and faces a charge of assault causing actual bodily harm , alternatively common assault . 
The three remaining servicemen , Warrant Officer Mark Davies , 36 , of the Intelligence Corps , Major Michael Peebles , 34 , of the Intelligence Corps , and Colonel Jorge Mendonca , 41 , lately of the Queen 's Lancashire Regiment , are charged with negligently performing their duties or neglecting to perform a duty , contrary to the Army Act 1955 . 
In the second case , the authority directed that four servicemen should stand trial for the manslaughter of Ahmed Kareem , an Iraqi civilian . 
That allegation relates to an incident in Basra on May 8 2003 . 
It is alleged that the four servicemen detained four suspected looters , of whom Mr Kareem was one . 
Three of those charged with the unlawful killing of Mr Kareem are Sergeant Carle Selman , 38 , of the Scots Guards ; Guardsman Martin McGing , 21 , of the Irish Guards ; and Guardsman Joseph McCleary , 23 , also with the Irish Guards . 
Another , 21-year-old lance corporal , with the Irish Guards , has yet to be informed of the charge against him and has not yet been named . 
Read the Queen 's Lancashire Regiment 's statement on the case here . 
