Military chiefs furious at betrayal by politicians as prosecutions raise fears of further damage to soldiers ' confidence and reputation Wednesday 20 July 2005 02.08 BST The decision , announced by the attorney general late last night , to prosecute British soldiers for war crimes under the International Criminal Court Act , is a crushing blow for an army known and respected worldwide for its peacekeeping prowess and discipline . 
In the Lords last week , former chiefs of defense staff lined up one after another to harangue the Ministry of Defense for succumbing to `` political correctness '' by allowing British soldiers to be subjected to legal constraints by lawyers who had no idea what it was like to face not a conventional enemy , but insurgents in Iraq , a uniquely dangerous security environment . 
In a Lords debate last Thursday they voiced particular concern about the case of Trooper Kevin Williams of the 2nd Royal Tank Regiment , who was accused of murder in Iraq . 
The case against him eventually collapsed when the crown prosecution service accepted that there was no realistic prospect of conviction . 
They were reflecting deep concerns among serving military chiefs who feel they are being betrayed by their civil and political masters - with the exception , perhaps , of their new and sympathetic defense secretary , John Reid . 
During the debate , Field Marshal the Lord Inge , a former chief of the defense staff , said he dreaded the possibility that British servicemen would be tried by the ICC , warning that any such prosecution would undermine faith in the armed services ' chains of command . 
Lord Boyce , the chief of defense staff at the time of the first war on Iraq , told peers : `` Our armed forces are under legal siege and are being pushed in the direction in which an order could be seen as improper or legally unsound . 
They are being pushed by people not schooled in operations but only in political correctness . '' 
He added : `` If we continue to travel down this road , there will come a point when the close relationship between the commanding officer and his or her people will be lost . 
If that is destroyed the consequences could be serious . '' 
The defense staff were assured by ministers that the ICC statute would have no impact on British soldiers . 
The ICC was supposed to have been an essential plank in new Labor 's `` ethical '' foreign policy advocated by the then foreign secretary , Robin Cook . 
It had been intended to target the war crimes that shocked the international community in such places as the Balkans and Africa . 
Moreover , the US refused to sign up to the ICC and the French obtained a `` get out '' clause for their troops . 
British soldiers , General Sir Mike Jackson , the head of the army , has insisted , are not above the law , but it may be galling for him to see his troops being dragged through the courts when so many others - including American troops - are getting off , the charges against those implicated in the Abu Ghraib prison scandal notwithstanding . 
Earlier this year a military review body reduced the sentences of two soldiers imprisoned for abusing Iraqi civilians in a case that drew comparisons with Abu Ghraib . 
Both were found guilty of abusing Iraqi civilians suspected of looting in May 2003 . 
Their trials in Germany focused on photographs taken of the abuse , which included dangling one man from a forklift truck . 
The photos provoked outrage in Britain , with Tony Blair calling the images `` shocking and appalling '' . 
British soldiers , notably those engaged in fierce fighting against insurgents in Amara , a town some 100 miles north of Basra , have achieved heroic deeds , rewarded by a VC and other honors . 
They have trained Iraqis and negotiated with tribal leaders in a way that has earned a level of trust which is the envy of American military commanders . 
The new reality of policing war zones is a sharp rejoinder to that work but not the first time the modern British army has faced pressures - the most notable example being Northern Ireland . 
The long-awaited , and costly , Saville inquiry report on the events of Bloody Sunday is expected to castigate the parachute regiment and the commanders for killing 13 unarmed Catholics on a civil rights March in Derry in January 1972 . 
Previous reputation aside , those who have mistreated Iraqis amount to only a small fraction of the tens of thousands of British troops who have served there , insists the MoD . 
If only the US had listened to the British and prepared properly for post-invasion things would have been so different , say military chiefs . 
Yet this only part of the picture . 
British troops were ill-equipped and the chain of command cracked up - witness the deaths of six military policemen in southern Iraq in 2003 , deprived of ammunition and unable to communicate with their base . 
Lawsuits damage morale and there are indications that the whole Iraq experience is seriously affecting recruitment , already hit by the scandals at Deepcut barracks . 
Pressure and overstretch is affecting training . 
These are not excuses , but if military commitments cheerfully agreed by the Blair government continue at their present rate without taxpayers prepared to cough up more for the military - and with Britain to take over control of Nato forces in Afghanistan next spring - then the reputation , and discipline , of the British army will be damaged , perhaps irretrievably . 
Two separate cases have resulted in charges . 
The first centres on allegations of offences against Iraqi detainees in Basra in September 2003 and involves seven servicemen . 
One of the detainees , receptionist Baha Da'oud Salim Musa , died . 
Those charged in connection with this case are : Corporal Donald Payne , 34 , of the Queen 's Lancashire Regiment , accused of the manslaughter of Baha Musa . 
Also charged with inhuman treatment of persons and perverting the course of justice . 
Lance Corporal Wayne Crowcroft , 21 , of the Queen 's Lancashire Regiment : inhuman treatment of persons . 
Private Darren Fallon , 22 , of the Queen 's Lancashire Regiment : inhuman treatment . 
Sergeant Kelvin Stacey , 28 , of the Queen 's Lancashire Regiment : assault causing actual bodily harm , alternatively common assault . 
Warrant Officer Mark Davies , 36 , of the Intelligence Corps : neglecting to perform a duty . 
Major Michael Peebles , 34 , of the Intelligence Corps : negligently performing a duty . 
Colonel Jorge Mendonca , 41 , lately of the Queen 's Lancashire Regiment : negligently performing a duty . 
The second case involves four servicemen and relates to the alleged killing of Ahmed Kareem , an Iraqi civilian , in Basra on May 8 2003 . 
Sergeant Carle Selman , 38 , of the Scots Guards : unlawful killing of Kareem . 
Guardsman Martin McGing , 21 , of the Irish Guards : unlawful killing of Kareem . 
Guardsman Joseph McCleary , 23 , of the Irish Guards : unlawful killing of Kareem . 
A 21-year-old lance corporal with the Irish Guards has also been charged with the unlawful killing of Kareem but has yet to be informed . 
