By Finlo Rohrer BBC News , Washington There have been many devastating images from the Gulf WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO THE OIL ? 
`` The good news is that oil is a natural product and is relatively easily degraded , '' says Prof Ed Overton , an environmental scientist at Louisiana State University . 
Some of the oil will be picked up by skimmers Oil which has not been dispersed or washed up on shore will be targeted by microbes . 
`` They use the oil as a food , '' says Prof Overton . 
There is an advantage in that the spill happened in the warm Gulf of Mexico , where conditions are good for decomposition . 
In colder climes , things can be harder . 
`` Contrast that with Exxon Valdez where you still have beaches where you can kick over cobblestones and still have pools of oil beneath them , '' says Stan Senner , director of conservation science for Ocean Conservancy . 
`` In the Gulf of Mexico it is a different environment . 
There is some greater capacity for that environment to handle hydrocarbons . '' 
But that is not to say the oil will totally vanish . 
There may be oil which becomes buried on shore , and oil may end up at the bottom of the sea in anaerobic areas - places where there is no oxygen to allow the microbes to do their work . 
`` We have never seen these clouds or plumes of oil dispersed in tiny droplets in the water , '' says Mr Senner . 
`` We do n't know how much is ending up on the bottom . 
Onshore , we do n't know how much is being buried . '' 
WHAT WILL THE EFFECT BE ON THE WETLANDS ? 
The Gulf Coast 's wetlands are home to a diverse range of wildlife `` The wetlands that are already impacted , if only the stems and the grass you see on the surface are affected then the recovery will be within one or two years , '' says Dr Larry McKinney , director of the Harte Research Institute for Gulf of Mexico Studies . 
`` If the oil has penetrated down to the roots , then you are going to lose those areas altogether . 
-LRB- Wetlands -RRB- will go to open water and will never recover . '' 
It 's hard at this juncture to tell what the eventual effect will be on the northern Gulf Coast 's habitat . 
`` A coating on the leaves will kill the leaves but it does n't necessarily kill the plant , '' says Prof Overton . 
`` With events like this their impacts occur in different phases , '' says Mr Senner . 
First there is the initial wave of deaths , the animals that get covered in oil and die . 
Longer-lived animal populations will take years to recover The death toll Mr Senner is aware of already includes a `` thousand bird carcasses - half of them are oiled , others are just carcasses , a few hundred turtles , 50 or so dolphins '' . 
But those small numbers reflect the fact that only a small percentage of carcasses are recovered . 
`` The assumption is that the actual mortality rate is many times what has been recovered , '' says Mr Senner . 
`` The rule of thumb for the bird carcasses is that they find one in 10 , but that could be low . '' 
The question everybody will be asking is how quickly can animal numbers return to normal . 
It all depends on the life span of the animal . 
In the Ixtoc spill of 1979 , there was a 60-70 % reduction in shrimp in the year of the spill , but they were back to normal within one or two years , says Dr McKinney . 
Then there are longer-lived animals like dolphins , whale sharks and sea turtles . 
If a single generation has been largely wiped out , numbers might not fully recover for 10-20 years . 
And then there are the truly long-lived organisms . 
`` For deepwater solitary coral communities , their lifespan is in hundreds of years , '' says Dr McKinney . 
What will the effect of widespread use of the dispersant Corexit be ? 
Will migrating birds be severely affected ? 
How much oil has actually been spilled ? 
How much is buried in fragile wetland habitats ? 
What is the effect of oil on deep-sea ecosystems ? 
They could potentially be vulnerable to the oil or to patches of oxygen-depleted water created by the oil-eating microbes . 
When the microbes degrade the oil , oxygen is used up and carbon dioxide is produced . 
Dr McKinney is worried about `` huge clouds of low-oxygen oil dispersant mix , -LRB- which is -RRB- methane-heavy '' . 
The plus side for fish stocks on the other hand is that , severe as the damage might be , it will be mitigated by the break in fishing . 
`` They have closed such large areas of the Gulf that the pressure has been reduced , '' says Dr McKinney . 
`` Reducing the fishing pressure will allow more fish to remain alive and reproduce . '' 
So stocks of fish like red snapper could be back to normal within two to four years . 
But , the effect of the spill on species that are already under immense pressure - like Atlantic bluefin tuna - could be severe . 
HOW WILL ECOSYSTEMS BE CHANGED ? 
`` In ecosystems , when you wipe out large segments of them , the ecosystem responds to the absence of those things and other things come in to take their place and you do n't return to the way things were , '' says Mr Senner . 
`` Ecosystems are always dynamic . 
What we see in the Gulf of Mexico is an ecosystem that already had a number of stresses on it . '' 
Some animals and plants may be badly affected by the disruption of the spill and not regain their previous place in the ecosystem once conditions return to normal . 
But they will be replaced by other organisms . 
A lot of the thinking about the effects of the BP oil spill is informed by the work done following the Ixtoc spill of 1979 . 
But there are some aspects of the latest spill about which scientists find it hard even to speculate . 
Marine biologists will admit that not a great deal is known about the effects of oil on organisms in deep water . 
`` We know almost nothing about the ecology in the deep ocean , '' says Prof Overton . 
It may offer only a crumb of comfort , but the 2010 spill will one day provide that knowledge . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
