By Laura Trevelyan BBC News , New Orleans Laura Trevelyan describes the atmosphere at the commission Day one of the public hearings of the national commission into the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in New Orleans , and raw emotions were on display alongside the more tempered contributions . 
The many different reactions to the spill were there for all to see . 
This was the chance for the people of the Gulf Coast to give their reaction to what has happened , and finally , after a day of statements from officials and affected industries , it was the turn of those who had waited patiently . 
Not all managed to get that far . 
As the proceedings began , a man from Revolution newspaper stood up and denounced this as a capitalist oil spill . 
He was escorted out by the police , as was Kimberley Wolf , who objected loudly to the use of dispersants to get rid of the oil . 
She was taken out shouting : `` Everybody has got to get upset about this . '' 
Speaking to the BBC afterwards , she claimed the coastguard has no idea how damaging the dispersants are to the environment . 
Then there were the carefully couched statements by the co-chairs of the commission . 
I wish we had the power to bring you immediate solutions , but that 's beyond our best abilities . '' 
End Quote Robert Graham Co-chair of the commision President Obama has asked the panel to investigate what happened when the Deepwater Horizon oil rig exploded , and make recommendations to ensure it does n't happen again . 
Senator Robert Graham , co-chair and Democrat who represented Florida in the Senate for eighteen years , told the hearing how everyone grieved for the families of the 11 men who lost their lives on board the rig . 
`` I wish we had the power to bring you immediate solutions . '' 
`` But that 's beyond our best abilities . 
`` We promise to give our best efforts , '' he pledged , adding that this would be a thorough independent investigation without any political objective . 
That was pointed as a riposte to those who have criticised the commission for failing to represent the oil industry , and being weighted towards environmentalists and academics . 
William Reilly , head of the environmental protection agency during the Exxon Valdez oil spill , and the Republican co-chair , promised that the commission 's work would poignantly remind America how much it treasured the Gulf . 
Restaurateurs , drilling companies , oyster distributors - all the intertwined industries of the Gulf Coast were represented at this hearing . 
TJ Collins , the president of Oceaneering , said deep water drilling rigs were moving from the Gulf of Mexico because of the Obama administration 's moratorium . 
A rig was already going to Egypt , he said . 
Larry Dickerson CEO , of Diamond Offshore Drilling , said a high-tech , high-wage industry in which America was a world leader was being driven out . 
At the day 's end , there was a poignant note as Cherri Foytlin told the commission how her family had suffered since the drilling moratorium lost her husband his job . 
`` I have six kids , and I do n't want to them to see us fighting . 
We do n't trust you because of Katrina , so make it right . '' 
A crawfisherman came with his guitar , and strummed a song about people on the Gulf Coast losing their jobs . 
The commissioners listened sympathetically . 
They will produce their recommendations in December . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
