The BBC 's Andy Gallacher explains BP 's new plan BP has delayed a key test on a newly installed well cap aimed at stopping the flow of oil in the Gulf of Mexico . 
BP and US Coast Guard officials said further analysis was needed before pressure testing could begin . 
If it proves successful , the well will be kept `` shut in '' and the leak halted until relief wells plug it entirely . 
The blown-out well has been spewing oil into Gulf waters since April . 
The US administration has sent BP and other parties a new bill for the clean-up . 
The administration says the latest bill is for $ 99.7 m -LRB- # 65.8 m -RRB- . 
The oil giant has already fully paid the last three bills totalling $ 122.2 m -LRB- # 80.6 m -RRB- for costs related to response and clean-up of the spill , according to the Obama administration . 
The test in the Gulf of Mexico , which was supposed to begin on Tuesday , will determine whether BP 's new cap can contain the oil . 
Coast Guard chief Admiral Thad Allen said the extra analysis would continue into Wednesday . 
This latest move to stop the oil comes a day after the containment cap was placed on the leaking well . 
The sealing cap system never before has been deployed at these depths or under these conditions '' Work on the permanent relief well solution continues . 
BP Vice-President Kent Wells said no promises could be made about whether the new cap would work . 
`` It 's not simple stuff . 
What we do n't want to do is speculate around it , '' he said . 
Shutting in the well would provide a temporary solution to the leaking oil . 
BP is continuing work on the relief well that is expected permanently to stop the oil . 
If the test goes as planned , it will mark the first time since the explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig on 20 April that the leaking oil has been stopped . 
During the tests , BP will be monitoring the pressure of the oil in the well . 
High pressure will mean the oil has been contained inside the wellhead . 
But if the tests showed there was low pressure , Mr Wells said , this might indicate that oil was leaking elsewhere in the well . 
He added that if pressure was low the cap would not be kept shut and ships on the surface of the Gulf would continue collecting oil . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL In June , BP placed a cap , known as an LMRP cap , over the top of the Deepwater Horizon well so oil could be collected at the surface . 
However , this continued to leak oil and has now been replaced with a better fitting device . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL When engineers removed the LMRP cap on 10 July , oil began to freely flow from the top of the blowout preventer once more . 
However , the Q4000 containment system continued to take some oil to the surface . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Engineers then bolted on a new capping stack onto the blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- . 
This allowed them to conduct a series of tests to see if the flow of oil could be stopped using the newly installed equipment . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL During the test the three ram capping stack has been closed and all sub-sea containment systems collecting the oil temporarily suspended , effectively blocking the flow of oil from the well . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Once the tests have been successfully completed , BP will resume collecting oil . 
The Helix Producer ship was recently connected to the BOP to provide another collection route in addition to the Q4000 rig . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT The testing will involve closing three separate valves that tightly fit together , stopping the oil from entering the Gulf . 
BP expects no oil will be released from the well during the test process , but the company remains cautious . 
`` The sealing cap system never before has been deployed at these depths or under these conditions , and its efficiency and ability to contain the oil and gas can not be assured , '' it said in a statement . 
If the cap is unable to take the pressure , a pipe will be connected to the cap to take oil to the ships . 
Whatever happens , the well will still need to be plugged , which BP says may not happen until mid-August . 
The first of two relief wells has another 30ft -LRB- 9m -RRB- to drill before intercepting the leaking well , Mr Wells said . 
He expects BP to complete the drilling by late July . 
BP will then attempt to plug the blown-out well with mud and cement . 
By Monday , between 89m gallons -LRB- 337m litres -RRB- and 176m gallons of oil had leaked into the Gulf , according to government estimates . 
US President Barack Obama has labeled the oil spill the country 's worst-ever environmental disaster . 
BP says it has spent $ 3.5 bn -LRB- # 2.3 bn -RRB- on the response effort so far . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
