AMMAN | Sun Jun 12 , 2011 6:44 pm EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Tanks and helicopters stormed the northwest Syrian town of Jisr al-Shughour on Sunday , residents said , and state television said troops had taken full control and chased out remnants of `` armed terrorist organizations . '' 
More than 5,000 Syrian refugees have crossed the border and a U.N. refugee spokesman said the Red Crescent was preparing a fourth camp with room for 2,500 more . 
Witnesses said some 10,000 Syrians were sheltering near the border . 
The assault on Jisr al-Shughour , on a key road junction , is the latest action by armed forces to crush demands for political freedom and an end to oppression that pose an unprecedented challenge to President Bashar al-Assad 's 11-year rule . 
The main Syrian activist group organising protests said the crackdown had killed 1,300 civilians since February . 
Rights groups had previously put the toll at around 1,100 . 
Residents said most of Jisr al-Shughour 's 50,000 people had fled toward the Turkish border about 20 km -LRB- 12 miles -RRB- away , and tanks and helicopters had been shelling and machine-gunning the town . 
Syria has banned most foreign correspondents , making it difficult to verify accounts of events . 
It says the protests are part of a violent conspiracy backed by foreign powers to sow sectarian strife . 
`` Units of the Syrian Arab Army have taken total control of Jisr al-Shughour and are chasing remnants of the armed terrorist gangs in the woods and mountains , '' the Syrian news agency said . 
It said one soldier and two armed men had been killed in clashes around the town , and that that army units had defused explosives planted on bridges and roads . 
The agency said the forces had uncovered mass graves containing the bodies of 10 security men killed and buried by armed groups in Jisr al-Shughour . 
`` Most of them had had their heads and arms amputated with machetes , '' it said . 
Asked if there were clashes in the town , Mustapha , a 39-year-old mason who said he had fled to near the Turkish border early on Sunday , told Reuters by phone : `` What clashes ? 
The army is shelling the town from tanks . 
Everyone has been fleeing . 
`` Even if we did have guns , what are they going to do in front of artillery ? 
Syria is a tightly controlled dictatorship and all of a sudden the regime says Jisr al-Shughour is armed to the teeth . 
They are punishing us for wanting freedom . '' 
The government said last week that `` armed gangs '' had killed more than 120 security personnel in the town after large demonstrations there . 
Refugees and rights groups said the dead were civilians killed by security forces or soldiers who had been shot for refusing to fire on civilians . 
`` When the massacre happened in Jisr al-Shughour the army split , or they started fighting each other and blamed it on us , '' a woman refugee , who refused to give her name , told the Turkish news channel NTV on Saturday . 
A senior Western diplomat in Damascus told Reuters : `` The official version is improbable . 
Most people had left Jisr al-Shughour after seeing the regime 's scorched-earth policy , shelling and the heavy use of armor in the valley ... `` The refugee exodus into Turkey is continuing and the numbers are higher than those officially counted so far . '' 
Residents said the army unit attacking Jisr al-Shughour was commanded by Assad 's brother Maher and employing the tactics used in other centres to crush protests . 
The United States accused the Syrian government of creating a `` humanitarian crisis '' and urged it to halt its offensive and allow immediate access by the International Committee for the Red Cross to help refugees , detainees and the wounded . 
Turkey has provided camps for refugees and sent the wounded to hospitals , but restricted access to the refugees , saying this is to protect their privacy . 
In footage shot for Reuters by a Turkish youth on the Syrian side of the border , a few kilometres into Syria from Guvecci , exhausted and distressed looking Syrians waited in a cluster of tents and under makeshift shelters . 
The West and the United Nations have criticised Syria for not allowing international access to the wounded , the imprisoned and the refugees , but Russia and China have not backed any Security Council action to rein in Syria 's rulers . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
In its brutal response , the regime appears to be equally as desperate . 
This at a time when the U.N. and NATO are stretched to the limit and Russia and China are unwilling to act . 
It will become uglier and uglier . 
I am sure -LRB- ha . 
ha -RRB- that Mr. Cameron and Mr. Sarkozsy are up at this time after a sleepless night worrying about civilian deaths in Libya , reading the news on Reuters and wondering if they are in any way responsible for the Syrian mess . 
But of course they are not responsible , and I am sure that they are both appalled at the unfolding of events and regret that there is nothing that they can do about the situation . 
The massive propaganda effort that was launched to justify the intervention in Libya will have to be doubled now and the double-speak has to be ramped up , just to keep their little heads above water . 
But their heads will roll -LRB- politically speaking -RRB- , because their people are now going to realize that when you debase a noble ideal -LRB- saving innocent lives -RRB- by hypocritically using it to justify military action to promote narrow self-interests , then you create a situation where no one will care when that noble ideal is invoked again by you or anybody else . 
Morality in politics does matter . 
The Syrian President and both Cameron and Sarkozsy will soon learn that lesson . 
They will also learn that we are now living in the 21st . 
century and not the 19th . 
This whole uprising thing is ridiculous . 
First off , peaceful demonstrations should focus on labor stikes , shutdowns or sitins to get message out , not guns . 
Government should allow approved and controlled demonstrations and only use water cannons , tear gas or stun grenades if necessary to disperse unruly demonstrators . 
The idea is to PREVENT LOSS OF LIFE . 
Unfortuately , both sides need to get a grip -LRB- on reality and move towards negotiations that lead to reform . 
It would seem since the USA\/Israel has been activity trying to destabilize Syria for decades with regime change & transfer of Golan Heights officially to Israel as their goal that any reports from so called human rights activists should be suspicious unless funding NGO identified & confirmed by international recognizes independent journalist . 
Unrest in Syria is regional with the majority of the nation carrying on normal daily activity and supporting the Assad government . 
This is unlike the national popular protests of other Arab nation , and actually appears to have more in common with Ukraine s Orange Revolution 2004 than Arab Spring . 
In the Orange revolution activist incited young university student in Kiev to protest elections the local unrest gain western media attention which to the surprise of the rest of the country lead to regime change , which was revoked by the people in the next general election . 
We really need to question all reports of brutality that are n't validated by respected independent reporters least they lead to false accusation as those aired by the BBC against Gaddafi indicating the ordering of mass rape & issuing the troops Viagra to assist in the act . 
Stories like that are meant to build popular support for continued bombardment leading to the invasion & occupation of Libya . 
After USA\/EU once again going beyond the scope of UN Security Council Resolution ; using air attacks to aid rebels & impose regime change by any means , while refusing to sanction crimes against humanity of Israel , Bahrain , Yemen & Saudi Arabia it is unlikely that the USA , Israel & France will ever get Russia & China & a majority of the Security Council to approve any action against Syria or Iran . 
We are now actively attacking 5 sovereign nations therefore we are currently at war with 6 nations -LRB- N. Korea is only a cease fire so technically the USA is still at war -RRB- . 
No wonder we have a budget deficit . 
It is not because of the social safety net spending but for bombs & troops to be used against nations who refuse to implement USA economic or political policy . 
Basically with the help of a willing press our government is making up lies , misrepresenting facts & instigating unrest to convince USA population of government brutality & human rights violation requiring USA interference . 
This is not new we fell for it with Iraq , Vietnam , Pakistan & Afghanistan and the media was a willing partner . 
Why should we accept their word concerning other proposed interventions ? 
Instead of continuing to play policemen of the world so the privileged & corporations can profit we need to revise requirements for military intervention . 
Do any of the nations we are current at war with pose a threat to USA mainland ? 
No !!!! That should be the only reason to attack any sovereign nation . 
There are international organization to apprehend criminals , if someone has broke the law a warrant should issued , laws should be followed . 
No more assassination squads to eliminate people without due process under any circumstance , we are suppose to be a civilized nation ruled by law not vigilantes ! 
Is it the responsibility of the USA taxpayers to fund the acquisition , expansion & security of USA corporate foreign assets , or to maintain Israel 's illegal border expansion from its illegal 1967 attack , invasion & occupation of its nieghbors ? 
If Bahrain & Saudi Arabia can use its security forces to impose order & put down rebellion by slaughtering peaceful protestors , destroy Mosques , & torture political detainees why ca n't Syria put down what appears to be an instigated rebellion bent only on regime change not betterment of conditions . 
The Syrian rebels were never peaceful & continually have refused attempt by the government to respond to their complaints . 
This speaks of a foreign backed assault to overthrow a popular government , rather than a popular protest movement to improve condition & end corruption . 
Until the recent unrest the Syrian government has never been accused of being an brutal authoritarian dictatorship so what has change ? 
Arab spring has allowed covert activist to increase their activities to incite unrest hiding under the guise of regional unrest . 
Regime change definitely benefits Israel once Assad is removed the handpicked purchased new government will finally sign the treaty transferring the Golan Heights to Israel . 
Temporarily , providing for Israel s security , until the Syrians once again take up arms against colonial occupation . . 
When are we going to stop the use of our taxes & military to fill the pockets of the privileged while our nation crumbles around us and the people join those of the middle east in poverty ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
