ANKARA | Sun Jun 12 , 2011 3:12 pm EDT ANKARA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Turkey has put huge effort into improving ties with its neighbors in the Middle East but the unrest in Syria may force a rethinking of its foreign policy now that Sunday 's election is out of the way . 
Turkey 's `` zero problems with neighbors '' policy has made Ankara into a regional power and Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan a hero in the Arab street . 
But with more than 5,000 Syrian refugees fleeing across the border to escape a crackdown by President Bashar al-Assad , the long-time NATO member and European Union-candidate is reminded of the awkward position it has put itself in trying to champion democracy while befriending the region 's autocratic leaders . 
Erdogan , who won a third consecutive term in Sunday 's election , has stepped up his criticism of Assad after having embraced him in recent years . 
`` The whole policy of warming up to Syria has collapsed , '' said Semih Idiz , a foreign policy expert for Milliyet daily . 
`` After the elections I expect Turkey to reevaluate its Middle East policy . 
It has not brought the results expected . '' 
Other `` Arab Spring '' uprisings have tested Turkey 's ability to look after its new interests , but Syria -- an Iranian ally with a volatile ethnic and religious mix lying in a web of regional conflicts -- poses particular challenges . 
While Turkey has urged Assad to implement reforms and has added its voice to growing international condemnation by calling the crackdown `` inhumane , savage repression , '' Iran has supported the Syrian regime . 
Ankara and Tehran , which have also forged closer ties in recent years , compete for influence in Damascus . 
`` The Syrian crisis has the potential to make ties between Ankara and Tehran frostier . 
If Iran or -LRB- Lebanon 's Shi'ite group -RRB- Hezbollah get involved in Syrian affairs Turkey will have to tell foreign powers to stay out , '' Idiz said . 
Meanwhile the Syrians seeking refuge in Turkey are delighted by the decision to keep the country 's doors open to them -- around 300 Syrians in the border area cheered and shouted `` Long live Erdogan '' on hearing of his election win on Sunday . 
Some analysts say Turkey has been turning away from the West under Erdogan over the past decade . 
Last year , 22 percent of Turkey 's exports went to the Middle East and North Africa , double the share in 2004 . 
While Turkey 's bid for membership of the European Union has dragged on since formal negotiations began in 2005 , Ankara has pursued free-trade accords with Jordan , Lebanon , Syria and Iraq . 
In Libya , where Turkey had ventures worth $ 15.3 billion before an uprising against Muammar Gaddafi began in February , Turkish firms were forced to leave projects unfinished . 
Turkey has held joint military exercises and joint cabinet meetings with Syria and has abolished visa requirements , but those agreements might now be scaled down . 
Erdogan , whose country quietly hosted a conference of Syrian opposition figures last week , has said that after Sunday 's vote Ankara would talk to Assad in a `` very different manner . '' 
Hugh Pope , an analyst at International Crisis Group , said events in Syria have shown the limits of Turkey 's policy and exposed the reality that Ankara has little leverage convincing Assad to change . 
`` Turkey is terribly frustrated at Assad , but I do n't think any country has any leverage in Syria at this point . 
The regime is in a survival mode , '' Pope said . 
However , he said Turkey 's close business and people 's ties might give it some leverage in the future . 
The wars in neighboring Iraq brought refugees and severely disrupted trade with Turkey , but now Turkish firms are busy doing brisk businesses in Iraq . 
`` Whatever happens in Syria Turkey will adapt . '' 
Turkey was caught off guard at the time of the 1991 Gulf War , when 500,000 people flooded across the border from northern Iraq , but this time has started early preparing for a possible mass influx of Syrian refugees . 
When the 2003 invasion of Iraq was being planned , Turks made arrangements to set up a buffer zone inside Iraq to look after any refugees on Iraqi soil . 
In the event , only around 10,000 came . 
Some media have reported that Turkish political and military officials are considering a similar zone in the Syria case if the number of refugees increases sharply , but officials have told Reuters they are not aware of such plans . 
When asked about the possibility , Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul told reporters : `` It 's not on the agenda right now . '' 
Damascus would not welcome the prospect of Turkish boots on Syrian soil . 
Turkey and Syria went to the brink of war in 1998 when Ankara exerted pressure on Damascus to expel Kurdistan Workers Party -LRB- PKK -RRB- rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan who was sheltered there . 
The expulsion and capture of Ocalan resolved the crisis . 
