Since the beginning of Syria 's anti-government protests one year ago , more than 5,000 civilians have died , according to the United Nations . 
And as international sanctions tighten their grip , daily life is becoming increasingly hard . 
Once upon a time , a walk along the souk in Al-Hamidiyeh , Damascus 's most imposing indoor market , was an opportunity for quiet reflection . 
Even apart from the tantalising smells and the atmosphere , the place is a big as an aircraft hangar with a striking , high , pock-marked roof which seems to stretch to infinity . 
Now , however , it is a shop window for a newer kind of local culture - the deafening roar of scores of mini-generators which the stallholders need to power up their shops . 
The place is littered with them . 
Bright yellow or dark red , embossed with brand names like Suzuki , as if a fleet of lawnmower engines had come alive and was running the show . 
It is not far from the truth . 
Even in relatively tranquil central Damascus , electricity is now in short supply . 
Two or three times a day there are long power cuts . 
Broadcast on Saturdays at 11:30 GMT on BBC Radio 4 , and weekdays on BBC World Service Damascus 's stallholders are adapting in more ways than one . 
Among the ingenious replicas of designer watches and the gorgeous sweetmeats , are equally sought-after new items - candles . 
I was presented with one at my hotel the other night , after an outage made the walk up the steep staircase to bed even more precarious than usual . 
It did not stop me falling flat on my face on the stone stairs , sustaining several bruised ribs and an aching hip . 
Even candles however , are not as cheap as they used to be . 
Before this conflict saw Syria ostracised by much of the world community , a pack of candles would cost five Syrian pounds -LRB- $ 0.08 , # 0.05 -RRB- . 
Now it is 15 Syrian pounds . 
And a weekly shop which would , a year ago , have cost 500 Syrian pounds , now costs 1,000 . 
Most deleterious of all is the hike in heating oil or Mazout . 
It has been snowing in Syria , and many of the country 's poor can not afford to buy it - even those who can sometimes stand in long queues waiting for it only to find that by the time their turn comes , the supply has run out . 
Some Damascenes are seeking refuge in cafes Well if the miserable deadness of many of the city 's usual hotspots - streets in Bab Sharqi , Bab Tuma and around the Umayyad Mosque - is anything to go by , some are simply staying at home . 
Others are taking refuge in the coffee bars . 
One hidden-away establishment in the Saruja area was full with gaggles of young men and women smoking shisha and flirting with each other . 
When the room suddenly turned pitch black , there was a louche murmur of general approval . 
Many of the shops are staying open , even in the dark . 
Across the road from the hotel in the barbers , I saw a row of brave customers sitting waiting to have their hair cut by candlelight . 
In much of the rest of the country the electricity is cut off 12 hours out of 24 . 
Some are living without any power at all . 
One man with relatives in the country told me the excitement comes on the rare occasions that it is on , not when it is cut off . 
There is no doubt that for now Damascus remains firmly under government control , the place is a citadel , with military checkpoints everywhere . 
But the amount of poverty is growing , thanks in part to international sanctions . 
One small businessman friend , a man with no political sympathies on either side , thinks all this is going to do the opposition no favors . 
`` Now people do n't care about pro-Assad , anti-Assad , '' he told me , `` they just want to eat . '' 
The conflict has put many tourists off visiting Syria He he has lost 50 % of his salary in the last year as investment flowed out of the country , and what money he does have , does not buy what it once did . 
Some businessmen are angry with the government but more , he says , are playing a waiting game or taking their money abroad . 
It is particularly frustrating for those financiers , many of them Saudi , who put huge sums of money into the Syrian tourism industry in the years before the crisis . 
Back then , tourism looked to be advancing in leaps and bounds , and now it lies in ruins of the wrong kind . 
Ask regime economists about all this and they are likely to be bullish . 
Even though Syria has suffered from drought recently , they will say , this year brought a bumper crop . 
The keywords , just like the bad old days under the current president 's father Hafez , are self-reliance . 
Over breakfast just before I left for the airport on Thursday , my businessman friend beamed with pride as he told me he had just bought a mini-generator for his flat . 
`` We 're used to this , you know , '' he told me . 
But he in fact is in the minority . 
A full 60 % of Syrians are under 25 years old . 
They want a better life , of the kind that they see on Facebook and on cable TV . 
And now they are taking increasing risks to speak out against the regime . 
And not even a bumper crop or the promise of their own mini-generator is going to buy them off . 
How to listen to From Our Own Correspondent : BBC Radio 4 : A 30-minute program on Saturdays , 11:30 GMT . 
Second 30-minute program on Thursdays , 11:00 GMT -LRB- some weeks only -RRB- . 
Hear daily 10-minute editions Monday to Friday , repeated through the day , also available to listen online . 
