How do you turn a 400-year-old love poem into an opera about a TV journalist covering a modern middle-eastern war ? 
Stuart Jeffries talks to composer Judith Weir and the crew behind Armida Love conquers all ... Kenneth Tarver and Talise Trevigne in Armida In the Cafe de France in Essaouira , a beautiful walled city on Morocco 's Atlantic coast , some British people are making an opera . 
It 's called Armida and tells the story of a soldier and a TV newshound who set aside their differences during some nameless contemporary desert war and fall in love . 
But the locals do n't know or - let 's be honest - care about any of that . 
All they 're bothered about is that today is Thursday , Morocco 's national lottery day , and they need to buy their tickets from the bloke in the cafe 's back room . 
In between takes , a line of men is suffered by director Margaret Williams to walk across her set and return with a ticket each . 
Really , she should have shot the locals , too , and thereby made a second film featuring the characterful faces of Essaouira 's lottery junkies as they move nimbly across a landscape of cameras , cables , microphones and opera singers . 
It could have been a culture-clash ballet , or maybe a sitcom . 
But Williams 's task is difficult enough as it is . 
She is filming an opera to be screened on television . 
It 's the hardest job in the world - and , ratings-wise at least , one of the least rewarding . 
Have you ever tried to film a scene of soldiers playing football in a desert sandstorm with the sand lashing the opera singers ' faces and getting into the camera ? 
And have you ever tried to condense four centuries of myth-making about the Rinaldo and Armida love affair into a 50-minute opera that alludes to the Iraq war , without being exclusively about that conflict , to be screened on Channel 4 with one commercial break ? 
`` It 's even more difficult than that , '' says Philip Headlam , the conductor , removing his headphones between takes . 
`` It 's not like your normal opera from the canon , where everybody is familiar with the music and their roles in the story . 
Our singers have not heard it before , so it takes a lot of time and a lot of care to get it right . 
And then they have to perform in front of the cameras , which is very difficult if , as a singer , you 're not used to it . '' 
The opera has already been sung in a studio and now the singers have to act and sing their parts in sync with a tape played back in the cafe . 
Headlam 's task is to ensure they keep in time . 
Tricky enough without being interrupted after every take by impatient Essaouirans demanding their tickets . 
Judith Weir , the composer , is an oasis of calm amid the transcultural crossness . 
She sits , enviably self-contained , next to the cafe 's pool table , sipping mint tea from a glass . 
`` All my work is done . 
So I 'm really just here to observe - and have a holiday , '' she says . 
She started writing Armida in 2002 . 
`` All the eyes of the world were on Iraq at the time , but I was n't trying to write about Iraq in particular , just all the wars I 've lived through . '' 
This also presented her with an opportunity to think about the medium for which she had been commissioned to write - television . 
`` I wanted to write an opera which deals in part with the TV coverage of wars . 
We have become so aware of how we receive the news , and even how reporters come from behind the camera to talk about their feelings during conflict . 
So I wanted to engage with that . '' 
That 's not something you 'd expect an opera to do , at least not successfully . 
`` The position that classical music has in our society does make it rather removed from current affairs , '' Weir concedes . 
`` It 's presented as this refuge from modern life , where you go to have a comfortable sleep , often in a concert . 
I do n't think my work is removed from everyday life . '' 
She has certainly done her utmost to place the romantic story of Rinaldo and Armida , a Christian crusader and a Muslim witch , in today 's world . 
To anyone familiar with the many treatments of the tale , Weir 's version is a brave departure : Armida is no longer a sorceress but a TV news reporter , the setting a media-saturated desert conflict . 
It 's a controversial idea , and surely fraught with pitfalls . 
In Torquato Tasso 's 16th-century poem Jerusalem Delivered , which inspired nearly 100 operas and ballets -LRB- mostly baroque -RRB- , Armida is a hotsy-totsy Saracen sorceress at the time of the first Crusade , seeking to use her wiles to weaken the crusaders ' cause . 
She is enraged by the French crusader Rinaldo for freeing comrades she has bewitched , and also because he alone of the Christian army besieging Jerusalem remains unmoved by her charms . 
So she plans to kill him - but is so captivated by his beauty that she changes her mind . 
She carries him off to her enchanted castle on an island , where she puts him under a spell so that he falls in love with her . 
Eventually , Rinaldo is discovered on the island by his comrades , who confront him with his amorous folly by showing him his own degraded reflection in his shield . 
Rinaldo , though still torn by feelings of love for Armida , abandons her and declares revenge . 
Armida responds furiously by assembling an army , intending to kill Rinaldo . 
But when she finally meets him in an enchanted forest , her lingering affection for him renders her incapable of killing him , and she contemplates suicide . 
Rinaldo prevents her from destroying herself , and the two are reconciled with the implication that Armida will convert to Christianity and marry Rinaldo . 
But that is only one ending of the story . 
In the operatic adaptations by Gluck -LRB- 1777 -RRB- and Rossini -LRB- 1817 -RRB- , the drama ends when Rinaldo abandons Armida on her enchanted island . 
In Dvorak 's 1904 version , by contrast , a disguised Armida is killed by Rinaldo in battle and the pair are reconciled , as she dies , with her baptism . 
With all this weight of previous interpretation , how did Weir decide to tell the story ? 
The Dvorak version appealed least of all - not least because of its ending , which mingles the heroine 's death with Christian triumphalism . 
`` In fact , no one can say anything about the religious affiliation or ethnicity of any of the characters in my opera , '' says Weir . 
`` No one can say , this is a Muslim or this is a Christian . 
I wanted to show that I respect all the people in this piece . '' 
Both of the leads , Talise Trevigne and Kenneth Tarver , are black , thus perhaps further annulling the eurocentrism of Tasso 's original poem and several later treatments . 
Even more significantly , Weir did n't want her female heroine killed off . 
`` The issue of women singers in opera is important . 
Women have big roles in opera . 
But those characters nearly always die terrible deaths as they 're punished for their uppityness . 
I wanted a woman you could believe in and not a crazy opera type . '' 
Of the operas that precede hers , Weir says : `` Rossini 's is the one that still stands up . 
It is one of Maria Callas 's great roles . '' 
But while she admits that she was inspired by them , `` there is no quotation from them '' . 
Instead , her music is scored for an ensemble that is half jazz band and half classical group , and tips between the two . 
In Armida , Weir re-explores a theme she addressed in her earlier TV opera , Scipio 's Dream -LRB- a homage to Mozart also directed by Margaret Williams in 1991 -RRB- , namely the conflict between love and duty . 
Armida and Rinaldo are both torn by this conflict - they should n't love each other , since duty forbids it , but they do . 
`` I find the story interesting because it 's both a love story and a political story , '' says Weir . 
`` But it 's a love story , too , about the affair between the media and the war operation . 
It 's also a war story about love - because love can be a war as well . '' 
Her opera -LRB- she wrote both music and libretto -RRB- starts at the army camp from where the infidels are being besieged . 
Armida comes to the camp , ostensibly to interview the soldiers , but secretly to subvert their cause . 
But she falls in love with Rinaldo -LRB- a sensitive soul who writes poetry and quotes Taoist philosophy -RRB- , and whisks him off in her TV news helicopter to an enchanted Moorish city . 
His comrades try to free him , but he has other ideas . 
Ca n't they see he 's in love and has renounced war - as they should ? 
Unlike previous artists , Weir was hardly interested in using the story to press home a message of Christians triumphing over Muslims . 
And she emphasises that she did n't want to write `` an opera about Iraq '' . 
`` There was n't time to get into any sophisticated politics , '' she says , `` but I wanted to explore the idea , ` What if they held a war and nobody came ? ' '' 
Was she in favor of the Iraq war ? 
`` I think the whole thing is absolutely ludicrous . '' 
Armida is , then , an opera with an anti-war message . 
As viewers return again and again to the army camp , they find that the soldiers have started to plant lavender bushes and grow vegetables in the desert . 
And , around the world , enthusiasm for war and duty decline , while love triumphs . 
Nobody is interested in watching war porn ; instead , Metropolis TV now specialises in gardening shows and allied weather reports . 
Journalism , like soldiering , is to be replaced by what Weir in her libretto calls `` cultivation and repose '' . 
All of which , no doubt , is a healthy message in our benighted times . 
But it does make one hanker for the more fractious ending to Rossini 's version of Armida . 
There , the abandoned heroine , torn between love and anger , commands her spirits to destroy the enchanted island she created , before flying away on her chariot pulled by dragons amid thunder and lightning . 
Now , that would have made for good telly . 
But Channel 4 's opera budget probably does n't stretch that far . 
