Amid serious concerns that the swine flu outbreak could worsen an already-deep recession in Mexico , the World Bank yesterday moved to provide that nation with millions in emergency aid and set up a special fund for longer-term assistance . 
Stung by the credit crunch and weaker demand for its products in the United States and beyond , Mexico is set to suffer a worse downturn than the one in the United States this year , with the International Monetary Fund predicting this week that its economy would contract by 3.7 percent . 
Adding to those troubles , Russia , the world 's second-largest pork importer , yesterday suspended all pork shipments from Mexico , as well as from three U.S. states , despite assurances from international health officials that the flu could not be transmitted through exposure to pork . 
Other countries have intensified screening of pork imports . 
And several nations have issued travel advisories to Mexico just as resorts there are gearing up for summer bookings . 
Speaking at the close of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund biannual meetings in Washington yesterday , Mexican Finance Minister Agustin Carstens warned that the outbreak could have an `` important '' economic impact . 
`` This issue can have an important impact on the economy , although the most important impact is the one on human life and human well-being , '' Carstens told reporters . 
He added that the outbreak was a `` very serious matter '' with `` a high potential for -LRB- economic -RRB- disruption . '' 
Earlier this decade , the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome -LRB- SARS -RRB- and bird flu strains in Asia dealt economic blows to more than a dozen nations , forcing airlines to cancel flights , hotels to slash rates and depressing consumer demand . 
In the case of bird flu , Asian farmers additionally had to cull tens of millions of poultry from their flocks . 
Mexico -- and perhaps even the United States if a full-blown outbreak were to spread north of the border -- could face similar problems just as it is struggling with the global financial crisis . 
Earlier this month , Mexico established a new $ 47 billion credit line with the IMF , funds that may provide an important cushion if its financial situation sharply deteriorates . 
The World Bank yesterday said it would roll out $ 25 million to Mexico in emergency funds for medicine and equipment , including for devices to detect the new strain of swine flu that has killed up to 86 people there . 
In addition , it said it was prepared to draw on an additional $ 180 million to help finance other needs related to the outbreak . 
The Mexican assistance came just as the World Bank warned yesterday that health programs in poor and middle-income nations were being severely hit by the financial crisis that started in the United States . 
A new report from the bank , for instance , indicated that in March eight countries were reporting shortages of HIV - and AIDS-related drugs and treatments , and an additional 14 said they expected to see disruptions in the coming weeks and months . 
Robert B. Zoellick , the World Bank 's president , yesterday said the institution was offering Mexico advice about how other nations have dealt with similar health crises . 
He noted that there would be a time to account for the economic toll , `` but for now , the focus is on people 's lives . '' 
