GRAND ISLE , La. -- The women of Grand Isle are nervous . 
Used to be , they say , they could walk the streets of their beachside town alone , getting a little exercise after the hottest part of the day or setting out the trash after midnight . 
Now , a waitress wo n't let her 14-year-old daughter stroll to the store for a Coke , a souvenir shop owner is afraid to sit on her porch after dark and a bartender deadbolts her door , a newly purchased gun nearby . 
The vacationing families and sport fishermen who make this tourist town of 1,500 what it is are absent this summer , replaced by an army of workers brought in by BP to clean up the massive Gulf Coast oil spill . 
The outsiders walk in small groups along Route 1 at workday 's end and sometimes cut across lawns and under elevated houses to reach bars like Daddy 's Money , where women wrestle in oil . 
Some wear low-slung jeans , which prompted this warning note on one convenience store door : `` No pants on the ground allowed . '' 
What do such reactions mean ? 
A BP official says some culture clash is understandable , though he 's occasionally seen outright racial bias at work . 
But talk to some of the mostly white residents , and they do n't directly mention the skin color of the workers , most of whom are black . 
The workers , they say , just act different . 
And that makes some people uneasy , even though the vast majority of the workers pose no threat . 
Vicki McVey , a 44-year-old who pours beers at Artie 's Sports Bar , says she 's not taking any chances . 
`` Never had a gun . 
Never had a weapon . 
Now I got a weapon right next to my bed , '' says McVey , who stopped taking her grandson to the park when cleanup workers moved into a trailer nearby . 
`` You go to the park and they come and they touch you and want to talk to you and they harass you , '' she complains . 
Fears like McVey 's do n't surprise the men whose presence prompts them . 
Friday night , several black men in town for the cleanup sat in a grassy area near the island 's only grocery store , deciding what meat to buy to grill for dinner . 
They said they had n't been treated badly , though like most cleanup workers along the coast , they did n't want to give their names for fear of losing their jobs . 
`` This little town is just like any little town in the country , '' said one , who identified himself only as Daryl . 
`` A bunch of strangers are going to scare them . 
A bunch of black strangers are going to scare them even more . '' 
Another worker said he and his peers mostly just keep to themselves . 
`` People treat you OK , '' he said . 
`` But they have n't put any picnics on for us . '' 
People in town are talking about a recent stabbing , the first anyone can remember in ages -LRB- one published report said both victim and attacker were cleanup workers -RRB- . 
Locals suspect the workers when items go missing now , including golf carts that folks often use to get around . 
No one offers facts and figures to back up the stories . 
Neither the Jefferson Parish Sheriff 's Office nor Police Chief Euris DuBois , who 's upset over recent media reports about his town , would provide crime statistics or speak to The Associated Press . 
But the perception of a problem is undeniable . 
`` You used to be able to go and enjoy yourself , you know ? 
Have a few drinks with your friends , '' says 68-year-old Emma Chighizola , who used to sit outside and listen to the waves after a day of selling T-shirts and seashell tchotchkes at Blue Water Souvenirs . 
`` Now it 's kind of dangerous . 
There 's too many strangers . '' 
Parish Councilman Chris Roberts says he 's witnessed `` hostile environments ... no question . '' 
Tension is natural when a small town has a sudden influx of outsiders , Roberts says , and parish officials are monitoring it . 
But bringing in help is necessary , he said : `` There 's not -LRB- local -RRB- people lining up to go work in 105-degree heat to clean the beach . '' 
BP spokesman Jason French says some 1,800 workers from around the country report to Grand Isle at least once a day , including almost 300 who clean the town 's beaches . 
BP tried to hire locals , he says , but no more than three dozen submitted applications for jobs that pay as little as $ 12 an hour . 
Some tension in town is over cultural differences , he says , `` but I ca n't deny there has been some racism . '' 
While BP wo n't respond to complaints it considers motivated by bias , French says it does promptly address any legitimate behavioral problems . 
Workers , for example , were told to stop crossing lawns because they were trespassing . 
BP also dismissed some cleanup workers for unspecified misbehavior , though French ca n't say how many because they worked for subcontractors . 
The oil company has begun requiring those contractors to screen workers for drug and alcohol use as a condition of employment . 
`` As someone who 's been here for months , I get frustrated when workers are painted with a broad brush or the community is painted with a broad brush , '' French says . 
`` It 's not a community of racists any more than we have convicts working the beach . 
`` These are hardworking people working the beaches , '' he says , `` and there are people who are nervous because they 're seeing something they have n't seen before . '' 
All along the Louisiana coast , the flood of oil spill workers has temporarily altered towns . 
Quiet fishing villages in St. Bernard Parish have become small cities that bustle like military bases , with security checkpoints , a round-the-clock police presence and the never-ending rumble of trucks hauling food , trash and equipment on narrow country roads . 
And besides the influx of men and machines , there 's a deeper factor underlying locals ' mood . 
They talk of frustration over the loss of something simple -- the joy of a summer on the water . 
That disappeared when the Deepwater Horizon exploded April 20 , killing 11 oil rig workers and spilling millions of gallons of oil . 
`` You do n't hear no fishing stories , no beach stories , no talking about their kids and how they caught their first fish . 
None of that , '' says Buggie Vegas , owner of the Bridge Side Marina in Grand Isle . 
`` It 's just work , work , work . 
Every day , from a Saturday to a Monday to a Wednesday . 
We do n't know what day it is . 
It do n't matter what day it is . '' 
Vegas ' 30 rental units are full and his store still has some business , but it 's different : Instead of selling bait and tackle or T-shirts , he 's stocking green plastic hardhats , black rubber boots and tie-down straps . 
`` Everybody 's like robots , '' he says . 
`` They just trying to get hired on . '' 
Artie 's Sports Bar normally employs 16 bartenders who serve 2,000 people and pocket at least $ 250 in tips on a Saturday night . 
Now , it takes just six of them to wait on a crowd of 100 . 
Security guards who used to work only on weekends now monitor the door at Artie 's every night , checking patrons for weapons and watching closely for trouble . 
When she does n't like how things are going , McVey plays country music , hoping the crowd will move on . 
Shannon Ronquille , a 33-year-old waitress , says authorities patrol the beach on four-wheelers at night , protecting waterfront homes that owners are reluctant to rent to cleanup crews . 
It does n't help that business is off more than 60 percent at Barataria Seafood Grill , the island 's only fine dining establishment -- a place where , in normal times , dressed-up vacationers often wait an hour for seating . 
`` Now , '' Ronquille says , looking over the empty , white linen-covered tables , `` we have guys coming in with oil all over their boots . '' 
Two and a half hours away in Arabi , the tension manifests itself differently . 
There , a former school , renamed Camp Hope after Hurricane Katrina , has for five years been home to volunteers from across the country who came to rebuild storm-wrecked homes . 
But in June , the volunteers were told to move : BP was converting the building to a work camp . 
`` All the locals were more than happy to see AmeriCorps people here , that people were helping to rebuild , and it 's just a stark contrast to that , '' says 20-year-old AmeriCorps worker Kyla Philbrook , of Albany , N.Y. St. Bernard Parish has been spared the complaints that mar Grand Isle for several reasons : In Hopedale , Shell Beach and Delacroix , there 's no infrastructure to support thousands of workers . 
Many workers are bused in for the day . 
Law enforcement , citing lessons from Katrina , also set the tone early on : In May , Sheriff Jack Stephens declared the community `` wo n't tolerate a criminal invasion in the guise of people claiming they are arriving to help . '' 
A month later , he asked federal immigration officials to investigate claims illegal immigrants were working for BP . 
`` We 're not worried about people who want to earn an honest buck , '' he said at the time . 
Since then , deputies have made only a handful of arrests . 
Under a deal with BP , off-duty deputies provide paid security at worker encampments . 
And deputies `` engage '' every chance they get , whether at a traffic stop or a checkpoint , says Chief Deputy James Pohlmann , who notes that BP has strict rules for the Arabi camp . 
`` It 's like an extension of the job . 
There 's no alcohol , no weapons , '' he says . 
`` If you leave , you have to leave on a shuttle bus to a parking lot that 's offsite . '' 
Though workers are free to leave in their own vehicles , they are not free to walk around the neighborhood . 
If caught doing so , their ID is seized , `` and what that means is , you lost your job . '' 
In Hopedale , oysterboat captain Michael Anglin says the strategies are working . 
He 's even made some friends among the outsiders . 
`` There 's tension sometimes , but it 's just like any job , '' he says . 
`` It 's mostly been on where you park your car . 
In the wrong spot , somebody gets a little arrogant . 
And fishermen do n't put up with that . 
It 's our town , ya know . 
You just visiting . '' 
Traffic , in fact , is the biggest complaint among residents who watch weed-filled lots slashed and burned to make way for trailers . 
At the end of Hopedale Highway in Breton Sound Marina , BP runs a mess tent that feeds workers three meals a day . 
That means a steady stream of vehicles . 
`` I 'm scared to let my kids cross the highway , '' says 55-year-old former fisherman Kurt Guerra , his 9-year-old daughter Cassie playing on a swingset a few hundred feet from the pavement . 
The presence of so many strangers is unsettling , Guerra says , but with barely a place to buy a beer , problems are few . 
