May 28 : BP CEO Tony Hayward speaks during recovery operations at the Deepwater Horizon oil spill site in the Gulf . 
AP BP appears to have had enough of its embattled CEO , and are sending him to the Russian front -- literally . 
The oil giant 's chief executive , Tony Hayward , will step down from BP 's top post in October and take a job with TNK-BP , the company 's joint venture in Russia , Sky News reported Monday . 
Hayward , who became the face of BP 's flailing efforts to contain the Gulf of Mexico oil spill and clean up millions in damages , will likely be replaced by BP managing director Robert Dudley . 
BP said earlier Monday that `` no final decision '' had been made about management changes , which reportedly include the departure of Hayward as chief executive in an effort to mend the company 's image after the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
The oil company said its board would meet Monday evening , a day before it announces earnings for the second quarter . 
The BP board would have to approve a change in company leadership . 
`` BP notes the press speculation over the weekend regarding potential changes to management and the charge for the costs of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
BP confirms that no final decision has been made on these matters , '' the company said in a statement to the London Stock Exchange . 
The Obama administration has called on the company to meet its clean-up obligations , despite changes in management . 
`` BP can not , should not and will not leave the Gulf without meeting its responsibilities to plug the well , to clean up the damage that 's been caused and to compensate those that have been damaged . 
I think that is the most important lesson out of here , '' White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs told reporters . 
`` Regardless of who leads the company , those obligations and responsibilities must be met , '' he said . 
Hayward , 53 , had become a lightning rod for outrage in the United States about the spill , which started on April 20 with an explosion and fire on the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
Eleven workers died in the disaster . 
Hayward 's comment that he was eager to resolve the incident `` so that I can have my life back '' antagonized his critics in the United States . 
Dudley , currently heading the effort to clean up the Gulf Coast , figured prominently in speculation about Hayward 's likely successor . 
Dudley is currently BP 's managing director , and grew up partly in Hattiesburg , Mississippi . 
He spent 20 years at Amoco Corp. , which merged with BP in 1998 , and lost out to Hayward on the CEO 's slot three years ago . 
He took over from Hayward as the point man on the cleanup in June . 
Last week , BP said the cost of dealing with the spill had reached nearly $ 4 billion , but that it was too early to quantify the eventual total cost . 
Hayward joined BP in 1982 as a geologist , and currently makes 1.045 million pounds -LRB- US$ 1.6 million -RRB- a year as the company 's head , according to its annual report . 
In 2009 , he received a performance bonus of more than 2 million pounds plus other remuneration , bringing his total pay package to more than 4 million pounds . 
BP is in the process of selling assets to raise $ 10 billion toward a $ 20 billion fund that will finance the cleanup of the mess in the Gulf . 
BP announced last week that it had sold properties in the United States , Canada and Egypt to Apache Corp. for $ 7 billion . 
Under pressure from President Obama , BP also has announced that it will pay no more dividends to shareholders this year . 
The Associated Press and Newscore contributed to this report Sign up for free e-mail news alerts from FoxNews.com and FoxBusiness.com . 
