June 16 , 2010 : BP CEO Tony Hayward and Managing Director Bob Dudley , in background , are seen leaving the White House after meeting with President Obama . 
Reuters BP 's embattled boss Tony Hayward is set to be replaced amid `` leadership changes '' at the firm , Fox News confirmed on Sunday . 
Hayward , under heavy fire for his handling of the Gulf of Mexico oil disaster that followed the April explosion and fire on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig , is set to step down Monday . 
BP 's managing director Bob Dudley will step in as the new CEO , The Wall Street Journal reported . 
Earlier Sunday , BP spokesman Toby Odone seemed to downplay media speculation about Hayward 's departure , saying he `` remains BP 's chief executive , and he has the confidence of the board and senior management . 
`` BP 's board would have to approve a change in company leadership . 
An official announcement could come as early as Monday . 
BP is due to release its second quarter results on Tuesday , and the board of directors is scheduled to meet before the earnings announcement . 
It 's been more than three months since an offshore drilling rig operated by BP exploded off Louisiana on April 20 , killing 11 workers and setting off the spill . 
A temporary plug has stopped oil from gushing for more than a week now , but before that the busted well had spewed anywhere from 94 million gallons to 184 million gallons into the Gulf . 
Crews trying to plug the leaky well for good had to stop work late last week because of the threat from Tropical Storm Bonnie , but the effort was back on track as skies cleared Sunday . 
A drill rig is expected to reconnect at around midnight to the relief tunnel that will be used to pump in mud and cement to seal the well , and drilling could resume in the next few days . 
Since the explosion , Hayward has made several highly publicized gaffes . 
Among them : going to a yacht race while oil washed up on Gulf shores , and uttering the now-infamous : `` I want my life back '' line . 
Oppenheimer & Co. senior analyst Fadel Gheit said in an interview Sunday that it was too bad Hayward 's career was derailed by the spill , but `` unfortunately he became a sacrificial lamb in a politically charged world . '' 
Dudley would be well-suited to take over , Gheit said , describing him as even-tempered and a good delegator . 
It 's never an easy time to instill new leadership in a company , though , he noted . 
`` I 'm not sure if removing Tony Hayward is going to throw BP 's problems away , '' Gheit said . 
The company has already spent roughly $ 4 billion on its response to the crisis . 
The final tally could be in the tens of billions of dollars . 
News that the CEO will depart came as no surprise to people living along the Gulf . 
Patrick Shay , 43 , sat on a porch swing of his cottage in Grand Isle , Louisiana , on Sunday , his front yard filled with small , white crosses , each bearing the name of sealife or ways of life the oil spill has killed . 
`` He seems like a pretty self-absorbed person , so I 'm not surprised to hear he would walk away in the middle of all this , '' he said . 
`` If anything it will help . 
They need to get him out of the way and get this cleaned up . '' 
In New Orleans , Chris Hearn , a 23-year-old security guard , said what 's important is getting the oil stopped permanently . 
`` It does n't matter who 's in charge , '' he said . 
`` As long as they clean it up , I really could care less . 
They just need to get it cleaned up because it 's affecting all of us down here . '' 
Completion of the relief well that is the best chance to permanently stop the oil now looks possible by mid-August , but retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , the government 's point man for the spill , said he would n't hesitate to order another evacuation based on forecasts similar to the ones for Bonnie . 
`` We have no choice but to start well ahead of time if we think the storm track is going to bring gale force winds , which are 39 mph or above , anywhere close to well site , '' Allen said . 
Allen said officials will spend the next day determining how Bonnie , which did no real damage on shore , affected the area . 
Oil may have migrated north to Mississippi Sound , he said , and officials are checking to see if boom that was protecting sensitive marshlands was pushed ashore . 
Allen said he had not heard whether Hayward is being replaced . 
`` I 've got no knowledge of the inner workings of BP , '' he said . 
Dudley took over from Hayward as BP 's point man on the cleanup in June . 
Dudley grew up partly in Hattiesburg , Mississippi . 
He spent 20 years at Amoco Corp. , which merged with BP in 1998 , and lost out to Hayward on the CEO 's slot three years ago . 
Hayward , 53 , joined BP in 1982 as a geologist , and currently makes $ 1.6 million a year as the company 's head , according to their annual report . 
In 2009 , he received a performance bonus of more than $ 3 million plus other remuneration . 
The company can terminate the contracts of directors `` at any time with immediate effect on payment in lieu of notice equivalent to one year 's salary , '' the report says . 
Hayward has a pension pot of about $ 17.3 million , which would pay 584,000 pounds a year upon retirement . 
Hayward took over the top spot at BP in 2007 after a series of events including a fatal explosion at a Texas refinery and an oil spill off the Alaska coast , as well as accusations of misusing company resources , led to the ouster of John Browne . 
Upon replacing Browne , Hayward promised to focus `` like a laser '' on safety . 
In June , members of Congress repeatedly reminded Hayward how empty that promise sounded with 11 workers dead , BP seemingly unprepared to contain the spill and a Congressional investigation indicating that officials put cost-savings ahead of safety in the days and hours before the rig explosion . 
BP has n't completed its own investigation into the cause . 
