UPDATE 1-GSK says Asia Pacific sales could double in 5 yrs \* Will lower prices in some Asian countries to boost sales \* Says Australia , NZ , Taiwan , Singapore have bought Relenza -LRB- Recasts with Asia-Pacific sales forecast -RRB- SINGAPORE , June 29 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - British drugmaker GlaxoSmithKline -LRB- GSK . 
L -RRB- said its Asia-Pacific sales could double in five years as growing prosperity boosts demand for better healthcare and as it cuts prices in some Asian countries . 
GSK Asia Pacific chief Christophe Weber said on Monday the company aimed to boost sales in countries such as China , Indonesia and the Philippines by selling drugs and vaccines for less than it typically charged in developed countries . 
`` Clearly there will be a very high demand in the future because the economic development of the countries in the region and people want more healthcare , '' Weber told Reuters on the sidelines of a regional media workshop in Singapore . 
GSK Asia Pacific last year chalked up 1.18 billion pounds -LRB- $ 2 billion -RRB- in sales last year , accounting for just under 5 percent of the company 's total sales . 
GSK estimates its Asia-Pacific pharmaceutical market share at 5.3 percent , making it the region 's fourth largest player . 
Highlighting the region 's potential , GSK said Asia Pacific had twice the number of newborns compared with North America or Western Europe , but mortality rates for mothers were 12 times higher than in Europe . 
For children under five , the mortality rate was 3 times higher than in the Americas . 
A lot of the deaths in children in the region could have been prevented by vaccination had they been more accessible and affordable , Weber said . 
`` Price is one dimension , but it is a vital one . 
You need to have an affordable vaccine , that 's one of the strategies we are accelerating , '' he said . 
GSK opened a $ 411 million plant in Singapore this month , its second site producing vaccine against pneumonia-causing bacteria . 
It will take up to two years to test the new plant before commercial production starts . 
The other site is in Belgium . 
Since the H1N1 outbreak began in April , the governments of Australia , New Zealand , Taiwan and Singapore have bought GSK 's Relenza flu treatment , Weber said . 
GSK said it has advised governments to buy and stock more of Relenza , which is used to treat flus such as the H1N1 virus that is spreading across the globe , for a more effective response in dealing with a viral outbreak . 
`` There have been some publications showing that there is some level of resistance developed for Tamiflu , '' Weber said of the product made by competitor Roche -LRB- ROG . 
`` In case there will be more resistance to Tamiflu , Relenza will be a good alternative . '' 
GSK is also developing vaccine against the H1N1 flu virus , which is reported to have killed 306 worldwide and infected at least 67,000 as of June 26 . 
The World Health Organisation -LRB- WHO -RRB- earlier this month declared the first flu pandemic of the 21st century and advised governments to prepare for a long battle against H1N1 . 
-LRB- Editing by Kevin Lim and Dan Lalor -RRB- -LRB- $ 1 0 = 0.6052 pounds -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
