Oil drops $ 4 on recession fears , US sanctions Syria NEW YORK | Thu Aug 18 , 2011 11:48 pm IST NEW YORK Aug 18 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Oil fell $ 4 a barrel on Thursday as a raft of weak U.S. economic data provided a fresh blow to shaky investor confidence , extending U.S. crude 's losses to 14 percent so far in August . 
Equities plunged , volatility jumped and gold hit a fresh record as traders said fears of a new recession were growing again , sparking another round of risk aversion reminiscent of the violent sell-offs at the start of this month . 
Brent crude fell as much as $ 4.10 a barrel to $ 106.50 at one stage , on course for the biggest percentage loss in 10 days . 
U.S. crude dropped almost 6 percent . 
Thursday 's declines follow a short-lived rebound that had seen Brent climb by around $ 9 in the previous six sessions . 
`` It 's much of the same -- concerns over European banks , U.S. deficits weighing on economic growth and the possibility of a global recession as the end result , '' said Chris Jarvis , senior analyst for Caprock Risk Management in Hampton Falls , `` These cross currents are driving wild swings for riskier asset classes such as equities and commodities , specifically crude oil . 
Until clarity improves , we expect volatility to remain elevated relative to historical norms . '' 
At 1.40 p.m. EDT -LRB- 1730 GMT -RRB- , Brent crude was down $ 3.95 at $ 106.65 a barrel , breaking below the 200-day moving average , a key technical indicator closely watched by traders . 
U.S. crude oil was down $ 5.40 , or 6 percent , at $ 83.18 a barrel . 
U.S. crude 's discount to Brent widened to about $ 24 a barrel . 
Early pressure from disappointing U.S. weekly jobless claims and July home sales reports sparked a steep sell-off mid-morning . 
Selling then intensified after a report showed factory activity in the U.S. Mid-Atlantic region in August dropped to the lowest level since March 2009 . 
Implied volatility in the oil market soared , with the Chicago Board Options Exchange 's Oil Volatility Index hitting 54.23 percent , its highest level in more than a week and snapping a steady downtrend . 
`` The market is in meltdown mode ; the data continues to stink . 
I do n't know that there 's much more to be said . 
We continue to be in a soft patch , '' said Sal Catrini , managing director for equities at Cantor Fitzgerald & Co in New York . 
The dollar rose and gold hit a new record of $ 1,825.99 an ounce as investors sought safe havens away from equities and industrial commodities . 
U.S. stocks tumbled 4 percent and the Reuters-Jefferies CRB , an index tracking 19 commodities , was down 2.4 percent in the steepest one-day loss since the U.S. credit downgrade earlier this month by Standard and Poor 's . 
Analysts have revised down forecasts for fuel consumption in recent weeks as concerns about global growth rose , with Morgan Stanley the latest bank to cut its forecast for global gross domestic product in 2011 and 2012 . 
Concerned the European debt crisis might spread to U.S. banks , the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has asked for more information about whether the U.S. units of big European lenders have reliable access to funds needed to operate , the Wall Street Journal reported . 
Oil trading volumes rose back up toward the 30-day average after three days of relatively light trade at the start of this week . 
The oil market is also closely watching developments in North Africa and the Middle East . 
In Libya , where around 1.6 million barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- of crude production has been cut by a six-month civil war , rebel forces took control of a refinery and blocked a main highway , further isolating Muammar Gaddafi 's Tripoli stronghold . 
U.S. President Barack Obama banned U.S. imports of Syrian oil as part of sanctions against Amman , and joined the European Union in calling for President Bashar al-Assad to step down after a five-month crackdown on protesters . 
Brent prices are up by almost 13 percent so far in 2011 , in part because of the Libyan outage , but are almost $ 20 a barrel below the post-2008 peak they hit back in April as European refiners scrambled to find alternatives to Libyan supplies . 
`` What was announced today will have a very limited impact as it does n't really prevent anyone from outside the U.S. dealing with Syrian oil , '' said Greg Priddy , global oil analyst at Eurasia Group in Washington . 
`` With 95 percent of Syrian oil exports going to the EU , you might see more action there , '' he added . 
Syria produces about 400,000 barrels of oil a day , exporting most of about 150,000 barrels per day to European countries including the Netherlands , Italy , France and Spain . 
About 10,000 barrels per day of Syrian oil products were exported to the United States in the first five months of 2011 , out of total imports of near 9 million bpd . 
