LONDON | Thu Aug 18 , 2011 1:03 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - London 's marine insurance market has not changed its risk assessment of Syria , despite mounting violence and fresh sanctions , although it is monitoring the situation closely , a senior official said on Thursday . 
The United States for the first time explicitly called on Thursday for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to step down because of his brutal crackdown on five months of protests against his authoritarian rule . 
U.S. President Barack Obama also imposed a fresh round of sanctions on Syria 's government , freezing assets in the United States as well as banning petroleum products of Syrian origin . 
The Joint War Committee -LRB- JWC -RRB- , which groups syndicate members from the Lloyd 's Market Association -LRB- LMA -RRB- and representatives from London 's insurance company market , said while the situation in Syria was concerning it had not reached a level where it would be added to its list of high risk areas . 
`` At this time , current events would not justify such action because the threat to maritime assets is simply not high enough , '' said LMA senior technical executive Neil Roberts . 
`` It is a delicate business . 
The JWC does not want to be too slow , but at the same time will not act without objective evidence that the situation is serious for shipping and underwriters , '' he told Reuters . 
The London marine insurance market plays an influential role in the global marine insurance industry . 
Syria 's official news agency SANA said on Wednesday four oil tankers were loading and unloading this week as scheduled , adding that reports of operations being hindered at the ports of Tartous and Banias were `` untrue . '' 
`` Local security forces assisted by the army started to attack Latakia on Saturday forcing the port to close . 
Today the port reopened and is working normally , '' a shipping agent source based in Syria told Reuters on Thursday . 
`` Tartous remains open and working normally . '' 
Some European oil traders are still supplying fuel to Damascus , and several international oil companies have significant interests in the country . 
`` This latest political signal from the United States will likely prompt a strategic re-assessment in the boardrooms of several firms , '' said John Drake , senior risk consultant with security firm AKE . 
`` Employees will become less willing to travel to the country to work , and companies may have to re-assess their reputational risks of doing business with the regime . 
J. Peter Pham , with the Atlantic Council think tank , said banks , insurers , and other firms could be at risk of breaching U.S. law irrespective of their location . 
`` This legal threat increases exponentially the risk of doing any business with Syria and , over time , could well choke off a great deal of commerce as businesses , including shippers , are adverse to any risk in today 's fragile economy , '' Pham said . 
Syrian forces have fired on peaceful protesters throughout the country , often at short range and without warning , killing at least 1,900 civilians , including children , U.N. investigators said on Thursday . 
Syria 's net oil exports were less than 117,000 barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- in 2009 , according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration . 
The impact of any Syrian energy disruption on global supplies would be much smaller than the loss of over 1.3 million bpd of oil and 956 million cubic feet a day of gas exported by Libya before rebels launched a revolt against Muammar Gaddafi in early 2011 . 
Libya was added in March to the JWC 's list of areas it considered high risk for merchant vessels and prone to war , strikes , terrorism and related perils . 
`` Libya provides a useful comparison -- events there were monitored and when it became clear that the situation was deteriorating , the committee acted to list the country , '' the LMA 's Roberts said . 
`` The JWC is aware of the situation in Syria and are monitoring it . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Jonathan Saul ; editing by Jason Neely -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
