2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Police detained about 100 protesters in the nation 's capital of Algiers , according to the Algerian League for Human Rights . 
The league is one of the main opposition groups that organized the rallies - unauthorized gatherings that came a day after embattled Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak stepped down . 
`` We are here once again to tell this government that we want an Algeria -LRB- that is -RRB- democratic , '' one protester told Reuters television . 
`` That 's why we are here today and we will always be , as this power is still here , we will be always here too . '' 
More than 3,000 demonstrators , including activists , students , doctors , and parliament members , joined the rally but were blocked by more than 30,000 police officers , said league president Mustafa Boushashi . 
the police and the clash . . 
that would be a good concert . . 
` maggie may ' like ` hot legs ' but ` young turks ' think ` toight 's the night ' ... February 12 , 2011 at 7:25 pm | Report abuse | the algerian police should learn from their african brothers in Egypt and protect the people . 
Beating and detaining protesters will only call for mass reinforcement from the people . 
Respect their rights of your countrymen ! 
Brutality is not a call to answer from higher powers . 
LIBERTY AND FREEDOM TO ALGERIA !!! 3,000 protesters ; 30,000 police ? 
Little out os balance , is n't it ? 
February 12 , 2011 at 7:57 pm | Report abuse | In all cases , it is time for the Algerians to work much more , and protest less . 
It is very easy to critisize , but more difficult to lead . 
One should not forget where we were , and where we are today ; $ 35 Billions of debts before , zero debt now , zero in reserves before , now $ 150 Billions . 
The President might not be the best one , but he is far from being the worst . 
He does not have the stick of Mosses , not the ring of Suleiman . 
If you have 35 million Algerians , you have a potential of 35 million grumpy people , each of them with a different vision of things . 
So , it is time to work for the construction of the country , each at individual level , then things would certainly keep improving by themselves . 
The problem is that we have way too many people whose sole goal in life is to criticize others , and only stick to the faults of individuals instead of concentrating on the good that they do or have ... enough good for the President that he stopped the killing among us , and restaured the peace , and this has no price ... THE IVORIANS SHOULD LEARN FROM THESE MOVEMENTS AND STOP RUNNING FROM . 
STORM THE GULF HOTEL AND SAVE YOURSELVES FROM WAR !!! VIVE LA PAIX , VIVE LES IVOIRIENES !!! Qu'est - ce que les Ivoiriens ont a voir avec ce que passe en Algerie ? 
Les loubards en Washington ont peur d' y perdre control , mais j' espere que cela y passera !!! February 14 , 2011 at 8:10 am | Report abuse | February 14 , 2011 at 8:39 am | Report abuse | -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
