A woman wearing an Algerian flag holds a banner at a demonstration on February 12 in Bordeaux , southwestern France . 
Tensions erupted in another restive North African nation as security forces in Algeria on Saturday clashed with anti-government protesters who chanted , `` Change the power . '' 
Police detained about 100 protesters in the nation 's capital of Algiers , according to the Algerian League for Human Rights . 
The league is one of the main opposition groups that organized the rallies -- unauthorized gatherings that came a day after embattled Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak stepped down . 
`` We are here once again to tell this government that we want an Algeria -LRB- that is -RRB- democratic , '' one protester told Reuters television . 
`` That 's why we are here today and we will always be , as this power is still here , we will be always here too . '' 
More than 3,000 demonstrators , including activists , students , doctors , and parliament members , joined the rally but were blocked by more than 30,000 police officers , said league president Mustafa Boushashi . 
`` The police attacked the demonstrators , '' Boushashi told CNN . 
`` Many activists were beaten and over a hundred were taken into custody , including the parliament members from the Rally for Culture and Democracy Party . '' 
Khalil AbdulMouminm , the league 's general secretary , called the situation `` very tense on the ground '' and said police were preventing protesters from assembling , with authorities blocking all entrances to the capital . 
`` We want this rally to break the wall of fear in the first place , '' AbdulMouminm said . 
`` And to trigger change in order to reach our legitimate demands , like lifting the emergency law after all these years , liberating media , freedom of political expression . '' 
Mubarak 's ouster -- fueled by 18 days of angry protests -- was preceded by last month 's overthrowing of Tunisian leader Zine El Abidine Ben Ali , helping stoke demands for reform in the Arab world . 
In the past few weeks , demonstrators in the region have protested against various issues , including unemployment , high food costs and corruption . 
The problems are similar to those that fueled uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia . 
`` Population growth and associated problems -- unemployment and underemployment , inability of social services to keep pace with rapid urban migration , inadequate industrial management and productivity , a decaying infrastructure -- continue to affect Algerian society , '' the U.S. State Department says in a background note about Algeria . 
