Jim Muir says there is little ceasefire left in Homs and Aleppo . 
This video has not been independently verified The UN Security Council has passed a resolution authorising the deployment of an advance team of monitors to Syria to oversee the ceasefire there . 
A small group of observers is expected to arrive in Syria on Sunday . 
The vote comes as a BBC reporter says the ceasefire appears to be in danger of collapsing in some parts of Syria . 
Activists said at least 20 people were killed as hostilities flared in the restive city of Homs and in a shooting at a funeral in Aleppo . 
UN resolution 2042 approves a team of up to 30 unarmed observers to deploy to Syria An initial group of six monitors will arrive in Syria on Sunday The rest of the advance team is set to follow later Once certain conditions are met , the UN will seek approval for an expanded force of about 250 observers Ban Ki-Moon has said he will set out concrete proposals by 18 April for this larger UN observer force The US ambassador to the UN , Susan Rice , condemned the bloodshed saying it raises `` renewed doubts about the sincerity of the -LRB- Syrian -RRB- regime 's commitment to the ceasefire '' . 
She said the resolution was an important opportunity to stop the bloodshed , adding that the burden was now on the Syrian regime . 
But Syria 's ambassador to the UN , Bashar Ja'afari , blamed opposition forces for the spike in violence , saying that more than 50 violations had taken place including `` many assassinations and sabotage operations '' . 
Syria 's opposition umbrella group , the Syrian National Council , welcomed the vote . 
Barbara Plett BBC UN correspondent This is the first time the Security Council has been able to adopt a legally binding resolution on the Syria crisis , which in itself is significant - it marks a narrowing of the differences in the international community that analysts say Damascus has exploited . 
But agreement even on this technical issue was hard won , and shows that divisions on the Council remain over the nature of the conflict . 
Western nations were able to keep the main emphasis on the regime 's responsibilities to meet its ceasefire commitments , but Russia insisted on also including the opposition 's obligations . 
And it was able to soften language on the conditions needed for the observers to operate effectively - the resolution now `` calls upon '' rather than `` requires '' the government to provide full freedom of movement and access . 
All of which suggests each step of Kofi Annan 's peace plan will be contested , not only on the ground but also in the Security Council . 
The resolution was passed unanimously after Russia approved a revised text , which authorised the deployment of a team of about 30 unarmed observers . 
Diplomats had revised a US-proposed draft on Friday to accommodate Russian objections . 
Russia 's ambassador said Moscow supported the resolution because of the need for a rapid deployment of observers . 
Indeed the UN has said that it intends to increase the deployment to 250 - but that is dependent on certain conditions and will require further approval . 
Meanwhile the BBC 's Jim Muir in Beirut , who has been monitoring developments in Syria , says that in parts of the country the ceasefire seems to be in danger of collapsing , unless something is done to shore it up . 
Saturday witnessed a surge in violence , with activists saying at least 20 people killed in several incidents around the country : In Homs activists said security forces pounded some quarters with tanks and rocket fire Violence was particularly acute in the Qarabis quarter of the city , where video from activists appeared to show immense destruction Several quarters of the city seemed to have a considerable presence of rebel fighters from the Free Syrian Army In Aleppo , in the north of the country , heavy casualties were reported from a shooting at the funeral of a protester Activists said security forces opened fire on mourners , but state television blamed armed rebels opening fire at random In Geneva , UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon welcomed the resolution and also announced that UN aid co-ordinator Valerie Amos would chair a humanitarian forum on Syria in Geneva on 20 April . 
British ambassador Mark Lyall Grant : '' Today 's resolution is absolutely clear about the commitments that the Syrian regime must now fulfil '' He said that about a million people had been displaced inside Syria over the past 13 months of fighting and added that many more had been forced to flee to neighbouring countries . 
Mr Annan , the envoy for the UN and Arab League , drew up the plan which called for an advance monitoring team to be deployed immediately to Syria to observe compliance with the truce . 
Mr Annan 's plan aims to end more than a year of violence in Syria which the UN says has killed more than 9,000 people , mostly civilians . 
The resolution passed on Saturday expresses an intention to establish a full mission once there is a sustained cessation of violence . 
It also puts the onus on the Syrian government to meet its ceasefire commitments . 
Syrian-led political process to address the aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people 2 . 
UN-supervised cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties to protect civilians 3 . 
All parties to ensure provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the fighting , and implement a daily two-hour humanitarian pause 4 . 
Authorities to intensify the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons 5 . 
Authorities to ensure freedom of movement throughout the country for journalists 6 . 
Authorities to respect freedom of association and the right to demonstrate peacefully The text `` calls upon all parties in Syria , including the opposition , immediately to cease all armed violence in all its forms . '' 
The BBC 's Barbara Plett at the United Nations in New York says that it provides important backing to Mr Annan 's peace plan . 
Significantly , it is the first time Security Council members have been able to overcome divisions and adopt a resolution on Syria , which is a diplomatic defeat for Damascus , she says . 
Analysts say Russia appears to have been key to persuading President Bashar al-Assad to accept both the Annan plan and the ceasefire . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
14th April 2012 - 19:53 Russia and China and Iran have supported Assad and some sent weapons . 
They should be ashamed of themselves . 
They are responsible for so much suffering and killing and destruction . 
Does Russia and China and Iran think that killing 9000 people and destroying everything is better than the regime change in Libya ? 
Proper governments in 2012 do not kill their own people for protesting . 
14th April 2012 - 19:18 The power of any government surely rests with the rights of its citizens . 
When these citizens are subjected to violence on this scale , simply for protesting their ruling government 's policies , something must be done to protect their rights . 
There can be no excuses for what has happened in Syria . 
The UN must take a much firmer stance . 
Whilst caution is a virtue , it is now morally redundant . 
14th April 2012 - 18:48 Sadly , I think the odds of the ceasefire holding are little to none . 
Assad knows that his only method for retaining control in the rebelling areas is fear , and the rebels are probably a little too hopeful of Western intervention if it does n't work . 
It boils down to blood , power and revenge , and no rules have ever kept those in check . 
14th April 2012 - 18:44 the UN should send a large armed peacekeeping force in NOW . 
all of Assad 's forces should be disarmed then all the rebel forces should be disarmed then pave the way for elections -LRB- use force if thay need to -RRB- but as soon as all the heavy weapons are held by the UN then most of the govment forces would be powerless to stop the people doing what thay want 14th April 2012 - 17:59 The deployment of monitors is an imperative step . 
The Syrian government needs to be watched like an hawk . 
In the same breath , rebels should follow the conditions laid down by Kofi Annan . 
There are bound to be violations from both sides . 
The killing of civilians should stop . 
Impartial observers should report back to the Security Council . 
Concrete action should follow . 
All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
