Patient developed symptoms on domestic flight from Beijing to Chengdu , in Sichuan , after traveling from the US Monday 11 May 2009 13.41 BST A student recently returned from the US has become mainland China 's first confirmed case of swine flu , prompting the Chinese authorities to try to quarantine all those who shared a flight with him . 
The 30-year-old patient , who has been named only as Bao , tested positive for the type-A H1N1 virus . 
Up to 130 passengers who shared flights with the infected man are in isolation , the state news agency Xinhua reported , with authorities sending text messages to mobile phones nationwide asking those who had been on board the flights to report to the disease prevention bureau . 
Bao arrived in Beijing on Friday having traveled home from America via Tokyo . 
He developed symptoms on a domestic flight from Beijing to Chengdu , in Sichuan , the health ministry said . 
He went to hospital and was transferred to the city 's infectious disease hospital after being found `` weakly positive '' for swine flu . 
The country 's only previous confirmed case was a Mexican man who had traveled to Hong Kong . 
Visa agents and the official Chinese visa service in the UK said people who had just visited Canada , Spain , Mexico or the US would have to wait seven days before applying for a Chinese visa . 
But a foreign ministry press officer in Beijing said he was unaware of such a policy , and that any such change in procedure would have been announced . 
Deng Haihua , a health ministry spokesman , told reporters that of the 233 people on board the flight from Tokyo , 106 were foreigners ; roughly a quarter of them were Japanese . 
All but one of the passengers on the Beijing-Chengdu flight were from mainland China , Deng said . 
`` The local health authorities are doing their utmost now to try to track down these passengers , '' he said . 
China has been accused in the past of not acting quickly enough to combat the spread of diseases , especially during the 2003 global outbreak of Sars . 
The Chinese authorities , chastened by that experience , have been accused of overreactingn to swine flu . 
China 's response has drawn complaints from Mexico that its citizens were quarantined on the basis of their nationality alone . 
The World Health Organisation today confirmed that the virus has infected a total of 4,379 people across the world . 
Its official tally , which tends to lag behind national reports but is also held to be more secure , includes 45 deaths in the disease epicentre , Mexico , two deaths in the US , and one each in Canada and Costa Rica . 
