Pam Anderson will appear in an Indian version of `` Big Brother . 
`` AP LOS ANGELES -- Pamela Anderson says she 's doing what she can to combat the catastrophic oil spill that continues to pollute the Gulf of Mexico and threaten America 's southern shores . 
But is she one of the few stars stepping up to play a role in the clean-up ? 
`` It 's terrible , it 's awful . 
It feels like it is the end of the world to me , '' the actress\/animal rights activist told Pop Tarts at last week 's Big Bluff Online Trivia Game launch . 
`` I 'm working with international bird rescue , they 're expecting -LRB- it to get a lot worse -RRB- which is unbelievable . 
It 's the worst thing that could happen , and we wo n't know what the effects are until later . '' 
And as thousands of gallons of oil continue to spill every day , it seems the majority of Hollywood , a community often given to preaching on `` green '' issues , is staying away . 
Granted , there were some celebrities like Conan OBrien and Jimmy Fallon who took to Twitter to express their thoughts on the issue , but unlike the tragedy in Haiti in January , there has n't been an outpouring of donations , large-scale fund-raisers , contribution-driven websites and hotlines , or PSAs encouraging Americans to do all they can to help out . 
`` Hollywood stars have a romance with saving foreign countries , they see America as this rich and powerful country that should fix problems on its own , '' said media expert Michael Levine . 
`` Celebrities feel heroic in saving people from other places . 
Patriotism is n't of interest , sometimes Hollywood forgets that America needs care and consideration too . '' 
Hollywood 's heavyweights are certainly not afraid to dig very deep into their pockets in times of global disaster . 
It was well-documented in the press that celebrities including Brad Pitt , Angelina Jolie , Sandra Bullock and Madonna collectively donated millions to the earthquake relief . 
Actor George Clooney used his star status to raise over $ 57 million in his `` Hope For Haiti '' telethon . 
Queen Latifah , Sean `` Diddy '' Combs and Pharrell Williams hosted another telethon in conjunction with BET , and Sean Penn even hightailed it to the poverty-stricken country to personally lend his hand with refugee efforts . 
But according to other entertainment industry experts , it 's not a case of celebrities only wanting to help out foreign countries : it 's a case of this being a man-made disaster as opposed to a natural one . 
`` It 's politically safer when its victims on one side and a catastrophic event on the other . 
In that case , there is only one side to be on . 
Man-made catastrophes are not as clear-cut . 
This one is filled with politically loaded issues of off-shore oil drilling , dependence on foreign oil and the environment , '' explained Glenn Selig , founder of The Publicity Agency . 
`` Plus BP employees died . 
You do n't want to make those victims part of an ` evil ' oil company that created the mess . 
It 's complicated , which makes it a very tough issue to rally around . '' 
Media expert Dana Livingston Ward echoed Selig 's sentiments . 
`` We 're all referring to this environmental mishap as ` the BP oil spill , ' which automatically places blame on BP , therefore no one - Hollywood included - feels the need to pay for a problem caused by someone else , '' said Ward . 
`` In the end , the Gulf oil spill is an issue that does indeed affect our people , so celebs and the rest of Americans should be just as quick to help create a solution for this latest disaster ... even if it 's simply speaking up to raise awareness and thus force the guilty party to remedy the situation in more timely manner . '' 
Still , there are some stars that are n't afraid to bypass the politics to do what they can for the sake of the environment and those affected . 
`` Waterworld '' star Kevin Costner , who 15 years ago began funding the work of Louisiana-based firm Ocean Therapy solutions , has offered up his multi-million dollar machines which function like a vacuum to separate water and oil , purifying both in the process . 
Director James Cameron has loaned the submersibles used to shoot `` Titanic '' to the crews trying to stop the underwater geyser , and Robert Redford appeared in a commercial encouraging Americans to `` Call For Clean Energy Now . '' 
In addition Lenny Kravitz , John Legend , and Mos Def recently performed at a benefit for the Gulf Relief Foundation in New Orleans to raise funds for fisherman affected by the disaster , and 90 's pop sensation Sophie B. Hawkins is donating 100 percent of the net proceeds from her new song `` The Land , the Sea & the Sky '' to the Waterkeeper Alliance 's clean-up efforts in the region . 
But despite her concern over the wildlife affected by the spill , Anderson has faith that President Obama , despite the harsh criticism he has been under for not doing enough . 
`` I -LRB- totally blame -RRB- the oil people . 
They made a big mistake of not having a back-up plan , '' Anderson added . 
`` I would definitely like to see Obama do more , but I also want to support him and what he stands for . 
I think he 's a good president and he 's very compassionate , and we have to just trust that he knows best . '' 
Additional reporting by Deidre Behar Sign up for free e-mail news alerts from FoxNews.com and FoxBusiness.com . 
