With Close Ties to Wall St. , Hoboken , N.J. , Feels Strain of Financial Crisis Jonathan Gordon had to leave Hoboken , N.J. , after losing his financial-sector job . 
He now lives in San Antonio . 
-LRB- By Joel Salcido For The Washington Post -RRB- The Manhattan skyline as seen from Hoboken . 
The city 's proximity to Wall Street helped it become a trendy place to live . 
-LRB- By Mark Lennihan -- Associated Press -RRB- HOBOKEN , N.J. -- Jonathan Gordon is a survivor . 
On Sept. 11 , 2001 , Gordon , a longtime Hoboken resident , was working for the financial firm Instinet on the 13th floor of the World Trade Center 's North Tower when the first hijacked plane hit . 
He recalls clambering out of the burning tower `` one step at a time , '' and reaching the sidewalk only to look up at the second plane striking the South Tower . 
He had to run to avoid being hit by debris . 
`` I view it as a relatively good day because I got out unscathed -- a number of my friends did n't , '' Gordon said . 
This year , Wall Street experienced another type of crisis : a financial meltdown that saw some of New York 's most storied investment and banking houses fail , be forced into mergers or get rescued through government bailouts . 
This time , Gordon 's luck ran out . 
In March , his new firm , Bear Stearns , was taken over by J.P. Morgan Chase . 
The day after Labor Day , Gordon returned to the office after two weeks off for surgery and was told he was being dismissed . 
With tens of thousands of layoffs in the financial sector and few jobs to be found , Gordon , 55 , has been forced to leave Hoboken , his home of the past 24 years and where he had become well known as a community activist and constant presence at City Council budget meetings . 
Late last month , Gordon resettled in San Antonio . 
`` I found a job -- a lot of my friends are n't so lucky , '' he said in a telephone interview from his new home . 
He said he knows of other colleagues from Bear Stearns who have relocated for jobs in other parts of the country . 
Gordon said he will miss Hoboken , calling it `` a wonderful community . '' 
Speaking of the city 's inextricable link to the fortunes of the financial capital across the Hudson River , he said , `` When Wall Street sneezes , Hoboken catches cold . '' 
A generation ago , Hoboken was probably best known as the birthplace of Frank Sinatra and the gritty setting for the Marlon Brando film `` On the Waterfront . '' 
But since the boom days on Wall Street during the heady and prosperous 1990s , Hoboken has been able to reinvent itself as a city of pricey high-rise condos , top-rated restaurants and thriving , often raucous , nightlife -- all based on its proximity to Wall Street , a few minutes away by ferry or PATH commuter trains . 
Its most famous resident now is New York Giants quarterback Eli Manning . 
Just across the river from Manhattan , Hoboken was often jokingly called New York 's sixth borough . 
But being tied so closely to Wall Street also carries huge vulnerabilities , as Hoboken saw with the 2001 terrorist attacks . 
Hoboken was the area , by Zip code , to suffer the largest number of casualties per capita , with 57 residents killed . 
-LRB- The official numbers vary because some Hoboken victims carried driver 's licenses from other jurisdictions . -RRB- 
`` We 're a city which is a square mile with 50,000 people living in it , but in the greater metropolitan area , we had the largest loss of life in the world , '' said Hoboken Mayor David Roberts , who was mayor on Sept. 11 , 2001 . 
`` That 's not a laudable statistic , '' he said . 
`` It 's just a fact of life that we are so linked to the city . 
We are so linked to Wall Street , and so many of our people are in the financial industry . '' 
