Detective Orlando Martinez was one of the first defense witnesses called Lawyers defending Conrad Murray , Michael Jackson 's doctor , have called their first witnesses . 
They will have to counter four weeks of testimony from prosecution witnesses , who alleged that Dr Murray acted unethically and with gross negligence Dr Murray is charged with involuntary manslaughter in a Los Angeles court . 
Among the first witnesses were a doctor and a nurse practitioner , who had both previously treated or counselled Jackson . 
Dr Allan Metzger , a friend of Jackson 's for over two decades , testified that Jackson had requested anaesthetics from him as a sleep aid . 
During their cross-examination , prosecutors used the same testimony to show that other medical professionals rejected using intravenous or oral anaesthetics to help Jackson sleep . 
Cherilyn Lee , a holistic nurse practitioner who treated Jackson with vitamin infusions , testified that she urged Jackson to undergo a sleep study for his insomnia , but he refused , saying he did n't have enough time . 
Ms Lee , who has spoken publicly about Jackson requesting propofol from her , is expected to tell jurors about further exchanges with the late singer when she continues testifying on Tuesday . 
The defense also questioned Detectives Dan Myers and Orlando Martinez about testimony from bodyguard Alberto Alvarez . 
Mr Alvarez said that after Jackson 's breathing stopped , Dr Murray told him to place equipment and vials into a bag before calling the 911 emergency service . 
The defense has contended that Mr Alvarez may have changed his story after a coroner 's official report was released . 
Dr Murray is not expected to testify , but the defense has said they will call their own propofol expert to counter testimony of anaesthesiologist Steven Shafer , the prosecution witness who testified for five days . 
Defense lawyers argued in opening statements that Jackson could have drunk an extra dose of propofol , but later told the court they would drop the argument based on their own studies . 
Prosecutors have portrayed Dr Murray as grossly negligent for administering the drug outside of a hospital setting . 
The defense has argued that he was trying to wean a troubled Jackson off the drug , and that the pop superstar , desperate for sleep during rehearsals for a planned comeback concert , administered the fatal dose himself . 
Correspondents say that with multiple witnesses already called on Monday , the case could go to the jury as early as the end of this week . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
