A shopkeeper , selling fake foreign brand shoes , waits for customers in Beijing in this May 8 , 2008 file photo . 
MANILA | Thu May 14 , 2009 10:59 am BST MANILA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Global trade in counterfeit goods , including medicines , CDs and DVDs , is expected to rise to nearly $ 1 trillion this year as economies worldwide continue to slump , security experts said on Thursday . 
An estimated $ 800 billion in fake cigarettes , branded shoes , bags and belts , and pirated movies flowed across the globe in 2007 , Stephen Sayell , vice president of Hong Kong-based Asia Risk group , told Reuters . 
That figure is expected to rise 20 percent this year . 
`` As the global financial crisis deepens , the demand for much cheaper consumer goods rises , boosting sales of counterfeiters and movie pirates , '' Sayell said on the sidelines of a three-day anti-terrorism seminar in Manila . 
Sayell said trade in counterfeit products has exceeded the global narcotics trade , worth more than $ 400 billion a year , citing studies made by his security consultancy group . 
Proceeds from the sale of counterfeit cigarettes , CDs and DVDs and branded consumer goods could be funding terrorist groups around the world because the activities are considered high profit and low-risk , he added . 
A former Scotland Yard officer , Sayell cited his experience in dealing with the Irish Republican Army 's counterfeiting operations to raise funds for their campaign against British rule in Northern Ireland . 
`` The IRA shifted from extorting money from the people to distributing pirated movies because they do n't find anything wrong stealing from Steven Spielberg , '' he added . 
John Enoch , another Asia Risk executive based in Singapore , warned of the potential spread of fake anti-viral drugs in the face of the global scare of a new deadly strain of flu virus that has killed over 50 people and infected more than 5,000 worldwide . 
`` We expect a boom in counterfeit medicines and vaccines against flu , '' Enoch said , warning of potential high risk of a public health threat because of the improper use of anti-viral drugs . 
In the Philippines , the health department has already issued a warning against offers by some medical facilities to provide anti-flu shots against the deadly strain of A-H1N1 virus that originated from Mexico . 
Last month , the World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- warned against the proliferation of fake anti-malaria medicines in the Mekong area , blaming the counterfeit drugs for the emergence of a new strain of malaria that could spread in the region . 
-LRB- Reporting by Manny Mogato ; Editing by Raju Gopalakrishnan and Alex Richardson -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
