Now that the panic over the H1N1 flu strain has somewhat subsided , experts are contemplating what role Twitter played in helping the virus , commonly known as swine flu , go viral . 
The H1N1 virus has caused around 6,500 infections in 33 countries and 65 people have died so far , according to the World Health Organization . 
Common seasonal flu kills up to 500,000 people a year worldwide . 
So did Twitter put the media before the message and escalate anxieties by propagating rumors of biological attack and pork production infection ? 
Or did the Twittersphere prove itself to be the first choice in information for the wired era ? 
Tell us what you think . 
- Eric Auchard is a Reuters columnist . 
The views expressed are his own -- If you look no further than the latest headlines , you might think a worldwide flu pandemic was already underway with a very real threat to millions of lives . 
While there are many unanswered questions early on in the outbreak of flu from Mexico , it is crucial to remember that the number of deaths and reported infections remain small -- even if its spread across the globe has proved worryingly rapid . 
While the infected need access to medical care and anti-viral drugs , the rest of the world needs an inoculation against scary statistics and misinformation . 
-- James Saft is a Reuters columnist . 
The opinions expressed are his own -- Besides being a human tragedy , a deadly pandemic is , quite literally , the last thing a global economy suffering a huge drop off in trade and activity needs . 
To be very clear , we 've no idea how severe or widespread the evolving outbreak of a new form of swine flu will be and indications that it seems to be becoming milder as it travels from Mexico are reassuring . 
Dean Wright is Global Editor , Ethics , Innovation and News Standards . 
Any opinions are his own . 
There s nothing like a disease outbreak to highlight the value of the media in alerting and informing the public in the face of an emergency . 
There s also nothing like it to bring out some of our more excessive behavior , essentially shouting Run for your lives ! 
-LRB- but , whatever you do , stay tuned , keep reading the website and do n't forget to buy the paper ! -RRB- . 
