By Caroline Duffield BBC News , Niger Delta Campaigners say there are 300 oil spills every year in the Delta Visitors to the Nigerian village of Kpor , deep in the Niger Delta , are greeted by strange sights : silver frogs blink from gleaming puddles , sunlight bounces from an eerie black lake , and dragonflies hover over cauldrons of tar . 
This is Rivers State , an area abundant in oil and gas . 
Environmentalists call the Delta the global capital of oil pollution , but unlike the Gulf of Mexico , there are no underwater robots , flotillas of scientists or oil booms here . 
On 12 May 2009 , Shell 's Bomo manifold blew up , leaking massive amounts of crude . 
Local people say 39 hectares were contaminated . 
A second leak - from a derelict oil tap - had already been continuously spilling oil for years . 
Shell hired a local company to clean up , but the area remains an oil slick . 
`` It kills our fish , destroys our skin , spoils our streams , we can not drink , '' says Saturday Pirri , a local palm wine tapper . 
`` I have no livelihood left . '' 
His father taught him to make palm wine but today the trees yield only a quarter of what they once provided . 
Kpor is a world away from the Gulf of Mexico . 
In the Niger Delta , there is little independent monitoring of spills , and the companies themselves disclose virtually no data about their own pollution . 
But , according to the Nigerian government , there were more than 7,000 spills between 1970 and 2000 . 
Environmentalists believe spills - large and small - happen at a rate of 300 every year . 
Site after site visited by the BBC - in both Bayelsa State and Ogoniland - had happened months before , and still not been cleaned up . 
In May an Exxon Mobil pipeline in Akwa Ibom sprang a leak - one of several spills involving the company . 
Environmentalists , journalists and local people described oil leaking for days in a massive spill . 
They say the leak was less than 300 barrels and that it was isolated on the same day . 
The claims of the oil company , and the scepticism of environmentalists , are a good example of how little clear agreement there is about the size of spills . 
`` The Gulf of Mexico has drawn the attention of the whole world , '' says Erabanabari Kobah , a local environmentalist . 
`` Even the president of the United States must go there to see it . 
The people there get compensation . 
But here , you must go to court . 
You can not win against the oil companies in court . ' 
The oil industry is accused of a sharp double standard in its operations - of taking advantage of Nigeria 's lack of environment law and weak regulation , while observing higher standards of safety and maintenance overseas . 
`` It is a grave situation , '' says Kingsley Ogundu Chinda , environment commissioner in Rivers State . 
`` I blame the owners of the facilities . 
They are economical with the truth . 
They are not sincere in their practice . 
They are not sincere with the people . '' 
He also says the government has failed to force companies to observe the law . 
The joint ventures operating here are effectively Nigerian companies , operating under Nigerian law . 
The Bille 2 Awoba Flowstation is guarded by the military Shell , for example , owns only a 30 % stake in SPDC - the Shell Petroleum Development Company . 
The rest is Nigeria 's national oil company , the NNPC , and smaller stakeholders . 
The industry certainly has the spotlight - but not all of the power - nor all of the responsibility . 
It is a dangerous and unpredictable business . 
Oil workers and oil contractors are regularly kidnapped for ransom . 
Heavily armed militants blow up pipelines , stealing oil in a process known as `` bunkering '' . 
Shell says most of the spills are caused by sabotage , and therefore beyond their control . 
It is impossible to verify . 
`` We take every precaution that a spill as a result of our operation is kept to an absolute minimum , '' says Mutiu Sunmonu , Shell 's managing director in Nigeria . 
`` I can tell you that we have been able to achieve that in terms of the spills that are within our control . '' 
But oil industry insiders also speak of derelict infrastructure . 
They talk of decades-old pipelines , rusting oil taps , corroding manifolds , and historic underinvestment reaching back decades . 
We decided to examine flow stations and pipelines for ourselves . 
`` Getting close is not easy , '' shouts Evangelist Ibinabobo Sanipe , over the roar of the speedboat . 
As national secretary of the Oil and Gas Host Communities Association , he is traveling with us . 
Oil companies ' business in Nigeria , and their participation here , is a force for good '' End Quote Mutiu Sunmonu Shell 's managing director `` The military guard this place fiercely , '' he warns . 
We bounce above the waves towards a column of dark smoke on the horizon , it is the Bille 2 Awoba Flowstation . 
Before long , a big military vessel warns us to pull over , with our hands in the air . 
But with just a few jokes and handshakes , the soldiers are smiling and joking . 
We continue our journey , having paid no bribe , and shown no identification . 
Closer to the station , orange flames flicker through the trees , and the air is thick with fumes . 
Another military patrol is just metres away , behind the station , but we 're out of sight . 
For 25 minutes , we film the roaring gas flares , before two men in a canoe ask us to leave . 
`` It is very disturbing , '' says Evangelist Sanipe . 
`` If Shell is serious about stopping sabotage and oil spills , we would not have got so close . '' 
But protecting oil facilities from attack by armed gangs is the responsibility of the Nigerian military . 
In the past , spectacular attacks on oil facilities in Nigeria have threatened the country 's energy security , and delivered shocks to the global oil markets . 
The ease with which we reached the Awoba Flowstation will raise questions over the security of oil facilities . 
It is clear that the desperate efforts to halt the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the US have prompted many Nigerians to look hard at their own environmental catastrophe . 
There is a sense of anger , even among those a long way from the Delta . 
Shell insists it is misplaced . 
`` I have no regrets , '' insists Mutiu Sunmonu , Shell 's managing director . 
`` I am convinced that the oil companies ' business in Nigeria , and their participation here , is a force for good . '' 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
