20 April : A surge in oil and gas causes an explosion on the Deepwater Horizon oil drilling rig . 
The blowout preventer system of valves -LRB- BOP -RRB- at the well head on the seabed is believed to have failed . 
22 April : The oil rig sinks and the riser pipe that connected it to the well falls to the seabed . 
Oil and gas continue to flow from the pipe and blowout preventer , causing a five mile -LRB- 8km -RRB- oil slick . 
The blowout preventer is meant to be the ultimate fail safe against pressure surges . 
Its valves should have closed , shutting off the oil and gas from the reservoir and sealing the well . 
The initial failure of the blowout preventer , and subsequent efforts to remotely shut it down , result in a constant leak of oil and gas from holes in the bent riser pipe on the seabed and above the BOP . 
As oil continues to flow into the sea , initial efforts are made on the surface to contain the leak using booms and dispersants . 
The response grows daily and soon hundreds of vessels are involved , including skimmers , tugs and recovery ships as well as dozens of aircraft and multiple mobile offshore drilling units . 
2 May : BP starts drilling the first of two relief wells . 
The aim is to connect with the original well and then pump in heavy liquid to stem the flow of oil . 
Drilling for the second starts on 16 May . 
Both are expected to take two to three months to complete . 
5 May : BP successfully stops the flow of oil from the end of the drilling pipe - one of three leak points . 
Around the same time , a huge containment dome is lowered over the main leak but this fails on 8 May as the dome is blocked by frozen hydrate crystals caused by leaking gas . 
16 May : A tube is inserted into the leaking pipe to funnel off leaking oil and gas to a ship on the surface . 
26 May : BP starts its `` top kill '' procedure in an attempt to plug the well by pumping mud into the blowout preventer from a vessel on the surface . 
A manifold system of pipes and valves is connected to the BOP and a drill pipe from the vessel . 
Pipes from the manifold are attached to the `` choke and kill '' bypass systems inside the blowout preventer . 
This gives access to the BOP system 's main valves . 
Heavy mud with a large proportion of clay is pumped into the BOP under high pressure . 
The aim is to force enough mud into the well to stop it flowing . 
A `` junk shot '' mixture of materials such as rubber , golf balls and rope is injected in an effort to help block the flow . 
29 May : BP announces that the top kill system has failed and the oil spill continues . 
2 June : BP starts the next procedure - to lower a cap over the blowout preventer to capture the leaking oil and funnel it to a surface vessel . 
The riser pipe is cut and removed and the cap is lowered onto the top section of the blowout preventer , known as the lower marine riser package or LMRP . 
The cap is not a tight fit and oil is still leaking around it , but it does collect about 15,000 barrels of oil a day . 
16 June : Engineers open a second route to the surface by connecting the lines used in the top kill procedure to a floating rig called Q4000 . 
This collects about 10,000 barrels a day . 
10 July : The LMRP cap is removed to be replaced with a tightly fitting capping stack , designed to seal the well . 
15 July : With the sealing cap fitted , all three rams - or valves - inside are turned off and the flow of oil is stopped for the first time since 20 April . 
In the following days , tests are conducted to check whether pressure will cause oil to leak from elsewhere in the BOP or well . 
The tests are successful . 
Work begins on the next process : a `` static kill '' which involves pumping drilling mud through the blowout preventer into the well and reservoir . 
5 August : Engineers follow up the mud with cement , blocking the well . 
US Government scientists announce the total estimated amount of oil spilt into the Gulf of Mexico is 4.9 million barrels . 
Work continues on the relief wells . 
The plan is to use at least one relief well to pump more mud and cement into the main well to totally seal or `` kill '' it . 
The well can then be abandoned although BP says it will continue clean-up work in the area for `` as long as it takes '' . 
The cost of cleaning up the oil spillage in the Gulf of Mexico now runs into billions of dollars , according to BP estimates . 
The company has tried a number of methods to shut down the leak from the damaged oil well - often innovating as subsequent attempts fail . 
Although some of the methods have been tried and tested at incidents elsewhere in the world , they have not been carried out at such great depth as the Deepwater Horizon leak - 5,000 feet -LRB- 1.5 km -RRB- below the surface . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
