After two days visiting areas of the Gulf Coast affected by the BP oil leak , US President Barack Obama has addressed the nation live from the Oval Office inside the White House . 
You can see video from the White House at the top of the page , and analysis from BBC correspondents below , as well as the latest from the blogs , Twitter and e-mails from our readers . 
2200 : Our live coverage ends now - but you can keep up with the latest developments here . 
Thanks very much for joining us . 
2159 : Conservative think tank The Heritage Foundation tweets : President Obama 's message tonight was the wrong one . 
We need leadership , not politics . 
Read The Heritage Foundation 's tweets 2156 : Joshua Green , The Atlantic `` Seizing the moment , '' invoking World War II vets and the moon landing are all well and good , but it rang pretty hollow to me ... For all his praise of the House climate bill and talk about the `` consequences of inaction '' and so forth , not once did he utter the phrase , `` It 's time to put a price on carbon . '' 
And that suggests to me that this speech was primarily about containing the damage to his administration , and was not the pivot point in the energy debate that many people were hoping for . 
2155 : Kedar from India writes : We make BP pay for this damage . 
Who will pay India for the Bhopal gas tragedy ? 
2152 : Taegan Goddard , Political Wire Though Obama called for a `` national mission '' to transition to clean energy , he was vague on what he actually wants to see in a comprehensive energy bill . 
In doing so , Obama is just another president that has refused to ask Americans for the necessary sacrifice to finally achieve this greater national goal . 
He missed a golden opportunity . 
2150 : Energy politics blogger David Roberts tweets : I feel like , unlike Congress , the public is desperate for purpose and ambition right now . 
Everything Obama 's doing is ... managerial . 
Read David Roberts 's tweets 2140 : Daniel K from Philadelphia , US , writes : I think Obama gave a good speech , and it was exactly what we need to hear from a leader about this crisis . 
2137 : The BBC 's Paul Adams in Washington When the president speaks from the Oval Office , it 's serious , and it 's personal . 
This was Barack Obama attempting to show that he is now in charge of dealing with the worst environmental disaster in US history . 
He spoke in lofty terms about moving away from fossil fuels , embracing a clean-energy future and shaping the country 's destiny . 
But most Americans just want the leak to stop and that , two months after it began , remains a distant prospect . 
2135 : Bpdeadbirds uses data from a Deepwater Horizon Response report to provide updates on the total number of animals that have died apparently due to the spill . 
It tweets : `` Today 's BP death tally : 770 birds , 341 sea turtles , 41 mammals . '' 
Read Bpdeadbirds 's tweets 2132 : This just in : The White House announces President Obama will address reporters in the Rose Garden following his meeting with BP execs . 
We were n't expecting another appearance : does that mean the White House is unhappy with how tonight 's speech has been received ? 
2130 : You can read the full speech here . 
2125 : Ezra Klein , WashingtonPost.com The optimistic take , at least for environmentalists , is that this is the language and approach Obama uses when he really means to legislate . 
The pessimistic take is that Obama shied away from clearly describing the problem , did not endorse specific legislation , did not set benchmarks , and chose poll-tested language rather than a sharper case that might persuade sceptics . 
2115 : Linda R Friar from Pacific Palisades , California , US , writes : Obama needs to deal more effectively with the current environmental disaster reaching our shores , and stop campaigning about energy proposals that at the moment are irrelevant . 
2104 : That 's it for President Obama 's first address to the nation from the Oval Office and Robert Gibbs 's live question session . 
But you can find more quickfire analysis and reaction brought to you here for the next hour . 
2103 : Mr Gibbs ends the live question session talking about the long-term need to restore the coastline along the Gulf . 
He 'll be taking more questions from the public tomorrow . 
2102 : Michael Whitney , firedoglake Basically , Obama offered no specifics on how to bring some life to the recovery effort , used BP 's unfounded statistics to promise about the cleanup , and again offered no specifics for what he will do to help the people of the Gulf . 
There 's a whole lot of pretty sentiments and references to maritime tradition , but nothing about what the administration will do differently . 
2059 : Media critic Howard Kurtz tweets : On Fox , Palin rips Obama speech , says if he does n't admit oil needs `` we will be brought to our knees , '' `` bowing '' to Saudis and Venezuelans . 
Read Howard Kurtz 's tweets 2056 : Mr Gibbs says that the government needs to end its subsidies for big oil , but it does n't look like he 'll get much co-operation from Congress on that front . 
Today , the Senate voted against closing tax loopholes that would have resulted in $ 35bn in taxes from oil companies . 
2055 : M2ab tweets : Obama 's speech sounded like his typical ` Hope ' speech . 
Read M2ab 's tweets 2055 : Yikes ! 
Technical hitches on the White House live page . 
2052 : Mr Gibbs appears to be sticking closely to his unofficial job description : do n't overshadow your boss and do n't make news unintentionally . 
He has referred several times to his son , and his hopes for a cleaner future for him . 
2051 : Chris Cillizza , The Fix , WashingtonPost.com Obama began the speech by drawing an overt comparison between the war against al-Qaeda in Afghanistan and the `` oil spill that is assaulting our shores and our citizens '' . 
He repeatedly referred back to military terms - `` battle '' and `` siege '' to name two - to frame the challenge before the country , and even referenced the build-up of material in the early stages of World War II as evidence of the American people 's ability to conquer seemingly impossible challenges . 
The goal of all that war talk ? 
To unify the country behind the government 's attempts to solve the problem . 
2050 : Tiina from Helsinki , Finland , writes : The US has to take serious and quick action on environmental issues . 
They must join global efforts - they have too much influence worldwide to stay behind . 
2049 : Mr Gibbs says he knows Mr Obama well and assures viewers that Mr Obama is not going to be the next in a long line of presidents who just walks up to Capitol Hill and says he is going to do something about America 's dependence on foreign oil . 
He 's going to do something . 
Mr Gibbs calls on Congress to take bold steps to assist the president . 
2048 : Mr Gibbs is careful to distinguish between `` BP 's oil spill '' and BP 's response , and the response of the administration . 
2043 : Daniel Foster , The Corner , National Review Online I have to admit I was somewhat surprised to see President Obama use his first Oval Office address to repeat populist platitudes about `` making BP pay '' and hit the bullet points , for the umpteenth time , of the Democrats ' ill-advised cap-and-trade scheme . 
Oval addresses are best reserved for wars and resignations . 
2043 : Mr Gibbs says he will not let BP dictate media access to the Deepwater Horizon site . 
2042 : In case you are wondering , the purple bracelet Mr Gibbs is wearing is for the nine-year-old daughter of friends of his who is battling cancer . 
2042 : Donna Wills from Largo in Florida , US , writes : Please help us , this is all some people here know . 
Florida has been my home for thirty years and now it is slowly dying . 
2034 : At several points in his presidency , Mr Obama has used a speech to change the conversation . 
Remember the speech on race prompted by the Rev Wright videos ? 
Remember the address to Congress about healthcare ? 
Do you think he used his oratorical skills to good effect tonight ? 
2030 : HellNoYouDidnt tweets : This speech is the death nail for Democrats . 
Tea Partiers , Republicans and Independents , Do n't screw this one up ! 
Read HellNoYouDidnt 's tweets 2029 : Wonkette We planned to do liveblogging on this historic night of Barack Obama 's first televised speech from the Oval Office , but it went so quick ! 
Still , we can live-blog whatever nonsense people say on the teevee in response , right ? 
2025 : The BBC 's Paul Adams in Washington It 's all about Americans shaping their own destiny . 
The president has made a lofty appeal to American idealism . 
It wo n't be universally welcomed at a time when Americans are mostly worried about the more pressing need simply to stop the leak . 
2025 : We 're now waiting for Press Secretary Robert Gibbs to answer questions from members of the public , who have made their submissions via YouTube . 
You can watch Mr Gibbs here . 
2024 : RaklGps tweets : Mr President , the engineers at NASA are indeed the innovative types we need . 
Does this mean you will refund NASA ? 
Read RaklGps 's tweets 2023 : RL Miller tweets : Obama is n't making the connection between fossil fuels and climate change . 
Biggest missed opportunity ever . 
Read RL Miller 's tweets 2022 : Jed Lewison , Daily Kos Turns out the President does n't sound quite as eager to lift the moratorium as Drill , Bobby , Drill -LRB- Louisiana Governor Bobby -RRB- Jindal would like . 
2020 : President Obama ends his speech on an optimistic note , saying that Americans will pray that a hand may guide them through the storm towards a brighter day . 
2019 : The BBC 's Paul Adams in Washington The president says the Minerals Management Service had `` over the last decade '' become `` emblematic of a failed philosophy that views all regulation with hostility '' . 
Mr Obama is perhaps too subtle to blame the Bush administration by name for his present predicament , but this is clearly a jab at his predecessor . 
2018 : It 's rare for Mr Obama to talk about God , but tonight he talked about faith several times , including this anecdote : `` As a priest and former fisherman once said of the tradition , ` The blessing is not that God has promised to remove all obstacles and dangers . 
The blessing is that He is with us always . ' '' 
2018 : TreeHugger tweets : Obama , no offshore drilling can be absolutely safe . 
6 month moratorium is nice , but why continue issuing leases ? 
Read TreeHugger 's tweets 2017 : The BBC 's Paul Adams in Washington The president says that he will `` inform '' the head of BP that `` he is to set aside whatever resources are required '' to compensate affected individuals and businesses . 
He wants to make sure that tomorrow 's encounter at the White House is seen as an occasion in which he lays down the law . 
That he , not BP , is in charge . 
2017 : Is the US Senate listening to this message , because it 's clear who President Obama is talking to here : `` The one approach I will not accept is inaction . 
The one answer I will not settle for is the idea that this challenge is too big and too difficult to meet '' . 
2016 : Obama 's rhetoric in this section is very reminiscent of his campaign 2008 speeches . 
He says : `` The transition to clean energy has the potential to grow our economy and create millions of good , middle-class jobs - but only if we accelerate that transition . 
Only if we seize the moment . 
And only if we rally together and act as one nation . '' 
2013 : President Obama takes a passionate tone , asserting that the `` the time to embrace a clean energy future is now '' . 
Emphasis on the `` now '' . 
2013 : Now , President Obama reflects President Johnson 's same concerns three decades ago : `` Time and again , the path forward has been blocked - not only by oil industry lobbyists , but also by a lack of political courage and candor . '' 
2011 : Mark Knoller from CBS News tweets : Obama concedes that no matter how effective our response becomes , there will be more oil and more damage before this siege is done . 
Read Mark Knoller 's tweets 2011 : The BBC 's Paul Adams in Washington At a time when the president and his administration face criticism over the speed and scale of the federal response , the president quickly sets out the extent of what he calls `` the largest environmental cleanup effort in our nation 's history '' , while admitting that `` there will be more oil and more damage before this siege is done '' . 
2010 : President Obama takes his first shot at his Republican opponents , saying that the mismanagement of the Minerals Management Service is `` emblematic of a failed philosophy that views all regulation with hostility - a philosophy that says corporations should be allowed to play by their own rules and police themselves '' . 
2009 : President Obama says an independent third party will adjudicate claims for compensation , but gives very few details about how that process will work . 
Expect Press Secretary Gibbs to be bombarded with questions about that in the coming days . 
2007 : President Obama 's tone is firm but calm and even . 
This is no Lyndon Johnson `` bullhorn '' moment , but he 's not echoing Jimmy Carter 's `` malaise '' themes either . 
It seems he 's doing his best to be reassuring . 
Perhaps the best analogy is President Clinton ? 
2007 : The BBC 's Paul Adams in Washington `` Unlike an earthquake or a hurricane , '' the president says . 
This is not his Katrina . 
2005 : Mr Obama uses tough language with regard to BP , saying he will `` make them pay '' . 
But he does n't dwell on BP , moving on to more positive news about the clean-up effort . 
2003 : Mr Obama opens by chronicling his response to the spill - perhaps an attempt to instil confidence in his management style ? 
2001 : Following the speech , White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs will answer questions from the public . 
For more details go to the White House website . 
1957 : Some interesting poll numbers provide context for tonight : according to Gallup , 59 % of Americans believe BP should pay for damages and lost wages , even if it forces the company into bankruptcy . 
And 71 % do n't think President Obama has been tough enough on BP . 
1955 : Although Mr Obama is expected to have harsh words for BP tonight , Walter Shapiro of Politics Daily says : `` An Oval Office address is too rare and too important a presidential event to waste time scoring cheap political points at the expense of BP . '' 
1952 : The oil executives received a thorough grilling on Capitol Hill today , but later , senators voted 35-61 against stripping big oil companies of $ 35bn in tax breaks they 'll receive over the next 10 years . 
Are members of Congress all talk and no action ? 
1947 : One more big question : will Mr Obama call for Congress to put a price on carbon ? 
1945 : Lawrence Grenier from Corpus Christi in Texas , US , writes : As our neighbors to the east of us struggle with the now imminent destruction of their wetlands , marshes and beaches , I hope the armchair experts realize that the environment is but one factor to be reckoned with . 
This tragedy will come at an astronomical financial cost as well . 
Gulf coast resorts and local business will lose , pensioners of BP will lose and , without any defense , migratory birds , fish , mammals will lose their habitats . 
1945 : Questions continued : How exactly will Mr Obama compel BP to create an escrow account to compensate individuals and businesses affected by the spill ? 
What are your thoughts ? 
1939 : Ed Hornick , AC360 , CNN President Obama must angle his address to the nation on the gulf oil disaster as more of a `` warlike update '' than the kind of addresses given by past presidents on national tragedies , a top presidential historian said . 
`` This is going to be a different kind of president address ... like we 're in the middle of the war and he 's giving an update on the war on the Gulf , '' said Douglas Brinkley , a professor of history at Rice University . 
1938 : Brian Woodahl from Indianapolis , US , writes : I find it unacceptable that Barack Obama finds it reasonable to bash BP . 
Most of this is done to enhance his political posturing in light of the upcoming November elections . 
1937 : Big questions for tonight : what will Mr Obama say about the fate of deepwater offshore drilling in the US , especially given how much coastal communities are already hurting from the current moratorium ? 
1936 : You can send us your thoughts on Mr Obama 's speech here . 
1930 : The BBC 's Steve Kingstone in Washington Barack Obama will use his prime-time address to reassure the American public that he understands the scale of the challenge and is ready to hold BP to account . 
He will reiterate his administration 's principal demand : that BP pay into an independently-administered account to compensate those affected by the spill . 
1928 : White House staffers are hoping for tonight to be an `` inflection point '' , a moment where confidence in the administration 's ability to handle the crisis is restored . 
What do you think ? 
1926 : White House officials have indicated that Mr Obama will use the opportunity to present his vision for America 's energy future , and use his bully pulpit to pressure Congress to act . 
1917 : The BBC 's David Willis in Washington A recovery czar is to be appointed . 
President Obama is expected to talk about that person . 
Also , prevention is expected to be a part of his speech ... On the crucial aspects of the discussions with BP , for example whether or not BP has agreed to suspend the dividend , we will probably have to wait until tomorrow . 
1914 : We also expect Mr Obama to announce regulatory changes to help prevent future spills . 
This will probably include some reorganisation of the Minerals Management Service , which was , prior to this spill , the government agency charged with overseeing oil drilling . 
Administration officials indicated Mr Obama would call for a body that acts as a `` watchdog not a partner '' of the oil industry . 
1910 : According to administration officials , we can expect the president to outline plans for the ongoing clean-up effort , as well as longer term plans to restore the Gulf . 
Look for the area to be described as having `` unique beauty and bounty '' . 
1905 : Welcome to our live coverage of President Barack Obama 's first Oval Office address to the nation . 
On the agenda tonight : oil , oil and a bit more oil . 
The president is n't just battling the worst environmental disaster in the nation 's history , he 's trying to combat the growing perception that his response to the BP spill has been inadequate . 
Tonight we 'll be updating this page with up-to-the-minute news , analysis from our correspondents , some of your emails , and rounding up the best of blogs and tweets . 
