Edward Markey called for `` iron-clad '' oil drilling safety plans Edward Markey told the House energy and commerce sub-committee Exxon-Mobil , Chevron , ConocoPhillips and Shell all have identical response plans to BP . 
BP 's US chief Lamar McKay and four other oil bosses gave evidence amid accusations BP took shortcuts . 
President Barack Obama is to make a TV address later from the White House . 
He will use the prime-time speech , at 2000 -LRB- 0000 GMT -RRB- , to outline the next steps his administration will take against the spill . 
Those are reported to include new steps to restore the Gulf Coast ecosystem and explicit demands to ensure BP fully compensates those affected . 
The speech will be delivered from the Oval Office , a setting reserved for the most sombre and important moments in US national life . 
Speaking in Florida before returning to Washington at the end of a two-day trip to the affected region , he said the government would not abandon those affected . 
`` I am with you , my administration is with you for the long haul to make sure BP pays for the damage it has caused , '' Mr Obama said . 
Oil has been spewing into the Gulf of Mexico since a drilling rig leased by BP exploded on 20 April with the loss of 11 lives and sank two days later . 
A cap placed by BP on the damaged oil well earlier this month is now said to be collecting about 15,000 barrels daily . 
But US government and independent scientists now estimate that the most likely flow rate of oil is between 35,000 and 60,000 barrels per day - a sharp increase on the estimate of a week ago . 
The operation suffered a setback on Tuesday when a lightning strike sparked a fire on board a vessel collecting oil , forcing BP to suspend operations temporarily . 
Fitch Ratings , one of the three big credit rating agencies , has downgraded BP by six notches , from AA to BBB . 
The move means Fitch is less confident of BP 's ability to repay its debts following the huge clean-up and legal costs the company is expected to rack up as a result of the spill . 
Also on Tuesday , Mr Obama named Michael Bromwich as the new head of the federal agency in charge of oil and gas development , the White House . 
Opening the congressional hearing , Henry Waxman , joint chairman of the full House energy committee , took a tough line , declaring that the major oil firms were `` no better prepared to deal with a major oil spill than BP '' . 
He called the five firms ' responses `` cookie-cutter '' plans and `` paper exercises '' , adding : `` BP failed miserably when faced with a real leak and one has to wonder whether ... -LRB- the others -RRB- would do any better . '' 
Mark Mardell BBC News , Washington The president 's real problem is whether he has gripped this crisis hard enough from the start `` This addiction is fouling our beaches , polluting our atmosphere and undermining our national security , '' said Mr Waxman . 
However , Texas lawmaker Michael Burgess , a Republican , accused Democrats of using the oil spill as a cover to propose climate change and energy legislation that would lead to over-regulation and higher taxes . 
And the five oilmen called to give evidence - the bosses of Shell , Chevron , ExxonMobil and ConocoPhillips as well as BP America - all told the committee of their corporate commitment to safety . 
`` We do not proceed with operations if we can not do so safely , '' ExxonMobil boss Rex Tillerson said . 
While the theme of Tuesday 's hearing is deepwater drilling in general , BP chief executive Tony Hayward will face a separate House hearing on Thursday devoted to the Deepwater Horizon disaster . 
Mr Waxman and fellow committee member Bart Stupak sent Mr Hayward a letter on Sunday in which they set out technical questions they expect him to answer . 
The letter quotes internal communications between BP engineers before the disaster in which the site is described as a `` nightmare well '' . 
At issue were the choice for the design of the well , preparations for and tests of the cement job , and assurances that the well was properly sealed on the top . 
The drilling rig exploded and sank in the Gulf , causing 11 deaths Among other things , BP apparently rejected advice of a sub-contractor , Halliburton , in preparing for a cementing job to close up the well . 
BP rejected Halliburton 's recommendation to use 21 centralisers to make sure the casing ran down the center of the well bore . 
Instead , BP used six . 
In an e-mail on 16 April , a BP official involved in the decisions explained : `` It will take 10 hours to install them . 
I do not like this . '' 
Later on the same day , another official recognized the risks of proceeding with insufficient centralisers but added : `` Who cares , it 's done , end of story , will probably be fine . '' 
`` It appears that BP repeatedly chose risky procedures in order to reduce costs and save time and made minimal efforts to contain the added risk , '' the congressmen write . 
`` If this is what happened , BP 's carelessness and complacency have inflicted a heavy toll on the Gulf , its inhabitants , and the workers on the rig , '' they say . 
The BBC News website will provide live coverage of Barack Obama 's address , insights from BBC correspondents and reaction from around the web between 2300 and 0200 GMT -LRB- 1900 to 2200 EST -RRB- . 
France24 BP OIL SPILL : Obama calls for ` clean energy future ' in Oval Office address - 10 hrs ago Bangkok Post US oil spill ` epidemic ' may last years : Obama - 15 hrs ago The Scotsman Major US oil firms ` no better ready to deal with large spills than BP ' - 15 hrs ago Reuters via Yahoo ! 
Obama set for big oil spill speech ; BP hits snag - 15 hrs ago Canada.com Oil execs feel heat from congressional grilling - 16 hrs ago The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
