BP credit rating downgraded by Fitch BP has seen its share price fall dramatically since the oil leak began Fitch Ratings , one of the three big credit rating agencies , has downgraded BP following the disastrous Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
The oil giant 's rating has been cut by six notches , from AA to BBB . 
The move means Fitch is less confident of BP 's ability to repay its debts following the huge clean-up and legal costs the company is expected to rack up as a result of the spill . 
Fitch expressed concerns about `` BP 's fundamental financial flexibility '' . 
The incident has so far cost BP $ 1.6 bn , the energy giant said on Monday . 
Fitch said it expected BP to face greater costs than previously thought in relation to the oil spill , and these liabilities might have to be met immediately or soon , rather than spread over time . 
Nils Blythe BBC business correspondent This is not the first time since the Deepwater Horizon disaster that BP 's credit rating has been cut . 
But the downgrade by Fitch is unusually sharp . 
One of the reasons for the downgrade is US political pressure for the company to set aside more than # 13bn against the cost of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
BP currently has nearly # 3.5 bn of cash and # 7bn of unused banking facilities . 
With a high world oil price the company is also generating new funds all the time . 
So even the colossal sums currently being talked about by US lawmakers may not be beyond BP 's means . 
BP bosses are due to meet President Barack Obama on Wednesday . 
Mr Obama wants BP to pay billions of dollars into a ring-fenced fund to compensate those with `` legitimate '' damages claims - which is expected to run into many billions of dollars . 
`` The scale of today 's rating action has been partly driven by the increased risk that the balance between long-term and near-term cost payments may now be skewed much more heavily toward the near-term than previously anticipated , '' Fitch said in a statement . 
The downgrade means that BP may find it more expensive to borrow money from investors , but analysts suggested the immediate impact on the company would be small . 
David Stedman , oil analyst at Daiwa Securities , said the downgrade would have a `` relatively limited '' effect in the short term , as BP does not rely heavily on borrowing . 
Explaining its decision to downgrade , Fitch added that the volume of oil being lost was higher than had previously been reported , increasing the fines BP would have to pay to the US government . 
Moreover , the immediate clean-up costs were also higher than it had previously forecast - ranging between $ 3bn and $ 6bn . 
Longer-term legal costs will be subject to lengthy court proceedings , Fitch said , with a large amount likely to be payable over many years . 
Fitch also said it would be `` surprised '' if BP did not suspend dividend payments to shareholders while the financial impact of the oil spill remained so unclear . 
BP has so far sought to reassure major shareholders that dividends will be paid as normal . 
This is Money : Obama : BP ` will not control ' clean up costs - 4 hrs ago CNN What can BP afford to pay ? 
- 6 hrs ago ITN BP bosses braced for White House grilling - 8 hrs ago Daily Express BP 's credit rating cut as spill bill rises - 9 hrs ago Houston Chronicle BP credit rating falls as talk of claims account rises - 9 hrs ago The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
