Live rats are stored awaiting transport to Vietnam at Chrey Thom district in Kandal province , 65km -LRB- 40 miles -RRB- south of Phnom Penh near the Cambodia-Vietnam border , May 15 , 2009 . 
CHREY THOM , Cambodia | Mon May 18 , 2009 11:51 am EDT CHREY THOM , Cambodia -LRB- Reuters Life ! -RRB- 
- Stir-fried or grilled , Vietnamese ca n't seem to get enough of Cambodian rat meat , and the global influenza outbreak as well as recent heavy rains have proven a boon for both consumers and exporters . 
In Chrey Thom , a Cambodian town on the border with Vietnam , motorbike after motorbike carries wooden cages full of hundreds of the plump , furry , brown rats . 
The rains in the Mekong Delta area have helped boost the Cambodian trappers ' catch , as more rats rush out from their flooded holes and into waiting cages . 
`` There were so many rodents we just ca n't eat them all , so we need to export lots more to Vietnam , '' Cambodian rat trader Kang Chanthan told Reuters . 
`` It 's good business . '' 
`` If you prepare them well and fry the meat with garlic and put some mint on it , they 're tastier than chickens , '' he added . 
Worries about swine flu , as the H1N1 influenza virus was first called , may have also spurred demand . 
The spread of H1N1 flu was not caused by pigs and pork , but many people and governments have reacted to the name . 
`` Rat meat substitutes well for pork these days , '' said Khe Le , adding that her family exported up to a ton of live rats across the border on good days . 
Rat meat was eaten in Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge regime in the 1970s and for some time afterwards when little else was available . 
The poor took to rat meat last year when the price of other meat soared , but younger Cambodians tend to avoid it . 
In Vietnam , rat meat is something of a delicacy . 
Online Vietnamese newspaper , VietNamNet Bridge , said more than 35 metric tons of rat meat a day was imported from Cambodia . 
Cambodian officials said they did not keep records of this aspect of bilateral trade but reckoned the figure was realistic . 
`` The high season for catching rats has returned for the farmers in my district , where I see several thousand kilos of live rats transported every day to Vietnam , '' said Ly Marong , an agriculture official in Koh Thom district on the border . 
Live rats sold for $ 1 per kilo and dead ones -- used for feeding crocodiles in Vietnam -- went for $ 0.37 , officials said . 
`` Some rats are as big as piglets , 2 kilos , and that has intrigued the Vietnamese . 
They see them as wild animals and they find them tasty , '' Marong said . 
Bun Tuon Simona , a Cambodian official in the southern province of Kandal , said the Vietnamese appetite for rat meat has helped a government campaign to get rid of the rodents that were destroying rice fields . 
`` Before , we rewarded farmers with milled rice in exchange for a rat 's tail after they killed one . 
Now it 's not a problem . 
They catch the rat and can sell it to make some money on top of what they get from farming , '' he said . 
Cambodian farmer Chan Pakdeiratha , whose family has rather taken to the meat , said the rats gave birth three times a month and had about 15 babies each time . 
`` If we do n't catch them this year , they 'll destroy our crops next harvest , '' he said . 
