Asia worries over H1N1 flu vaccine production HONG KONG | Mon May 18 , 2009 1:35 pm IST HONG KONG -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Asia has shown steely resolve in fighting the H1N1 flu virus with health checks and quarantines , but with more than 90 percent of flu vaccine production capacity located in the West , is less prepared than it wants to be . 
Vaccines are a key weapon to fight any pandemic influenza virus , but the bulk of production is sited in Europe and the United States and health experts and officials in Asia find that worrying . 
`` Do you actually think that in a really serious pandemic that vaccines will be shipped here -LRB- to Asia -RRB- ? '' 
said a microbiologist in Hong Kong , who declined to be identified . 
Even though the new H1N1 appears mild for now , countries like India and Indonesia are keenly aware of their vulnerability and have recently ordered local companies to develop H1N1 vaccines . 
But Asia lacks sophisticated medical technology , experts say , and while it takes an experienced vaccine maker in the west four to six months to prepare a vaccine , Indonesian drugmaker Bio Farma said last week that it would need two years . 
Lily Sulistyowati , an official with Indonesia 's Ministry of Health , said that if the country failed to come up with its own vaccine , it would push the WHO to distribute stocks fairly . 
`` We had the experience with bird flu where we had to line up to buy Tamiflu behind other countries that did n't have any cases . 
Why should we line up when we have the most cases ? '' 
`` We hope that wo n't happen again , we should be given priority if we have more cases than other countries , '' she told Reuters . 
India has invited a number of local drugmakers to submit plans and the government will decide in the coming week which company gets to manufacture the H1N1 vaccine . 
V.M. Katoch of the Indian Council of Medical Research told Reuters : `` We 'll do our best ... We are very confident , whatever we try to do , we do succeed . '' 
In Geneva on Saturday , health negotiators from rich and poor countries failed to clinch a full deal on virus sharing to produce vaccines , but said they had closed gaps on some tough political issues . 
The vast majority of H1N1 cases are in Mexico and the United States but the spread of the disease to at least 39 countries led the WHO to declare a pandemic was imminent at the end of April . 
Its pandemic alert level is now 5 on a 6-level scale . 
The WHO , whose data lags national tallies , earlier put the number of confirmed worldwide cases of the flu strain , a mix of swine , human and avian viruses , at 8,480 , with 72 deaths . 
Ben Cowling , public health expert at the University of Hong Kong , said it would be interesting to see whether governments in Asia forge deals with western vaccine makers . 
`` Many western countries have agreements with vaccine makers . 
That 's why phase 6 alert is a big deal because it means we promise to buy vaccines from you , it gives the vaccine producers the assurance that they need -LRB- to go into production -RRB- , '' he said . 
Nearly all of the world 's flu vaccine factories - which produce 350 million doses annually - are in Europe and the United States . 
They can ramp up production to 500 million doses , but that 's not enough for a global population of over 6 billion . 
China , Japan , South Korea and Australia produce seasonal flu vaccines but these are mostly for domestic use and their combined share make up less than 10 percent of the world 's total . 
`` We are in touch with vaccine makers and have expressed our interest to buy . 
But there are no details as they have not started production yet , '' a Hong Kong government spokeswoman said . 
Some countries are relaxed as the virus appears mild so far . 
Tawee Chotpitayasunondh , head of Thailand 's unit for strategic planning in fighting pandemic flu , said Thailand was `` thinking about vaccine ' but this was not a priority . 
`` The priority now is how to stop the spread among people to prevent secondary spreading , that is what we are fighting now . '' 
Major vaccine makers in the west have already obtained the new H1N1 virus samples from the WHO , but the organization has not decided whether manufacturers should shift their production away from seasonal flu vaccines to targetting H1N1 . 
