Tourists wearing masks walk down the street in Osaka May 15 , 2009 . 
Japan confirmed on Monday 125 people -- many who have not been abroad -- had been infected with the new strain of H1N1 flu , after New York saw its first death from the virus and Chile reported its first two cases . 
GENEVA | Mon May 18 , 2009 2:07 pm EDT GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Humanity may be witnessing an influenza pandemic unfold , the head of the World Health Organization said on Monday , as Japan reported a big jump in infections with the newly-discovered H1N1 virus . 
Flu fears dominated the start of the WHO 's annual congress in Geneva , where many of the 40 countries touched by the flu strain urged the United Nations agency to rethink its pandemic alert scale that is now at the second-highest notch . 
WHO Director-General Margaret Chan said the outbreak that began in North America and has stretched to Europe , Asia and South America needed to be tackled with seriousness even though its symptoms appear to be largely mild . 
`` For the first time in humanity , we are seeing , or we may be seeing , pandemic influenza evolving in front of our eyes , '' Chan told the World Health Assembly meeting in Geneva , where rich and poor governments discussed their drug , vaccine and other needs . 
`` We are all under pressure to make urgent and far-reaching decisions in an atmosphere of considerable scientific uncertainty , '' Chan told the annual congress , which was shortened in length to allow health ministers to go home earlier and resume their monitoring for flu infections . 
Several topics including food safety and viral hepatitis were dropped from the agenda while drug-resistant tuberculosis was initially slated to be postponed and then re-added at the last moment with support from China and others . 
According to the WHO 's latest tally , 74 people have died from H1N1 infection . 
Most of the other nearly 9,000 patients have suffered mild effects like fever and diarrhea from the bug that is a genetic mix of swine , bird and human viruses . 
But its rapid spread between people and across countries has caused the WHO to raise the alert and declare a pandemic is `` imminent , '' a designation that reflects views on the way the new virus is spreading and not the seriousness of its effects . 
Mexico , Britain , China , Egypt , Switzerland and the United Arab Emirates were among those who called at the opening-day session for the WHO to rethink its criteria for declaring a pandemic , which under current rules would occur when the virus is spreading in a sustained way in two regions of the world . 
British Health Secretary Alan Johnson said the `` mechanistic process '' now in place seems to give the wrong public impression about the seriousness of the flu , which can be treated without drugs in most cases . 
Chan , who also fought bird flu and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome -LRB- SARS -RRB- in her tenure as Hong Kong health director , said she would consider the request that came just as the number of infections in Japan , Britain and Spain approached critical mass . 
The WHO said its laboratories have confirmed 125 cases in Japan , 103 in Spain and 101 in Britain . 
Officials from its North American stronghold said the virus was still spreading , albeit in a seemingly less virulent form . 
Richard Besser , head of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , told a high-level session that the H1N1 strain has reached nearly all 50 U.S. states and was likely to circulate worldwide . 
`` While we are not seeing the seriousness of illness that was initially reported in Mexico , the outbreak is not over , '' he said . 
Mexico 's Health Minister Jose Angel Cordova said there was a slow but steady fall in the number of cases in his country . 
If H1N1 flu does reach all corners of the world , the WHO 's Chan said there would be certain communities at particular risk -- including people living in slums and shantytowns , pregnant women , and patients with HIV\/AIDS and other health problems . 
Poor countries are seeking international assistance to get drugs , diagnostic tests and medical personnel needed to combat an outbreak which has so far not been identified in Africa or in the world 's most impoverished areas . 
Developing nations are also negotiating fair access to antiviral drugs like Tamiflu and to any vaccines developed to fight the H1N1 strain . 
Officials will also seek an agreement on how samples of the virus should be handled and shared with pharmaceutical companies working to develop vaccines to fight the strain . 
The WHO 's Chan is due to hold meetings on Tuesday with U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and top executives from several pharmaceutical companies , which are waiting for a signal about whether to start making H1N1 jabs or to include the strain in the seasonal flu vaccine mix . 
