Saturday 30 April 2005 02.22 BST Sudan 's Islamist regime , once shunned by Washington for providing a haven for Osama bin Laden as well as for human rights abuses during decades of civil war , has become an ally in the Bush administration 's `` war on terror '' . 
Only months after the US accused Khartoum of carrying out genocide in Darfur , Sudan has become a crucial intelligence asset to the CIA . 
In the Middle East and Africa , Sudan 's agents have penetrated networks that would not normally be accessible to America , one former US intelligence official told the Guardian . 
Some of that cooperation has spilled over into the war in Iraq : Sudan is credited with detaining foreign militants on their way to join anti-American fighters there . 
Sudanese agents have also helped the CIA to monitor Islamist organizations in Somalia . 
`` The intelligence relationship is the strongest thread between Washington and Khartoum , '' the official said . 
`` Khartoum is probably the only government in the Arab League that has contributed in a major way to the protection of US forces and citizens in Iraq . '' 
News of the growing cooperation was first reported in yes terday 's Los Angeles Times . 
The paper traced the thaw in relations since 2001 to a milestone last week : the visit to Washington by Sudan 's intelligence chief , Salah Abdallah Gosh . 
It reported that Sudan 's secret police had begun to crack down on suspected Islamists , had shared evidence with the FBI and allowed US personnel to interrogate al-Qaida suspects . 
In May 2003 , Sudanese security forces raided a suspected terrorist training camp and deported more than a dozen , mainly Saudi , militants to Arab states which work closely with US intelligence services , the newspaper said . 
Yet a decade ago Sudan was a haven to Bin Laden and other international outlaws , such as Carlos the Jackal . 
In 1993 , it was placed on the US state department 's list of terrorist regimes . 
Approaches from Khartoum were rebuffed - even as it offered its services against an emerging al-Qaida in the 1990s . 
`` Sudan tried to hand over two guys implicated in the 1998 bombing of the US embassies in east Africa , and the response was to send cruise missiles to hit the aspirin factory in Khartoum , '' the official said . 
`` They offered up Bin Laden in 1995 , and we said we do n't even have an indictment on him . '' 
Officially , Washington 's position towards Sudan remains unchanged . 
`` Sudan is still considered a state sponsor of terror , '' a state department spokesman said yesterday . 
News of General Gosh 's visit to Washington caused consternation in human rights circles . 
The general is among 51 Sudanese officials implicated in human rights abuses by the international criminal court . 
`` I quite understand that the war on terrorism means dealing with bad actors , but to fly in one of Sudan 's chief committers of what Washington has formally described as genocide is deeply disturbing , '' said an independent Sudan analyst , Eric Reeves . 
He noted there had been signs of a slight thaw towards Khartoum for some time - despite the state department 's official stance . 
