A newspaper for your perusal . 
As ever , comments welcome . 
This post was last changed at 03:02 AM , May 1 2005 , at a time when the top headline on Guardian Unlimited was New legal fears over Iraq war , and the top headline from the BBC was Blair concerned over Iraq effect , and there were posts elsewhere tagged with these same keywords : newspapers media frontpage The post was written by Rafael Behr . 
You can email the author at Rafael.Behr@observer.co.uk On your online front page you have all the lies , evasions and truth-twisting of Blair , and proof that he took us into an illegal war ; and yet you also have that increasingly shrill and desperate war-supporter Aaronovitch telling us to vote for the party that did this , plus a leader endorsing the current government . 
Once upon a time , you could at least rely on the Observer to be consistent , rather than offer such such rank hypocrisy . 
What you are saying to your readers is ` yes , we know they lied , yes , we know they ruined the image of are country in the eyes of the world , yes , 100,000 people died , yes , they are authoritarian and illiberal , but hey , vote for them anyway , you sheep . 
I have been a lifelong Guardian and Observer reader and a former Labor party member , but you and New Labor can go hang . 
I 'm switching to the Lib Dems and the Independent . 
the Observer\/Guardian has nailed its colors to the New Labor mast , and as far as I am concerned , it can go down with Blair 's sinking ship . 
Posted by Sandriana on May 1 , 2005 10:03 AM . 
Do n't get it , Sandriana . 
The Attorney General 's advice supported Blair 's position : its -LRB- overdue -RRB- release does n't expose a single ` lie ' and states there was a strong legal case for the war . 
You 're giving it a very blinkered read ... And frankly , if enough intelligent , well-meaning people like you also jump to the Lib Dems on Thursday , there 's a fair chance of Michael Howard being PM on Friday . 
Wo n't that be nice ? 
Wo n't that make Britain better ? 
Wo n't you be pleased with yourself ? 
Enjoy the Independent , anyway . 
Posted by David C on May 1 , 2005 11:53 AM . 
Posted by Andrew Rogers on May 1 , 2005 12:21 PM . 
David : Oooh , well that 's me told then . 
The atty gen ` ls advice emphatically did not support the PM 's position . 
Like any good legal opinion , it laid out the arguments for and against and which arguments were weak , and which were strong . 
No sensible lawyer would come down one side or the other : the decision is up to the client , which was the cabinet , not Blair ; not unless we have suddenly changed over to a presidential system . 
The cabinet did not have the benefit of the full written legal advice -LRB- and before you jump on me , read Blair loyalist Patricia Hewitt 's own testimony to this : she first saw it last week on Channel 4 's website -RRB- , so any decision they made to support Blair 's and Bush 's little Iraq adventure was made in ignorance of the true legal position , not to mention ignorance of the lack of WMD . 
The verbal advice they did get bore little relation to the equivocal written legal advice , by Blair 's own admission : he told Parliament it was ` clear and unequivocal ' , which , if you actually read it , it patently was n't . 
Today 's revelations show clearly that the decsion to go to war was made by Blair himself , presidentially , following meetings with and representations by the Republicans . 
That verbal advice given to cabinet by Lord Goldsmith was given following a visit to the US , and ` discussion ' with Alberto Gonzalez , John Ashcroft , William Taft IV et al , all rabid neocon supporters of the ` pre-emptive ' strike doctrine , clearly illegal under international law . 
Blair , again by his own admission , took the decision himself to commit regime change in Iraq -LRB- again illegal , as Goldsmith himself pointed out -RRB- , any subsequent decisions made by Cabinet and Parliament were made on the basis of false inmformation provided by the PM . 
As for the chance of Michael Howard being PM : keep on with the scare tactics if you want , go on , hold on to nurse for fear of something worse . 
the maths that labor has done rely on every single person who voted labor last time doing so again , plus nabbing any floating voters . 
Dream on , but do n't be surprised when not even your core vote turns out on Thursday . 
All bets are off . 
For this paper call for us to vote for this government after all that has passed is a blatant exercise in poitical cynicism . 
Andrew : if the best you can do is parrot , why bother ? 
Posted by Sandriana on May 1 , 2005 02:22 PM . 
Luxury Lifestyle Links top portal specializing in Luxury deals , high end product and services , and top of the range items . 
The Internet has changed the way that we buy online , there are many companies competing for your business and with the reduced costs involved in selling to the consumer over the Internet , Posted by Luxury lifestyle Links on May 1 , 2005 05:10 PM . 
Over at the Independent they debunk the myth that voting for the Lib Dems will put the Tories in power . 
-LRB- Surprise , surprise : the Tories will only get to power if Labor votes swing to them -RRB- . 
The Observer has compromised its historic principles over the Iraq war . 
From a moral perspective war can only be just if it is a last resort , and if it is waged justly . 
Blair fails on both counts . 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- We wanted the UN inspecters to continue doing their job of disarming Saddam . 
Blair could have supported the French and German proposals for beefing up the inspection team , and putting UN forces on the ground to create no-go zones for Saddam 's troops -LRB- like the no-fly zones in the North -RRB- . 
Let 's stop this peddling of lies that the choice was leaving Saddam in power or invading ! 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- The war has been waged unjustly using depleted uranium , targetting of civilians and bombing and flattening of civilian homes , and widespread torture . 
Because these are British and American troops doing evil , does not make it OK . 
On top of that , under the same banner `` war against terrorism '' we have seen Guantanamo Bay and the `` rendition '' of prisoners by the US -LRB- with UK aid -RRB- to countries where they can be tortured , and at home we have seen the erosion of our civil liberties . 
We have a principle of ministerial accountability , but it does n't seem to apply to the PM . 
The best thing Blair could have done , last year say , was to resign on the basis that he `` unintentionally '' misled parliament and the public . 
-LRB- In fact , if he seriously believed that there was a danger of letting the Tories in through the back door this is what he would have done -RRB- . 
As he has failed to do so , I suggest that all Labor supporters -LRB- I am a stalwart of over 40 years -RRB- follow the lead of Brian Sedgemore and vote for the Lib Dems . 
As for the Observer : There is hypocracy in arguing that the Americans , having re-elected Bush , are now culpable for their misadventure in Iraq but suggesting that we vote for Blair to keep Howard out . 
Posted by TC on May 1 , 2005 07:34 PM . 
I 'd like express my own disappointment at the Observer 's decision to support Blair . 
Leaving aside Iraq , which has been well covered above , there are other issues . 
Blair continues to use the `` Vote Lib Dem , get the Tories '' argument but this claim has no basis in fact . 
As TC notes above , the Independent has shown that it is untrue . 
Channel 4 Factcheck has done likewise . 
If you 'd like to try a little experiment of your own you can also use Peter Snow 's Swingometer on the BBC website . 
It predicts a 18.5 % swing from Labor to the Lib Dems would be needed for this result : Con 231 , Lab 230 , LD 155 . 
Anyone seriously arguing that this result would lead to a Conservative government ? 
There is no Lab\/LD swing which can lead to the Conservatives winning an overall majority . 
And besides , Mr Blair promised to introduce PR in the 1997 manifesto . 
8 years later he 's using the unfairnes of FPTP to frighten people into voting Labor . 
Do n't blame the system you promised to reform , Mr Blair , you 've had 8 years to change it ! 
Posted by Garry on May 1 , 2005 09:36 PM . 
Before you put full faith in that argument , you might like to ask yourself why they covered something like 30 scenarios , but not one in which the tory percentage vote was as far from the poll value as it has been in every single one of the last half-dozen or so elections . 
While it is theoretically possible they are right , it would be unprecedented in modern politics . 
Posted by Garry on May 2 , 2005 12:53 AM . 
This is not about the election but the article `` It 's official : Acupuncture really works '' , which would be hilarious if it was n't so depressing . 
Suggestion and qualification being presented as proof , depressing stuff . 
We 're only told that genuine acupuncture created brain activity - the author does n't even bother to state which , if any , of the control groups displayerd a universal improvement in their symptoms . 
Probably because none did , which would demonstrate -LRB- again -RRB- that acupuncture is pure quackery -RRB- . 
It does n't take a genius to notice that all the -LRB- stress induced -RRB- illnesses listed as being treated by acupuncture come straight after we 're shown the amateur psychiatry associated with the `` treatment '' . 
A pathetic article masquerading as Health\/Science in an otherwise intelligent newspaper . 
Posted by Daniel Sexton on May 2 , 2005 07:54 PM . 
I think it is great the Observer opens its pages to its readers and discovers that some live in a greater fantasy world than some of its political commentators . 
My mind goes out to the words of Nixon who said something along the lines of `` it ca n't be illegal if the President of the United States does it . '' 
Have these people not been elected to rule this county and does n't that allow them to lead us in to war anytime they want for any reason they want ? 
Do we believe in giving men power and then tripping them up when they try and make decisions that we -LRB- and that includes me , if you must know -RRB- do n't approve of ? 
And what about all the smarmy knockers who say `` it is all about oil . '' 
We live in a world dominated by oil . 
The world we know and enjoy is spun around it . 
Who knows what will happened when the stuff starts running out and prices go through the roof ? 
Is this country going to start riding bikes or start throwing bricks ? 
Blair has n't done a bad job for this country and it is right that he should be re-elected . 
The initial public love affair was never going to last - but I think his record is quite respectable and will probably be viewed more kindly when he calls it a day . 
Posted by Peter Hayes on May 3 , 2005 05:17 PM . 
the party party - George Bush sampled in funky mp3 mash-up jam . 
Sublime subversion ... openDemocracy - Independent , free , free-thinking . 
Gotta be a good thing ... Guardian Unlimited - Suspicious behavior on the tube - In which an innocent man is arrested for wearing a coat . 
If it had been denim he might be dead ... Tim Worstall : Britblog Roundup # 31 - It 's a roundup of Brit blogs . 
The 31st , to be precise ... TV Cream Themes - Mp3 TV nostalgia binge -LRB- as inspired by Troubled Diva 's indirect Jonny Ball connection -RRB- ... Up The Down Escalator - A husband cares for his very sick wife . 
An excellent blog -LRB- via <ahref="http://timworstall.typepad.com/timworstall/"> Tim Worstall </a> -RRB- ... Grammar Puss - A friend of the zeugma is a friend of ours ... Ourmedia - Free bandwidth for digital creativity . 
