More than two months after the April 20 BP oil rig explosion in the Gulf of Mexico , experts are still trying to determine what the health effects will be on the workers who are struggling to clean up the biggest oil spill in American history . 
There are concerns that some workers could suffer lung , kidney and liver damage from exposure to the volatile organic compounds found in the oil . 
As of Wednesday , 407 oil exposure complaints had been reported to the American Association of Poison Control Centers . 
In Louisiana , more than 100 oil spill-related illnesses were reported , 74 of them from workers hired by BP . 
`` We 've seen a total of 11 patients that have come through our ER since May 26 , and most of them stayed for about two to three days , '' Taslin Alfonzo , spokeswoman for West Jefferson Medical Center in Marrero , La. , told FoxNews.com . 
`` They all complained of similar symptoms , which were nausea , dizziness , severe headaches , skin irritation and shortness of breath , which is an indication -- our doctors believe -- there was some kind of chemical exposure or chemical irritant that caused them to come in . '' 
But exposure to toxic chemicals is n't the only thing causing workers to seek medical attention . 
With the heat index in the Gulf hovering around 110 degrees during the steamy summer months , one of the main short-term health concerns is heat exhaustion . 
`` You really are talking about a triangle of heat , chemical exposure , and then the behavior changes that you see as a result , '' Linda McCauley , dean of Emory University 's School of Nursing in Atlanta , said at an Institute of Medicine hearing in New Orleans this week . 
Behavioral changes are just another layer of the health issues that could lie ahead for the workers cleaning up the Gulf . 
With many fishermen out of work in an area still reeling from the lingering economic and emotional damage left by Hurricane Katrina five years ago , the mental health of both the workers and the residents affected by this environmental catastrophe could be fragile . 
`` Individuals who have been directly affected by it , their livelihoods , their very way of life from generations , being told to terminate it at this point in time , and not being able to determine which steps they need to take , '' Victor Sims , a clinical social worker and counselor at West Jefferson Behavior Medicine Center , told FoxNews.com . 
It 's that type of situation that generates stress and anxiety , and then begins to exacerbate itself in changes in sleeping habits , changes in eating habits and other disorders based on their attempts to try and deal with this issue , he added . 
On Wednesday , the United States Coast Guard reported the deaths of two oil spill workers in unrelated incidents . 
One of the men , a 55-year-old boat captain , took his own life , the Gulf Shores Police Department said in a news release . 
William Allen Kruse , of Foley , Ala. , was found above the wheelhouse of his boat at the Fort Morgan Marina in Gulf Shores , Ala. , with a single gunshot wound to the head that appeared to be self-inflicted . 
Medical screening for oil spill workers BP is taking precautions to ensure workers meet the physical health requirements to work under such extreme conditions . 
In a partnership with West Jefferson Industrial Medicine , LLC , and West Jefferson Medical Center , the British oil giant has set up a medical screening clinic in Lafitte , La. , where potential workers are examined and trained before being hired to work on the cleanup . 
`` People are having physical exams , which includes an examination , screening for previous medical history for conditions like diabetes , cardiac disease , '' said Dr. Brian M. Bourgeois , owner of West Jefferson Industrial Medicine , LLC . 
`` They 're also being screened for problems that may make working in the heat and humidity for long hours difficult , like vision problems and physical ability to do manual labor-type work . '' 
Another concern is the workers ' ability to work in an environment where they do n't necessarily have medical attention readily available , out in the open water , Bourgeois added . 
For their part , community hospitals like West Jefferson have set up medical tents on the beaches of Grand Isle , La. , where workers , first responders and volunteers are often seen between shifts . 
`` Initially we wanted to set it up for the oil spill workers , but BP is handling that now , and so we 're mainly dealing with the first responders and anything that the community needs down there , '' Alfonzo said . 
With $ 10 million set aside for tracking and surveillance of oil spill-related illnesses in states along the Gulf Coast , officials at the Department of Health and Human Services admit that little is known about the health impacts of oil spills on humans . 
In the last 50 years , at least 400 spills have occurred around the world , yet only seven of them have been studied to date . 
Perhaps that 's why health officials on both the federal and local levels are now clamoring to implement health surveillance systems in Louisiana , Alabama , Mississippi and Florida . 
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention -LRB- CDC -RRB- , the National Institutes of Health -LRB- NIH -RRB- and the Environmental Protection Agency -LRB- EPA -RRB- have been working with affected coastal communities to track cases of acute illnesses and trends in oil exposure-related hospital visits , medication sales and increases in certain diseases . 
`` What it 's going to do more likely than not , is maybe magnify preexisting conditions rather than being a causative agent for a new condition , '' Bourgeois said . 
In an effort to closely monitor potentially serious long-term effects of those with the most exposure to the toxic chemicals -- the workers -- the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health -LRB- NIOSH -RRB- launched its own system . 
Of the nearly 35,000 BP oil spill response workers currently involved in the cleanup effort , 14,664 workers have volunteered to be part of the long-term tracking system . 
Nicole Aber and Reuters contributed to this report . 
