Syria unrest : Arab League urges Assad to reform The Arab League has called for a national unity government in Syria , aimed at ending the bloodshed in the country The Arab League has outlined a series of reforms it wants Syria to undertake to end the violence in the country . 
After a meeting in Cairo , the league called on the Syrian authorities to form a national unity government to include the opposition in two months . 
It said both sides should end the bloodshed , urging President Bashar al-Assad to hand over power to his deputy . 
Syria 's state TV quoted an unnamed Syrian official as saying that Damascas had rejected the power transfer plan . 
`` Syria rejects the decisions taken which are outside an Arab working plan , and considers them an attack on its national sovereignty , '' the official said , according to the AFP news agency . 
Earlier on Sunday , Saudi Arabia said it was pulling out of the league 's 165-strong monitoring mission in Syria because Damascus had broken promises on peace initiatives . 
While the Arab League ministers said they were extending the controversial mission for another month , analysts say the Saudi decision has thrown its longer-term future into serious doubt . 
Saudi Arabia is one of the key funders of the league 's projects , but the monitors have been criticised for failing to stop the violence . 
The Arab League is now increasingly split about what could be done to resolve the Syrian crisis , the BBC Middle East editor Jeremy Bowen in Damascus reports . 
With the Syrians rejecting the conditions of the initiative , the Arab League 's roadmap is effectively in tatters , our correspondent says . 
Meanwhile , violence has continued in Syria , with activists reporting battles between government troops and army defectors in Damascus ' suburb of Douma on Sunday . 
At least five people were killed , according to Syria 's Local Coordination Committees . 
Activists say almost 1,000 people have been killed since the monitoring mission began in December . 
At the start of the Arab League meeting , Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal urged the international community to step in and put pressure on Damascus . 
The BBC 's Jon Leyne in Cairo says the league 's foreign ministers spent five hours trying to resolve growing differences in their ranks over Syria . 
At a news conference in Cairo , Qatari ruler Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim al-Thani read out a statement agreed by the ministers laying out an ambitious plan of political reform . 
It called on President Assad to delegate power to his vice-president to engage in proper dialogue with the opposition within two weeks , and form a government of national unity in two months . 
The league said this should eventually lead to multi-party elections overseen by international observers . 
`` The new Arab initiative adopted by the foreign ministers envisages the peaceful departure of the Syrian regime , '' Sheikh Hamad said , in a quote translated by the AFP news agency . 
Jeremy Bowen met pro-Assad supporters at a demo in Damascus He said the league would seek the support of the UN Security Council for the changes . 
But he added : `` We 're not talking about military intervention . '' 
Syria has been wrecked by unrest since last March , when protesters gathered calling for reform . 
Sporadic government crackdowns have followed , and the UN says more than 5,000 have died . 
The government in Damascus says it is fighting `` terrorists and armed gangs '' and claims that some 2,000 members of the security forces have been killed . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
Deutsche Welle ` Flagrant interference ' 2 hrs ago 
