UPDATE 1-Oil catcher dome hits snag near leak site - BP exec \* BP says will take 48 hours to assess new solution \* Hydrates a danger , but also a possible energy source \* Relief well could take two-three months to drill ROBERT , La. , May 8 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - London-based BP Plc 's plan to lower a giant containment dome to trap oil from a blown-out Gulf of Mexico oil well on the sea floor hit a technical obstacle on Saturday in the form of methane hydrates , or flammable ice , a BP -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- executive said on Saturday . 
BP officials are scrambling for a solution after methane hydrates stopped up the 98-ton containment dome as they were maneuvering it into place , Doug Suttles , BP 's chief operating officer , told reporters at a briefing in Robert . 
`` As we were placing the dome over the leak source a large volume of hydrates formed inside the top of the dome , requiring us to move the dome to the side of the leak point , '' Suttles said . 
`` I would n't say it 's failed yet . '' 
The four-story structure , BP 's only short-term hope of controlling the leak , is supposed to redirect the unchecked flow of crude from nearly one mile -LRB- 1.6 km -RRB- below the water and , once connected , pump it to a surface tanker . 
If the dome plan fails , BP faces the prospect of drilling a relief well to cut off the leaky oil well , which could take two to three months . 
A giant oil slick from the gush of oil threatens to create an environmental disaster for four Gulf Coast states . 
Methane hydrates -- a slush of frozen hydrocarbons and water that form in the deep , cold conditions at the leak site -- began clogging up the opening in the dome , forcing them to set the structure aside , Suttles said . 
The dome is now resting on the ocean floor about 200 metres -LRB- 660 ft -RRB- from the leak source , and it could take 48 hours or more to find a workaround , Suttles said . 
Those could include using hot water to heat up the hydrates at the ocean floor , or using hydrocarbons like methanol to thin them out , Suttles said . 
Suttles said BP is mulling two other short-term fixes , including installing a new blow-out preventer on the leak site and trying to clog up the existing failed blow-out preventer with an injection of rubber and other solids , known as a `` junk shot . '' 
Hydrates are highly flammable and present a danger to BP workers on ships above the leak . 
If they dethaw in an uncontrolled manner , they could send a flood of natural gas to the top of the ocean surface and potentially ignite . 
Ironically , methane hydrates are a promising future energy source in themselves , but researchers are still searching for ways to safely harness them . 
A recent study by the Minerals Management Service pegged methane hydrate resources in the Gulf of Mexico at 21,000 trillion cubic feet of natural gas -- 100 times the country 's current proven supply . 
-LRB- Reporting by Erwin Seba , Writing by Chris Baltimore , Editing by Eric Walsh -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The sea pressure and well collapse will take care of the leak . 
Laugh at the environmentalists , call them tree huggers . 
Laugh at the scientists , and call global warming a hoax . 
Elect politicians on whether or not they support gay marriage . 
We -LRB- well , not me -RRB- almost elected a vice president that probably believe in `` the rapture '' . 
Now google `` solar cities '' and `` china '' . 
They are developing solar power , solar equipment to sell and have cities that get huge amounts of energy from solar . 
While here in America we are fighting amongst ourselves ... ... . 
Jesus tap dancing christ on a cracker . 
WAKE UP STUPID IGNORANT FAT ASSED FOOLS . 
Read a science book once in awhile . 
I 'm not a chemist , geologist nor an explosives expert , but it would seem to me that you 're gambling that the hole would close against a bigger permanent fire than the one in Centralia , PA. . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
