S. Coast Guard\/Petty Officer 3rd Class Patrick Kelley\/Handout ROBERT , Louisiana | Sat May 8 , 2010 5:29 pm EDT ROBERT , Louisiana -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc suffered a setback on Saturday in an attempt to contain oil gushing into the Gulf of Mexico with a metal box when crystallized gas filled the structure , a blow to hopes of a quick , temporary solution to a growing disaster . 
BP engineers have moved the four-story containment dome -- which was seen as the best short-term way to stem the flow from a ruptured oil well -- off to the side on the sea floor and will take two days trying to come up with a solution , Doug Suttles , chief operating officer , told reporters . 
The problem is with gas hydrates , essentially slushy methane gas that would block the oil from being siphoned out the top of the box . 
As BP tries to solve it , oil keeps flowing unchecked into the Gulf in what could be the worst U.S. oil spill . 
`` I would n't say it 's failed yet . 
What I would say is what we attempted to do last night did n't work because these hydrates plugged up the top of the dome , '' Suttles said . 
`` What we 're currently doing , and I suspect it will probably take the next 48 hours or so , is saying , ` Is there a way to overcome this problem ? ' '' 
The company , under pressure from the Obama administration to limit the damage to the Gulf and coastlines of four states , expected hydrates , but not the volumes encountered after a crew lowered the dome nearly a mile to the sea floor . 
Possible solutions may involve heating the area or adding methanol to break up the hydrates , Suttles said . 
Officials had already warned there was no guarantee that the technology would work at such water depth . 
BP had spent the previous day or so lowering the 98-ton contraption to the well site with the aid of sensors , video cameras and undersea robots . 
It hopes to attach a pipe to the chamber to start pumping oil up to a tanker , with the aim of capturing about 85 percent of the leaking oil . 
The spill threatens an economic and ecological disaster targeting beaches , wildlife refuges and fishing grounds in Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama and Florida . 
It has forced President Barack Obama to rethink plans to open more waters to drilling . 
BP suffered another blow on Friday when ratings agency Standard & Poor 's lowered its outlook on the British oil giant to negative from stable . 
It has said it will pay all legitimate costs , a bill that is likely to run into the billions of dollars . 
The company gave up on efforts to close valves on a failed blowout preventer with underwater robots , after trying in vain for two weeks . 
Suttles said BP may now try to plug up the existing preventer or attach a new one on top of it . 
It also is drilling a relief well to halt the leak -- which began after the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on April 20 , killing 11 crew members -- but it could take up to three months to complete . 
In the initial blast , a natural gas cloud enveloped the rig and exploded just as visiting BP officials were celebrating seven accident-free years in the rig 's crew quarters , according to accounts by survivors of the blast . 
According to transcripts of interviews obtained by Robert Bea , a University of California Berkeley engineering professor , a giant methane bubble rushed up the drill pipe and filled the air above the deck of the drilling platform with flammable gas , followed by a scalding flood of crude that spilled onto the drill deck and ignited . 
Nine workers on the drill deck were killed , along with two others working in the nearby mud storage room , Bea said . 
After several days of calm weather , winds began to pick up on Saturday , preventing controlled burns of the thickest concentrations of oil . 
Crews conducted five burns on Friday . 
Nearly 200 boats deployed protective booms and used dispersants to break up the thick oil on Saturday . 
Crews have laid almost 900,000 feet of boom , and spread 267,000 gallons -LRB- 1 million liters -RRB- of chemical dispersant . 
In Bayou La Batre , the heart of Alabama 's seafood industry , the docks were largely quiet as thousands of shrimpers and seafood processors remained idled by fishing restrictions prompted by the oil spill . 
About 30 oyster-processing plants have run out of product and shut down , putting as many as 900 people out of work , said Wayne Eldridge , owner of J&W Marine Enterprises and an oyster plant operator himself . 
`` I 'm screwed , '' Eldridge said . 
`` The biggest thing is I 've got 35 people unemployed there . '' 
BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward said a $ 75 million legal cap on the companies ' liabilities for economic damages under federal law , which some U.S. lawmakers now want to raise , would not be a limit and renewed promises to meet all `` legitimate '' claims . 
Standard & Poor 's , in announcing BP 's negative outlook , indicated a ratings downgrade was likely . 
Moody 's said the spill raised the specter of credit pressure for the five primary companies involved in the project . 
S&P cut its outlook for Anadarko Petroleum Corp , which has a 25 percent stake in the ill-fated well , to stable from positive , saying it is `` potentially liable for significant costs and liabilities relating to the clean-up . '' 
Other companies involved are Transocean , owner of the rig ; Cameron International , which supplied the failed blow-out preventer for the well ; and Halliburton , which helped cement in place the blown-out well . 
An estimated 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons\/795 ,000 liters -RRB- have poured into the Gulf each day since the well ruptured . 
But Ian MacDonald , a biological oceanographer at Florida State University , said the estimate was much too conservative . 
The real flow rate from the undersea well , based on aerial images of the oil slick and estimates of the thickness of the oil itself , is probably closer to 25,000 barrels -LRB- 1.05 million gallons\/4 million liters -RRB- per day , MacDonald told Reuters . 
A sheen of oil has engulfed much of the Chandeleur Islands , barrier islands that are part of Louisiana 's Breton National Wildlife Refuge , the first confirmation of the oil slick hitting land . 
Some oiled birds have been found in recent days . 
BP contractors and commercial fishermen worked feverishly in waist-deep water to anchor booms around tiny uninhabited barrier islands as thousands of birds watched , according to a Reuters photographer . 
The Breton refuge was closed to the public after a silver sheen and emulsified oil reached the shoreline , the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service said . 
Altogether , crude from the spill could hit 24 national wildlife refuges . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Obama was too busy playing stand up comic to even bother with this situation for nearly TWO WEEKS ! 
Then , instead of sending the world 's best engineers to save our shorelines , he sent LAWYERS to see who could be SUED . 
How much money will bring back the coral reefs , the white beaches , the sea ? 
Obama is utterly useless . 
To the last poster : Where do you get your `` facts '' ? 
The administration declared it an emergency within a couple days and had already directed coast guard officials and the DOD to act expeditiously in containing the leak . 
The answer to your question is Billions , with a a B , it will cost BILLIONS to fix the problem . 
This is exactly why we should n't be risking our waters and beaches with offshore oil drilling , instead we should be creating thousands of jobs by implementing off shore wind farm . 
Let us all hope and pray that they are successful in placing this dome and that it works . 
Do everything we can to help the effort to stop this leak ! 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
