Get To Know Piers Morgan Tonight : Donny Deutsch Guest Hosts This evening `` Piers Morgan Tonight '' welcomes the return of Donny Deutsch , as the brand guru is back for a fourth stint as guest host Need to Know News : Libya calls for cease-fire , more concern in Japan , and a BIG moon Each day , we here at `` Piers Morgan Tonight '' will put together the news you need to know -- from what happened last night to what will happen today . 
For March 18 , 2011 -- U.N. imposes a no-fly zone on Libya , The crisis at the Japanese nuclear plant gets worse , Morehead State continues to ` dance ' cents Libya calls for cease-fire amid foreign military moves : `` Libya called for a cease-fire and a halt to military action on Friday , hours after the U.N. Security Council authorized the use of force to protect besieged civilians in Libya . 
Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa , speaking to reporters Friday in Tripoli , said that in light of its membership in the United Nations , the country is ` obliged to accept the Security Council resolution that permits the use of force to protect the civilian population . ' '' 
cents Japan raises threat level at nuclear plant : `` Japan 's Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency raised the level for the crisis at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant Friday from a 4 to 5 - putting it on par with the 1979 incident at Pennsylvania 's Three Mile Island . '' 
cents Japan 's death toll climbs to nearly 7,000 : `` Japan documented more deaths Friday as Prime Minister Naoto Kan sought to reassure a nation reeling from disaster , saying that he is committed to taking firm control of a `` grave '' situation . '' 
cents Weekend full moon the biggest in about 20 years : `` Saturday 's full moon will be a super `` perigee moon '' - the biggest in almost 20 years . 
This celestial event is far rarer than the famed blue moon , which happens once about every two-and-a-half years . 
`` The last full moon so big and close to Earth occurred in March of 1993 , '' said Geoff Chester with the U.S. Naval Observatory in Washington . 
` I 'd say it 's worth a look . ' '' 
Snap a great photo this weekend ? 
Submit it to ireport . 
You should have asked the tough question , that why did he send mecenaries to help out in Libia . 
Or why Sharon was poisoned . 
Better yet you should get INFORMED by the real news in occupied Palestine through a great Jewish person Phil Weiss , of Mondoweiss , very educated & informative . 
I was disappointed in Piers Morgan 's interview with Netanyahu primarily because several times he did not give Mr Netanyahu time to answer his questions before he asked another one . 
I was very impressed with Mr Netanyahu 's presence , patience and concentration during the interview which in my personal opinion allowed Mr Morgan to proceed with his agenda . 
I also felt that he was trying to create an impression that Mr Netanyahu would be a failure as the Israeli Prime Minister if he did not achieve peace with the Palestinians . 
I was looking forward to hearing what Mr Netanyahu was thinking on several of the matters rather than what Mr Morgan wanted him to think . 
Not the best performance for an excellent journalist whom I regularly watch . 
I 'm trying to find a tactful way of saying what I want to say , because I generally do n't like to be critical unless I can think up a better alternative . 
But I 'm really not digging that guy from the NYT who 's been brought on as the ` nuclear expert ' . 
It just sounds like he 's reporting stuff he 's picked up on the internet that the rest of us have already read , rather than having any additional insight or knowledge to report . 
In his defense though , with so little information known about what 's happening at the reactors , and with there being such a small body of knowledge in existence for how to deal with a nuclear crisis , even the people in charge seem to be having to rely on trial and error to problem solve . 
I wish I could think up a better alternative ... March 18 , 2011 at 12:01 pm | Report abuse | Reply I was incredibly upset over the interview with Mr. Netanyahu . 
Mr. Morgan interrupted him so many times , rarely gave him a chance to finish his answers , did not hear a word the Primie Minister said and implied that it is up to Israel to give in to all of the demands made by the world . 
What a horrible interviewer . 
No wonder I never listen to CNN . 
You are spot on . 
It was the first time i saw Mr. Morgan give an interview and it was very dissapointing . 
Mr. Morgan should have handed Mr Netanyahu the questions so Mr. Morgan could have touted even more of his views . 
It was borderline disrespectful . 
I believe the moon is this close and full every 2 or 3 years not 20 . 
It 's the blue moon that occurs every two-three years . 
The full , close moon that 's coming up is the perigee moon . 
And as for Lybia , put a smart bomb in his hooka or pipe . 
I mean Gadafi 's !! The dude is smoke'in some good sh-t . . 
The moon is coming right for us ! 
\* jumps out window \* I 'm trying to watch the reporting coming in from Tripoli , but the CNN newscasters wo n't keep their pie-holes shut long enough so that the viewer 's can hear and the see anything including the reporters on the ground . 
The state-side staffers need to `` SHUT THEIR MOUTHS '' so we can watch the action !!! 3\/19\/11 . 
Libya -- not pleasant to watch , but why does America , UK & the rest feel they need to get involved . 
THREE LETTERS -- OIL . 
History repeats itself again . 
Big brother will send their young men & woman to slaughter again . 
UK sold arms weeks before , earlier media reports said they had no money for social necessities , but quickly found money for bombs . 
How do you sell you people this nonsense ? 
America relies again on their terrible intelligence from Bengaz your own CIA as per media reports ? . 
Now you wonder why the Arab world distrusts you people . 
I am Christian South African , and I wonder seriously what your real intention could be . 
Obama -- you are no better than your predecessor . 
As for the Lybian gov-military I say they ca n't be trusted , no more than you can trust the word of our gov. This whole thing in all the middle-east is about `` OIL '' and you have to know it !!! Our gov is killing our men , women , boys and gifls all for OIL , it 's a sad , sad time in the US and the world . . 
Obama 's strategy is clear . . 
require the EU and Arab League to take ownership of the problem . 
Libya 's exports of sweet low -LRB- extraction -RRB- cost crude oil : Ireland 23 % -LRB- of oil imports -RRB- , Italy 22 , Austria 22 , Switzerland 18 , France 16 , Greece 14 , Spain 12 , Britain , Germany 8 , China 7 , USA 2 . 
Kadhafi is a pain to Arab league who want their kindoms etc. to maintain a low profile . . 
Once committed however , the only way out is his military ousts him , someone invades , or Kadahafi 's killed . 
So regardless of disclaimers or qualifications , once you comitt to military action , it is what it is . 
So those with the largest financial stake , including the Arab league should lead . 
Is this about oil or democracy . 
, what 's happend ? 
were those enough stricks to eliminate Gadafi brutal machine ? 
oh , come on ? 
You start talking bussiness , -LRB- Americans as usual !! -RRB- as if it 's picnic expensses . 
Was n't it a humanitarian mission & it tasks to save Libyan civilians and to kick out the dictator ? 
, where are your patience and steadiness , Americans ? . 
We -LRB- Libyans -RRB- are positive , you did n't kill civilians & sure about precise aims you attacked , so why are you back-lagged , slow , infirm & passive regarding your targets ? 
Now in the very moment , 1 -RRB- - Gadafi mafiosi gangs & mercenaries are missilling & bombarding Musrata & Zentan civilians turning who alive , dead . 
2 -RRB- - People of Jedabia are nearly becoming ashs by Gadafi atrocities . 
Intensify your attacks and let they more aggressive and accurate on aims -LRB- Gadafi 's strongholds -- Bab al azezzia & Khamees ' bregad in Km27 west to Tripoli for example , should I tell you so ??!! -RRB- . 
Thank you Mr. prisident , talk to congress , persuade them & you could Obama ; tell them `` this war is the righteous one in the world through the ages '' . 
Do n't think about expenses Congress -LRB- not think it over long -RRB- it is a war to save innocent souls like yours you share humanity with them , it is simple like that and no more . 
Sorry , -LRB- I forgot -RRB- regarding costs of this war is gonna payed gratefully by free , good & proud of you Americans from one -LRB- just one -RRB- oil well . 
Mr. prisident , you are brave -LRB- and only now -RRB- go on , you are clear & right , and I promise you anather term ; cos all the conscious world and sympathized Americans withe you -- your immage now is clean . 
Please , hit Gadafi mercilessly an ' agressively -LRB- & SOS -RRB- . 
Please CNN , stope saying -- Civil war in Libya -- Cos , absolutely it is n't . 
It is -- exactly -- a war raged against weak , oppressed , patient & freedom-seeking Libyans from cruel-hearted , unhumane and 42 year bloody -LRB- schizophrenic -RRB- dictator . 
Stop saying CIVIAL WAR , I rather prefer to use ALIAN INVASION instead !!! , what 's going on ? 
, Libyans start losing faith in you , for God sake !!!!!! . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Notify me of follow-up comments via email . 
OJ , Lance , Casey Anthony ? 
Can they ever get their reputations back ? 
@garyvee , @Faith_Saile , @HuntsmanAbby , Stan Van Gundy hashing it out . 
9:51 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` We do n't focus on it as an illness ... we look at them as crazy '' Stan Van Gundy on ex-LAPD cop killer , others who commit mass murders . 
9:45 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` There will be more people entertained by the tweeting during the State of the Union than the speech '' @garyvee #SOTU 9:40 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Yet you follow me , you dumbass -RRB- RT @ROSSH2304 Everytime someone rt 's a @piersmorgan tweet a little bit of me dies inside ... please stop !! You were fabulous ! -RRB- 
RT @reallorraine Thanks @piersmorgan and Life Stories team & brilliant audience - made me feel very relaxed and happy ! 
