2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Read our complete story and check out our full coverage on unrest in the Arab world . 
-LRB- 9:22 p.m. ET , 3:22 a.m. in Libya -RRB- Forces loyal to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi are honoring a cease-fire and are not fighting a militia group that is making advances in the eastern part of the country , according to a government official . 
Rebel forces are advancing on the town of al-Migrun , south of the rebel stronghold Benghazi , said Deputy Foreign Minister Khaled Kaim . 
-LRB- 7:45 p.m. ET , 1:45 a.m. in Libya -RRB- Several nations laid out their military intentions on Friday regarding Libya : -- Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper said his country is sending CF-18 fighter jets to join a Canadian warship on standby off the coast of Libya . 
-- French government spokesman Francois Baroin said France plans to participate in `` swift '' efforts against the Gadhafi regime . 
-- President Nicolas Sarkozy will convene a summit Saturday to examine the crisis . 
Members of the Arab League , the president of the European Council and representatives of states supporting implementation of the U.N. resolution have all been invited . 
-- British Prime Minister David Cameron said the United Kingdom has started preparations to deploy aircraft , and `` in the coming hours '' they will move to air bases where they will be positioned for any `` necessary action . '' 
-- Spain will offer NATO the use of two military bases and provide air and naval forces for use in operations involving Libya , Spanish Defense Minister Carme Chacon said Friday in Madrid . 
-LRB- 7:15 p.m. ET , 1:15 a.m. in Libya -RRB- President Obama is trying to limit the United States ' role in enforcing a no-fly zone over Libya to support aircraft only and is very reluctant to commit any offensive U.S. firepower , a senior U.S. official familiar with the military planning discussions said Friday . 
`` We will provide the unique capabilities that we can bring to bear to stop the violence against civilians , including enabling our European allies and Arab partners to effectively enforce a no-fly zone , '' the president said in a nationally televised statement about U.S. military action . 
`` The president chose his words deliberately and carefully , and you should be guided by them , '' the official said . 
`` He is very sensitive that this not be a U.S. operation . 
We are part of it . 
And of course , we by nature of our superior capabilities have a lead and leadership role to play . 
But we are part of it and expect a lot from our partners , '' the official said . 
-LRB- 6:30 p.m. ET , 12:30 a.m. in Libya -RRB- Deadly conflict is raging in Libya , witnesses say , despite the government announcement of an `` immediate '' cease-fire after a U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force to protect civilians . 
At least 28 people died and hundreds were wounded as fighting raged in the Libyan cities of Mistrata , Ajdabiya and Zintan on Friday , according to Khaled el-Sayeh , military spokesman for the opposition . 
-LRB- 6:30 p.m. ET , 12:30 p.m. in Libya -RRB- A resolution permitting `` all necessary measures '' to protect Libyan civilians does not preclude the United States from arming rebels , the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations said Friday . 
Ambassador Susan Rice told CNN 's `` Situation Room '' that the `` U.S. is ready to act '' and that Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi `` should be under no illusions that if he does n't act immediately he will face swift and sure consequences , including military action . '' 
President Barack Obama warned Gadhafi to adhere to a cease-fire and pull back from several besieged cities or face military consequences . 
Rice said the immediate focus is protecting civilians . 
-LRB- 4:50 p.m. ET , 10:50 p.m. in Libya -RRB- Libya 's deputy foreign minister on Friday called for observers from China , Malta , Turkey and Germany `` to come to Libya as soon as possible ... to make sure that there is a real cease-fire on the ground . '' 
Khaled Kaim also noted that the `` door is open for any other countries to send observers . '' 
-LRB- 2:37 p.m. ET , 8:37 p.m. in Libya -RRB- President Barack Obama said Friday that `` left unchecked , we have every reason to believe Gadhafi -LRB- will -RRB- commit atrocities against his own people '' and the surrounding region could be destabilized . 
`` The democratic values that we stand for would be overrun '' and the `` words of the international community would be rendered hollow , '' the president said . 
The focus of the United Nations is on protecting innocent civilians and holding Moammar Gadhafi accountable , Obama said . 
A cease-fire must be implemented immediately , and Gadhafi 's troops must be pulled back from several cities , he said . 
Power and water must be restored to those cities , he declared . 
`` These terms are not negotiable , '' Obama said . 
If Gadhafi does n't comply , the U.N. resolution will be imposed through military action . 
The United States will work as part of an international coalition , Obama said , but American troops will not be deployed in Libya . 
-LRB- 2:37 p.m. ET , 8:37 p.m. in Libya -RRB- President Barack Obama said Friday that `` left unchecked , we have every reason to believe Gadhafi -LRB- will -RRB- commit atrocities against his own people '' and the surrounding region could be destabilized . 
`` The democratic values that we stand for would be overrun '' and the `` words of the international community would be rendered hollow , '' the president said . 
The focus of the United Nations is on protecting innocent civilians and holding Moammar Gadhafi accountable , Obama said . 
A cease-fire must be implemented immediately , and Gadhafi 's troops must be pulled back from several cities , he said . 
Power and water must be restored to those cities , he said . 
`` These terms are not negotiable , '' Obama said . 
If Gadhafi does n't comply , the U.N. resolution will be imposed through military action . 
The United States will work as part of an international coalition , Obama said , but American troops will not be deployed in Libya . 
-LRB- 8:48 a.m. ET , 2:28 p.m. in Libya -RRB- The Libyan government has decided on an immediate cease-fire in its civil war with rebels , Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa said Friday . 
Libya 's action comes after the U.N. Security Council authorized the use of force to protect Libyan civilians from attacks by forces loyal to the Moammar Gadhafi regime . 
Enforcement of a no-fly zone over Libya could begin in hours , a French government spokesman said on Friday . 
This reminds me of 1919 when the League of Nations assigned France to mandate Lebanon in order to ` create a better future ' for the countries that were extricated from the Ottoman Empire . 
However , the secret Sykes-Picot Agreement and Balfour Declaration proved the typical colonization goals and not the alleged aiding goals . 
Similarly , the French ` assistance ' to the Libyans will turn be the mask of secret colonization treaties . 
This reminds me of 1919 when the League of Nations assigned France to mandate Lebanon in order to ` create a better future ' for the countries that were extricated from the Ottoman Empire . 
However , the secret Sykes-Picot Agreement and Balfour Declaration proved the typical colonization goals and not the alleged aiding goals . 
Similarly , the French ` assistance ' to the Libyans will turn out to be the mask of secret colonization treaties . 
Very true , George F. Look at the idiotic way the French handled the French-Indochina War . 
They should have gotten together with the Viet Minh and created a French Commonwealth where Vietnam would become a part of it . 
March 19 , 2011 at 11:03 am | Report abuse | '' ... Security Council Resolution 1973 , passed yesterday with 10 yes votes and 5 abstentions - Brazil , China , Russia , India and Germany ... '' ; I still doubt about it why the scores -LRB- result -RRB- did n't cover WIN-WIN . 
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- . 
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- . 
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- , -- -- -- -- -- -- -- , -- -- -- -- -- -- -- . 
-- -- -- -- -- -- , -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- . 
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- ? 
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- : '' -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- ? '' 
May 27 , 2011 at 12:42 pm | Report abuse | Michelle , great post Michelle . 
I too thank the UN for doing the right thing . 
Good to see that the good doers of the world agree with Washington for once . 
Sorry Michelle , I did n't post the above . 
What I want to know is what 's wrong with majority of these people here anyway ? 
Once again , I want to state that war has no glory and that killing people is bad regardless of what majority of Americans think . 
All this warmongering here proves that this a very sick society !!! March 20 , 2011 at 3:26 pm | Report abuse | Who are your censors , GOP supporters , demo wierdos , what . 
you have some distance to go to grow up ! 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival in Merida , Mexico seems like they favor throwing candy instead of beads ! 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
