As far as I can tell , Americans have not been provided with sufficient evidence of mass atrocities committed by the Gadhafi regime to justify a military intervention on humanitarian grounds alone . 
Nor has the administration made a case that the alternative to Gadhafi justifies the risk of removing him . 
Members of both political parties are prone to support humanitarian intervention to stop war crimes and given Gadhafi 's past , it seems a strong case could be made that an alternative to him would be in the U.S. interest . 
But it is somewhat shocking that the U.S. is preparing to take military action against Libya and neither of those arguments have been convincingly made . 
The main reason the donations are not coming in like before , is because like when so much was donated for Hatie , we can see no success after all this time . 
I am afraid that whetever I donate does not help the people it was suppose to . 
Thanks JanJ March 18 , 2011 at 4:12 pm | Reply On about the 13th of Feb , I remember seeing a story that there were two Iranian warships which had passed through the Suez Canal into the Mediterranean . 
Could these two ships be a factor in what is going on in Lybia now that the U.N. has finally taken a stand against the Gaddafi regime ? 
March 18 , 2011 at 4:55 pm | Reply Anybody with half a brain knows that the U.S. , Great Britain and France want Libya 's oil . 
These three countries run on sheer greed . 
That explains the aggressive U.S. foreign policies as unjust as they are because the right-wing thugs in Washington know no moral principles !!! March 18 , 2011 at 5:42 pm | Reply Not oil : they 're after power in the Sahel and the fresh water supply March 28 , 2011 at 1:03 pm | Reply I am surprised that sofar nobody in the Obama-Administration spoke of a possible islamic influences in the uprising in Libya . 
The Gaddafi regime made it adamantly clear that Al-Qaeda is behind it and last week the German `` Spiegel '' showed Abu Abibi , one of the prominent members of Al-Qaeda , appealing to the rebels in Benghazi to topple Colonel Gaddafi and set up an islamic state . 
Hilary Clinton wants a regime-change in Libya . 
Can she garantee that the successors would be able to build and run a new country , that embraces her values ? 
What are Americans fighting in the Af-Pak Region for ? 
To punish the Taliban for harbouring the Al-Qaeda , that attacked the U.S on 11th September 2001 . 
Is this the reason for the U.S. to go to war in Libya ? 
March 19 , 2011 at 7:20 am | Reply What both Barack Obama and Hilary Clinton want is another pro-Western stooge to take over in Libya so the West can once more exploit it 's oil . 
We 're fighting in Afghanistan for that country 's mineral resources and do n't let any right-wing nutjob tell you different , j. von hettlingen ! 
March 19 , 2011 at 11:59 am | Reply According to our own intelligence one of the rebel 's leader was detained in Gitmo for being a terrorist . 
We went to war in Iraq base on fault intelligence , and here we go again , there are allegations on the rebel 's side of killings and `` thousands '' dead by Kaddaffi 's troops . 
Do we have confirmation ? 
Is it reliable information ? 
WHO cares , FRANCE NEEDS his own oil pool and Obama is running to help his french friend . 
When war is the matter , billions of dollars just rain from government , but there is no money to create jobs , to help with education , social security , Medicaid . 
I have heard no republican shouting against the money we are spending in the new war and at the end , everybody is going home and Mr. Obama , the bantu warrior , will have to finish what he started and guess what : deja vu again , the US against the muslim world . 
Here is a list of some countries were people is being massacred so Mr. B can attack them to save the day : Bahrein , Yemen , Somalia . 
By the way Pakistan , Afhganistan , Saudi Arabia can be attacked too . 
If we still have money left . 
March 21 , 2011 at 5:35 pm | Reply Why do n't we just mind our own business ? 
Put money into our own `` pool '' to develop synthetic POL 's , and take care of our own for once ? 
March 21 , 2011 at 9:47 pm | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
