During the past century the United States has faced two brutal assaults . 
Within four years of the first , on December 7 1941 , the US and its allies had mobilised , taken on and defeated two powerful enemies , Japan and Germany . 
Four years after the second , on September 11 2001 , what real progress can the US and its allies honestly claim for the war on terror ? 
The answer , tragically and alarmingly , is that they have not made enough . 
Not only is terror very much still with us , it is also on the increase . 
Last year , the US state department reported 651 `` significant terrorist attacks '' around the world , three times the total for 2003 and the highest annual number since Washington began to collect such statistics two decades ago . 
Around a third of those attacks took place in Iraq , supposedly the central front of the war on terror , in some parts of which terrorist killings have now reached pandemic levels . 
Since April , more than 4,000 Iraqis have been killed by terrorists in Baghdad alone . 
But the killing is in no way confined to Iraq . 
No one in London needs any reminder of that . 
And Britain , like the US and many others , is wrestling to balance established liberties and ways of life with the danger that another 9\/11 , or another 7\/7 , may occur at any time . 
The assault on America four years ago this week was in every way as infamous a deed as the one committed by Japan in 1941 . 
Much of the response to it , however , was not just ineffective but counter-productive . 
Faced with 9\/11 , George Bush 's initial response was briefly both brainy and belligerent . 
But the initial advantages were quickly squandered under pressure from the ideological right . 
By choosing to rid the world of evil - above all in Iraq - rather than to hunt down , take out and politically disable al-Qaida , Mr Bush set his country on a path which continues to dismay America 's friends and to delight its enemies . 
In effect , though , he also did Osama bin Laden 's job for him . 
The war on terror , with its rhetoric of a battle between good and evil and its talk of a fight that will last for generations , depended for credibility upon the efficacy of American power and upon the accuracy of the US neocon prescription of a `` democratic revolution '' across the Middle East . 
In reality , both have proved to be wishful thinking - the real surprise being the limits of the US military effort . 
America has fought and occupied , but it has not shown that it can rebuild . 
The idea that Iraq would set off a domino democratic effect across the Middle East now seems even more preposterous than ever - if Iraq is exporting anything to its neighbors , it is violence not democracy . 
Faced with a ruthless insurgency , American public opinion is faltering as the gulf on the ground between reality and objectives widens . 
Post-Katrina , the question is not whether the US will begin to withdraw - but when , how and , above all , with what damage . 
Politically this may be inevitable and even desirable - but we will all live with the consequences . 
The most damning charge against the war on terror is that it has been a recruiting sergeant for the very forces it sought to destroy . 
As Mark Danner put it in the New York Times yesterday , Mr Bush 's failure to focus on al-Qaida has created a global `` al-Qaidaism '' of the kind that struck this country on July 7 . 
Such al-Qaidaism is not going to go away . 
If the earlier generation could produce a 9\/11 in the face of American power , what will the next generation produce in the wake of the American weakness inseparable from an Iraq withdrawal ? 
Bin Laden 's organization may have been damaged and disrupted since 2001 , and his dreadful cause may in many places be in the hands of amateurs , but he could never have dreamed that the world four years after the twin towers would look so favourable to his objectives . 
