Journalists believe recent deaths and injuries among their number based in Iraq show US troops are getting out of control It was a routine assignment that , like too many in Iraq , went wrong . 
Tipped off that police had clashed with gunmen in western Baghdad , the Reuters news agency dispatched Haider Kadhem , a cameraman , and Waleed Khaled , a soundman , to the scene . 
As their car headed down Ghaziliya bridge American troops opened fire , hitting Khaled in the face and the chest , killing him instantly and spattering blood over the US military and Reuters press cards clipped to his shirt . 
By the time relatives and colleagues arrived American armored vehicles had sealed off the street and Kadhem , slightly wounded from fragments , was under arrest . 
Having found nothing suspicious the troops allowed the car to be towed away and handed relatives a body bag . 
One soldier told them not to look too closely at the corpse . 
`` Do n't bother . 
It 's not worth it . '' 
Other soldiers standing a few feet away joked among themselves . 
For Reuters and many other foreign media organizations in Baghdad the August 28 shooting was further evidence that American troops are out of control . 
Since the 2003 invasion US forces have killed at least 18 media workers in incidents for which no one has been charged or punished . 
There have been no satisfactory investigations that we know of , '' said Rodney Pinder , director of the International News Safety Institute -LRB- INSI -RRB- , a Brussels-based advocacy group . 
Angry and frustrated , several radio and television networks , agencies and newspapers , including the Guardian , met last week to chart a joint response to the crisis . 
The gathering agreed to form a foreign correspondents ' association and to jointly lobby the US military and state department . 
More journalists have been killed in Iraq in two years than during the 20 years of conflict in Vietnam , according to Reporters Without Borders . 
It counted 66 dead in Iraq compared to 63 in Vietnam and 49 in the former Yugoslavia between 1991 and 1995 . 
INSI estimates the Iraq toll at 81 while the New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists reckons 74 . 
Insurgents killed most and with few exceptions , such as the Italian Enzo Baldoni , the victims were Iraqis . 
Foreign journalists , based in fortified hotels or compounds , can move discreetly around the capital and accompany coalition troops on missions but they routinely rely on Iraqi colleagues for on the ground reporting . 
Increasingly US forces pose the graver threat . 
`` It is becoming impossible for us in good conscience to send out reporters to gather information because we do n't know what will happen to them , '' says Richard Engel , a correspondent for the US television network NBC . 
If something goes wrong , he says , `` we do n't know what procedures if any exist to follow up . '' 
The International Federation of Journalists accused the US military of `` incompetence , reckless soldiering , and cynical disregard '' for journalists ' lives . 
The Committee to Protect Journalists said there appeared to be official `` indifference '' to reporters ' deaths . 
In addition to shooting them , US forces have a habit of detaining journalists without charge . 
Weeks can pass before a bureau is able to confirm that an employee has been arrested , possibly injured , and held incommunicado in Abu Ghraib or another prison . 
A driver for the Guardian , accredited with the US authorities , was held without explanation for five days . 
At stake is not only the existence of independent media , says Alastair Macdonald , Reuters ' Baghdad bureau chief , but the credibility of US claims to be fostering democracy . 
`` The American ambassador recently called us the fourth estate , a pillar of the democracy , but we 're not being allowed to do our job here . '' 
When the US military detains employees media organizations try to sort it out privately , going through regular channels , appealing to the relevant major or colonel , until it dawns that this does not work . 
Asked at a recent press conference if there was a special policy for journalists , a handful of the 10,000 US-held detainees , Major General Rick Lynch , a US military spokesman , was blunt : `` That 's a no. . 
What we 've got to do is look at the individual that was indeed detained and what was he doing , regardless of what his profession is . '' 
Many correspondents say the fundamental problem is that US forces do not recognize the media 's right to work in Iraq . 
Almost every single Iraqi stringer in Mosul , a volatile northern city , has been arrested , including a freelance cameraman for CBS who was shot in April and has been detained since without charge . 
Investigations into shootings are conducted by an officer from the unit which opened fire . 
Invariably shooters are exonerated and victims deemed at least partly culpable . 
Waleed Khaled 's case was typical . 
A three-day investigation concluded the 35-year-old Reuters soundman was driving fast , stopped , immediately reversed and that he or Haider Kadhem , the cameraman , leaned out with what appeared to be a weapon . 
`` Our soldiers on the scene , using established rules of engage-ment and all the training received , decided that it was appropriate to engage that particular car . '' 
In other words the popular , jokey newsroom presence , the husband of a pregnant wife , the father of a four-year-old girl , brought it on himself . 
His colleague Kadhem , 24 , was released without charge after three days of questioning about `` inconsistencies '' in his story . 
US military spokesmen often cite `` strong evidence '' that an arrested Iraqi was an insurgent who used his work as cover . 
Despite astonishing allegations - including the shooting down of a helicopter by three journalists - no proof has emerged publicly . 
Hardly a surprise given that the legal process is secret and reports are not published . 
A smear or not , hinting at evidence can intimidate an employer less than 100 % sure about a stringer 's background . 
`` They make you ask yourself if you really want to bat for this guy , '' says one bureau chief . 
Such tactics contrast with the military 's warm embrace of those who `` embed '' , a well-oiled , largely transparent system which allows journalists to attach themselves limpet-like to troops . 
Everything is on the record and what you file , though monitored once published or broadcast , is uncensored . 
The openness and access -LRB- not to mention the food -RRB- tends to be better than the more controlled British version . 
There is no consensus on why there is such hostility to independent media . 
Some think it reflects the clumsiness of an army wrestling with a complicated guerrilla campaign . 
Insurgent cameramen do accompany gunmen and film attacks which end up on the internet . 
When a television crew arrives during or immediately after a fight troops often suspect the crew knew in advance . 
An urban myth , say the networks , but a dangerous one when even an established name like CNN is branded the Communist News Network . 
There is scant evidence that US troops deliberately target the press , unlike Israeli soldiers in the West Bank and Gaza . 
But commanders who view Iraq as an information war have an interest in blocking images they deem damaging . 
In a rare cracking of the opaque military Phillip Robertson , a reporter for the online magazine Salon.com , found the sniper who shot his friend Yasser Salihee , an Iraqi employee of the Knight-Ridder newspaper group . 
Salihee died instantly when a bullet entered his right eye as he drove towards a checkpoint in Baghdad in June . 
Named only as Joe , the sniper said his unit was braced for a suicide bomber and that the car appeared suspicious . 
Joe was troubled by the feeling that his victim was not an insurgent . 
`` I really hope he was a bad guy . 
Do you know anything about him ? '' 
