Aid groups have complained of delays getting aid to survivors A Royal Fleet Auxiliary ship carrying aid supplies is to be sent to Haiti to help with the earthquake relief effort . 
RFA Largs Bay will spend several weeks ferrying United Nations supplies . 
The government has already pledged # 20m to the relief operation , while public donations to a Disasters Emergency Committee fund have reached # 31.5 m. Meanwhile , UK rescuers in Haiti have been redeployed to Petit Goave , west of the capital Port au Prince , which was hit by Wednesday 's severe aftershock . 
The firefighters will join German and Polish teams in searching for survivors of the magnitude 6.1 tremor , which struck eight days after the initial magnitude seven quake devastated the country . 
Haitian officials say up to 200,000 people have been killed , 250,000 injured and 1.5 million left homeless . 
Announcing the deployment of Largs Bay , International Development Secretary Douglas Alexander said : `` This ship will provide a lifeline of essential supplies to sustain the recovery effort over the coming weeks to keep Haiti running . 
The Disasters Emergency Committee is co-ordinating an appeal to help the people of Haiti There are 13 charities involved including the British Red Cross , Islamic Relief and World Vision Donate via the DEC website or by telephoning 0370 60 60 900 `` The focus until now has rightly been on the immediate task of trying to save lives but we must also plan for the future . '' 
The ship is being sent at the request of the UN , and will be able to ferry supplies for the UN and non-governmental organizations -LRB- NGOs -RRB- involved in the aid effort . 
Mr Alexander said : `` Hundreds of thousands of people , many of them desperately poor to begin with , have been left with nothing . 
`` It will take many months for them to rebuild their lives and the international community stands ready to help . '' 
Mr Alexander said the Royal Navy 's professionalism and capability would `` make a real difference '' . 
Meanwhile , British Airways says a second relief craft will carry two Red Cross vehicles and 100 tonnes of food , blanket , tents and water supplies from Oxfam , the World Food Programme and Unicef to Haiti on Friday . 
Brendan Gormley , chief executive of the Disasters Emergency Committee - an umbrella group of 13 major UK-based charities , said he was `` stunned '' by the British public 's generosity . 
`` There is still a huge amount of work to be done , '' he said . 
`` However , vital aid is starting to get through in larger quantities , with some hospitals and clinics starting to receive life-saving medical supplies , food and water . '' 
Aid has been slow to reach survivors since the first tremor on 12 January , leaving hundreds of thousands of people still without food or water . 
Aid agencies , and some governments , have complained at delays in bringing in aircraft full of equipment . 
The US military has defended its handling of the rescue operation at the airport , saying it was doing `` everything in our power to speed aid to Haiti as fast as humanly possible '' . 
