Thousands of survivors are fending for themselves Scores of US troops have landed at Haiti 's presidential palace , as aid efforts gather pace a week after the devastating earthquake . 
Aid workers involved in the operation have been sharing their accounts with the BBC News website . 
Esitima , aged 12 , is recovering in hospital It has been a frantic day at the Baptist Haiti Mission Hospital where I am part of a multi-skilled team who arrived last Friday . 
The hospital is one of the few which survived the earthquake . 
News continues to spread that the hospital is open and that foreign doctors and surgeons are attending to patients . 
The hospital remains extremely stretched and is having to make difficult decisions about both the living and the dead in terms of priorities . 
We have had to dig a mass grave for patients who died and who have no family to collect the body - presumably the rest of the family perished in the earthquake . 
The smell of death is in the air , something I have not ever really had to deal with before . 
In terms of the living , we are having to make patients wait with what would normally be high priority injuries because there are others who arrive without warning in a critical condition . 
People say they are still pulling bodies out of the rubble , even after six days . 
A lorry arrived laden with fresh medical supplies just as the final cast on a broken leg was being completed The hospital has come close to running out of medical supplies , diesel for the generator and water . 
However it can only be described as miraculous how these needs are met at the last moment . 
A lorry arrived laden with fresh medical supplies just as the final cast on a broken leg was being completed . 
Somebody sourced some diesel as we ran the generator to keep the hospital functioning on its last gallons . 
As the hospital was reporting that it was out of water , we got the emergency filtration unit running ! 
Despite all of this there are smiles of hope . 
A man grabbed me as I walked through the ward with my camera and insisted that I took a photo of his son who , after being operated on by the HCJB Global medical team , is going to live . 
Whilst still in the same ward a Haitian hospital chaplain led the patients in prayers and singing of hymns . 
It was quite overwhelming to experience the sense of peace that descended on this ward in the midst of such tremendous suffering . 
Estima Yonel is another person with a big smile on his face . 
A 12 year old shepherd boy , Estima was walking back down the mountain with his herd of goats when the earthquake struck . 
Boulders tumbled down the mountainside and his leg and arm were crushed . 
The surgeons worked late into the night to save him . 
His brother and sister sit by his bedside with equally big white grins on their faces . 
I have just returned from Haiti , where I was delivering medical supplies , food and support for Relief International , and other institutions . 
I am heading back there tomorrow with more supplies . 
I 'm an information and communications technical consultant based in the Dominican Republic . 
Last Wednesday , after the earthquake , I decided to go to Haiti . 
I do n't work for an aid agency but I wanted to help . 
My friends advised me against it , but I went ahead anyway . 
Once word got out I was contacted by a someone who was trying to get a large trauma kit to Relief International doctors . 
The kit includes basics such as bandages and dressings , something that was needed urgently in Haiti . 
Once I set the ball rolling , things started to move quickly . 
We managed to get the Infante Sano organization to pay for the kit , a group of students got a truck with driver for us , a friend bought supplies , tents and sleeping bags , and additional medical supplies , and a teacher offered his 4x4 Land Rover . 
We were soon ready to go and help . 
When we got to Port-au-Prince we handed out our supplies to the Relief International doctors working in a field hospital . 
They just used the bandages and dressing right in front of me . 
They had no spare supplies at all . 
I watched as one doctor dressed a huge , five-day-old wound on a man 's head . 
I fetched more supplies from our truck and they were all used there and then . 
Even the most basic medical supplies are desperately needed . 
I knew that the film star Vin Diesel had frequently visited the Dominican Republic and Haiti . 
I decided to try and contact him to see if he could help . 
To my surprise I got through and he wants to help . 
I am organising a meeting with him , meanwhile I 'm planning to go back to Haiti on Wednesday when I hope to take four doctors to Port-au-Prince . 
Aid workers set up medical clinics and install clean water units For the third day in a row we have worked to treat victims in the Port-au-Prince soccer stadium . 
What started as an impromptu clinic has grown to become a field hospital where injured are kept overnight in tents . 
Today a group of French doctors joined the team allowing us to open 14 separate treatment stations . 
A truck with a PA system has been touring the downtown area encouraging the injured to come to the stadium for treatment and we have made announcements on the radio . 
One of the Israeli doctors we are working with sighed in frustration today and told me he had never seen anything like this , none of us have . 
Patients that would normally be rushed to the emergency room were being turned away because there were others with more serious conditions . 
I saw a child with a broken back , she was paralysed and I could see her spine bulging outwards in one spot . 
She was motionless except for her screaming . 
Another little girl had lost her right ear and a considerable section of her scalp . 
While the doctors worked in the stadium I was in the national hospital . 
We were responding to an urgent call the hospital made for clean water . 
This is the largest hospital in Haiti and everywhere you look there are patients resting after treatment . 
A good proportion of the hospital was destroyed and now the patients are lying on old desks , blood-stained mattresses or even on the ground . 
We were installing a water purification unit which can output 10,000 gallons of clean water per day . 
Tomorrow we will be back at the hospital to finish the installation and get water pumping and our doctors will be back in action in the stadium . 
The biggest challenge we are facing at the moment is the shortage of fuel . 
We are having to ration the diesel we have and we are hoping this does n't restrict movement in the midst of great momentum on our relief effort . 
The great news is that I just found out that Operation Blessing has a fuel supply on board a US Navy ship and that should be here in a few days along with tons of relief goods for distribution and 10 more of the water purification units like the one we installed today . 
It 's raining quite hard now and the mosquitoes will be out soon , the rain will only worsen the already difficult living conditions for the scores of Haitians in tents across the quake zone . 
Sarah Gillam : `` More food supplies will be picked up tonight for distribution tomorrow '' Yesterday ActionAid started the first of its distribution of emergency goods , delivering special emergency high protein meals to 2,750 children and enough medical supplies for about 250 wounded people . 
Working with a local partner organization , the team took the supplies to four refugee camps , an impromptu field hospital and an ActionAid supported school in the Mariani district of Port-au-Prince . 
The largest camp has 7,253 residents - all accounted for by volunteers working with us . 
They 're living under makeshift tents made out of bedsheets and sticks but many have no covering at all . 
In all the camps , voluntary committees have been set up by residents themselves to deal with food and water . 
The risk of rape is very real for women in the camps - but thankfully at one camp I visited today volunteers have developed a system in which the most vulnerable women are guarded by volunteers at night . 
Every afternoon a Haitian police officer visits the camp and residents turn in whoever has been accused of rape . 
This has significantly lowered the risk and shows how the people of Haiti are taking their destiny into their own hands . 
More food supplies will be picked up tonight for distribution tomorrow , a secure warehouse has been found , orders have been sent out for supplies , and we 've located a new office as ActionAid 's is now unsafe . 
Staff are working round the clock on funding applications across the world . 
Internet connection has been very poor and phone contact with the outside world intermittent . 
ISABELLE JEANSON , MEDICINS SANS FRONTIERES Yesterday I visited Trinite Hospital . 
There was a small baby , about one-and-a-half months old , lying on her side in her bed because her right arm had been amputated and was covered in bandages . 
Isabelle Jeanson : inside a therapeutic feeding center for malourished children The auxiliary nurse told me her story - sad and miraculous . 
She was in the hospital when the earthquake partially destroyed it . 
Somehow this tiny little girl survived after falling through concrete floors and walls and was rescued from the rubble , though we have no idea where her mother is . 
Chances are she does n't have a family anymore . 
Some people are now selling food in makeshift markets , and there is more traffic in the streets . 
There 's also the regular sound of helicopters hovering . 
More and more aid organizations are showing up and trucks and some cranes are steadily working through buildings in the city , though who knows how long it will take to dig through all the rubble to find those missing . 
A man with a gunshot wound was carried in on a stretcher . 
Two doctors jumped into action , first checking to see if he was conscious , then seeing if he could feel his arms and legs . 
Even though the gunshot had punctured his neck they determined he was `` operable '' . 
The patients we are treating will end up leaving our hospital as different people . 
Many must undergo amputations because their limbs are so badly crushed there 's no way of saving them . 
A colleague , who is on his fourth mission , told me he was amazed because he had no idea MSF had the capability to implement the human resources , the logistics , the setup that is required for this kind of emergency . 
Most amazingly though , is that everyone here , including our Haitian staff , are so singly focused these days on the one common intention : to save as many people as we can . 
