Suffolk inventor looks to help Haiti earthquake victims A shortage of water is just one of the problems in Haiti An Ipswich man 's invention is being used to help with the relief work in Haiti , following the earthquake which killed as many as 200,000 people . 
One thousand of Michael Pritchard 's Lifesaver water bottles , which make dirty water suitable for drinking , have been sent to Haiti . 
`` The bottle holds nearly a litre of water , '' said Michael . 
`` You unscrew the base and fill with water from your surroundings - puddles , streams , ditches , any muddy water . '' 
Michael says his jerrycan can provide over 15,000 litres of drinking water Haiti , the poorest nation in the Americas , and its 10 million residents were devastated by the earthquake . 
Michael says 1000 of his bottles are being sent to Haiti via the American charity Operation Blessing - and hopes 1000 jerrycans , which he says can provide over 15,000 litres of water , will follow in February . 
`` With the jerrycan you unscrew the top , fill it with water , give it a few pumps , and then there 's a tap on it and you can then fill up your cups and your pots and pans . 
`` Mothers ' baby milk is going to be mixed with dirty water out there - it 's ridiculous . 
`` This does 2 litres a minute , is robust - we just need to see them out there . '' 
WaterAid says governments need to be involved in finding a solution WaterAid , the UK-based charity which strives to improve access to drinking water for some of the world 's poorest people , said : `` There are many different ways to purify water in emergency situations . 
`` Some appliances use filtration , others use treatment with chemicals , heat or ultraviolet radiation . 
`` These solutions offer vitally needed clean water to communities in the short term after a disaster event . 
However , all filters need to be cleaned and replaced periodically . 
`` In these communities access to a source of water is often the problem . '' 
WaterAid wants governments or local authorities to solve the problem of water supply by investing in infrastructure . 
