SOS Children 's Villages runs a community for 1000 orphaned Haitians A Cambridge-based charity is helping to re-home children orphaned by the earthquake in Haiti . 
SOS Children 's Villages runs a home near the capital , which is currently being used as an emergency hospital . 
The organization is working to reunite children with surviving family members . 
Describing themselves as `` orphan specialists '' , Andrew Cates , from the charity 's UK headquarters , said : `` We are , as it were , literally holding the babies . '' 
Do you remember what you were doing at 2153 GMT on the night of Tuesday 12 January , 2010 ? 
Perhaps you were getting ready for bed ? 
You probably brushed your teeth and checked that your clothes were ready for work the next morning . 
In fact , you probably did much the same as you would on any other evening . 
Seven thousand kilometres away on an island in the Caribbean it was still daylight . 
Not yet 5pm local time , you would still have been at work . 
Or preparing supper for your family . 
And this was the moment that the earthquake struck . 
With a magnitude of 7.0 , the quake is estimated to have killed over 200,000 people , with a further three million affected . 
Numerous aid agencies , charities and international troops have descended on the island to assist in the humanitarian relief effort . 
Among these is a Cambridge-based charity - SOS Children 's Villages -LRB- SOS CV -RRB- - an international organization supporting over 70,000 orphaned children in 124 countries . 
Andrew Cates , chief executive of SOS CV in Cambridge , explained why staff from the charity - which already has a base in Haiti - are well-placed to help the children affected by the earthquake . 
`` Our children 's village -LRB- in Santo , 16km from Port-au-Prince -RRB- is largely intact , '' he said . 
`` We have food , water and electricity , and the village playing field is now having an emergency hospital built on it because we are one of the very few places with a working infrastructure there . 
`` But our national office in Haiti has been destroyed , '' he continued . 
`` We had a social center in town which is completely gone and a vocational training center that no one 's even been able to get to because it 's in an area that 's been totally devastated . 
`` So , the village itself is totally serviceable and is now being used as a hub , to help in particular the children and the orphaned children around Port-au-Prince . '' 
`` The role that we 're given is to look after the unaccompanied children , the lone children . 
We trace the families , we do trauma therapy and at the end of 18 months of trying to find a family - and the best solution for every child - we typically end up with 500 or 600 children who live in family-based care in our children 's villages . 
Earthquake devastation near SOS Children 's Villages ' Santo home in Haiti `` We are orphan specialists . 
In Haiti we have trauma specialists who know how to deal with children who are traumatised . 
`` We have people with a lot of experience in tracing families and we have local staff - and that helps with understanding the local culture and with clues about local families or where they might come from . '' 
If a child ends up staying at one of SOS 's villages , they are cared for `` through to independence '' . 
Andrew is quick to point out that the definition of independence depends very much on local culture as well as the individual child . 
`` Quite a lot of the children who are more difficult to place have some degree of developmental problems and so some of them end up being supported by us , to a degree , for life . 
`` We take children on - and when we do , we take them on as a parent would - with a commitment that as long as they need us , we will be there for them . '' 
Two days after the earthquake , SOS staff from the neighbouring Dominican Republic hired a helicopter and flew to Haiti . 
They were unable to land but filmed the devastation . 
