U2 and Jay-Z record song for Haiti U2 and Jay-Z duetted in front of Berlin 's Brandenburg Gate last year U2 , Jay-Z and producer Swizz Beatz have recorded a song together to raise money for victims of the Haiti earthquake . 
U2 's guitarist The Edge told Irish radio station 2FM the band `` wrote a song , finished and recorded '' last week after being contacted about the idea . 
The Edge , Bono and Jay-Z , along with Rihanna , are due to appear in London for `` a group performance '' as part of Friday 's Hope For Haiti telethon . 
George Clooney 's two-hour benefit show will be aired on MTV in the UK . 
The Edge told 2FM DJ Dave Fanning over the weekend : `` Bono got a call from a producer , Swizz . 
He and Jay-Z wanted to do something for Haiti . 
`` So Bono came up with the phrase on the phone and last night we were here , we wrote a song , finished , recorded , and sent it back to them . 
`` So , that might be the next thing you hear from us . '' 
Swizz Beatz also confirmed the project on his Twitter page , saying : `` Me , Bono , Hova -LRB- Jay-Z 's nickname -RRB- have something to say about Haiti . 
`` I told you I was working on something amazing for Haiti . 
They need us ! '' 
It is not clear when the single will be released , or whether the artists plan to premiere the song during Friday 's telethon Jay-Z has played with the Irish rock group before , popping up for a handful of dates on last year 's 360 tour , and adding a rap to their hit single Sunday Bloody Sunday during the 2009 MTV Europe Awards . 
George Clooney has been organising the Hope For Haiti telethon Meanwhile , more acts have been added to the bill for the Haiti telethon including Coldplay , who will play at `` a London location '' alongside Jay-Z . 
Kid Rock , Sheryl Crow and Keith Urban will appear in Los Angeles while Haitian-born Fugees star Wyclef Jean , Sting , Mary J Blige , Shakira and Bruce Springsteen will be among performers in New York . 
Funds raised will go to Oxfam America , Red Cross , Unicef , Partners in Health and the Yele Haiti Foundation . 
The telethon will be screened live in the UK from 0100 GMT on Saturday 23 January . 
In the US , the telethon is being screened live without commercials on a number of channels including NBC , ABC and CBS . 
