Rescuers applaud as the children are pulled alive from the ruins A strong aftershock has rocked Haiti , sending screaming people running into the streets , eight days after another quake devastated the country . 
The extent of the damage is not yet known . 
The magnitude 6.1 tremor struck west of Port-au-Prince at 0603 local time -LRB- 1103 GMT -RRB- . 
An estimated 200,000 people died in last Tuesday 's quake and another 1.5 million were made homeless . 
Despite an international aid operation , supplies are slow to reach survivors . 
However , international teams are still rescuing people alive from the rubble , including a 69-year-old woman pulled from the ruins of a church in the capital . 
The US military has defended its handling of the rescue operation , as aid groups complained of long delays in getting vital supplies of food , water and medicine . 
Haitian President Rene Preval said aid delivery was the main problem now . 
Help came `` very fast , '' Mr Preval told a French radio station . 
`` When it arrives , the question is : where are the trucks to transport it , where are the depots ? '' 
The US Geological Survey said Wednesday 's tremor was centred 35 miles -LRB- 56km -RRB- north-west of the capital . 
It struck at a depth of 6.2 miles -LRB- 9.9 km -RRB- , but was too far inland to generate any tsunamis in the Caribbean . 
We were forced to buy a saw in the market to continue amputations Although some aid has started to reach desperate survivors , hundreds of thousands are still without food or water , a full week after the disaster . 
Medecins Sans Frontieres -LRB- Doctors Without Borders -RRB- said its cargo plane with 12 tonnes of medical supplies had been turned away from the congested Port-au-Prince airport three times since Sunday . 
It said five patients died from lack of the supplies it carried . 
`` We were forced to buy a saw in the market to continue amputations , '' the group 's Loris de Filippi told the Reuters news agency in Cite Soleil . 
But the US military has defended its efforts in the face of vast logistical challenges . 
`` We 're doing everything in our power to speed aid to Haiti as fast as humanly possible , '' said Gen Douglas Fraser , head of US Southern Command . 
He said they plan to start using two other airports , at Jacmel in Haiti and San Isidro in the neighbouring Dominican Republic , in the coming days . 
One full week after the magnitude seven quake devastated the country , search-and-rescue teams were emerging from the ruins with unbelievable success stories . 
Ena Zizi , 69 , was rescued from the wreckage of the residence of Haiti 's Roman Catholic archbishop on Monday , a day before crews recovered the body of the archbishop himself , Monsignor Joseph Serge Miot . 
Another survivor , 25-year-old Lozama Hotteline , was rescued from beneath a collapsed supermarket with the help of teams from Turkey and France . 
Television pictures showed her smiling and singing as she was carried to safety . 
The United Nations said early on Wednesday that 121 people had been rescued by international teams since the 12 January earthquake - an extra 31 people on Tuesday . 
In a bid to speed up the delivery of aid and stem looting and violence , US troops have stepped up their presence in the quake-ravaged country . 
Mark Doyle , BBC News , Port-au-Prince Haiti was extremely poor even before the earthquake , and this disaster has now broken all the basic services , like phones and electricity . 
But Haitians are resilient . 
Everywhere there are volunteers filling some of the gaps created by the slow arrival of international aid . 
A company which sells drinking water is distributing it free to people living in a school compound . 
A Haitian Jesuit priest has mobilised local relief workers and international doctors to work together in a rural region just outside the capital . 
In a slum area , a volunteer first-aider dressed the wounds of a girl who had been trapped in rubble . 
These largely unsung heroes know they ca n't replace the big foreign aid agencies , but they 're doing what they can to fill the gaps . 
US Black Hawk helicopters swooped down on the grounds of Haiti 's wrecked presidential palace on Tuesday , dropping scores of US troops who moved to secure a nearby hospital and set up aid distribution points . 
US Army Maj Gen Daniel Allyn , the deputy commander for relief operations in Haiti , said the military had delivered 400,000 bottles of water and 300,000 food rations since last Tuesday 's earthquake . 
He said the number of US troops would grow to 10,000 in the coming weeks . 
Meanwhile , the UN Security Council voted to temporarily boost its peacekeeping forces by 3,500 personnel . 
UN officials said they would accompany US troops as they delivered supplies . 
While military escorts are still needed to deliver relief supplies , the United Nations said fears of violence and looting had eased . 
`` The overall security situation in Port-au-Prince remains stable , with limited , localized violence and looting occurring , '' the UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said . 
So far , feared infectious diseases have not shown up , although many injured faced the immediate threats of tetanus and gangrene , and hospitals are overwhelmed . 
The UN says `` localized looting '' is occurring , but overall security is good The Pentagon said a navy hospital ship , the USNS Comfort , had received its first Haitian patients , even as it was still heading towards Haiti . 
US Defense Secretary Robert Gates said the military is sending additional ships to help with earthquake recovery in Haiti , including one that could remove debris blocking the main port . 
The World Food Programme said it was planning to bring in 10,000 gallons -LRB- 40,000 litres -RRB- of diesel a day from the neighbouring Dominican Republic as Haitian fuel supplies dried up . 
Haitian officials say the death toll from the quake was likely to be between 100,000 and 200,000 , and that 75,000 bodies had already been buried in mass graves . 
