Airdrops allow food to be given out without having to land the aircraft . 
The US Air Force C-17 planes involved in the first airdrop came from a base in North Carolina and dropped 14,000 meals and 15,000 litres of water in a secured area 5 miles north east of Port-au-Prince . 
The problem with airdrops is that without proper control on the ground there may be rioting as people fight over supplies . 
Port-au-Prince airport is small , damaged and congested and lacks the warehouses needed to store all the aid before it can be distributed . 
The US has been managing the airport and has established a slot system to maximize its capacity . 
About one hundred flights a day are landing there , but there have been reports of disputes between countries and agencies about who gets priority for landing their planes . 
It takes 18 hours to travel the 160 miles from Santo Domingo in the Dominican Republic to Port au Prince . 
The route is very congested with people trying to leave Haiti and relief supplies trying to get into the country . 
Bottlenecks due to relief traffic have been causing delays of up to an hour at the border crossing point and disorganised relief efforts were further hampering operations . 
A field office has been set up at Jimani for the transfer of supplies into Haiti . 
A fleet of 30 long haul trucks was secured in Santo Domingo on Monday 18 January . 
Distribution points are being set up within Haiti to ensure aid reaches all the outlying population centres . 
Port-au-Prince harbor was badly damaged in the quake and it may be many months before it 's fully operational again . 
US divers have been surveying the harbor and and will begin a salvage operation to remove underwater debris . 
The aircraft carrier USS Carl Vinson will serve as a `` floating airport '' for relief operations with 19 helicopters on board . 
Other US ships have been deployed carrying medical staff and equipment , as well as troops and relief supplies . 
Other supplies may be diverted to ports further north , such as Cap Haitien , Saint Marc and Gonaives . 
The USS Carl Vinson is moored off Port au Prince . 
It is carrying 19 helicopters and will act as a floating airport , ferrying supplies and troops to and from the island . 
Some of those injured in the earthquake have also been treated on board the ship . 
Other US ships are being deployed to Haiti , including the hospital ship USS Comfort . 
Others will bring helictopers capable of lifting heavy loads , trucks and other equipment needed to begin repairing the island 's infrastructure . 
Three million people are in need of aid , according to the Red Cross , and so far some 14,000 ready-to-eat meals and 15,000 litres of water have been dropped north-east of the capital , Port-au-Prince , by the US military . 
With the reported number of homeless people varying from 200,000 to 1.5 million , tents are in huge demand . 
UK-based ShelterBox is among those distributing non-food packs . 
The boxes , which cost # 490 , contain equipment to shelter 10 people and provide other basic living equipment . 
The World Food Programme -LRB- WFP -RRB- reports that water tanks are being set up across Port-au-Prince , with a further 120,000 bottles of water supplied to the city 's main hospital . 
High-energy biscuits , seen as the most effective way to feed people with no access to cooking facilities , have also arrived in Port-au-Prince . 
Ready-to-eat meals -LRB- MREs -RRB- , similar to those supplied to the US military , are being dropped in the region by the WFP . 
The packs contain main meals such as beef stew , chicken noodles or spaghetti , along with crackers , spread , biscuits , condiments and saline water . 
Each pack contains about 1,200 calories . 
As the name suggests , they are ready-to-eat but they can also be heated up by submerging in boiling water or using the flameless heater provided in the pack , which works by using a chemical reaction to create heat . 
The WFP hopes to have sent 10 million food packs to Haiti by 25 January . 
