US troops land at Haiti 's presidential palace US troops are stepping up aid operations across Haiti , a week after the devastating earthquake . 
UN officials said aid distribution points were being set up in the capital and UN security forces would accompany US troops as they delivered supplies . 
Helicopters dropped scores of US troops in the presidential palace grounds , and they moved to secure a nearby hospital . 
Meanwhile , the UN Security Council has voted to boost its peacekeeping forces to help control outbreaks of looting . 
Anger has been growing in the streets of the capital , Port-au-Prince , as people wait for help . 
The US military has begun delivering food and water to distribution points in the capital and elsewhere by helicopter , after congestion at the airport delayed deliveries of aid . 
For those who have lost everything , of course , help can not come soon enough UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon Some 14,000 ready-to-eat meals and 15,000 litres -LRB- 3,300 gallons -RRB- of water were dropped north-east of Port-au-Prince on Monday , the US said . 
It also defended its handling of operations at the airport in Port-au-Prince . 
Aid agencies - and some governments - have complained at delays in access for aircraft full of equipment to help the survivors , with priority going to military flights . 
`` We 're doing everything in our power to speed aid to Haiti as fast as humanly possible , '' said Gen Douglas Fraser , head of US Southern Command Meanwhile , the UN has approved a recommendation by Secretary General Ban Ki-moon to boost UN troop numbers in Haiti by 2,000 for six months , and UN police numbers by 1,500 . 
Mr Ban said he was grateful to the UN Security Council for its swift action , calling it `` a clear signal that the world is with Haiti '' . 
He said the UN was in discussion with member states , and he hoped to have the extra troops and police to deploy soon . 
The UN mission in Haiti currently numbers about 9,000 . 
There have been reports of widespread violence and looting . 
But the UN has played down worries over security , saying that despite violent incidents , the overall situation is calm . 
US Army Maj Gen Daniel Allyn , deputy commander of the Joint Task Force on ongoing relief efforts , echoed that message , saying the security situation was `` relatively calm '' and that aid distribution points were orderly . 
He said there were `` pockets of instability '' , but that UN forces and the Haitian national police were addressing security needs with `` agility '' . 
Mark Doyle , BBC News , Haiti The Medecins Sans Frontieres hospital in Port-au-Prince was destroyed in the earthquake , so the local and international medical staff who survived set up a new treatment center across the road in their pharmacy . 
Using rough wooden sticks and a crude curtain they 've established an operating theater in the open air . 
The operating table is a wooden desk . 
The doctors say they treated several hundred people a day in the first few days after the earthquake , and that more are coming all the time as they hear medical aid is available . 
Most patients have broken or crushed limbs from falling concrete . 
There were more than 2,000 US personnel on the ground and 5,000 offshore on ships , he said , adding that 10,000 troops in total would be arriving in the coming weeks , half of whom would be directly involved in distributing humanitarian aid . 
Mr Ban said the UN 's goal was to increase the number of people receiving food to one million this week and at least two million in the following two weeks . 
Addressing concern that aid has been too slow to reach desperate Haitians , Mr Ban said the situation on the ground was `` overwhelming '' , but that UN efforts were `` gearing up quickly '' . 
`` For those who have lost everything , of course , help can not come soon enough , '' Mr Ban said . 
`` But we are working day and night . '' 
Last week , US Defense Secretary Robert Gates said airdrops had been ruled out because they might do more harm than good . 
Mr Gates warned that they could trigger riots if there was no proper structure on the ground to distribute supplies . 
The problem is dehydration but there is still a chance -LRB- of finding survivors -RRB- But the BBC 's Nick Davis in Port-au-Prince says that the US military is now securing areas on the ground before pallets of food and water are parachuted in . 
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown said on Tuesday Haiti was a `` test of resolve '' for the international community . 
France 's Co-operation Minister , Alain Joyandet , had suggested on Monday that the US was `` occupying '' Haiti and urged the UN to `` clarify '' the US role . 
However , a statement from President Nicolas Sarkozy on Tuesday said France was `` very satisfied '' with the co-operation and praised the US for its `` exceptional mobilisation '' . 
The UN says dozens of search and rescue teams are now on the ground . 
On Tuesday , UN spokeswoman Elisabeth Byrs said 90 people had been pulled out alive since the earthquake , and rescue efforts were now concentrated outside the capital . 
She insisted there was still hope for survivors . 
`` The climate is mild , there are significant air pockets . 
The problem is dehydration but for the moment there is still a chance , '' she said . 
Haitian officials say the death toll in the quake has risen to at least 75,000 . 
Some 250,000 people were injured and about a million left homeless . 
At least 70,000 earthquake victims have already been buried . 
On Tuesday , the Paris Club of creditor governments , including the US , UK , France and Germany , called on other nations to follow its lead in canceling debts to Haiti . 
Venezuela and Taiwan are the other biggest creditors . 
Meanwhile , the bodies of eight Chinese nationals killed in the quake have arrived back in Beijing in a high-profile ceremony attended by relatives and top officials . 
