VENICE , La\/PENSACOLA BEACH , Fla | Sat Jun 5 , 2010 7:16 pm EDT VENICE , La\/PENSACOLA BEACH , Fla -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The latest effort to siphon oil and gas gushing from a ruptured deep-sea wellhead in the Gulf of Mexico is working well so far , U.S. officials said on Saturday , as President Barack Obama defended his handling of the environmental crisis . 
British energy giant BP Plc said it collected 6,077 barrels -LRB- 255,000 gallons\/966 ,000 liters -RRB- of oil per day from the well on Friday , and that `` improvement in oil collection is expected over the next several days . '' 
After soiling wetland wildlife refuges in Louisiana and barrier islands in Mississippi and Alabama , the black tide of pollution has reached some of the famous white beaches of Florida . 
The toll of dead and injured birds and marine animals , including sea turtles and dolphins , is also climbing . 
But 47 days into the crisis and after several unsuccessful attempts at containment by BP , a partial solution finally appears at hand . 
The containment cap that BP clamped over the leak earlier this week was siphoning oil to a waiting drill-ship at a faster rate than initially estimated , U.S. Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen said at a briefing in Theodore , Alabama . 
Bob Fryar , senior vice president with BP , later told a meeting of local mayors in Alabama that the latest undersea containment effort had gone `` extremely well '' so far . 
The collection rate is still only about one-third of one day 's flow from the oil geyser , which has been estimated by the government at about 19,000 barrels -LRB- 800,000 gallons\/3 million liters -RRB- per day . 
But it could mark a turning point in the drama that has riveted the world and forced the Obama administration to reconsider plans to expand offshore oil drilling , which was seen as way to reduce U.S. dependence on foreign oil . 
Allen said the full capacity of BP 's containment device was about 15,000 bpd , the `` upper limit '' of the current leak control effort . 
BP does not expect to fully halt the oil flow until August , when two relief wells are due to be completed . 
He said that winds continue to push parts of the vast oil slick closer to the coastline across a wide area -- roughly from the Mississippi-Alabama border to Port St. Joe in the Florida Panhandle , or more than 200 miles . 
Florida 's fishermen got a glimmer of good news late on Friday when the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reopened about 16,000 square miles -LRB- 41,400 sq km -RRB- that had been closed to fishing on June 2 as a precaution . 
Still , fully one-third of Gulf federal waters , or 78,603 square miles -LRB- 203,582 sq km -RRB- , remains closed to fishing in waters off four states . 
The U.S. shrimp and oyster supply , in particular , is heavily concentrated in the Gulf . 
In his weekly radio address on Saturday , Obama defended his administration against charges it had not moved aggressively enough in its response to the worst oil spill in U.S. history , which followed an April 20 rig blast that killed 11 workers . 
Obama , who made a third trip to the Gulf coast on Friday , said he has put in place the largest response to an environmental disaster in U.S. history . 
The government had been `` mobilized on every front , '' he said . 
Meanwhile , BP said it had no specific pre-allocated budget to pay damages claims resulting from the spill , but will pay all those `` hurt , harmed or damaged '' until all legitimate claims are satisfied , `` We will make these payments for as long as it takes ... There is no budget , we 'll do this until it 's finished , '' BP America Vice President of Resources Darryl Willis said in a conference call from Orange Beach , Alabama . 
The company faces a U.S. criminal probe , several lawsuits , dwindling investor confidence and growing questions about its credit-worthiness . 
Its share price has been stripped of about one-third of its value since the crisis began . 
BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward has insisted the company had plenty of money to meet its obligations , including $ 5 billion in cash and additional credit lines it could tap . 
The company has said it had already spent $ 1 billion on the disaster . 
It is preparing to send a second advance payment to individuals and businesses along the Gulf Coast to compensate for the loss of income as a result of the spill . 
About 14,000 individuals and businesses will have received about $ 84 million once the second payment is processed . 
The company delayed a decision on Friday to suspend its quarterly dividend payments , as some U.S. politicians have demanded . 
The far-flung but fragmented oil slick appeared to make its first landfall in Florida on Friday as tar balls and an oily sheen washed up on Pensacola Beach on the Panhandle . 
Tar ball sightings were fewer on Saturday , but residents and environmental officials were still uneasy . 
`` BP ca n't stop it , I do n't think the Navy or the military can stop it , '' said local businessman Michael Penzone . 
`` If we can get people to come out and start praying , maybe something good can come out of this . '' 
Local officials are bracing for more impact from the spill on Florida 's $ 60 billion-a-year tourism industry . 
Protesters planned an anti-BP rally for Sunday at a BP gas station in downtown Pensacola -- although such grass-roots actions are mostly seen as damaging to small business owners who run the stations . 
In Orange Beach on Alabama 's Gulf shore , BP 's Fryar faced anger from local mayors about what was termed the company 's sluggish response to oil clean-up on local beaches . 
`` We just climbed out of a hole , from two hurricanes and two years of recession . 
This was going to be a banner year , and BP killed it , '' said Tony Kennon , mayor of Orange Beach , just west of the Florida border . 
Latest figures from the U.S. government on Friday showed 527 birds across the Gulf Coast have been collected dead over a 45-day period , although not all showed signs of oil . 
Tom Bancroft , chief scientist for the National Audubon Society , said the government 's numbers tell only part of the story . 
`` Some -LRB- birds -RRB- just sink under the water and will never be counted , '' he said . 
Of particular concern , Bancroft said , are threatened shore birds that breed on Gulf Coast beaches . 
The spill could also be `` a really bad setback '' for the brown pelican , Louisiana 's state bird , which was only removed from the endangered species list in 2009 . 
NOAA also reported many heavily oiled sea turtles in the spill zone . 
The turtles are being caught , cleaned and transported to an Audubon Aquarium outside New Orleans for further care . 
Dozens of dead dolphins have also been stranded within the spill area since late April . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It doesnt look like its collecting anything ! 
www.deepwaterbp.com @dara , the article says they 're collecting only 5 % of the oil so far . 
That means they 're NOT collecting 95 % of the oil . 
For some reason this President only seems comfortable when he can threaten those who he sees as a problem , whether that problem is intentional or not . 
It may hearken back to his days in Chicago politics , or just the defensive instincts of a man lacking the maturity of age and development . 
Regardless of the reason , he stands tall when there is credit to be taken and points fingers in all directions when there is a lack of adoration . 
He lacks statesmanship and can not even comprehend that as a fact ... he could not recognize it if it confronted him in a narrow hallway . 
But ... we elected him and fate always sees that we get what we deserve . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
