SYDNEY | Thu Jun 16 , 2011 12:25 pm BST SYDNEY -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Lend Lease -LRB- LLC . 
AX -RRB- is bulking up its infrastructure management business in Australia with funds , joint ventures and club deals targeting the sector , which needs investment to support population growth out to 2050 . 
Lend lease , which manages about $ A11 billion -LRB- 7 billion pounds -RRB- of property assets globally , would use its existing platforms and experience to lever its growth in the infrastructure sector , said Tarun Gupta , Lend Lease 's group head of investment management . 
`` On a risk adjusted basis , Australia 's infrastructure assets offer competitive returns compared to some of the regions around the world , '' he told Reuters . 
`` We see continued demand from our domestic superannuation funds and selective demand from some of the offshore funds , '' he added . 
Australia 's population is expected to total more than 37 million people by 2050 , from 22 million , data from industry group Infrastructure Partnerships Australia showed . 
The group noted that the greater demand for roads and rail networks , and other public facilities , over the next decade translated to investment requirements totaling $ A360 billion to $ A770 billion . 
In April , Lend Lease hired Duncan Taylor as head of infrastructure funds and mandates . 
He has been sounding out investors with a view to launching infrastructure funds , or form joint ventures and club deals . 
Projects involving hospitals and schools were popular with investors , Gupta said , noting Lend Lease had a strong track record in the wholesale unlisted property space . 
Lend Lease launched Australia 's first unlisted property trust in 1959 and is now one of the leading wholesale property fund managers in the country . 
`` We want to leverage those relationships and those models into the infrastructure space , '' he added . 
In 2010 , Lend Lease upped its infrastructure offering by acquiring Australian construction and engineering contractor Valemus from Germany 's Bilfinger Berger 's -LRB- GBFG . 
Abigroup , a part of Valemus , has since won a $ A900 million contract to build the second stage of the Queensland Children 's Hospital . 
`` We have been in multiple PPPs -LRB- private public partnerships -RRB- and the track record that we are finding investors see as attractive , '' Taylor said . 
The Australian government was also taking steps to encourage private investments , announcing a new infrastructure tax incentive as part of the 2011\/12 federal budget . 
-LRB- Reporting by Eriko Amaha ; Editing by Andrew Macdonald -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
