Mature grain ready for harvesting stands in a farmer 's field near Goulburn , about 80km -LRB- 50 miles -RRB- northeast of Canberra , December 15 , 2009 . 
BRASILIA | Thu Jun 16 , 2011 6:08 pm BST BRASILIA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The G20 group of large economies will jointly monitor world supplies of key grains to help prevent speculation from driving up food prices , according to a draft statement of a ministerial meeting next week . 
Farm ministers gathering in Paris on June 22-23 would also call on the group 's finance ministers to control food commodity speculation by adopting stricter regulations for food derivatives markets , the statement , obtained by Reuters , said . 
Global food prices rallied earlier this year on rising grain costs , renewing concern about food security and inflationary pressure , particularly in some developing countries . 
Food prices have since eased but in May remained 37 percent above the previous year . 
France has made stronger regulation of commodities markets , mainly agricultural , a priority of its year-long presidency of the Group of 20 leading economies . 
Under the proposed statement , the G20 would share market information through a database -- the Agricultural Market Information System -LRB- AMIS -RRB- -- to be housed within the Rome-based United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation -LRB- FAO -RRB- . 
Non-G20 members and private-sector players would be encouraged to participate in the database on wheat , corn , soy and rice , which would later be expanded to include other foods . 
`` We emphasise that AMIS will enable financial actors and market regulators to be better informed of the fundamentals of physical markets . 
Transparency on physical markets is important for derivatives markets but the reverse is also true , '' the statement said . 
Its creation would be a boost to French President Nicolas Sarkozy ahead of next year 's presidential election . 
In a speech to French farm unions on Thursday , he urged agriculture ministers to back the database creation . 
The data would also be used to inform a proposed Rapid Response Forum that would mobilise broad political support for policies affecting agricultural production and in the response to crises in agricultural production . 
`` We agree that risk management of food price volatility in developed and developing countries would provide an important contribution to promote longer term agricultural development , '' the statement said . 
G20 farm ministers would also back a UN World Food Program pilot project for emergency humanitarian food reserves , as well as World Bank efforts to boost food security in vulnerable countries during food price surges and external shocks . 
At their meeting next week , they also will back the scrapping of taxes on food donations . 
Other proposals would seek increased coordination and sharing of crop forecast data obtained by satellite and more analysis on the effects of using food crops for biofuel production . 
-LRB- Reporting by Peter Murphy ; Editing by Raymond Colitt and Dale Hudson -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
