AMMAN | Thu Jun 16 , 2011 7:54 pm EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Tycoon Rami Makhlouf , who says he is quitting the Syrian business scene , owes his fortune and his role as a hate figure for protesters to his cousin President Bashar al-Assad . 
Just three months ago it would have been unthinkable to have even criticized him and Assad told businessmen last year , before the uprising against him : `` I wish Syria had 10 Rami Makhloufs . '' 
Yet by March , his name was already being uttered by demonstrators trying to burn down the premises of his telecoms operation while chanting : `` Go away Makhlouf . 
We do n't want thieves . '' 
The announcement on state television that he is taking a lesser business role and moving into charity work will be no doubt be widely seen as aimed at helping the ruling family survive the turmoil -- even though campaigners scoffed at the move . 
A close friend and confidant of Assad , Makhkouf controls companies with outright monopolies or semi monopolies in duty free , airlines , telecoms , real estate , oil , construction and import businesses . 
Aref Dalila , a leading economist , was jailed for eight years after he criticized the state for awarding a cellphone contract to Makhlouf that created Syriatel , the country 's largest mobile phone operator . 
The tycoon , who has been under U.S. sanctions since 2008 for what Washington calls public corruption and was put under EU sanctions last month , has repeatedly said he is a legitimate businessman whose firms provide jobs for thousands of Syrians . 
Makhlouf belongs to Assad 's Alawite minority sect , an offshoot of Shi'ite Islam , which rose to dominate political system in majority Sunni Syria after controlling the army following a coup that brought the Baath Party to power in a 1963 . 
Alawites influence have spread to business , undermining a Sunni merchant establishment that had traditionally dominated commerce -- although Makhlouf sought to placate Sunnis by bringing them into a holding company he set up five years ago . 
He is seen by many protesters as a front for more powerful family members , including Assad himself . 
He also began taking a more political role , appearing on television to promote ties with Turkey and participating in meetings with Iraqi officials to improve relations , diplomats in the Syrian capital said . 
His father Mohammad , a brother of Assad 's mother Anissa , also amassed a fortune under the rule of Assad 's father , the late Hafez al-Assad , and still plays a major role in managing the Makhlouf fortune , businessmen and diplomats say . 
Before the uprising , Makhlouf had been changing the structure of the his companies by inviting Syrian and gulf shareholders , they added . 
`` Makhlouf has been trying to improve his image and portray himself as a regional businessman , '' one of the sources said . 
A leading opposition figure dismissed the move to charity as a cosmetic attempt to placate a public angry at the widespread corruption he said Makhlouf epitomized and doubted Makhlouf would lose his position as one of the country 's power elite . 
`` The news that Makhlouf will be donating to the Syrian people money he obtained by corruption and from monopolies granted to him because of his family links is comic , '' Walid al-Bunni told Reuters by phone from Damascus . 
`` The announcement would have had some credibility if Makhlouf had said he returned the billions of dollars he had amassed to the treasury . 
The Syrian people may then think of forgiving him . '' 
One businessman said that Makhlouf 's rise began with the death of Assad 's brother Basil in car accident in the 1990s . 
The death of Basil , who was being groomed to succeed his father , brought in Bashar to politics . 
`` The difference between Bashar and Basil is that Basil was not under the influence of his cousins , '' the businessman said . 
Makhlouf told the New York Times in an interview last month that Syria 's ruling family will fight protesters `` to the end '' and hinted that Israel 's stability could be threatened if Assad was toppled . 
In a rare public statement , Syrian authorities said that Makhlouf was a private citizen and that his views did not represent the Syrian state . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Look at the massacre they are carrying out in Tibby you call that a revolution man you call that an operation for the people ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
