Muslim Brotherhood to Enter Egypt Talks ; Millions Gather for Super Bowl Sunday Aired February 6 , 2011 - 06:00 ET THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT . 
RANDI KAYE , CNN ANCHOR : Good morning . 
A quite morning so far in Tahrir Square , as hundreds gather for Muslim prayers and protesters dig in for Day 13 . 
In Iran , the trial of three U.S. hikers now under way , all accused of spying and trespassing . 
And paying tribute to Ronald Reagan . 
He would have been 100 years old today . 
Events across the country will honor his life and legacy . 
We 'll take you there . 
It 's early and we 're on it . 
From CNN Center , this is CNN SUNDAY MORNING . 
It 's February 6 . 
Good morning , everyone . 
Glad you 're with us . 
I 'm Randi Kaye . 
It 's 6 a.m. on the East Coast and 1 p.m. in Egypt . 
We want to give a special welcome now to our troops watching us on Armed Forces Network . 
We start with Egypt , where it 's the start of the workweek . 
And for the first time in more than a week , some banks in Cairo are open . 
They had closed at the height of the anti-government protests . 
The stock market remains closed . 
Also today , leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood group are expected to meet with Egypt 's new vice president . 
Brotherhood members originally said they would not talk until President Mubarak was out of office . 
VP Omar Suleiman met with other opposition leaders yesterday . 
Suleiman also got a call from his American counterpart , Joe Biden . 
They talked about the transition and the need for a concrete plan . 
Biden also set a clear timeline is needed . 
We 've also seen some high-level shuffling in Egypt 's ruling political party . 
Several leaders handed in their resignations , including one of President Mubarak 's sons . 
While some of the banks are reopening in Cairo , life is n't exactly back to normal . 
Protesters are gathered in the city 's main square for the 13th straight day . 
CNN 's Ivan Watson joins me live now from Cairo . 
Ivan , I understand that the Coptic Christians are expected to be gathering in the square today to show their support for the protesters . 
Have you seen any sign of this ? 
IVAN WATSON , CNN CORRESPONDENT : That 's right . 
We saw Muslims and Christians holding hands together upfront at the stage and hold side by side , Randi , a cross and a copy of the Quran in a show of brotherhood here . 
We 've also just had some evangelical Egyptian Christians playing music on the stage . 
And that was moments after hundreds of Muslim Christians prayed on the asphalt . 
And that 's a big deal in a country where just about a month - a little bit more than a month ago , there were some bloody tensions between Muslims and Christians erupting in different parts of the country . 
Now , we 've heard that one of the main opposition parties , Randi , the Muslim Brotherhood , has said it is willing to sit down now and engaged in a dialogue with the new vice president , Omar Suleiman . 
Meanwhile , the demonstrations continue here , and there 's a new twist that 's emerged since yesterday : All night last night , some of the demonstrators , scores of them , sat outside the barricades that really protect this enclave here in the heart of Cairo - they sat with campfires making a human chair to prevent the Egyptian military from being able to come in . 
We saw a standoff earlier yesterday where two tanks were approaching . 
They are putting their lives on the line , and they do not trust the Egyptian military to come in in large numbers . 
They say they do not want them to push this demonstration out of Tahrir Square . 
Take a listen to what one man had to say to us . 
WATSON : And you can see there , people sitting around - and they 're still doing that now - around an armored personnel carrier . 
They do not want it to be able to move . 
Why some of the distrust ? 
Well , one argument might be that the Egyptian military police is one of the secret police - plainclothes police organizations that has been involved in a number of the tensions of journalists and aid workers and human-right workers around Cairo in recent days . 
I 've talked to at least four or five people who say they have been detained by the military police . 
Some of these people saying they 've been blindfolded and handcuffed , taken in for hours of interrogation . 
And that 's despite the fact that a spokesman for the interior minister recently claimed in a press conference that the military will remain neutral in this standoff between Hosni Mubarak and the demonstrators here in Tahrir Square - Randi . 
KAYE : All right . 
Our Ivan Watson for us there in Cairo . 
And I 'll tell you , take a look at those crowds , and you 'd think after - what ? 
- Day 13 now , the protesters might be feeling a little bit defeated . 
But you just look at those crowds , and it seems as though more and more protesters are making their way today to Liberation Square . 
Ivan , we 'll check back with you later on . 
Before Egypt erupted , the anti-government protests brought change in Tunisia . 
But new demonstrations there have now turned deadly . 
Two people were killed and more than a dozen others were injured when police fired shots into the crowd . 
Protesters threw rocks and Molotov cocktails at a police station in the northern city of El Kef . 
Tunisia 's president fled after protests last month . 
It 's not clear exactly what sparked these new demonstrations . 
Iraq 's prime minister is n't wasting any time announcing his political intentions . 
Nouri al-Maliki now says he wo n't run for a third term as Iraq 's leader . 
He has another three years left in his current term , Al-Maliki also says he 'll back a term-limit amendment to Iraq 's constitution . 
Time for our `` Weekend Wheel , '' a look at other news you need to know as you get started this Sunday morning . 
Check out this police stop of a suspected drunk driver in Frankfort , Kentucky . 
This is from a gas-station surveillance video . 
That 's Office Brian Redman -LRB- ph -RRB- there in his car . 
You can see him trying to get the driver to stop . 
But that 's not exactly happening . 
The officer was injured . 
The driver was later found arrested - and he was arrested later on and has a court appearance tomorrow . 
The officer is recovering at home . 
Some restaurants in Southern California are being warned that their ground beef could make customers sick . 
The beef shipped to those restaurants by one California company may be contaminated with E. coli bacteria . 
We 're talking about 3,000 pounds of hamburger patties and other products . 
We have n't heard of any reports of people getting sick from that bad beef . 
Two American hikers are on trial today in Iran for spying and trespassing . 
Shane Bauer , Josh Fattal and Sarah Shourd were detained in the summer of 2009 after they allegedly strayed across an unmarked border from Iraq into Iran . 
Shourd was released last fall because of a medical condition . 
She did not return for the trial . 
Well , as if I really need to remind you that the Super Bowl is today . 
The Green Bay Packers and Pittsburgh Steelers will battle it out in Arlington , Texas . 
For your planning purposes , kickoff is at 6:29 p.m. Eastern time . 
More than 90 million people are expected to tune in . 
But many are n't really watching the game ; they want to see the commercials , and of course the halftime show . 
This year , is the Black Eyed Peas . 
I. AM , BLACK EYED PEAS : We were inspired by the Olympics in China , where everyone came together as - as one . 
And I do n't want to give too much , but it 's - it 's to that level . 
Last year 's Super Bowl actually set a record with more than 106 million people watching . 
Former Vice President Dick Cheney is remembering the legacy of former President Ronald Reagan . 
Today would have been the Great Communicator 100th birthday . 
DICK CHENEY -LRB- R -RRB- , FORMER VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA : When all of us think back to Ronald Reagan and try to sum up all that he was and all that he accomplished , ` thank you ' is still a pretty good place to start . 
We associate idealism with youth . 
But the oldest man ever elected president was also the most idealistic . 
And he brought out that quality in the American people . 
He inspired the kind of affection that even great men can not claim by right , but goes only to the truly good . 
KAYE : California Governor Jerry Brown has declared today Ronald Reagan Centennial Day . 
If you wanted to preorder the iPhone 4 from Verizon , well , forget about it . 
Verizon sold out of its preorder iPhones in less than a single day . 
It had expected to take preorders right up to Thursday 's launch date , when the iPhones will be in stores . 
Verizon says there will be one more presale starting - mark your calendars - at 3:01 a.m. - 3:01 a.m. Eastern - on Wednesday morning . 
So set your alarms . 
It seems like Lindsay Lohan just can not keep herself out of trouble . 
The Los Angeles district attorney is considering felony charges against the actress for the alleged theft of a $ 2,500 necklace from a Venice , California , jewelry store . 
Lohan 's lawyers says his client did not do anything wrong . 
The 24-year-old actress is already on probation in a drunk-driving case . 
It is a good thing the Super Bowl will be played under a dome because the weather in Dallas has been downright dreadful . 
Will it finally warm up for the fans to come out and play ? 
Plus , how long will Christina Aguilera hold that last note when she sings the national anthem at Saturday 's Super Bowl . 
Millions of dollars could be riding on it . 
Got snow , like they did earlier this week in Dallas ? 
Well , what do you do ? 
You build an igloo . 
That ' exactly what Jon Kettles did . 
He credits his Canadian family for teaching him the fine art of melting and refreezing snow to build this . 
How cute is that ? 
One hundred snow block sin all went into constructing it . 
His son and daughter selling hot chocolate for a buck . 
That 's a very unique hot - chocolate stand . 
The igloo chimney and all is the hit of the neighborhood , as you can imagine . 
KAYE : Are you willing to take a gamble this weekend ? 
Experts figure about $ 10 billion will be bet on Sunday 's Super Bowl . 
And half those wagers will have absolutely nothing to do with point spreads or even football . 
They 'll be propositions bets . 
For example , you can place a wager on how many times the Fox announcers will mention former Packer Brett Favre 's name . 
The over - under there is two-and-a-half . 
Or , who will the Super Bowl MVP thank first after the game ? 
His coach , 10-to-1 odds . 
His family , 4-to-1 odds . 
He 's actually a 3-to-2 favorite . 
You can even bet on how long it will take for Christina Aguilera to sing the national anthem . 
The over-under is one minute , 54 seconds . 
Or maybe even how long she 'll hold that final note . 
The over-under there is six seconds , a bet comedian Jimmy Kimmel may be planning to place . 
JIMMY KIMMEL , COMEDIAN : I am going with the under . 
I 'm going under six seconds . 
I think she 's going to do it under ... KIMMEL : Almost every person I talk to thinks she 'll go longer to show off because it 's the Super Bowl . 
But I say , no , I do n't think Christina Aguilera is a showoff . 
Do you hear that Christina ? 
I do n't think you 're a showoff . 
And only a showoff would sing the word `` brave '' for more than six seconds . 
-LRB- END VIDEO CLIP -RRB- KAYE : Seems like he 's up to no-good there . 
So that 's how the Super Bowl can actually change your personal finances . 
But what about the overall impact of the big game ? 
The numbers are actually staggering . 
CNN 's Jason Carroll takes a look . 
JASON CARROLL , CNN CORRESPONDENT : You ca n't talk about football without throwing in a few interesting stats . 
Here 's the bottom line : More and more out there are watching . 
This past season was a runaway hit . 
Each game had almost 18 million people watching . 
And if you just look at Super Bowl viewing , the audience has quadrupled since the mid-1960s . 
Last year , over 160 - 106 million people watched , making it the most-viewed TV event in history . 
All that popularity coming at a high cost . 
This year 's Super Bowl ads run $ 3 million for a 30-second spot . 
Well , apparently , it 's worth it . 
Advertisers know they can reach out not only to a large number of men , but women , too , who are now watching in higher numbers . 
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE : It 's a social thing , and you want to be involved in a social thing . 
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE : Because of very attractive football players like Miles Austin . 
You know , it 's a Sunday thing . 
It 's definitely like an American sport . 
CARROLL : So what 's behind all the football fever ? 
It goes beyond the Bowl . 
Take a listen to one expert . 
MARK WALLER , NFL 'S CHIEF MARKETING OFFICER : There 's now in - in this country and around the world so little that people can huddle around and - and are kind of word is , it 's America 's last campfire . 
LINDA KAPLAN THALER , MARKETING EXPERT : This is an event that everybody is part of , and you 're not - you 're not going to watch a - you know , you 're not going to DVR it . 
That 's - you know , it 's going to - it 's very , very immediate . 
CARROLL : Well , some companies do n't even need to buy a Super Bowl ad in order to cash in on the day . 
Sunday is traditionally one of the busiest pizza-buying days of the year , along with the day before Thanksgiving and New Year 's Day . 
Retailers also looking for a Super Bowl bounce in flat-screen TV sales in anticipation for the big day . 
KAYE : Jason mentioned that last year 's Super Bowl broke the record for most-watched TV show in history . 
So what show held the old record ? 
The answer coming your way in just 90 seconds . 
KAYE : Before the break , we asked you what show was knocked off the most-watched list by last year 's Super Bowl . 
Well , the answer is `` M \* A \* S \* H. '' The finale of the long-running series was watched by more than 105 million people . 
The Super Bowl beat it by around a half a million viewers . 
And just for fun , we threw in the numbers for the No. 2 most - watched Super Bowl . 
Time now to go cross country and see some of the stories our CNN affiliates are covering . 
To the Greater Boston area , where we have adventures in childbirth . 
Meet Jonathan Patrick Rozzi -LRB- ph -RRB- , who arrived Friday at a whopping 13 pounds . 
But even given his size , he was actually pretty quick . 
Mom says it only took 10 minutes to deliver him . 
To Seattle now , where the city 's iconic piggy bank Rachel took one on the snout yesterday . 
A taxi driver accidentally plowed into Rachel where she sat for years in front of the city 's Pike Place market . 
They say it will take just a few days to repair the 550-pound bronze piggy bank . 
In North Carolina , a very sweet challenge . 
Run down to the Krispy Kreme two miles away and chow down a dozen , then run back . 
And do it all in an hour . 
That 's pretty much the rules for the annual Krispy Kreme Challenge , a race that benefits North Carolina 's children 's hospital . 
From its humble beginnings back in 2004 with a dozen runners , the 7th annual run yesterday has 7,500 participants . 
Now , that is a marathon I can handle . 
Anything that involves running and doughnuts , I 'm up for it . 
Coming up , for the second week in a row , people have gathered around the U.S. to show their support for Egypt . 
We 'll bring you their stories next . 
If President Mubarak leaves , who will take over ? 
We 'll get a break down of the possibilities just ahead . 
KAYE : Welcome back . 
Twenty-two minutes past the hour . 
People in the United States are showing their support for the people of Egypt . 
Supporters gathered outside the White House , in New York City and here in Atlanta . 
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE : Down , down with Mubarak ! 
DON LEMON , CNN CORRESPONDENT : While most of the protests last week were focused on Mubarak , this week they 're focusing on this : `` Egypt means Muslims and Christians , '' meaning unity among people who had once been separated . 
Why are you passionate about this ? 
The Christians are protecting us in Tahrir Square . 
-LRB- INAUDIBLE -RRB- Christians and Muslim in Egypt is one -LRB- INAUDIBLE -RRB- , not two . 
LEMON : People would say , Why is a 10-year-old out here ? 
Every age should have equal rights , no matter how small or old you are . 
CROWD : Down , down with Mubarak ! 
Down , down with Mubarak ! 
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE : I want to tell all Americans that if you 're for freedom , if you 're for democracy , get out here . 
They deserve freedom just as much as anyone else . 
And please , please , President Obama - I know you have the power to get him down . 
So just tell him that he needs to go . 
SANDRA ENDO , CNN CORRESPONDENT : The protesters here are energized . 
They are in front of the White House that they say they want change . 
They are calling for President Mubarak immediately . 
They also had this message for President Obama : UNIDENTIFIED MALE : The message to the White House and especially to Obama : Just supporting , like , dictatorship and let people live free . 
And do n't ever , every like , you know , dictator to implement , you know , injustice in the world . 
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE : We 're mainly out here to support the Egyptian people back home . 
I know they 're dying every single day for their freedom . 
I 'm just hoping that they will stay calm and stay united and not go off in a civil war or anything . 
And just stay strong . 
Things are happening slowly , but we 'll definitely get our freedom very soon . 
ENDO : Now , this is one of many protests that have been held for days now in solidarity with Egypt . 
And protesters here say they will not stop getting their message out until there 's actual change . 
SUSAN CANDIOTTI , CNN CORRESPONDENT : Randi , about 100 people or so gathered out in front of the United Nations for the second time in as many weeks here , protesting the current government in Egypt and calling for President Mubarak to step down . 
There were fewer people here than last week . 
But those who were here were just as committed . 
Their message is simple . 
They said , for example : The number of people that have resigned from the national ruling party does n't matter . 
They call it purely a cosmetic change . 
The real change , they say , can only come if President Mubarak leaves . 
They are vowing to be back here again next week and in the coming weeks until he steps down - Randi . 
KAYE : As you just heard , many people are calling on President Obama to take a stronger stance against Mubarak . 
But here 's why the tensions in Egypt have the president between a rock and a hard place . 
The United States has strongly supported the Mubarak government since he took office nearly three decades ago . 
And in return , Egypt has been America 's most reliable ally in the Arab world . 
So this crisis has been difficult for the Obama administration to navigate . 
Our Suzanne Malveaux has more . 
SUZANNE MALVEAUX , CNN CORRESPONDENT -LRB- voice-over -RRB- : The assassination of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat ushered in a new era of U.S. relations with Egypt . 
Radical Muslims , threatened by Egypt 's peace with Israel , took out Sadat . 
The U.S. , desperate to protect Israel and eager to keep its most important Arab ally embraced Egypt 's new leader , Hosni Mubarak . 
That was October 1981 . 
The U.S. has held on to Mubarak as a critical friend ever since despite his autocratic rule and documented human-rights abuses . 
Egypt 's alliance with Israel is at the heart of the U.S. ' alliance with Mubarak . 
The Egyptian leader has steadfastly supported numerous attempts by several American presidents to establish peace between the Israelis and Palestinians . 
HOSNI MUBARAK , PRESIDENT OF EGYPT : The exercise of the right to self determination can not be denied to the Palestinian people . 
MALVEAUX : Mubarak also gave President George H.W. Bush the troops he need for the 1991 Persian Gulf War . 
Mubarak 's cooperation with the U.S. in taking on terrorists , including al-Qaeda , has often made Egypt a target of their rage . 
In 1997 , radicals killed dozens of tourists in Luxor and struck again in 2005 in the resort enclave of Sharm El Sheikh , slaughtering 88 people . 
Mubarak has tried to moderate Hamas and keep radical Islamic groups at bay , ruling with an iron fist . 
His cooperation with President George W. Bush 's war on terror became even more crucial after the September 11 attacks . 
Oil also plays a critical role . 
While Egypt is neither a major oil producer nor a consumer , the Suez Canal , which cuts through the country , is a vital waterway that keeps oil from the Arab region flowing to the west . 
KAYE : At a meeting of security officials in Munich , Germany , yesterday , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton backed the transition to a new government . 
She said the region - quote - `` is being battered by a perfect storm of powerful trends . 
Leaders can hold back the tide for a little while , but not for long , '' she said . 
For troops deployed overseas , today is one of the most anticipated days of the years : Super Bowl Sunday . 
Over 100,000 pounds of chicken wings and thousands of pizzas on the way to Iraq and Afghanistan for the big game . 
We 're going to take you there live next . 
KAYE : Welcome back , everyone . 
I ' Randi Kaye . 
It 's half past the hour . 
In Egypt today , the man put in charge of the government 's transition is meeting again with opposition leaders . 
Vice President Omar Suleiman is talking with leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood . 
The Muslim Brotherhood is one of the highest profile opposition groups . 
They had originally said they would not negotiate until president Mubarak resigned . 
But the group 's spokesman now tells CNN that they have decided to take the people 's demands to the negotiating table . 
As millions protest in Egypt and around the world , one very key element is missing , solidarity . 
The fragmented opposition agrees on one thing , Mubarak must go , but there is no clear leader is pulling them together . 
CNN 's Fred Pleitgen takes a look at what might happen if Mubarak does step down . 
FRED PLEITGEN , CNN CORRESPONDENT -LRB- voice over -RRB- : Roaring speeches and cheering crowds . 
Change is in the air in Cairo 's Tahrir Square . 
Abu Elezz Harari is a leftist politician with a large following , but says he 's not willing to step up and lead anti-government protesters . 
ABU ELEZZ HARARI , EGYPTIAN OPPOSITION POLITICIAN -LRB- through translator -RRB- : We have not chosen a leader yet . 
There is a group that represents the people that can lead in the transitional period , and then the people will choose a president and a government . 
PLEITGEN : Former IAEA Chief Mohamed ElBaradei is part of the group , and so is Amir Mousa , the head of the Arab League . 
But many of those who have battling on the front lines for over a week do n't want anyone representing them . 
This belongs on our shoulders . 
It 's grown up on our shoulders . 
It belongs to the people , the youngest people . 
This is our revolution , not belong to them . 
Understand me or no ? 
PLEITGEN -LRB- on camera -RRB- : Yes , but what about Mohamed ElBaradei , Amir Mousa ? 
We want Mubarak to move out . 
PLEITGEN : The protesters here have sacrificed a lot and they 've achieved a lot . 
However , Hosni Mubarak still remains in power and the opposition has yet to offer an alternative . 
-LRB- Voice over -RRB- : The conservative Islamic Muslim Brotherhood is the largest opposition movement in Egypt . 
But although their members are taking a leading role in the protests , they say they will not put up a presidential candidate . 
MOHAMMED BELTAGY , MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD : Our society activities , but no presidential candidate . 
PLEITGEN -LRB- voice over -RRB- : Several leaders of the established opposition parties have been negotiating with Omar Suleiman , the newly appointed Egyptian vice president . 
One of those who took part says the talks are in a stalemate . 
MUNIR FAKHRI , WAFD PARTY LEADER : As long as the protesters are not ready to lower the level of their demands , very bluntly , their demands is that President Mubarak leaves , quits . 
And as long as the regime refuses to take steps towards meeting at least part of those demands , I think it 's very difficult to reach a compromise . 
PLEITGEN : Without a leading figure in the anti-government movement , many fear Egypt could remain in a state of paralysis for months . 
Protesters entrenched in Tahrir Square , Hosni Mubarak clinging to power , and a nation on the brink of chaos . 
Fred Pleitgen , CNN , Cairo , Egypt . 
-LRB- END VIDEOTAPE -RRB- KAYE : Checking top stories for you now . 
Former Vice President Dick Cheney is calling embattled Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak a , quote , `` good friend and ally , '' but he is not predicting whether Mubarak will step down . 
Cheney says despite pundits and politicians , Egyptians will decide their own fate . 
DICK CHENEY , FMR . 
VICE PRESIDENT OF UNITED STATES : I think it is important for us all to remember that this issue will be resolved by the Egyptians . 
You know , there 's a lot of people with opinions outside of the government . 
Commentators on the cable news shows , but bottom line in the end , whatever comes next in Egypt will be determined by the people of Egypt . 
And we need to remember that . 
KAYE : Cheney spoke last night at a ceremony honoring former President Ronald Reagan . 
The Gipper would have turned 100 today . 
A concert was held last night at the Reagan Presidential Library and Museum in Simi Valley , California . 
California 's governor has declared today Ronald Reagan Centennial Day . 
Some restaurants in Southern California are being warned their ground beef could make customers sick . 
The beef shipped to those restaurants by a California company may be contaminated by e. Coli . 
We 're talking about 3,000 pounds of hamburger patties and other products . 
It 's not clear if anyone has been sickened by the recalled products . 
It 's Super Bowl Sunday . 
What 's a Super Bowl without pizza and wings , right ? 
American service members in Iraq , Afghanistan , Philippines and Korea are getting pizza and chicken wings with their Super Bowl . 
The non-profit group , Pizzas For Patriots worked with the delivery service DHL and Uno 's Chicago Grill to ship nearly 35,000 pizzas overseas , along with more than 245,000 pounds of wings , hot , spicy , mild , you name it . 
It is all there for the troops . 
Halfway across the world , Super Bowl fever is very much alive in Afghanistan . 
We 've asked Commander Keith Steussi from the U.S. Navy and Captain Sara Armstrong from the U.S. Army to join us from Camp Leatherneck , which is in Helmand Province in Afghanistan . 
Great to see both of you . 
We are so glad you are joining us this morning . 
I know you both have your picks on the game today and a favorite team . 
So , Commander , let 's start with you . 
Who would you like to see win the big one ? 
CMDR. KEITH STEUSSI , U.S. NAVY , AFGHANISTAN : Well , I think this hat says it all . 
I -- I 'm a huge Packer fan . 
Grew up in Wisconsin . 
And we were talking before you came on that I 'm predicting the Packers are going to win 24-23 on a last-minute drive by Aaron Rodgers , maybe you know , 10 , 15 seconds left . 
That 's how it will end up . 
KAYE : And Captain Armstrong , I believe have you a different view how this is going to turn out ? 
CAPT. SARAH ARMSTRONG , U.S. ARMY , AFGHANISTAN : I do have a very different view . 
I see the Steelers winning their -- the Super Bowl . 
It 's going to be close I think , but I definitely think the Steelers have it in them to win this one . 
KAYE : I think the game is on in the middle of the night for both of you . 
So , Commander , what is your plan to watch the game ? 
Anything set up for you ? 
STEUSSI : Yeah , well , we -- I run a clinic over here , and we have a pretty large sized TV in our conference room , so I 've got about 10 to 15 friends who will be coming over and we 'll watch the game there . 
So it should be a lot of fun . 
KAYE : And , Captain , what 's it like . 
Help us to understand what it 's like to watch your favorite team play halfway across the world , while serving your country ? 
It 's a great experience , and it really brings me close to home because I get to experience something with my family back in western Pennsylvania and really cheer for the home team . 
KAYE : I do n't see your Steelers hat with you . 
Do you have one ? 
KAYE : One advantage of being overseas and serving your country is all the food certainly that you get delivered to you on big game , on Super Bowl day . 
What do you get ? 
4,800 pounds of mozzarella cheese sticks , we understand , are going to Afghanistan alone ; 4,000 pounds of jalapeno poppers , 4,800 pepperoni pizzas , 3,600 pizza and supreme pizzas . 
What do you plan to eat ? 
I 'm sure you 'll have more than chips and dip today ? 
STEUSSI : I think we can go to the dining facility , and maybe we 'll have to bring some home . 
As you may know the timing , as you mentioned , is a little off here . 
We 're going to-the game starts at 3:30 in the morning . 
So we 'll probably have a dinner and then have a second dinner when the game comes on for sure . 
KAYE : I understand , Commander , you actually have some big plans , if the Packers do win , what 's your plan for a celebration ? 
STEUSSI : Well , you know , my celebration actually , it 's pretty big , I 'm going to take a half day off of work I think . 
I 'm going to just sleep in and celebrate probably . 
But we -- we have a little running bet in my clinic with another physical therapist , Commander Shane Vath -LRB- ph -RRB- , he 's a big Pittsburgh fan . 
We 've each got little side bets I ca n't disclose on TV . 
But if we-whichever team wins , we 'll have to do that tomorrow afternoon , probably , so -- KAYE : I know we 're here to talk about the Super Bowl . 
But , Captain , I want to give you a chance to say anything you 'd like to your family this morning . 
It will be great to see everybody when I get back . 
KAYE : And , commander , would you like to say hello as well ? 
STEUSSI : Yeah , my parents live in Florida . 
I think they are watching this . 
Hi , mom and dad . 
My wife is in San Diego . 
Say hi to them , and my kids , and I have two brothers who are also probably watching . 
Hi , to everyone . 
And just like captain said , we 'll be coming home relatively soon . 
And go Pack , that 's all I can say . 
KAYE : I knew she was going to follow with that one . 
We want to thank both of you . 
Captain Sara Armstrong , Commander Keith Steussi , I want to thank you both for , not only for joining us but for serving your country . 
STEUSSI : Thank you very much . 
KAYE : How nice . 
What a celebration they will have over there . 
When it rains it pours , or so the saying goes , but what about when it snows a whole lot . 
We are taking a look at the best videos to come out of this week 's storm . 
You are definitely going to want to stick around and see the rest after that giant snowman . 
That is coming your way next . 
KAYE : Welcome back . 
Thunder snow , sliding dogs , and a fire - breathing snow creature , oh , my . 
CNN 's Jeanne Moos on the crazy winter weather . 
JEANNE MOOS , CNN CORRESPONDENT -LRB- voice over -RRB- : Having to abandon your car on Lake Shore Drive in Chicago is bad , but not as bad as having your car 's nose rubbed in the snow . 
There were accidents like this one in Salem , New Hampshire and roof collapses . 
But as some things went down , others went up and up and up . 
This 35-foot snowman in Champion , New York , has a snow cone for a nose and a swimming pool for a top hat . 
It 's enough to give Frosty button envy . 
These buttons made out of racing tires . 
iReporters have sent in Packers and Steelers helmets in Wisconsin , a snow squirrel in New Jersey , a giraffe in Staten Island , and our personal favorite -- Nick and Anna Berte -LRB- ph -RRB- of Bel Air , Maryland , call their creation -- MOOS : Godzilla out of snow . 
The fiery breath is supplied by a flame thrower made out of carburetor cleaner and a butane lighter . 
It does n't melt the snow that much . 
MOOS : Now if there is a buzzword coming out of this latest mega storm it 's -- DAVID LETTERMAN , LATE NIGHT WITH DAVID LETTERMAN : Thunder snow ! 
It 's -- it 's God 's first new work in 500 years . 
It 's thunder snow ! 
MOOS : Thunder during snow , is a weatherman 's snow fantasy . 
Son of a -- MOOS : Weathermen get dumped on by comedians during snowstorms . 
MOOS : CNN 's own Ed Lavandera got the Jimmy Kimmel treatment . 
ED LAVANDERA , CNN CORRESPONDENT : Sorry . 
You have to be careful as these cars drive by I want to make sure they do n't lose control or anything like that . 
MOOS : From sliding dogs , to a joker who thought it would be funny to go shirtless in Chicago . 
How you view the snow can help you weather it . 
It 's kind of a fun challenge , do n't you think ? 
REGIS PHILBIN , REGIS & KELLY : I love those glasses . 
KELLY RIPA , REGIS & KELLY : She has four inches of snow on her glasses alone . 
MOOS : And a 100 percent chance of near zero visibility . 
Would n't it be great if some dusty old vase lying around the house turned out to be worth more than a million bucks , say ? 
That 's the story for one lucky man in England . 
We 'll go there in our `` Morning Passport '' . 
KAYE : It is going to be a big week in Washington , with President Obama and the Tea Party making some major moves . 
CNN Deputy Political Director Paul Steinhauser has the rundown . 
PAUL STEINHAUSER , CNN DEPUTY POLITICAL DIRECTOR : Good morning , Randi . 
President Barack Obama heads into what some consider politically enemy territory tomorrow , when he speaks in front of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce . 
Last year the Chamber opposed Mr. Obama 's push for Wall Street and healthcare reform . 
And in the mid term elections , worked to defeat many Democrats who had backed the president 's programs . 
On Tuesday , here in Washington , what 's being touted as the first - ever Tea Party town hall . 
Among the lawmakers attending the event , Senator Rand Paul and Congresswoman Michele Bachmann . 
On Thursday , the annual Conservative Political Action conference kicks off . 
There is controversy this year , with some social conservative groups boycotting to protest the inclusion of a pro-gay Republican group . 
Speaking at the event , many of the Republicans who may -- may -- run for the White House . 
The conference ends Saturday with the straw poll for the GOP presidential nomination , Randi . 
KAYE : An arrow straight through the heart of ancient Japanese tradition . 
Some of Japan 's most respected sumo wrestlers admit-get this-that they have been cheating . 
Plus , a shout out to reggae 's biggest icon ; Bob Marley would have been 66 today . 
We 're taking you to Japan and Jamaica , all in our `` Morning Passport '' . 
KAYE : 2,000 years of Japanese culture and tradition , undermined by modern-day cheats . 
Sumo wrestling in Japan dates back 2,000 years . 
It 's the country 's national sport . 
But it 's honor and image has now been tarnished . 
Just this week , by allegations of match rigging . 
Say it is n't so . 
Nadia Bilchik joining me to talk about all of that . 
NADIA BILCHIK , EDITORIAL PRODUCER : Exactly . 
It 's so bad , in fact , that the match rigging may result in them canceling the season . 
BILCHIK : Now , the season has not been canceled since 1946 , post World War II , when they had to cancel to repair the stadium . 
We are looking at sumo wrestlers , and as you said , dates back 2,000 years . 
KAYE : This is a little tough in the morning for me to watch . 
We 'll go with it . 
BILCHIK : Shinto is the native religion of Japan . 
And it means Way of the Gods , but there is much more to sumo than just large men eating each other up . 
In fact , what is really incredible is it is about entertaining the gods . 
And the pre-bout traditions are what makes it sumo so fascinating . 
They do all kinds of things like throw salt into the stadium as a way of purification . 
So there is so much more to sumo than just fighting . 
KAYE : Do we know how they even figured this out ? 
BILCHIK : Well , what they did was they confiscated the phones of 13 sumo wrestlers and they found - BILCHIK : Now , do you want to know how sumo wrestlers get so large ? 
They have 20,000 calories a day and 85 percent body fat . 
So , if you want to know how to get fat , go on the sumo diet . 
KAYE : I do n't think I need to go on the sumo diet . 
That does n't sound like a good thing . 
But they were texting each other to what ? 
You go down and I 'll get - BILCHIK : Yes , they were rigging it . 
It would be like rigging the Super Bowl . 
I mean , this is part of national pride . 
The prime minister has weighed in , saying you are betraying the Japanese people . 
KAYE : I just want to talk about an icon 's birthday today , before we run out of time . 
BILCHIK : Before we get to the icon 's birthday , can I tell you about a Ming vase ? 
BILCHIK : If you do n't mind ? 
Because in London this week , a gentleman walks in , a 79-year-old retired worker walks into an auction house with a box . 
In the box there is a vase . 
Now take a look at that vase . 
We 're looking at it . 
If you notice , the handles are of an Islamic design . 
So , it is a Chinese Ming vase with exceptional handles , that makes is so precious , that it is worth 1 million pounds , about $ 1.6 million . 
KAYE : Would have been 66 ? 
BILCHIK : Is n't that incredible ? 
Would have been 66 today ; the year of the Rooster , he was born in 1945 and he died in his 30s . 
There he is , the icon , the person who popularized reggae music and the Rastafarian movement . 
What would our lives have been like without , `` No Woman , No Cry '' , `` One Love '' and `` Buffalo Soldier '' ? 
So , personally , thank you , Bob . 
KAYE : `` Buffalo Soldier '' , big fan . 
BILCHIK : We honor you . 
This is Reggae Month in Jamaica , man . 
KAYE : Nicely done . 
Thank you , Nadia . 
KAYE : Thousands of T-shirts , hats and sweatshirts have been made proclaiming both the Packers and Steelers the Super Bowl champs , just in case . 
Once a team wins the merchandise will be rolled out to the masses . 
But did you ever wonder what happens to the shirts for the losing teams ? 
KAYE : Welcome back everyone . 
We are getting close to the top of the hour . 
Whichever team loses today 's Super Bowl , plenty of poverty - stricken children will be very grateful . 
CNN 's Mark McKay explains . 
MARK MCKAY , CNN SPORTS CORRESPONDENT Almost like magic in the moments after a new Super Bowl champion is crowned , the players on the winning team are sporting hats and T-shirts . 
There is no magic involved . 
All of that merchandise is preprinted . 
What happens to the apparel on the team that did n't win ? 
The NFL donates it to the aid organization , World Vision . 
Both championship games and the Super Bowl , we get about 300 shirts and 300 hats . 
But then from the pre-buys , each year , we get more and more of the pre-buy product from the retailers , and that has really helped a lot . 
Our stipulation with the league is it has to go out of the country . 
We ca n't keep it in the U.S. or Canada , and from there , they leave it up to us to determine where the most need is . 
This year , we know there is good needs in Zambia , Romania , Armenia , and Nicaragua . 
Those are poor countries we 're keying in on now . 
Basically , just strictly on need . 
If we do get some sweatshirts in , which I 'm sure we will , because all four teams are cold weather teams , we 'll look to the cold weather countries we are serving like Mongolia or Armenia . 
We 're working in areas where there is generally no electric , unfortunately , a lot of times no running water . 
They have in idea who the Chicago Bears , New York Jets , Pittsburgh Steelers , Green Bay Packers , any of the teams are . 
They are just glad they are getting a brand new shirt that is in great shape . 
A lot of them never received something new like that in their lives . 
It 's really life changing . 
MCKAY : So , now you know . 
By the way , World Vision 's international distribution center is located in Pittsburgh . 
I wonder which team 's apparel they would rather be shipping out next week . 
Mark McKay , CNN , Arlington , Texas . 
A quiet morning so far in Tahrir Square as hundreds gather for Muslim prayers and protestors now dig in for day 13 . 
In Iran , the trial of three U.S. hikers now underway , all accused of spying and trespassing . 
And paying tribute to Ronald Reagan . 
He would have been 100 years old today . 
Events across the country will honor his life and legacy . 
And later today , John King hosts special coverage of the centennial celebration starting at 2:00 p.m. here on CNN . 
It is early and we 're on it . 
From CNN Center , this is CNN SUNDAY MORNING . 
It 's February 6th . 
Glad you 're with us . 
I 'm Randi Kaye . 
It is 7:00 a.m. now on the East Coast ; 2:00 p.m. in Egypt . 
Thousands of people filling Cairo 's Liberation Square again today , and it looks like there 's some movement between the embattled government of Hosni Mubarak and one element of protesters . 
Leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood group have just wrapped up a meeting with Vice President Omar Suleiman . 
Brotherhood members originally said they would n't talk until President Mubarak was out of office . 
There 's also been some high-level shuffling in Egypt 's ruling political party . 
Several leaders handed in their resignations , including one of President Mubarak 's sons . 
CNN 's Frederik Pleitgen is in Cairo and joins us by phone . 
Good morning , Fred . 
Can you describe the scene there for us ? 
FREDERIK PLEITGEN , CNN CORRESPONDENT -LRB- via telephone -RRB- : Well , it is a very peaceful one , Randi , certainly much more so than the past couple of days . 
As you said , I would say , right now , it 's 4,000 to 5,000 people who are in Tahrir Square . 
And we are hearing that there 's also some Christian masses that are due to be held there today to commemorate those , of course , who were killed in the protests that have gone on . 
Of course , well over 100 people who are killed in that . 
Otherwise , what I 'm seeing , an Egyptian capital that tries to get back on its feet . 
There 's more traffic in the streets . 
I was sort of driving around town today and it seems as though more and more shop owners are trying to open their stores . 
The banks are open for the first time since the cries began . 
I saw some very long lines in front of ATM machines and inside banking centers . 
But it does n't seem to be the kind of panic that many had feared here . 
I saw -- a lot of people we were talking to who were saying , yes , they are withdrawing a lot of money right now , but the main reason for that is that they could n't withdraw any money over the past couple of days . 
So , they certainly have some catching up to do . 
So , at this point in time , it seems as though the Egyptian capital is sort of trying to get back on its feet . 
Of course , it 's still very much scarred by the past couple of days and , of course , this protest still is really going strong , we have to say , for the numbers I can see there on Tahrir Square right now , Randi . 
KAYE : And , Fred , is there anything that you can tell us anymore about the meetings with the opposition and the government ? 
We know that the Muslim Brotherhood has apparently just wrapped up a meeting with the vice president . 
The Muslim Brotherhood has wrapped up a meeting . 
And that , of course , as you said , is significant , because beforehand , the Muslim Brotherhood had said it would not talk to the government unless Hosni Mubarak resigned immediately . 
So , it seems as they have softened their stance . 
I 'm not exactly sure what came out of that meeting . 
Also , apparent representatives of the people actually on Tahrir Square , known as the Movement of January 25th , they also are going to meet with the government today . 
Now , I do have some inside information from an opposition leader who met with the government yesterday for a similar meeting . 
It was the Waft group , which is one of the biggest opposition groups here in Egypt . 
And they met yesterday with Omar Suleiman and they said that the talks were quite friendly , but they also said that the government very , very much entrenched on the issue of keeping Hosni Mubarak in power . 
They said that the government was not willing to move an inch and the government told them Hosni Mubarak would stay in power and would finish the end of his term . 
So , there are a lot of people who do n't see those negotiations coming to very much , unless , of course , the protesters drop their demand for Mubarak to leave or the government relents at some point . 
But it does n't look that way right now , Randi . 
KAYE : The military has really been s trying to stay neutral and trying to keep the peace . 
Do you see any presence of the military today in Liberation Square ? 
PLEITGEN : Oh , yes . 
I mean , yes , you see a lot of presence not necessarily on Liberation Square , but sort of all of the entrances to the square , probably mainly to try and keep pro-Mubarak groups away from that area so there 's no trouble . 
But the military is massive presence not just in the Tahrir Square but throughout the city . 
I mean , it was driving through vast parts of the city and you see a tank on almost -- down almost every two intersections or an armored personnel carrier . 
Also , when you go out of town , on the main roads , there are checkpoints there , there 's tanks stationed there . 
The military has a massive presence , not just here in downtown Cairo , but pretty much everywhere in Cairo and also outside . 
But they are pretty much the only law enforcement entity that 's out there . 
Although I did see a few traffic police officers . 
But clearly , they would not be able to deal with any sort of violent situations that would arise . 
So , yes -- I mean , the military , a massive presence , and you see a lot of tanks on many streets here in this country , Randi . 
KAYE : All right . 
Fred Pleitgen for us in Cairo , watching it all happen this morning . 
Thank you , Fred . 
Let 's take a look at the one institution that could prevent a breakdown of civil society in Egypt . 
That 's the military , which we were just discussing with Fred . 
Egyptian generals overthrew the monarchy in 1952 basically to set up a less corrupt , more responsive government . 
And they 've been at the heart of Egyptian power , culture , identity , ever since . 
All of Egypt 's presidents to date have been military men and they 've ruled with emergency powers that parliament routinely renews . 
All Egyptian men have to serve , and the officer corps enjoys decent pay and serious prestige in a relatively impoverished country . 
Let me show you how this force actually measures up . 
China has the most , 2.3 million troops on active duty , more than any other country by far . 
The top five countries all have more than a million troops , not counting reserves or paramilitaries . 
Egypt is actually tenth , with just under half a million active duty fighters . 
Its force is well-equipped with modern planes and tanks . 
And for that , it has you and me to thank . 
Last year , Egypt got $ 1.6 billion in U.S. military and economic aid -- most of it , military aid , used to buy big-ticket weapons from U.S. defense contractors . 
Over the years , the U.S. has funded Egypt faithfully . 
Generally , Congress gives Egypt $ 2 for every $ 3 that it gives Israel . 
The reason for that goes back to 1979 when Egypt and Israel signed the Camp David peace accords . 
Through it all , the U.S. and the Egyptian militaries have maintained very close military ties and that has not changed to this date . 
So , what next for the land of the pharaohs ? 
To talk about that , we turn to Fouad Ajami , professor of Middle Eastern studies at Johns Hopkins University . 
He 's joining us by phone . 
Professor , this weekend -- this week , we 've actually seen some big cracks in Egypt 's regime . 
Key members of Mubarak 's ruling party resigning their positions , including his son , also the vice president now having talks with the opposition leaders , including the Muslim Brotherhood . 
So , how significant would you say all of this is , or is it really just for show ? 
PROF. FOUAD AJAMI , MIDDLE EASTERN STUDIES , JOHNS HOPKINS UNIV. -LRB- via telephone -RRB- : Well , I think the regime has fallen . 
If you really look at the house of Mubarak and at President Mubarak himself , he has lost the mandate of his people . 
His moral case has fallen . 
When millions of people come out every day and ask you to leave , and you hold on to power , you can see the fraud of this regime and you can see the moral abdication of this regime . 
But also on trial now is the American response to what has been going on in Cairo . 
We have become -- we have come close to betraying the democratic aspirations of these people . 
We sent to Cairo -- the United States sent to Cairo , an envoy , Frank Wisner , who is extremely close to Mubarak . 
We now have seen Ambassador Wisner make a statement , remarkable in the annals of the American diplomacy , he identified totally with the despot in Cairo and basically put the word out that this man needs to be there to lead Egypt to a democratic -- through a democratic transition . 
It 's laughable to think that Mubarak would lead anyone to a democratic transition . 
So , here you have it . 
KAYE : President Mubarak has said this week that he would n't leave Egyptian soil even if he does resign . 
Do you think that the opposition needs to see him physically leave the country before they believe he is truly out of power ? 
AJAMI : Well , the opposition , and I think even the vast majority of Egyptian people , do n't believe that Mubarak -- do n't believe anything that President Mubarak says . 
They 've known him for a very long time . 
Thirty years is a long time . 
Some 35 million Egyptians , the bulk of the young people , have been born while President Mubarak has been in office and they know about the thievery of his family , about the looting of the country 's wealth in a very poor country , and they understand that he is playing for time . 
Should he be allowed to stay ? 
Should he stay between now and September ? 
He may create conditions where another deeper state of emergency could be declared . 
So , you 're right , the Egyptians need to see him out of the country . 
There is no way about it . 
And also , the leading figures in the opposition are surely worried about themselves . 
If he does n't leave in a few months , they may all be in prison . 
I think this is the great standoff between a dictator and his population with America in the middle , backing this terrible dictator . 
KAYE : All right . 
We 'll have to leave it there . 
Thank you for your insight , Professor Ajami . 
KAYE : He was called the great communicator . 
But he was so much more than that . 
Broadcaster , actor , and the nation 's 40th president -- Ronald Reagan is being remembered today on what would have been his 100th birthday . 
We look back at the Reagan legacy and more , next . 
KAYE : Welcome back . 
Twelve minutes past the hour . 
One hundred years ago today , America 's great communicator was born and 40th president was born . 
Ronald Wilson Reagan , the modern day icon of conservatism , is being warmly remembered this weekend at his presidential ranch and museum in California . 
Our Ted Rowlands takes us there for a tour and more . 
TED ROWLANDS , CNN CORRESPONDENT : Randi , it 's a weekend of celebration here at the Reagan Library . 
Nancy Reagan will be here to cut the ribbon on a $ 15 million renovation of the museum portion of the library . 
We had an opportunity to take a sneak peek at it . 
It is very impressive . 
RONALD REAGAN , FORMER U.S. PRESIDENT : Mr. Gorbachev , tear down this wall . 
ROWLANDS -LRB- voice-over -RRB- : Video and sound are a constant feature . 
Reagan 's movies and speeches played throughout . 
JOHN HEUBUSCH , EXEC . 
, REAGAN PRESIDENTIAL FOUNDATION : We have right over here to my right , the very famous debate with President Carter where he asked the question , `` Are you better off now than you were four years ago ? '' 
ROWLANDS : There 's also a Berlin Wall , with tunnels and interactive videogame table and an inauguration day exhibit complete with Reagan 's speech on the teleprompter . 
His diaries have been digitized for people to flip through . 
There 's also an exhibit dealing with the assassination attempt on President Reagan after 70 days in office . 
As in many presidential libraries , you can see an exact replica of the Oval Office and Air Force One , the actual plane used by seven U.S. presidents and the one Reagan flew in during his eight years in office . 
HEUBUSCH : They get to see where the president sits in the aircraft . 
They get to see his working quarters . 
They get to see where the Secret Service would sit , where the traveling press corps sits . 
They get to touch and feel the airplane . 
It 's just a great experience . 
ROWLANDS : An Iran-Contra affair exhibit deals with the low point of the Reagan presidency . 
Also on display , the letter Reagan wrote , with the audio of him reading it , announcing to the world he had Alzheimer 's . 
REAGAN : My fellow Americans , I have recently been told that I am one of the millions of Americans who will be affected with Alzheimer 's disease . 
ROWLANDS -LRB- on camera -RRB- : Everything here at the library this weekend is closed to the public , but the new museum inside the library opens to the public on Monday . 
They are expecting a lot of people . 
They 'll be serving cake throughout the day to celebrate Ronald Reagan 's 100th birthday -- Randi . 
KAYE : Ted Rowlands from Simi Valley , California -- thank you , Ted . 
Stick with CNN later this afternoon for live coverage of the festivities at the Reagan Library . 
Our John King hosts . 
It all begins at 2:00 p.m. Eastern Time . 
It 's a good thing the Super Bowl will be played under a dome , because the weather in Dallas has been down right dreadful . 
The whole area is under ice and snow . 
Will it finally warm up for the fans to come out and play ? 
We 'll let you know . 
KAYE : And welcome back . 
People at Cowboys Stadium today can keep their eyes on the game instead of looking up constantly to check out the roof . 
We told you how ice and snow slid down 60 feet off the road Friday . 
Six workers getting ready for the big game were injured , but luckily , they are all OK . 
Well , it is about 16 minutes past the hour . 
Here to check in with Karen on the latest I guess there in Arlington , Texas . 
And I guess we 're seeing more snow and ice in that area ? 
Or have things warmed up a bit ? 
KAREN MAGINNIS , AMS METEOROLOGIST : Yes , I 'm going to show you what our latest prognostications are looking like , Randi . 
And this is what we anticipate over the next 24 hours . 
What we 're looking at so far across the panhandle , yes , you can see this snow coming a while away . 
There is Dallas right there . 
You can see , it looks the eastern edge of Dallas is going to be kind of a rain event . 
But then for the west -- now , this is as about 11:00 in the evening . 
Everybody is probably still milling around the Cowboys Stadium , but just to the west , this is where we 've got the snowfall , but there 's going to be a fine line as to where the rain or the ice and snow are going to be located . 
So , it 's going to be kind of an interesting set of events that take place over the next 12 hours or so . 
It moves in and out fairly quickly . 
So , that will be the good news in the forecast . 
However , here as we take a look at the specific forecast at game time , it looks like it 's going to start out as rainfall . 
And then be a rain\/snow mix . 
Temperatures in the upper 30s , but then dropping down fairly quickly after that . 
Speaking of , we 're watching temperatures across the northern tier states . 
Now , typically for Minneapolis , and I know , Randi , you 've worked there before . 
They should be around 25 , 30 degrees . 
But they 're looking at high temperatures coming up around five for a high . 
KAYE : All right , Karen . 
Stressed out by the heavy snow ? 
Check out this canopy that collapsed just before midnight last night at the Indianapolis International Airport 's parking garage . 
Nobody was injured luckily , but a few rental cars sure took a beating from the falling ice and snow . 
The area is now off limits to parking . 
Then there is this department store roof that collapsed in the greater Tulsa area last night . 
Two employees were inside at the time when they heard the rumbling , and the ceiling of the store began to cave in . 
They ran out just in time . 
Boy , were they lucky . 
Just in time before it collapsed . 
He grew up as the son of Jim and Tammy Faye Bakker . 
His life is all about religion . 
But at one point , he wanted nothing to do with God . 
Now , Jay Bakker preaches the word punk style . 
He explains it all in his new book `` Fall to Grace , '' and we 're going to chat with him after a quick break . 
KAYE : After getting exposed to the ugly side of religion , Jay Bakker turned his back on God . 
But now , the prodigal son of Jim and Tammy Faye is leading a congregation of his own . 
He is joining us live from New York to talk about his journey back to grace and his new book on our `` Faces of Faith '' this morning . 
Jay , good to se you . 
Glad you 're with us this morning . 
JAY BAKKER , AUTHOR , `` FALL TO GRACE '' : Good to be here . 
KAYE : I 'm well . 
Your parents , PTL Network , Praise the Lord Network , reached 13 million homes . 
Tell us what it was like for you growing up before the television cameras ? 
BAKKER : It was really surreal . 
I mean , it was all I knew . 
So , growing up , it seemed normal . 
But looking back , it was quite just an amazing thing to just constantly be on . 
You know , constantly wondering , you know , how you look and what you 're doing and what 's going on . 
And also , also I grew up in my parents ' church . 
I mean , the school was there , everything was there . 
So , I was like growing up in a big Christian bubble . 
And I know that later on , you struggled with alcohol and drugs as you got older . 
Would you say that was a direct result of what you had to deal with when you were younger with your family ? 
BAKKER : Maybe some . 
Also , I think it was just natural rebellion , trying to fit in in high school and stuff like that . 
You know , I mean , especially when everybody knows what 's going on with your family , it can be a little awkward . 
Having all of your business out there . 
You have since started your own church , called Revolution , a very unique name . 
What is the message of your church ? 
BAKKER : The message is inclusion . 
You know , everyone is accepted . 
And just -- we 're a church for everybody . 
And we do n't say you have to be a Christian , you got to be this . 
We just want to let people know that they are loved and they 're included and created in a safe space for people to come , and discuss issues that are going on in their life . 
KAYE : And it 's also what comes with that that was a little bit of controversy , because you are you a Christian minister , but in your book `` Fall to Grace , '' you talk about gay people and how you consider yourself a gay-affirming minister . 
So , in other words , you think homosexuals have a place in the church . 
What was the reaction to that ? 
BAKKER : The reaction right away was as we lost all our finances . 
I had to let the staff go because we could n't raise finances . 
All of my speaking engagements got canceled for a year . 
So , it was quite a backlash . 
But it 's definitely worth it because I -- that 's my conviction . 
I really believe that the LGBT community is poorly treated by the church and that we 've got to open the doors completely . 
KAYE : And really , in a way , you 're carrying on the beliefs of your mom in speaking out this way . 
BAKKER : Yes , my mom was -- you know , my mom was a gay icon , and , you know , she just loved people . 
And so , what I 've tried to do is take it to the next level of , you know , we do a lot for gay rights because it seems like a civil rights issue . 
So , we 're not just wanting to be welcoming , but we 're wanting to be affirming and inclusive . 
KAYE : And when you think about grace , just leave us with why you think grace is so important . 
BAKKER : Because it accepts even the unacceptable , and it allows us to live our life and work with the things that are -- that are -- that are tough , and so , I think grace helps us to accept that we 're accepted and it will transform our lives . 
KAYE : All right . 
Jay Bakker , glad you 're with us this morning . 
Thanks for joining us . 
BAKKER : And thanks for having me . 
A quick check on today 's top stories , and the latest on the situation in Egypt -- that 's up next . 
Former Vice President Dick Cheney is calling embattled Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak a , quote , `` good friend and ally , '' but he 's not predicting whether Mubarak will step down . 
Cheney says despite pundits and politicians , Egyptians will decide their own fate . 
RICHARD CHENEY , FORMER U.S. VICE PRESIDENT : I think it 's important for us all to remember that this issue is going to be resolved by the Egyptians . 
A lot of people with opinions , outside other governments , commentators on cable news shows -- but bottom line is , in the end , whatever comes next in Egypt is going to be determined by the people of Egypt . 
And we need to remember that . 
KAYE : Two American hikers are on trial in Iran for spying and trespassing . 
Shane Bauer , Josh Fattal and Sarah Shourd were detained in the summer of 2009 after they alleged strayed across an unmarked border from Iraq into Iran . 
Shourd was released last fall because of a medical condition . 
She did not return for the trial . 
Some restaurants in southern California are being warned that their ground beef could make customers sick . 
The beef shipped to those restaurants by one California company may be contaminated with E. coli bacteria . 
We 're talking about 3,000 pounds of hamburger patties and other products . 
We have n't heard any reports of people getting sick from the bad beef . 
Well , as you know , it is Super Bowl Sunday . 
So , we thought it would be a good time to talk about youth football and injuries suffered by kids and teenagers . 
If you 're looking for ways to keep them safe , we think CNN 's chief medical correspondent , Dr. Sanjay Gupta , might have found the perfect program to help . 
