Get To Know Piers Morgan Tonight : Donny Deutsch Guest Hosts This evening `` Piers Morgan Tonight '' welcomes the return of Donny Deutsch , as the brand guru is back for a fourth stint as guest host Yesterday Anderson Cooper tweeted : `` It is with a heavy heart that I have decided to leave #Egypt . 
CNN continues to have many teams in place . 
It was a hard decision to leave . '' 
Now back in New York , Cooper will sit down for a lengthy interview on `` Piers Morgan Tonight '' Monday to talk about his experience . 
What do you want Piers Morgan to ask Anderson tomorrow ? 
Leave your questions below ... So Glad You stayed safe , , You did A wonderful Job And suffered enough , , , You Are The Best Thank You Amen , Jen . 
We all have a point beyond which we can not go -- at that time -- at that place . 
Anderson Cooper and many , many of the journalists have done a magnificent job in bringing us to the tragic and heroic places and people with whom we share this planet . 
It is unbelievable how the new technology opens the world to everyone -- but a picture is only a picutre -- it is the journalists who bring the pictures to life and afford us the understanding of what is occurring . 
I humbly thank each and every one of them . 
I thank them too , but I hope they will reconsider and go back to Egypt . 
Those who want to retain their grip on power and lock democracy up in a police state want to do that outside the view of cameras . 
That is precisely why they harried Anderson Cooper out of the country . 
I realize it takes incredible courage to face that police state and demand free access to the democracy movement now being kept away from journalists in the center of Cairo , but I hope Anderson Cooper will reconsider his decision . 
If he can not go back - and I will still respect him if he does n't - I hope he will lend his considerable visibility and prestige to working with organizations like the Committee to Protect Journalists to get his Eygption counterparts out of dungeons and I hope he will support getting the truth out of Egypt to his American viewers . 
They are taxpayers - and it was their tax money that was used to beat him up in Cairo . 
February 7 , 2011 at 7:57 am | Report abuse | AC : Were you ever scared ? 
Do you want to never go to dangerous events ever again ? 
Muslims and Christians had each others backs for prayers in the square . 
Nice change from Shia and Sunni killing fellow Muslims in Iraq . 
Is that normal in Egypt , or more good result from the protesting ? 
Is that a message to the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt ? 
Anderson , you brought us some incredibly tense video . 
I truly feared for your safety . 
Clearly the thugs were willing to throw punches . 
But you know they had knives and guns . 
Why do you think they stopped short , God forbid , of bringing any more harm to journalists if their goal was truly to silence them ? 
Could have been the Beatiin in the Head several times . 
Most likely CNN has played this out , we 're tired of hearing about it . 
At the height of your visit to Egypt , , when you had to hide . 
What went through your mind ? 
Did you make a bucket list ? 
Did you make a promise to yourself to do something you have been procrastinating ? 
Piers , please tell Anderson , how much I loved the -LRB- Reports Notebook -RRB- February 6 , 2011 at 4:00 pm | Report abuse | Reply Did the government -LRB- US or Egypt -RRB- have anything to do with your departure ? 
Good question , Tawni . 
I had n't thought of that -- I hope he asks it ! 
Please hug your Mom tonight . . 
and spend some quality time with her . . 
As a Mother of a soldier during `` Shock and Awe '' , I know EXACTLY how she felt watching your reports . 
I thank God , both of you were brought home safe . 
In what way will the Cairo uprising impact China , if at all ? 
I wonder how the Hong Kong , Vietnam , Indonesia , Malaysia , Philippones , Taiwan , Communist China 's press\/TV And the people are reacting ? 
Afterall , the future economic and intellectual powerhouse are or will be in Asia . 
There are lots of similarities , and tons of differences . 
But no TV reportings have even mentioned one word except mentioning Tien Ghan Min Square massacre . 
My biggest question is why the reporters were attacked by the Egyptians demonstrators when considering that reporters were doing them a favor by telling the world about their current conditions ? 
2 different `` factions '' One pro Government , One against the present Government . 
do u think that the muslim brotherhood will ever respect isreal Does it make a difference to us ? 
We just need to stay home and put our money in `` our '' mouthes . 
I 'm happy of your safe return and I hope that you will continue to cover the current crisis in Egypt . 
My question is if you can elaborate on how exactly is Egypt 's current situation affecting other countries and if so , is it very damaging or something we need to keep a look out for the future ? 
Anderson : As per usual , terrific reporting in Egypt . 
Glad you 're safe and back home ! 
After experiencing the violence during your time in Egypt , do you regret going there to begin with ? 
Or , did it make for an even bigger experience ? 
Were you really punched in the face ? 
What was your most intense experience while there ? 
Anderson , You such a hard worker and I have to ask when do you ever sleep while you are on these trips ?? Your family must be so proud of you . 
What was the final straw for you to decide to fly back ??? Keep safe , we love your shows Anderson I am so glad u are back and safe The whole world has been concerned When a country goes against our Freedom of Free Speech we come out fighting like Wildcats I admire your Bravery Your Bravado Your Courage to bring us The Truth whatever the cost Will EGYPT TAKE AWAY THE FREEDOMS OF THEIR PEOPLE WILL IT BECOME A CONTROLLED ARAB STATE I WAS SO SCARED FOR U HOW SCARED WERE YOU I WOULD BE SO AFRAID I WOULD TRUST NO ONE EVEN THOSE CLOSEST TO ME HOW IS YOUR MOTHER I KNOW SHE IS SO HAPPY YOU ARE BACK GOD BLESS YOU ANDERSON WE ALL ARE PROUD OF YOU WARMEST REGARDS JUDY OF CHICAGO If the segment is taped and airs at a much later date , who is gonna care when it is broadcast ? 
Through no fault of your own , you went from reporting the story to being part of the story . 
How do you feel about that ? 
Can I be the first to say , while I completely understand why you are upset to be coming home early , we are all so incredibly happy to have our silver fox home . 
My question for you is : as an American , what do you believe our country should do in regard to Egypt ? 
Why did you not get to interview more significant people -- e. g , Christiane Amanpour got the VP and the President , Piers Morgan had the minister for finance -- outside of the elbaradei interview , you only had other reporters on your show . 
-LRB- Frankly I found Piers Morgan 's coverage way more interesting and educational -RRB- 2 . 
Did you purposely go for the `` people ' side of the story rather than the political one ? 
Did you lose sight of the story once your safety was compromised ? 
Keeping them honest -- why not cover the fact that the US for 30 years has endorsed Mubarak and on the heels of a few days of rioting , the US changes it 's position ? 
Keeping them honest again - in light of the fact that there are 82million people in Eygpt , is there any way to know that the protesters -LRB- a mere 100-200k or so of the population -RRB- are indeed the voice of the majority ? 
-- you seem to have a chip on your shoulder . 
Some -LRB- not all -RRB- valid questions , but you start out attacking ... AC , with all due respect , but where is the objectivity in your reporting about Egypt , ? 
you took the rebels side and started calling Mubarak folowers as thungs . 
You come and say let 's keep it honest . 
I am sorry for your eventful run but again the tension is high and many Egyptians see CNN reporting acting like a Jazeera which is well known for its liaison with Iran and radicals . 
-LRB- btw I am not Egyptian -RRB- . 
you will be surprised how many egyptians still feel passionately about Mubarak . 
I did not see you going all up in arms when we were watching the Green revolution in Iran . 
All what we heard was US should not involve and it is an internal issue ... wake up and adjust your reporting . . 
you had a great potential and I still remember your reporting in 2005 out of Beirut during the great coverage of the Cedars revolution . . 
Many of you fans , including myself have made the comparison of your reporting in Egypt being similar to your reporting in Sarajevo . 
Can you elaborate on it - did you make the connections also , or is each reporting experience new and completely different for you ? 
Thank you so much for all your hard work and effort in Egypt and other reports . 
You are truly wonderful and amazing ! 
How do you think the uprisings in Tunisia , Egypt and other Arab countries and countries in the Middle East will affect US relations with those countries ? 
Secretary Clinton condemned censoring in Egypt . 
However , she did n't mention that China blocked words like `` Cairo '' and `` Egypt . '' 
Why do you think that is and how do you think had she mentioned it , China-US relations will affected ? 
: Thanks a great deal for providing poeple with a really breathtaking chance to read critical reviews from this site . 
It really is very brilliant and as well , full of fun personally personally and my office co-workers to find your site nearly thrice inside a week to find out the latest secrets you might have . 
Obviously , Im also usually motivated for your wonderful suggestions you serve . 
Selected 2 points about this page have been in truth the very best weve had . 
How is it that many other journalists equipment was confiscated , and they were jailed , but you and your crew managed to escape this ? 
What made you decide to come back when Egypt is still in such a state ? 
On Friday , when the army was evidently out in numbers to prevent violence , I expected you reporting from Tahrir Square , but you were in a hotel room . 
Was it still unsafe for you to be at ground zero ? 
Other reporters on other channels were reporting from Tahrir Square , so it was surprising to not see you there as well . 
Do you plan to go back to Egypt in the near future ? 
When did you sleep ? 
can `` t instigate more fights so run home ? 
So you got a poke in the nose apparentlyllll covering several thousand young protesters and ignoring the fact that there are some 82 million Egyptian who were not protesting seems a little one sided to me . 
How come you all stayed fixated on the square and did not even try to get the working man ? 
The protesters are still there , they are not the poor working average Egyptian . 
believe me the average Egyptian doesn ' have a cell phone . 
internet etc. and they ca n't afford to sit around shooting their mouths off !! they work . 
Morgan please Ask Anderson if he personally see Mohammed El-Baradei as a betrayal to World Security ? 
Does he belive the world should stand publicly NOW in support for president Muhammad Hosni Sayyid Mubarak for the security of this World ??? . 
Qo Ekamutn Internetum internet beusnsis dproc @ iskapes bacarik hnaravorutun er boloris hamar . 
Ays mi qani shabatva @ntacqum mez aynqan proffesional ev kazmakerpvac kerpov matucvec nor informacian , vor Internet beusnsis ashxarh @ darcav miangamamayn harazat vayr indz hamar ev es patrastvum em hastatvel ev sharunakel aystex . 
Bolor nranq ovqer derevs tarakusum en masnakcel nor sksvox daserin te voch , es mecaguin patasxanatvutiamb ev vstahutiamb erashxavorum em , masnakceq ev dzer arjev kbacven nor drner , hnaravorutunner ev iharke amboxjovin nor giteliqner Da dzezanic shat ban chi xli , ev ardunqum inch kunennaq anhamemateli e linelu !!! Mi hapaxeq !!! THIS IS FOR PAULETTE : HOW WOULD YOU FEEL IF YOU WERE THE ONE BEING ATTACKED NOT JUST ONE DAY BUT MORE THAN ONE DAY FORCED TO GO IN HIDING DUE TO JOURNALISTS BEING ARRESTED INTERROGATED JAILED TORTURED ANDERSON MADE A DECISION THAT WAS A VERY DIFFICULT ONE I RESPECT THAT DECISION AND ADMIRE ANDERSON ALL THE MORE FOR MAKING IT This hero worshiping of journalists who tell only one side of the story and the safe side at that is why so many of them feel they are the story themselves . 
They make the news not tell it . 
But that 's what makes the world go round . 
Far be it from me to upset your love in >> When journalists are attacked to prevent them from showing the military abusing human rights , the journalists are the entire story . 
Do you seriously suggest CNN report on the attacks without mentioning what happened to Cooper ? 
February 7 , 2011 at 7:26 am | Report abuse | Ask him how long you have to be on CNN before they let you have a video podcast . 
Piers Morgan Tonight only gets an audio version for now , as ratings improve will that justify video as well ? 
Anderson , I commend you for your exceptional reporting . 
I want to know if you see much change in the government so far . 
The people want Mubarak to go , but he still is n't leaving . 
The prime minister has been blaming the media for this chaos . 
He seems to be just as bad as Mubarak . 
These thugs that the govermnent has hired are still attacking you and other journalists . 
From what I saw yesterday , the general tried to get people to leave Tahrir Square . 
This also seems to be what the government is trying to do to defuse the situation and for everything to go back to normal . 
They claim that they are making changes , but so far I have n't seem much . 
They outsted his son , which from what I have read the people like much more than Mubarak . 
The people of Egypt want freedom and it seems the goverment is not doing much to allow this . 
Mubarak claims there will be chaos if he leaves , but he and his goverment are the ones creating this chaos . 
He claims if he leaves that the Muslim Brotherhood might take over and it would be very bad for the people , but from what i have read they are very peaceful and they are only speaking with the goverment about change . 
They are not trying to lead the country . 
Even Obama said he should listen to the people , but not enough is being done . 
He needs to go now . 
How soon do you think Mubarak will leave ? 
when Piers is interviewing he will ask a question but never lets the guest finish what they are saying . 
What the hell is that about ?? Very Very rude and unprofessional . 
It 's most irritating and I have n't even watched it very often . 
Hope he 's replaced ... . . 
SOON !!!! I made the same comment here about his interruptions . 
It is indeed so frustrating ! 
At least Larry King did n't try to take over the show to bring emphasis on himself . 
He remained objective and allowed his guest to remain the center of attention . 
Also , some of Piers ' questions are inappropriate . 
While Piers Morgan filled the Larry King time-slot , he did n't replace him . 
They 're both excellent for different reasons ; Piers Morgan will be even better 3 months from now than he is today . 
You 'll know he 's reached a certain level of excellence when they give him a video podcast , for now it 's just audio February 7 , 2011 at 5:47 am | Report abuse | Good evening , Wanted to let Anderson know thank you for risking your own personel safety , and health not sure , if this is something that I could do . 
Also , I hope its not ture but is he leaving CNN . 
Who cares if he 's gay or not he is a fantastic journalist I would put him right up there with Walter Cronkite ... Peter Jennings ... . 
Thank you Anderson for all the wonderful reporting . 
You may like Anderson Cooper but to even try and compare him with Walter Cronkite or Peter Jennings is a real stretch !! Whether he is gay or not is of no concern ... he is just more of an personality then a reporter\/journalist . 
The real journalists like Jennings and Cronkite gave you all the accurate details as much as they could and tried to ensure the information was correct ... Now the media just tries to fill its 24 hour news slot with the same video over and over again and interviews with any person who call themselves `` specialists '' who seem to know everything long after the fact !! Yes Lynn , you are right . 
The true newmen of yesteryear are gone and that is unfortunate for us all . 
They had real principles and they did investigative journalism with honest fact checkers . 
A station like the animal network and the people on it , would never have been accepted back in Cronkite 's day . 
It really got bad when Bush took office and his people knew they were going to tell a lie to get us to go to war . 
Some of the stories they wanted to fool the public with would not past muster with the Cronkite 's of the world . 
So they got rid of the honest unbiased newmen , Jennings , Rather , Brokaw , Koppel . 
They even set Dan Rather up because they did not think he would go quietly . 
None of the old timers would play the game that the special interest lobbies who are tight with the network owners wanted to play . 
We have done a foolish thing by allowing a handful of people to own the majority of our media . 
And we have really done a foolish thing by not having FCC rules that you must be American born to own and control any media outlet in the United States of America . 
When you control the media , you can control knowledge and thinking . 
Put that together with the dumbing down of Americans or ones who are too lazy to research and read , then you have the robots and their followers at the animal network . 
We claim to have freedom of the press but that is not totally true . 
Example : what do you think would happen if one of these news personalities went on air and said `` We have to pull back off the story and Mubarak is staying in power because Israel prefers it that way '' They would be fired and thrown off air faster than Rick Sanchez . 
I agreed with Charlton Heston when Michael Moore asked him why he thought crime had increased , people caalled me racist but I 'm not . 
Another example would be the way the media started out reporting the aids epidemic , special groups wanted them to stop connecting the word `` gay '' to it and put pressure on the Center for Disease control to watch how they release their findings . 
Look at what happened to Lou Dobbs just because he was fighting against illegal aliens who broke the law and companies out sourcing jobs . 
He lost me as a fan when he started on the Commander in Chief . 
No matter how much you disagree with him , the Cronkite 's of years ago would never disparage our President the way he did , especially on International Television . 
That was left to politians and others , not newsmen . 
That 's why he is now on a network without principles . 
I do n't believe in hate or intolerance , we need to be able to hear the factual truth without fear , not opinions and personal commentaries . 
February 7 , 2011 at 2:15 pm | Report abuse | When will the Colin Firth interview on Piers Morgan Tonight be rescheduled ? 
MARON There was one report that Muslims were going to protect Christians while they had a Mass in the Square . 
I would be interested if you think that the Muslims , Jews and Christians will be supportive of each other in whatever new government is developed . 
Craig , that is a good question for Anderson . 
I think they will all be supportive of each other , if they all got equal treatment . 
Whenever there is inequality , you will have problems . 
Stand two children next to each other , then give one a big popsicle and a hug , and give the other a smaller popsicle without a hug , then watch the latters reaction . 
You can use the same concept with adults or nations . 
There must be equality and fairness for all . 
God Bless I know I 'm off topic , but I do n't know where else to write . 
I have been tuning in for the past 10 days and yet somehow I missed the interview with Colin Firth and Jeffrey Rush . 
Did it actually run or is it still pending ? 
The Firth interview has not been shown yet ... Mr. Morgan seems to think that all anyone is interested in is constant repeat information about Egypt . 
He has advertised the Firth Interview now twice and then at the last minute pulls it . 
A real insult to his viewers . 
I find it hard to fathom how he thinks jerking viewers around like this ... advertising a program and then without notice changing it will get him a loyal audience . 
But if you check further on this sight you will see how angry the people are at him for this constant bait and switch !! As news change so must scheduled line-ups . 
When important news stories come about you have to move things around a bit . 
February 7 , 2011 at 11:19 am | Report abuse | I 'm as big a Colin Firth fan as the next ridiculous hero-worshiping American woman , but really ... such venom ! 
It 's a friggin ' news channel . 
Honestly , the interview is n't going anywhere ... it 'll air ! 
Hmmm ... lemme see ... should CNN programming revolve around unrealistic , unsatisfied romantic women who want to drool over an English actor or covering a world changing revolution about democracy as it was unfolding . 
It 's not like Piers signs a contract in blood when he announces his lineup , for cryin ' outloud ! 
I think most rational people udnerstand it is `` SUBJECT TO CHANGE '' . 
Kind of like what 's for dinner . 
Honestly , I think Colin is probably patient enough to know his interview will air as schedules and BREAKING NEWS AROUND THE WORLD allow . 
The rest of us should , too . 
BTW , Colin - you are devastatingly handsome and I do love you , but I 'm willing to wait for you . 
February 7 , 2011 at 4:57 pm | Report abuse | Just wanted to let everyone know , I am one that thinks Anderson made the right choice . 
I realize someone has to cover the news in the hot spots . 
However , I love Anderson 's sense of humor , and would like to see more of it . 
I think he has had enough Drama in his life and it is time for a change . 
I do not want any-one to come home in a body bag , but the world would loose a great heart if Anderson was bagged . 
Anderson has so much more to give with his words and needs to share his talent of writing with us . 
- Paul Stathakis from Montreal , Quebec -LRB- Canada -RRB- Anderson you and Wederman , not Christianne deserve an award for your coverage . 
Mubarak gave an interview to the person he knew would soft peddle his dictatorship and removal . 
Please take the stand that the female reporter in Egypt took , and do n't be a part of the media controlled groups . 
No country or group is a true friend if they ask America to do something wrong that goes against who we claim to be and what we claim to believe in which is , freedom and democracy for all . 
A true friend would not ask you to do something wrong . 
There are people who put pressure on the U.S. Media to sway this story and make the public believe if Mubarak leaves office , the big bad scary wold -LRB- muslim brotherhood -RRB- will move in . 
Those people will not trade one dictator and oppressor for another . 
Those protesters are begging us for help in obtaining freedom and democracy and if we turn our back on them , they will feel hopeless and that is what will make them latch onto radical groups . 
When we sent thousands of young American men and women to war in Iraq saying we were there to liberate them and bring freedom and democracy , how to we turn our backs on Egypt ? 
How do we call a brutal dictator like Mubarak a friend just because he did what we paid him to do ? 
Can you begin to imagine what will happen to the protesters or family members of them , especially the ones who work to get the messages out , once the media leaves Egypt ? 
Murbarak is so desperate to stay in power , he will stage a phony terrorist act against his own people or even Israel , to make it look like he must stay in power to help Israel thwart any additional acts . 
He could set up some of the protesters like he alreay tried to do with this phony story about an assassination attempt on the new VP . 
, and this mess with a broken gas pipe on fire . 
Won `` t trade one dictator for another ... wow you must be very young !!! ever hear of Iran ? 
Just because we score lower academically than several other countries does not mean we Americans are stupid . 
Mubarak is getting rid of the journalist , and will fool the protesters away from Liberation Square , then do some serious damage to Egypt and the protesters . 
That is why he must be made to step down now , not later . 
Concessions , when I see these reporters act as if Mubarak has made some great concessions and the protesters should be satisfied , they are either brainless or being told how to swing the story . 
The first and only concession Mubarak should make is to leave . 
A sinister game is being played . 
All of the sudden Mubarak will hold talks with the bug bad wolf -LRB- muslim brotherhood -RRB- the very people they painted as sooooo scary . 
It does not matter if the whole world is watching , Mubarak can change laws today and unchange them tomorrow , and no one in the world will go to the rescue of those people . 
We are hippocrits if we turn away . 
Mubarak is on his way out in September , so why not get cozy with the next group who will take his place by helping to bring freedom and democracy , they will owe us , and remain friends . 
Or they will remember when they were begging for it and we turned our backs . 
Iran is not Egypt , an education will help you truly understand the differences . 
Not only are the cultural and religious beliefs different , but they do n't even like each other . 
Eygpt is fighting for personal rights and freedoms as citizens . 
Sorry Lynn , they are right . 
Iran and Egypt very different people and causes Kudos Anderson for great coverage of Egypt . 
I agree with the person who said you should get an award . 
This is a Yes , or No , answer . 
No smoke and mirrors roundabout answers please . 
Former Secretary James Baker has admitted Mubarak is a dictator and should leave , Do you think dictators are ok , as long as they do what we want ? 
Why do you think American Journalist are now down playing the need for Mubarak to go immediately ? 
If Journalist from around the world came to cover Americans uprising against their government , do you thing our security agencies or others would find a way to prevent them from covering the story , and would our government cut off our ability to get the story out , such as Twitter , Internet , etc. ? 
During the Iraqi war , we did almost the same thing . 
Americans were prevented from gaining access to Al-Jezeera 's news and website , so we could read other points of views of what was going on in Iraq . 
If you find time to give an answer to any of these questions , Thank you . 
I think Anderson went in there and stirred the pot but did n't finish the job . 
A reporter at Democracy Now was able to go into the square and capture footage when Anderson went into hiding . 
Not a fan of this new style of reporting where a lot of questions are asked by the reporter and then they do n't stay around for the answers and resolutions . 
To me a lot of the field reporting today is full of fractured sound bites and incomplete thoughts trying to support one agenda or another . 
That is why most people are going to the internet , you can scan a lot more information more readily , read tweets from the people on the ground and get different points of view . 
I do not really trust any television reporter to give me the news . 
Those days are long gone . 
Bravo !!! someone not easily taken in by the 24\/7 hype . 
How come the reporters seemed to spend all their time in the square instead of going out and actually talking to the other 82 million egyptians who have to work for a living . 
If all these protesters are so poor how come they all have cell phones ... internet ... and can sit in the square for two weeks ! 
I admire courage as much as the next person and I hope Egypt ... a great people ... get out of this with a better ... freer ... life ... however the re ; porters are just stirring the pot ... as always . 
CNN should show the `` abuse '' of journalists in Egypt and what better way to show this , than to show what Anderson Cooper went through . 
I think it sneds the message straight home to people . 
That foregin news correspondents are no different than military men and women who risk their lives everyday for us . 
Unfortunately , media does not have weapons to help in defending themselves . 
I think Anderson Cooper coming `` home '' was the right decision everyone needs a break , not to mention the mental stress that this has to cause . 
If in a couple of months he can go back than good for him . 
If not than that 's okay to . 
He can do just as much good reporting from New York , and being safe and still bringing the events of the day to the American people . 
Like a Military personnwl I will say thank you to Anderson Cooper and all the media people for risking their lives , and sometimes people around the world do n't realize how dangerous these assignments are for you both mentally and physically . 
What are the chances that women will be represented in the new Egyptian government . 
Are there any prominent woman Egyptian leaders who have emerged and will have a seat at the table and\/or can take a leadership role going forward ? 
Frst of all I would like to tell you how inspired I was of how courageous and brave of a reporter you are . 
I would like to know is , what was the most shocking scene that you witnessed while being in Egypt ? 
I too could n't help thinking ... what is poor Anderson 's mother going through . 
I love your reporting and humility . 
Always apologizing for broadcasting conditions like low lighting Really ! 
Do n't apologize you are out there risking your life . 
My question is do you actually BELIEVE ANYONE . 
Every expert has a different take but I think they have a different agenda and I have come to not trust or believe anyone . 
Whom do you believe is being forth right here ? 
El Baradei , Muslim Brotherhood , Mubarak etc ? 
Thank you In retrospect , was covering the protest the correct story for a recognized and respected American international journalist to cover in Egypt , or do you think it would have been more relevant and appropriate for you to have covered why and how the US government at the heart of a democracy came to and continued to endorse Mubarack , a dictator , for so many decades ? 
Its a shame that the US supports and prop up many governments that are tyrants . 
Mubarak and Omar Suleiman need to be removed ; however , that leaves a void for any militant organization to take charge . 
Therefore , the Egyptian people need to decide on whom they would like to be president and vice president so they can slide in when Mubarak and Suleiman slide out ! 
Does anyone know why the interview with Anderson did n't air on Monday ? 
: That is such a perfect rrsouece that you are providing and you give it away for free . 
I love seeing web pages that understand the value of providing a quality rrsouece for free . 
It is the old what goes around arrives around routine . 
Did you acquired plenty of links and also I see many trackbacks ?? Posted on Hello , my name is Alex , i 'm a newbie here . 
I rllaey do like your resource and rllaey interested in things you discuss here , also would like to enter your community , hope it is possible : - -RRB- Cya around , best regards , Alex ! 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Notify me of follow-up comments via email . 
Everything from #Paterno to #Rihanna , Melissa McCarthy to the Pope , plus #OBL 's shooter & #GunsinAmerica . 
@DonnyDeutsch is on it ! 
9p #CNN 8:13 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Will the 4th time be a charm ? 
Probably , just like the 1st , 2nd , and 3rd . 
RT @reallorraine Thanks @piersmorgan and Life Stories team & brilliant audience - made me feel very relaxed and happy ! 
