Flames rise from a gas pipeline attack in the Egyptian Sinai town of El Arish on February 5 , 2011 . 
A pipeline that sends natural gas to Jordan was set on fire in the Egyptian Sinai town of El Arish on Saturday , and the suspected act of sabotage has forced its temporary closing , officials said . 
Ghaleb Al Maabreh , head of Jordan 's national electricity company , confirmed the closing . 
He said at least one week will be needed to fix it and the cost for the repair will be covered by Jordan . 
Al Maabreh said the government will start using alternative sources that will cost it $ 4.2 million daily . 
It is able to provide itself with energy sources for the coming three weeks , he added . 
Unless the pipe is repaired quickly , it could become a big problem for Jordan , a country already spending heavily in fuel subsidies , a Jordanian senior official said . 
Read more ... February 6th , 2011 11:14 am ET Current events in the middle east have become very clear . 
Here are a few details which will help you understand . 
OPEC is an oil cartel\/monopoly which is run by 11 heads of state from the middle east . 
American statesmen have declared that the price of oil is inflated because of this monopoly . 
They think OPEC 's monopoly threatens Americas need for cheap oil . 
They think if OPEC should be broken up -LRB- Lets say OPEC group A & OPEC group -RRB- then competition between rival OPEC A & B would drive down the price of oil . 
Next you must be aware that the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt has been set up and funded by Britain 's MI5 since the 1920s . 
The Muslim Brotherhood were used by the British to revolt against President Nasser during the Suez crisis . 
The Muslim Brotherhood are calling for revolution throughout the middle east . 
This equates to Britain and her allies wanting revolution throughout the middle east . 
Couple this with Americans calling for the breakup of OPEC and it becomes clear that the plan by the west is to dismantle this area . 
For example , if Saudi Arabia exploded into revolution it may split into North Saudi and South Saudi . 
With all the middle east in revolution the 11 OPEC members could be split into 22 OPEC members . 
But the 22 will be rivals , form separate groups and create competition in oil sales which will drive down the price . 
However the game cant end with a breakdown of OPEC . 
The resulting cheap oil will also be available to China . 
For America to control the cheap oil , it will need to keep the area in a state of constant chaos and on the edge of war . 
This will create the excuse for America to deploy its military and pretend that its in the region to create peace . 
The exchange for this calculated peace will be for the cheap oil to be directed to America . 
Some will argue that most of the dictators in the middle east are puppets installed by America and that the USA is already in control . 
This is correct , but only to a certain level . 
Most of the American backed middle east dictators have become +30 year family dynasties . 
They will follow America to a point . 
But if the USA wants utter turmoil which can threaten the succession of the family dynasty , the dictators will defy the will of America . 
i.e. for Mubarak it was more important that his son takes power , obeying the USA had become a secondary priority . 
America threw the stone of revolution in the middle east and tried hide its hand . 
Thats why they started with claims of support for Mubarak . 
It was not supposed to look like an American driven revolt . 
But when Mubarak found a way to cling onto power , the Americans realized their plan may fail . 
Hence the Americans started to announce Mubarak must go . 
There is no confusion in America , only a fear that their plan may not work . 
America hopes ElBaradei will take control of Egypt as he is their man and will follow the instructions needed to help break up OPEC and spread revolt . 
Israelis will now find that for 60 years they have been sleeping with the American mafia . 
It was fine for them as America -LRB- once the only super power -RRB- would back Israel in any crime or illegal occupation . 
Israelis were laughing at the Arabs as the grabbed more and more land with American support . 
But now America has a plan for middle east rebellion and instability to breakup OPEC . 
The instability needs to last generations , so the USA can have its military there to ensure the USA gets all the oil it wants . 
With this agenda , Mubarak and peace between Israel and Egypt is expendable . 
With turmoil in the middle east both Muslim and Jew will die and suffer . 
Israel is about to learn that when you sleep with the mafia you are expendable . 
Now some Israelis have a dream of a greater Israel which includes parts of Egypt , Jordan , Syria and Saudi Arabia . 
Some Israeli leaders may see the turmoil as a chance for more military victories and a chance to grab more land . 
They will sell the idea of conflict on the Israelis as they believe it will be for the countries greater good . 
Nevertheless , the price will be paid in Jewish and Muslim blood . 
Mubarak has played some extremely difficult cards with brilliance . 
He knows he has been betrayed by America and is probably buying time to establish better relations with Russia , China and Turkey . 
All the other Arab dictators have also seen how America may betray them . 
So do n't be surprised if China or Russia are invited to open naval or air bases in the middle east soon . 
America has taken an enormous gamble which will be paid for by everyone in the middle east . 
My guess is ; in the long term it will also accelerate the decline of American influence in the area . 
Conclusion , Israel better get to the negotiating table quickly and offer something that can be considered reasonable and serious . 
Get as much regional agreement as possible while you still hold the upper hand . 
The dynamics of the middle east are changing and you ca n't rely on the benefits of American mafia styled politics . 
America can wait for Mubarak to leave in September . 
The next opportunity for the USA to generate chaos now looks like it will be after he steps down . 
The next vote will be crooked as always and the dissatisfaction of the people will again be whipped up into anarchy . 
February 6th , 2011 4:45 pm ET p.s. Egyptian people have genuine concerns . 
Most of these concerns are based on the cost of living and limited chances to feed their families . 
The IMF -LRB- largely run by USA & UK -RRB- instructed Egypt to cut food subsidies or face a reduced credit rating . 
Its called banking poor countries into submission . 
They new Egyptian people would not be able to afford to eat and then they would blame the government . 
The IMF was the political tool used to spark this crisis . 
The the people of Jordan were then inspired by Egyptian protest and also start to protest themselves over their poor living conditions . 
And surprise surprise they have their gas cut off . 
An act intended to increase dissatisfaction in Jordan . 
How many more dirty tricks will we see in the Anglo American attempt to destabilize the middle east , cause revolt and breakup OPEC . 
People of the world from America to Jordan , from Egypt to Israel better start realizing they are all expendable pawns in the game played by our out of control governments -LRB- Goverments who serve the military industrial complex and banks , they dont serve you -RRB- . 
On a closing note Liberty and human rights are not subjects for governments to meddle with . 
On the other hand Democracy is two wolves and a sheep voting on whats for lunch . 
Instead of crowing about democracy in the world , we should be focusing on Liberty . 
The founding fathers of America said , `` Give me Liberty or Give me death '' . 
They did not ask for democracy , as democracy can be interpreted in so many different ways -LRB- As we have discovered via wiki leaks -RRB- . 
If the West 's focus was on human liberty our politicians would be greatly limited in their ability to manipulate the lives of the people they were elected to serve . 
February 7th , 2011 4:18 am ET Good Analysis . 
We need more about Mahdi coming and Jesus coming to face the anti christ and the armagadon . 
The MI5 is a British domestic counter-terrorism force . 
They would have had little role in Egypt of the 1920s . 
If the British had any role in supporting the creation of the Muslim Brotherhood it may have been their interest in the social institutions they were setting up in British controlled Egypt but , as has been proven many times , this was only one element in their agenda . 
It is rediculous to suggest that while the British were trying to prevent German infiltration in the 1930s they would be supporting the Brotherhood who were working with the Nazis to defeat the British . 
Although doubtless there have always been British Arabists who would do anything to promote the Arab cause even to the detriment of their own nation . 
Your comments are little more than anti-Western conspiracy and propaganda . 
Miriam , you are so sweet and simple in mind . 
The Egyptians did n't like it . 
So Britain created a radical group to convince the people anarchy would replace Britain . 
Does that sound familiar to you . 
But in your sweet simple world there are no spies or dirty tricks . 
In fact the thought of a country manipulating information is a wild conspiracy theory . 
Do n't you think its time to grow up . 
The real world does n't guarantee a Walt Disney happy ever after . 
Where do you get your facts from ? 
They are not supported by anything to be found on the internet . 
Do you have a secret library of sources only available to you ? 
I have covered a lot of issues . 
Name the ones you would like more information on and I will point you to the sources . 
In fact you will find them on the web if you try a little harder with your research . 
But be warned , if you can support facts on this web site , some will try to say its just cut and paste . 
If you do n't offer sources of information , others will say the sources do n't exist . 
Meanwhile most people just type in blogs that have no thinking behind them at all . 
I love your analysis becuase they align with my thinking about America and her allieds , particularly when it comes to political and economic interest . 
But they often forget that what goes around comes around . 
I think the solution to these problems confronting humanity is to form a universal government where all humans are giving equal liberty . 
Meaning that the more we tolerate geographical barrier , entry visa , racial distinction , all sorts of political associations etc. the more humanity sinks into these problems . 
The Arabs were not the only ones trying to negotiate with the Nazis . 
`` As late as 1941 , the Zionist group LEHI , one of whose leaders , Yitzhak Shamir , was later to become a prime minister of Israel , approached the Nazis , using the name of its parent organization , the Irgun -LRB- NMO -RRB- ... -LRB- The proposal stated : -RRB- ` The establishment of the historical Jewish state on a national and totalitarian Pd bound by a treaty with the German Reich would be in the interests of strengthening the future German nation of power in the Near East ... The NMO in Palestine offers to take an active part in the war on Germany 's side ' ... The Nazis rejected this proposal for an alliance because , it is reported , they considered LEHI 's military power ` negligible . ' 
Allan Brownfield in `` The Washington Report on Middle Eastern Affairs '' , July\/August 1998 . 
February 9th , 2011 11:38 am ET Izma says , `` the solution to these problems confronting humanity is to form a universal government '' A universal government means one leader for all the world . 
This is in fact a definition for dictatorship . 
Be very careful for what you wish for . 
In my opinion the real solution is less government , more law which protects human rights and the let people manage their own lives . 
People manage their lives better than government . 
What governemnt actually is popular and successfull ? 
Sad answer : non . 
So lets drop the global goverment idea which is more or less the meaning behind the story 1984 . 
What you fail to mention in your regurgitated anti-Israel propaganda is that the Lehi , a group with no single political , religious or economic ideology whose members ranged from the far-right to the far-left before and after the re-establishment of the Jewish state , was unpopular within the Jewish population and rejected by the Jewish leadership for its terrorist activities . 
Many members had served with the British against the Nazis at the start of WW2 but with the British Mandate anti-immigration policy which left thousands of Jewish refugees fleeing Europe having to return straight back to extermination camps , some became staunchly anti-British and anti-imperialist . 
A wild , and for obvious reasons , unpopular proposal sent to the Nazi party suggested that they could solve their `` problem '' with the presence of Jews in Europe by allowing their emigration to a Jewish state . 
At the same time , they would continue with their shared aim of defeating the British . 
Claiming that the British established the Brotherhood is as stupid as suggesting that the British created the Lehi , that is , excluding the reactionary contribution . 
But then again , some of the conspiracies we read here are that stupid . 
The proposal by Shamir is not a conspiracy theory but a fact and people were so outraged that they elected him PM of Israel . 
The spin you have tried to put on facts of history is just so much BS . . 
As we say '' this dog wo n't hunt '' . 
February 11th , 2011 8:38 pm ET Do n't think America is behind this at all ! 
This was all precipitated by the backwards economic programs in all these Arab nations , run by Monarchs or Totalitarian leaders . 
The spark that set it off was a Tunisian setting himself on fire over the problems in Tunisia , and Egyptians responded that they were all suffering from the same thing . 
All over the Arab\/Muslim world , including Iran , the problems are the same . 
The rest of the world is progressing faster and these people were being left behind , largely because of the ineptitude of their leadership . 
Revolution is the hardest thing until it is done , now the hardest thing will be establishing a new order , one that actually fulfills some of the people 's aspirations . 
There is no reason Egypt 's people ca n't be productive or modern as anywhere , but it will take time to achieve that and in the meantime they have to worry about feeding themselves . 
All they have done is gotten rid of a bad leader , that does n't mean they do n't have real problems that need to be addressed before things get better . 
Are n't the people in Egypt going through what America did in gaining it 's independence ? 
Ultimately political power lies with the people , if the Army wo n't fire on them , then their will is more likely to come into being . 
They need a full overhaul of their government , their constitution and their policies . 
Many regions of the world which were once colonized have eventually emerged with a hope to rule themselves . 
We have many examples from Africa and South America . 
Unfortunately all newly liberated countries soon wake up to reality . 
Their history included occupation by a foreign military . 
This is quickly replaced with stealth colonialism controlled by banks . 
No country is free through the word `` democracy '' . 
Freedom is built via fair trade and resultant financial stability . 
Freedom also requires laws to protect human rights . 
The post colonial powers and America have always spoken with hypocrisy . 
They claim they want a democratic and prosperous world and then use their established power to ensure the people of developing regions can not compete within a fair market place . 
Besides if Egypt freely and democratically elects a government which calls American & Israeli corruption to account , we know western media will declare Egypt to be a hostile Islamic state . 
This in itself will be hypocritical , because in America its okay to have a Jewish state , but its wrong to have an Islamic state . 
Egypt is far from being free , but its suppressors are not all within Egypt . 
One good thing I noticed is that all Egyptians interviewed on the street are aware of American hypocrisy . 
As one said so well after Obama 's latest speech , `` We started this revolution without the help of America and we will end it without the help of America '' . 
Needless to say America now busily does all it can to ensure Egyptians choose a leader wanted by the Whitehouse . 
Now if we really care about democracy , we should do everything possible to ensure that the Egyptians choose who they want and the world community supports their choice without economically pressuring them into a leadership the west prefers . 
Who called it a conspiracy theory ? 
You are correct it is a fact but over exaggerate it 's significance . 
Not only did almost all the Jewish leadership reject the proposal including other Lehi members , the Nazis rejected it primarily because it contradicted their objectives in collaborating with Arab leaders . 
WRT Shamir 's election to PM , as is common in virtually all societies , those who fought for independence are often elected as political leaders although in Israel 's case , they were given many years to prove that their militant activities had been well and truly abandoned . 
This is was you wrote : `` some of the conspiracies we read here are that stupid . '' 
At least get right it right . 
Enough already with your BS ! 
Conspiracy in relation to the Brotherhood being created by MI5 . 
You do n't need to twist my words . 
you are the BSter , you have no idea about facts , you lie , falsify history and support the jew hating antisemite john cut-and-paste A February 20th , 2011 10:56 am ET Proud Zionist has escaped from his nurses again . 
If any one has seen Proud Zionist , please be kind enough to let Herzog Hospital know where he is . 
With thanks to all the tireless staff who take care of him . 
Where can I read more posts about this ? 
January 22nd , 2012 11:25 am ET Hi , satisfyingly area , i muse on hither something correspond to to this chair but i do n't procure anytime second , but seriously it 's utter careful Comments are moderated by CNN , in accordance with the CNN Comment Policy , and may not appear on this blog until they have been reviewed and deemed appropriate for posting . 
Also , due to the volume of comments we receive , not all comments will be posted . 
Welcome to the Inside the Middle East blog where CNN 's journalists post news , views and video from across the region . 
This is also a place where you can start the discussion so please keep your comments coming . 
We highlight not only current news stories but also anecdotes and issues that do n't always make the top of the headlines . 
Inside the Middle East airs the first week of every month on the following days and times : 
