HOWARD KURTZ , HOST : As journalists scramble to chronicle the uprising in Egypt , this is the week the story turned ugly in more ways than one . 
From CNN 's Anderson Cooper , to ABC 's Christiane Amanpour , from CBS 's Lara Logan to Fox 's Greg Palkot , correspondents have been attacked , beaten , chased , threatened , arrested , and detained . 
How do you cover a dangerous story when you become a target for the mob ? 
Our guests include Katie Couric , just back from Egypt , and Sam Donaldson . 
From Cairo to Jerusalem to Britain to here in Washington , we 'll look at the way the crisis is being portrayed , the coverage of President Obama , the unorthodox criticism by Glenn Beck , the Egyptian television reporter who quit in protest , the trashing of Al Jazeera 's offices , and why the press never saw this coming . 
I 'm Howard Kurtz , and this is RELIABLE SOURCES . 
Journalists who race off to hot spots are accustomed to taking risks , but when violence erupted between Egyptian protesters and pro- government agitators , correspondents were not just caught in the crossfire , they were specifically targeted . 
It 's a harrowing list , reporters from `` The New York Times '' and `` Washington Post '' arrested and released . 
Lara Logan and her CBS crew first marched back to her hotel at gunpoint and later detained by police before being released . 
ABC correspondent Brian Hartman threatened with beheading by a group of angry Egyptians who let his crew go only after a plea from their Lebanese cameraman . 
Fox News correspondent Greg Palkot and his cameraman , badly beaten , then detained before being hospitalized for the injuries , released only after the Obama administration interceded . 
Some of these incidents were captured on tape , beginning with the one involving Anderson Cooper , who later started reporting from an undisclosed location . 
ANDERSON COOPER , CNN ANCHOR : We were set upon by a crowd of pro- Mubarak supporters , punching us , trying to rip the clothes off my producer , trying to take the camera from my cameraman , punching me in the head several times in the body . 
All of us were punched . 
I do n't mind telling you , I am a little scared because we frankly do n't know what the next few hours will hold . 
And I think there 's a lot of people who are scared tonight in Egypt . 
CHRISTIANE AMANPOUR , `` THIS WEEK WITH CHRISTIANE AMANPOUR '' : We left that angry crowd and got into our car . 
They forced us into our car . 
And as we started to drive off , they hit the car with their fists over and over again , and threw a rock through the front window . 
The glass is shattered all over our driver . 
Did they hurt you ? 
ARWA DAMON , CNN CORRESPONDENT -LRB- voice-over -RRB- : As we are filming from a bridge , this man starts yelling at us to stop . 
`` Why are you filming ? '' 
`` Is this a nice image ? 
It 's ugly . '' 
He threatens to break our camera . 
-LRB- on camera -RRB- : Why is everybody so angry with the media ? 
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE : Because it does n't give a very good picture about us . 
KURTZ : One of network anchors who went to Egypt was Katie Couric , who found herself in the thick of the story . 
KATIE COURIC , CBS NEWS : This ancient city is the epicenter of an uprising by the people of this country who say now is the time for a new Egypt . 
And when the man many believe represents the old Egypt finally spoke to the people today , it only stoked the fires of rage and resentment . 
KURTZ : I spoke to the anchor and managing editor of the `` CBS Evening News '' a few moments ago by phone from New York . 
KATIE COURIC , `` CBS EVENING NEWS '' : Hi , Howie . 
KURTZ : You waded into that crowd in Cairo . 
We just saw that clip . 
Why did you decide to do that ? 
It looks like things got pretty tense there for a few minutes . 
COURIC : I think that was in the initial stages of the tension . 
You know , we had been shooting from other things . 
I had an interview with Amr Moussa , who is the secretary general of the Arab League , and then went and talked to Mohamed ElBaradei . 
And we had heard that things were getting a bit dicey in the square . 
So of course we decided , well , let 's go and find out what 's going on . 
And it was very clear as we tried to get into the square itself -- we were just actually on a road leading to the square -- that things had taken a very ugly turn . 
The atmosphere had changed dramatically from the night before , when it felt , as I said on the `` Evening News , '' like a turbo charged street festival . 
All these pro-Mubarak industry protesters were marching into the square sort of in pretty big numbers . 
And their attitude toward the media was very , very different than the anti- government protesters . 
At first I thought -- COURIC : Well , yes , I was a little nervous . 
But at first , I just thought it was a boisterous crowd . 
You know , when you have a television camera , it sometimes attracts some pretty crazy behavior , people wanting to get in the shot , wanting to scream and yell and carry on and make faces and signs , et cetera . 
So I thought , really , it was just one of those situations , but it became clear pretty quickly that this was a very different scenario , that this was fueled by a great deal of anger and animosity towards the press , towards the United States . 
And when I got surrounded , and this one sort of young Egyptian man pushed me , I thought -- I looked at his eyes , and they were so full of rage . 
I thought , gee , this is a pretty precarious situation I need to walk away from here , and so that 's what I did . 
I just kind of walked away and got out of there . 
KURTZ : It kind of leads to my next question . 
Some people are saying , you know , maybe American anchors should n't go into these volatile situations . 
They attract so much attention . 
Perhaps they become targets and distract from the story . 
I can see both sides of that argument . 
What do you think ? 
COURIC : Well , I do n't really see the one side of the argument . 
I mean , first of all , no one knew I was an anchor . 
They saw me as another journalist , as far as I know . 
And , you know , hopefully people who are in anchor roles have spent years out in the field reporting and have covered some of the biggest stories that have unfolded across the world for a fair amount of time and are experienced . 
And so , you know , I think that you have to be smart and responsible and use good judgment . 
But I do n't really think that we were necessarily targeted in terms of being anchors . 
I heard of journalists getting abused from `` The New York Times , '' from French news agencies . 
I talked to a couple of still photographers who had their cameras taken by the police and their film confiscated . 
So I do n't think people were making judgments and saying , oh , she 's the anchor of the `` CBS Evening News , '' let 's go after her . 
But on that point , clearly they were going after some journalists . 
And when we reached that 48-hour period where Anderson Cooper of CNN was attacked , where your CBS colleague Lara Logan was arrested and eventually released , what was your reaction to these attacks being in the middle of that cauldron ? 
COURIC : Well , obviously , it was very unnerving . 
And , I mean , I think it was pretty clear why they were doing it . 
You know , I think heretofore , most of the coverage of the anti- government protesters had been pretty positive . 
And the government clearly knew they were losing the propaganda war , if you will . 
And they wanted these images coming out of Tahrir Square and elsewhere to stop . 
So what 's the best way of doing that ? 
It 's obviously to intimidate , threaten and attack reporters . 
KURTZ : Of course , but that then became the story . 
And the government got a whole new wave of bad publicity . 
While you were in Egypt , Katie , to what extent were you able to get a sense of the passion of these protesters and why some of these people who were not especially political in the past were joining a mass protest that frankly none of us had seen coming ? 
COURIC : Well , I think that , clearly , this had been simmering for a long time . 
I had Lara Logan go a piece in Alexandria last week on Khaled Saeed , who was a young Egyptian man who had been beaten up by the police because he was really what ignited this -- partially ignited this tinderbox of simmering anger and rage . 
He was beaten up by police . 
A Facebook page was started . 
I think it 's fascinating , the role social media played in this . 
I do n't think you can say it was solely the result of social media , but I think it spread the word like wildfire and got young people incredibly engaged and organized in this process in a way that they would n't otherwise have been able to do . 
But I think that , you know , people -- the joblessness , jobless rate , the lack of employment is so terrible in Egypt , the poverty rate is so intense and severe . 
And I think people were just -- their anger just came to the surface . 
And I think that they -- it was really a people 's revolution . 
People felt empowered , and you felt that when you went in Tahrir Square the first night I got there , because it was a peaceful protest , and you felt like people were actually going to speak out and try to enact change . 
And it was actually an incredibly inspiring thing to witness . 
KURTZ : And a revolution that is still unfolding before our eyes . 
Katie Couric , we 're glad you 're back home safe . 
Thanks very much for joining us . 
-LRB- END VIDEOTAPE -RRB- KURTZ : And we 're continuing our coverage of the unfolding events in Egypt . 
Joining us now from Cairo , Christopher Dickey , Paris bureau chief and Middle East regional editor for `` Newsweek . '' 
In Jerusalem , Janine Zacharia , who covers the Middle East for `` The Washington Post . '' 
She 's just back from Egypt . 
And here in Washington , Frank Sesno , former CNN Washington bureau chief and now professor of Media and Public Affairs at The George Washington University . 
Frank Sesno , to some extent , these brutal attacks against journalists by these thugs who are working for -- or in the employ of the Mubarak regime , did n't they backfire ? 
FRANK SESNO , THE GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY : Yes , they did backfire , because they turned an even harsher glare on the regime in Egypt , they distracted the world , in a sense , from the debate of the street , and put it on these sort of -- the human rights essentially , the human rights record . 
And it turned the -- I think you could argue that it turned the Obama administration , many other governments around the world , even more harshly toward the notion that there needs to be real deep and lasting change , because this veneer of civilization is being challenged . 
KURTZ : Chris Dickey , in Cairo , as somebody has been there through most of this story , what was the government hoping to gain by going after journalists , arresting them , threatening them , in many cases physically attacking them ? 
It just seems like this has made the coverage more negative toward that regime . 
CHRISTOPHER DICKEY , MIDDLE EAST REGIONAL EDITOR , `` NEWSWEEK '' : Well , absolutely , it has . 
But the regime was n't thinking about the coverage in that sense . 
It was thinking about its domestic constituency , what it was going to tell the people here in Egypt . 
And it wanted to tell them that this protest in Tahrir Square , that 's not Egyptian , it 's all a foreign conspiracy . 
It 's all being run by these -- these journalists are all part of that foreign conspiracy . 
And that 's why although we 're talking about journalists , really , it 's worse than that . 
You 've not only had attacks on journalists , you 've had attacks on people just because they were foreigners . 
And this has just been the constant drumbeat of the Mubarak administration , even as the people who have been appointed to run things now , Prime Minister Ahmed Shafiq and Vice President Omar Suleiman are saying , oh , we 're against attacking foreigners , we 're against attacking journalists . 
What we 're seeing is one thing being said to the outside world and another thing being said to incite the people inside Egypt . 
And that 's a very old game by this regime . 
And Janine Zacharia , the pictures , of course , speak very loudly . 
And I wonder whether you think journalists kind of became the face of the thuggish tactics of the Mubarak regime when they were , in effect , providing first-person witness to the fact that people were willing to use guns and people were willing to use clubs and rocks against those who were trying to cover the story . 
JANINE ZACHARIA , JERUSALEM BUREAU CHIEF , `` THE WASHINGTON POST '' : Well , it 's no doubt that journalists became part of the story when it becomes this kind of high profile and you have senior top anchors flying in there . 
That 's going to be the case . 
But I thought , you know , one of things to point out here is that what this really showed -- and it echoes a little bit what Frank said , is sort of the history of how the Egyptians deal with their own media . 
I mean , they just do n't have a culture of free media , of people coming in . 
Even when I was there in Cairo the day -- the Thursday before the `` Day of Rage , '' so two days after that first protest , they had a press conference at the party headquarters , and you saw -- I was reminded again of how the Egyptian media are so cowed , they could n't ask the most obvious question that day , which namely was , where is President Mubarak ? 
We had n't seen him yet . 
They asked very simple questions . 
So , then , here you are , you 're the Egyptian regime , and you 're seeing all these people reporting all these things . 
You try shutting down their Internet and their phones , and that does n't work , so , instead , you arrest them . 
And it really shows the Egypt that the media has not covered -- the foreign media -- in any kind of serious , sustained way , at least for the last coupe of years . 
SESNO : There 's one other thing very interesting , Howie , that has been the backlash , as you say , from all this . 
I got an e-mail earlier this morning from Theo May , a young man who 's over there as a freelance journalist who spent a lot of time on the ground . 
He says one of things that these beatings and the harassment of these journalists has done has made it harder to write a story from the point of view of the Mubarak government , that he 's found , actually , in a lot of his travels , that there 's a fear bit of support for Mubarak in terms of the security -- the oasis of relative security that Egypt has become . 
You have activities like this on the street with reporters being targeted and harassed . 
Not going to write a story that 's favorable or has the point of view very favorably of the Egyptian government . 
KURTZ : But to some extent , Chris Dickey , it worked for a while in the sense that I saw fewer live shots for several days , we saw Anderson Cooper of CNN broadcasting from his hotel room , not in the streets . 
NBC 's Richard Engel has done an extraordinary job , up on a balcony for many of his live shots . 
So , did the regime get what it wanted , which was to kind of tamp down the live pictures of the clashes in that square ? 
DICKEY : Well , to the extent that that 's all it wanted , yes , it did reduce some of the coverage . 
The other vital thing that it did was shut down a lot of the camera positions in high-rise hotels around the square . 
That 's where it really started to black out the coverage . 
It was n't just the people going into the square . 
And yes , it 's been very scary going in and out . 
Often , when you 're in the square , there 's not that much of a problem . 
But going in and out , you wind up , all of a sudden , confronted by people , you 're not sure who they are . 
They 're carrying clubs , they may be very angry . 
You know , what you need to understand , though , is that this is something that the Egyptians have lived with for a long time . 
A lot of these thugs are normally employed by government party parliamentarians , and they 're used during elections to intimidate voters . 
It 's not like they just sprang out of nowhere . 
This is part of the system . 
And this is something that -- this is precisely what the people who are protesting are protesting against . 
DICKEY : And to the extent that they created a situation where the international journalistic community identified directly with those people and their problems , they created a disaster for public relations in Egypt . 
KURTZ : And now the whole world is seeing it close up . 
Janine Zacharia , I wonder if there was some irrational exuberance , to use a Wall Street term , in the early coverage of these protests . 
You have a front page story in `` The Washington Post '' today saying that maybe some observers , some journalists were expecting the Egyptian governments to topple rather quickly like Tunisia , and now it looks like it will be more of a long slog . 
ZACHARIA : I was n't one of those journalists , really . 
But I was wrong on the other end . 
I really thought this was going to be over in four days , having covered Egypt in one way or another for the last 15 years , knowing the way that they deal with these kinds of situations , and having been there just a few months ago and taken the pulse , and it was so different . 
So I think , yes , there was that euphoria of expectation . 
But I have to tell you , on that Friday night , that `` Day of Rage , '' when I 'm sure everybody was watching at home , those battles on the bridges , I was one of those journalists up in my hotel room , on the balcony , along with a lot of other journalists , because you could not physically breathe outside . 
They must have fired 2,000 cans of tear gas . 
Plus , the building next to me on fire . 
And I got a sense that night when the army rolled in . 
I did n't read it the same way everybody else did . 
I did n't think that , oh , this is the army with the people . 
I saw it more as , this is going to be a long stalemate , the army is here , it 's not really clear what their role is . 
And even now , today , we 're not rally sure how this is going to end , as I pointed out in my piece today . 
So it 's really -- ZACHARIA : I think we 're headed into a long battle here , yes . 
And where the pictures may not be quite as vital because the violence has subsided , at least for a moment . 
Let me get a break . 
We 'll continue our conversation in just a moment . 
KURTZ : And we 're continuing our conversation about the unfolding events in Egypt . 
Let me go back to Cairo and Christopher Dickey . 
Chris , it 's no secret that American media appetite for international coverage has shrunk over the years excepts in extraordinary situations like this . 
If the violence were to continue to subside , and we do n't have the dramatic pictures of protesters being -- you know , clashing with the pro-government agitators , and the story moves behind the scenes , negotiations , diplomacy , do you think coverage of this story within days will begin to fade a bit ? 
DICKEY : Oh , I think it 's already fading . 
I think you 've seen a lot of people leave . 
You know , the big anchors , they 're gone . 
The television coverage of not just the violence , the overall television coverage , has diminished considerably , and it will continue to do so . 
But the people who are in sort of quasi-leadership positions of the protest and of this movement , this democracy movement , they understand that perfectly well , and they 're looking for new ways to keep continuing the pressure on the government . 
And I think they are going to looking to the Americans to help them , but I think they also will have a lot of different tactics from boycotts and other kinds of measures that they can take , which wo n't be as mediagenic , but which may still help them achieve their goals . 
KURTZ : Frank Sesno , just because NBC 's Brian Williams and CBS ' Katie Couric and CNN 's Anderson Cooper have either left , or are in the process of leaving , does n't mean the coverage has to fade . 
But it seems to me that there was a narrative early on -- this was driven by Twitter , this was driven by Facebook -- and that Mubarak , somebody joked , will he be gone by the Super Bowl ? 
It does n't always work out quite so neatly , does it ? 
SESNO : It does n't work out quite so neatly . 
And the problem is , Howie , that we are utterly addicted to the picture . 
We are addicted to the narrative , to this great dramatic story . 
And when the great dramatic story of these millions of people in the streets suddenly fades , even though the story , what 's happening behind the scenes , is going to be more important , probably , to what happens to Egypt 's future , more important to the region , that 's going to require more and better and smarter coverage , not less . 
And we are in real danger here of missing the real story if everybody bails out of town -- not everybody , because this wo n't go away . 
We 'll still get the coverage , but will it get the attention that it needs ? 
And will we seize this , what needs to be a teachable moment for the world ? 
This a pivotal part of the planet , and what happens there matters to everybody . 
KURTZ : And Janine Zacharia , since you 're in Jerusalem , this is playing out very differently , is it not , in the Israeli press , which does n't welcome the toppling of Mubarak , which might be cheered in many corners in America ? 
Do Israeli commentators care less about the fact that he has been an autocrat for nearly three decades and looking at it more through the lens of Israeli security ? 
Clearly , the Israeli security issue definitely trumps . 
The narrative here is one of deep concern about what 's going to happen , especially the expectation that the Muslim Brotherhood will have some role in any new government . 
So you definitely see a lot of editorials along those lines . 
In terms of the news coverage , I would say though that even here , where this is really like an existential issue for Israel , the new coverage is starting to fade . 
Today 's front page does not have a story about Egypt . 
It 's trumped by a fire at IKEA that burned down yesterday , and the story about the appointment of the next chief of staff . 
So , yes , it 's certainly of concern to the leaders . 
But how long Israelis will sustain interest , I 'm not quite sure . 
And , of course , tonight the big story will be the Super Bowl here in the United States . 
And Bill O'Reilly interviewing President Obama . 
He 'll do a big number for that . 
Janine Zacharia in Jerusalem , Christopher Dickey in Cairo , Frank Sesno , here , thanks very much for joining us . 
We 're going to take a commercial break . 
Our coverage continues on the other side . 
HOWARD KURTZ , HOST : Welcome back . 
We 're going to go now to Spokane Washington and talk to Lawrence Pintak . 
He 's a former Middle East correspondent for CBS News , the founding dean of the Edward R. Murrow College of Communication at Washington State University . 
Lawrence , you 've written about Al Jazeera and its crucial role in the Egyptian events of the last two weeks . 
Why is that Arab satellite network , in your view , been so important ? 
LAWRENCE PINTAK , FMR . 
MIDDLE EAST CORRESPONDENT , CBS NEWS : You can draw a direct line from the birth of the Arab media revolution which started with Jazeera 's launch in '96 and this uprising . 
Social media has been very important for the activists to organize in this uprising . 
But the fact that people can watch this play out on television has been the game-changer . 
KURTZ : Why are we -- you lived in Cairo for some time . 
Leaving aside the pro-Mubarak thugs who were sent out there to rough up protesters and journalists , why are we not seeing from the crowds more hostility toward Americans , American journalists in general , and in particular ? 
Was that revealing at all ? 
PINTAK : Well , there 's never been hostility toward American journalists on the part of the average Egyptian . 
There has been hostility toward the media on the part of the government . 
And what American journalists are enduring now is something that Egyptian journalists and other Arab journalists have endured for a very long time . 
KURTZ : There was , as you know -- I was going to play the clip , we do n't have it right now , a reporter for Nile TV who was going -- I 'm sorry , we do have it . 
Let 's roll that . 
I want to ask you about it on the other side . 
She resigned from the state-run television . 
Here 's her explanation . 
SHAHIRA AMIN , FMR . 
CORRESPONDENT : We were just covering the pro-Mubarak rallies , which I thought was ridiculous . 
And I do n't want to be part of their propaganda machine . 
And I heard the chants of the protesters and decided to get off in Tahrir Square and join the protesters , because I 'm siding with the people , not the regime . 
KURTZ : That was Shahira Amin . 
And I 'm sorry , she was surprised that Egyptian state-run television is n't fair and balanced and that she was only covering one side of the story ? 
PINTAK : Well , I suspect she was n't surprised . 
But the fact is that Arab journalists have been moving forward in how they approach their job for a long time . 
And obviously , the holdouts are those working for the overtly government-owned stations and papers . 
But we did a survey of Arab journalists a couple of years ago , and we found that 75 percent of them said they saw it as their mission to create political and social change . 
And that was even true of those on government-owned papers and TV stations , but they were a little more constrained in what they could do . 
KURTZ : All right . 
Lawrence Pintak , I have to interrupt you . 
We 're going to toss now to Candy Crowley for some breaking news . 
She 's going to talk to the Egyptian prime minister by phone -- Candy . 
CANDY CROWLEY , HOST , `` STATE OF THE UNION '' : I 'm Candy Crowley in Washington . 
We do indeed have the chance to interview Ahmed Shafiq . 
He is the prime minister of Egypt , and we have him on the phone now . 
Mr. Prime Minister , can you hear me ? 
AHMED SHAFIQ , EGYPTIAN PRIME MINISTER : Now I hear you good . 
Thank you so much . 
CROWLEY : Let me ask you first -- there are reports that the state of emergency , which I believe has been in place in Egypt since 1981 , has been lifted . 
Can you confirm that or deny it ? 
SHAFIQ : May I ask you kindly to repeat your message in a more louder voice , please ? 
I was asking , has the state of emergency in Egypt been lifted ? 
SHAFIQ : If you are speaking now concerning the emergency now in Egypt , the emergency situation , I do n't say that the problem be over now . 
But the situation today is extremely better than yesterday , and the discussion between the old factions are going on . 
We spoke together today with all the ideas , reaction -LRB- ph -RRB- , in the fields . 
Hopefully tomorrow or after tomorrow we will get better raises now , because I think the ideas are nearer each other now than before . 
CROWLEY : Mr. Prime Minister , our reporters on the scene in Cairo tell us that while you negotiate about a democratic process , there are still arrests of local and international human rights activists , as well as journalists . 
Why are you arresting them ? 
SHAFIQ : I did n't understand you . 
I did n't understand you . 
CROWLEY : We are told that you are arresting human rights activists and journalists . 
I do n't hear well . 
I do n't hear well now . 
CROWLEY : Can you tell us about President Mubarak ? 
Do you expect him any time soon to resign ? 
SHAFIQ : If you are speaking about the situation with President Mubarak now , you know that President Mubarak will leave in September . 
And now the discussion is if he 's able to leave before or not . 
We insist here in Egypt to continue his period until the end of September , the month of September , because during this period we will be headed by the president , and a lot of points must be covered before he leaves . 
So I think we are in bad need for the president -LRB- INAUDIBLE -RRB- because that will be easier for us to fulfill the mission we are looking to get . 
CROWLEY : Will the demonstrators accept President Mubarak staying until September ? 
SHAFIQ : Because he 's -- the former period must be ended in September , and we have another six months to work with him , changing all the points , or working on changing all the points that we discussed with the majority of the ideas existing in the market here . 
And we think that this formal action must be respected , and no need to change this time as far as we are already changing all the needed points to be changed . 
CROWLEY : Mr. Mubarak will not leave until September . 
SHAFIQ : Yes , exactly , in September . 
CROWLEY : Let me ask you by arrests by the military police . 
Why are they arresting -- CROWLEY : About the detention of human rights activists . 
Why are you detaining them ? 
SHAFIQ : Oh , frankly speaking , there is some problem . 
It 's not intended at all , my dear . 
Frankly speaking , I insist to assure all the authorities here not to ban -LRB- ph -RRB- anyone or not to bother anyone doing his work -LRB- INAUDIBLE -RRB- . 
But during some periods as such the period we are passing now , we will not be -- it 's rather difficult to be sure 100 percent that this man or either man gets some bad behavior concerning the foreigners here , and he does n't understand their work or their job or something like that . 
So we have to excuse him for such action done with this group because this is not at all intended , my dear . 
And we insist to cover this point . 
And I repeat again , hopefully that will not be -- this phenomenon will not be existing after that . 
CROWLEY : We were told by our reporters today that you have arrested another Al Jazeera reporter from Al Jazeera English , as well as more human rights activists . 
And it 's the Egyptian military police . 
Do you have a way to get them to stop those arrests ? 
SHAFIQ : After our telephone now , after our call now , I will go directly to check this point . 
And if you permit me , I will give you an answer if there is something like that . 
But they are not allowed at all to do something like that . 
CROWLEY : We would appreciate a return call . 
That would be great . 
And finally , let me try one more time . 
CROWLEY : There are reports that the state of emergency that was imposed in Egypt in 1981 has been lifted . 
SHAFIQ : Frankly , I did n't understand your meaning now . 
Can you repeat it for me ? 
CROWLEY : A state of emergency declaration . 
Has that been lifted ? 
SHAFIQ : Do you want to say that keeping the case of emergency during the oldest period since 1981 until now , or something like that ? 
CROWLEY : Has the state of emergency been lifted ? 
SHAFIQ : I think if I understand perfectly your paragraph now , I think even this point is discussed now . 
And I do n't know . 
I ca n't give you my answer perfectly now because I ca n't get the meaning exactly that you mean . 
Thank you so much for taking the time . 
We look forward to talking to you again when you 've checked into these things . 
We totally appreciate your time . 
SHAFIQ : Please be sure that concerning our friends working here with us , I will assure now that nothing is banning the work , and excusing for any action like that against them . 
CROWLEY : Thank you so much . 
We look forward to that . 
I appreciate your time . 
Thank you , my dear . 
We 're going to take a quick break . 
When we come back , reliable sources . 
KURTZ : We pick up our coverage of the crisis in Egypt . 
Joining us now via an Internet connection , from Cambridge , England , is John Burns , chief foreign correspondent for `` The New York Times . '' 
And here in Washington , Abderrahim Foukara , Washington bureau chief for Al Jazeera English . 
Our thanks to Lawrence Pintak , who we spoke to earlier . 
Mr. Foukara , Egypt first banned Al Jazeera , as we discussed when you were on the program last week . 
Your Cairo office has been ransacked and burned . 
You 've had a couple of staff members detained and then released . 
Other news organizations as well . 
Do you feel like your network is being singled out by Egypt ? 
ABDERRAHIM FOUKARA , WASHINGTON BUREAU CHIEF , AL JAZEERA ENGLISH : Well , the feeling is that all networks and all news outlets have been targeted by these measures in Egypt . 
KURTZ : But only Al Jazeera has been banned . 
FOUKARA : But Al Jazeera in particular . 
And the reason is that Al Jazeera Arabic , which I work for , that 's obviously the most watched channel in Egypt and in the rest of the Arab region . 
So the coverage of Al Jazeera Arabic is of true consequence . 
But Al Jazeera English is of true consequence to the world at large , particularly here in the United States . 
So we have seen both channels actually harassed in different ways . 
KURTZ : You have managed to stay on the air most of the time , despite the fact that , officially , you 're not allowed to broadcast from Egypt . 
I mean , we have found all sorts of different ways to go around the ban . 
Both the Arabic and the English continue to operate from inside Egypt . 
Egypt continues to be the main story on both channels . 
KURTZ : John Burns , you reported for many years from Iraq , a very dangerous place for journalists . 
But the danger in Egypt is very different , is it not ? 
JOHN BURNS , CHIEF FOREIGN CORRESPONDENT , `` THE NEW YORK TIMES '' : Hello ? 
KURTZ : We seem to be having an audio problem . 
We 'll see if we can go back to John Burns . 
So I 'll pick up with you , Abderrahim . 
Fascinating , that the Web site of Al Jazeera English , the traffic has increased 2,500 percent since this crisis began . 
That is the only way that most Americans can get Al Jazeera coverage . 
You 're on in only a couple of markets across the United States . 
Frank Rich , writing in `` The New York Times '' today -- the columnist -- saying that , this is censorship , his word , by America 's corporate gatekeepers . 
He compares Al Jazeera to the Voice of America behind the Iron Curtain . 
Now , censorship happens to be a term used for government , but do you feel like there 's been a concerted effort to keep Al Jazeera English off of the American airwaves ? 
FOUKARA : Well , I mean , we 've had different things and different interpretations over the years since Al Jazeera English was launched a few years ago . 
But , look , what matters now is that this is a huge story . 
It 's a huge story not just for Egyptians or Arabs , it 's a huge story obviously for the United States as well . 
The fact that Al Jazeera does provide this coverage is food for thought , whether it 's a conspiracy against Al Jazeera , censorship , whatever it is , but it provides a service that in crucial times like this , Americans do need to have it to see what 's going on in a story that affects them directly . 
KURTZ : There are those who say -- are very critical of Al Jazeera , say that it 's anti-American , say that it 's anti-Israel . 
I know you 've heard these criticisms before , but that -- I mean , you know , to some of these cable operators , these big companies , you have been kind of radioactive . 
FOUKARA : Well , look , criticism , you 'll always be criticized for one thing or another . 
All news media are imperfect media in an imperfect world . 
Talking of the Israelis , it 's interesting that the Israelis have over the years sort of appreciated the coverage of Al Jazeera more , perhaps , than people in other parts of the world like the United States or Canada . 
But ultimately , when you have a big story like this , and when you have not just the public , but even the international community scratching their heads and saying , how come this has come about ? 
And you have a channel that has been focusing on this story not just for weeks , but for months , it tells you something . 
That regardless of its flaws , it does provide crucial coverage of a crucial story . 
KURTZ : But do its flaws include a point of view ? 
Or are you trying to be fair , even to Americans , even to Israelis ? 
Certainly , there 's an American appetite now for Al Jazeera English . 
But are you trying to be fair , or do you have a point of view ? 
FOUKARA : Well , the reporters , for example , do sometimes approach the story from different angles , and that creates a controversy for sure . 
But both Arabic and English have provided open platforms not just to governments in the Arab world , but governments in Israel , governments in the United States , governments in Canada , other parts of the world . 
Everybody who has a point of view and is willing to express it comes to express it . 
If they do n't want to express it , that 's their problem . 
KURTZ : Abderrahim Foukara , appreciate your stopping by this morning . 
My apologies to John Burns of `` The New York Times . '' 
We could see him , but we could n't hear him , which is sometimes the danger of relying on an Internet connection . 
Let me get a break . 
Sam Donaldson and John Fund join us from the Reagan Library in California in just a moment . 
KURTZ : Joining us now at the Reagan Library , in Simi Valley , California , Sam Donaldson , longtime ABC correspondent and former host of `` This Week '' ; and John Fund , columnist for `` The Wall Street Journal . '' 
Sam Donaldson , I want to briefly touch on Al Jazeera . 
I just interviewed their Washington bureau chief . 
You had some nice things to say about the network 's coverage . 
Bill O'Reilly took issue with that . 
He said , `` Al Jazeera makes a living blaming most problems in the Middle East on the USA . 
SAM DONALDSON , FMR . 
ABC CORRESPONDENT : Yes . 
Do n't tell all the people here at the Reagan Library , will you ? 
Keep it under your hat . 
You know , Al Jazeera , I thought , performed a service in fanning the flames in Egypt . 
But , hey , is that so bad ? 
If Al Jazeera brings information to people in the Arab world , it makes them think they should throw over their dictators , should we complain ? 
Now , Howie , Al Jazeera says things about us we do n't like , and some things that are not true . 
And I certainly do n't subscribe to that , except a news service of any kind has got to be able to say whatever it wants , otherwise it 's a contradiction in terms . 
KURTZ : All right . 
Let me let John Fund say whatever he wants right now . 
JOHN FUND , COLUMNIST , `` THE WALL STREET JOURNAL '' : Well , I have toured Al Jazeera 's headquarters in Qatar , and I think they have come a long way . 
I remember back in 2003 and 2004 , they had one of their correspondents who was a paid spy for Saddam Hussein . 
I think they 've cleaned up their act . 
I think they 're providing better information . 
And frankly , the Arab street is never going to trust Western media . 
Al Jazeera is about as good as we 're going to get in terms of objective analysis for the Arab world , and I 'm glad that it 's there . 
KURTZ : Almost a qualifying endorsement from John Fund . 
Let me play for you a bit of Glenn Beck from Fox News Channel , getting a lot of attention this week for things he is saying about the situation in Egypt . 
We 'll ask you a question on the other side . 
GLENN BECK , FOX NEWS : Please , if you take anything away from this show , please be prepared . 
Look at Egypt right now . 
These were people that were not prepared . 
Tomorrow , the radicals here in America that are operating as Marxists and communists , that are in support of this -- but the Muslim Brotherhood is n't just operating overseas . 
We 're not done with them yet . 
We showed you in their own words that their goals include the transformation of America into an Islamic state , the destruction of the Western world . 
KURTZ : Sam , now , Glenn Beck has got a following . 
He 's got a rather unique style . 
He can say whatever he wants . 
But is there a point when he tries to tie the American left wing to the caliphate that 's going to take over the Middle East , where other commentators need to say , hey , this is pretty out there ? 
DONALDSON : You should have heard what Father Coughlin -- and I 've heard the radio tapes in the '30s -- call Franklin Roosevelt . 
We could n't use it on the air . 
It 's too bad when people want to make their case by just calling names . 
But I say to people , hey , if I 'm arguing with you , and you ca n't beat my argument with another argument , but you just to have call me a name , I win . 
So I would n't pay that much attention to him . 
It 's nonsense to think that we are going to have an Islamic state here . 
I mean , not in the lifetime of my great-great-grandchildren . 
I do n't know what the future is going to hold after that , but the diverse views in this country , I think , are a good thing . 
KURTZ : John Fund , no less a conservative than Bill Kristol of `` The Weekly Standard , '' writing the other day that when Beck uses this kind of language , he sounds like the John Birch Society and he marginalizes himself . 
Do you agree with that , or would you disagree ? 
FUND : Look , Glenn Beck is a commentator . 
And I think that part of his analysis is accurate . 
Look , we have to remember that the Iranian regime , when it collapsed , was going to be a democracy . 
Then it was hijacked by Islamic extremists , and we are still dealing with them 30 years later and their nuclear weapons . 
And obviously Europe has a lot more to worry about . 
You know , by 2030 , nine percent of Europe is going to be Muslim . 
But to carry that and take it into apocalyptic conspiracy terms about America becoming an Islamic state , that goes too far . 
And I think if Glenn Beck had to do it over again , he might rethink that . 
KURTZ : All right . 
I 'm coming up on a break . 
Let me get a 30 - second answer from each of you . 
Do you think that the media coverage has engaged in the traditional blame game toward President Obama and his handling of the Egyptian situation ? 
It seemed like that might be happening early on . 
Lately , it seems like the situation has kind of gotten so far out of any other country 's influence , that maybe there is less of that . 
John Fund , we 'll start with you . 
FUND : I think there 's finally some humility not only in American politics regarding Egypt , but also the American media . 
The situation is complicated enough , the cultures are different enough . 
I think we 're holding back , and I think that 's a good thing . 
Humility , good thing . 
DONALDSON : I think the media really swings with the story . 
Media really swings with the story . 
And often we 're wrong , and sometimes the story is messy , as it is now , and we do n't know what 's happening . 
I just -- stick to it . 
There is sometimes a tendency to think that a president can control almost anything . 
And right now that 's not the case . 
Got to get that break . 
And when we come back , we 'll talk about the reason that you folks are there , the 100th anniversary of Ronald Reagan 's birth . 
KURTZ : Ronald Reagan 's 100th birthday would have been today . 
The press was far more critical of the 40th president when he was in the White House than is the case today . 
Just look at how he dealt with some of those pesky reporters . 
DONALDSON : In talking about the continuing recession tonight , you have blamed mistakes for the past and you have blamed the Congress . 
Does any of the blame belong to you ? 
RONALD REAGAN , PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES : Yes , because for many years I was a Democrat . 
KURTZ : Sam Donaldson , he used humor there to slap away your question . 
And that was not unlike Ronald Reagan , was it ? 
DONALDSON : That 's right . 
That was game , set , match . 
We all sat down and laughed . 
He would turn things around with one line . 
He went on to explain what he meant on that , but the president said whatever he -- came into his mind . 
And often , his staff would run round after a news conference and say , `` Well , what the president meant to say was '' -- you understand it was just a hypothetical case . 
Reagan had very little guile that I saw . 
He would say what he thought the case was . 
And I 've maintained , John , that if you put a polygraph to anything he said , he would pass . 
He believed what he said . 
KURTZ : At the time , John Fund , the press often depicted President Reagan as kind of uninformed , detached , somewhat insensitive toward the poor . 
Do you think there has been a marked correction since his death in that , in effect , journalists have given him more credit for an essential -LRB- ph -RRB- presidency than was the case at the time ? 
FUND : Oh , sure . 
We now have his diaries and we now have his correspondence . 
So we know he was a pretty sophisticated thinker and he read a lot . 
We also know that the media , I think , has stepped back and realized that Reagan was sometimes playing a game with them . 
Reagan loved being underestimated , because in being underestimated , he was able to accomplish a lot more . 
And he loved the fact that people thought of him as just an actor . 
Actually , what he told David Brinkley just before he left office was fascinating . 
Brinkley asked him , `` How in the world could you do this job , Mr. President , if you have been an actor all these years ? '' 
And Reagan said , `` I 've often thought about that . 
How in the world could I do this job if I had n't been an actor ? '' 
KURTZ : All right . 
Well , with that , we 're going to have to bring the curtain down on John Fund and Sam Donaldson . 
And CNN will have live coverage of the Reagan centennial celebration starting this afternoon . 
That 's at 2:00 p.m. Eastern . 
That 's it for RELIABLE SOURCES . 
We 're going to go over now to `` STATE OF THE UNION '' with Candy Crowley . 
Thank you for watching . 
Glad we were able to bring you some breaking news , the interview with the Egyptian prime minister , during this hour . 
And we 'll be on this story next week and probably for some weeks to come , whether it stays on television or not . 
That is to say , whether the pictures , the dramatic pictures that we have seen from Tahrir Square , whether they fade or not . 
It 's important for journalists to stay on this story . 
Sometimes we have been accused of not sufficiently covering stories when they did n't have dramatic pictures . 
I think that perhaps will not be the case this time . 
`` STATE OF THE UNION '' with Candy Crowley begins right now . 
