By the CNN Wire Staff Anti-Mubarak rally in New York Demonstrations are held in Atlanta , New York , London , Tokyo , among other cities In Washington , protesters observe a moment of silence to honor those who have died They are calling for Mubarak to step down now -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Egyptians and activists around the world took to the streets Saturday demanding the immediate resignation of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak . 
Demonstrations were held in Atlanta , Los Angeles , Paris , New York , London , Tokyo and in the West Bank city of Ramallah . 
In Washington , protesters marched from the Egyptian Embassy to the White House , carrying posters and chanting . 
They observed a moment of silence for the people who have lost their lives since the protests in Egypt began late last month . 
`` Mubarak staying in Egypt is not going to be beneficial for the security of Egypt . 
It 's just going to fuel most protests in the streets , '' said Ahmed Fathi , head of the Alliance of Egyptian-Americans , who attended the New York protest . 
He said Mubarak is simply taking `` cosmetic actions '' and refusing real change . 
On day 12 of the unfolding unrest , apparent fissures in Egypt 's regime surfaced as key members of the embattled ruling party , including Mubarak 's once heir-apparent son , gave up their party leadership posts and the vice president began talks with opposition leaders . 
It was a strong gesture . 
But for many of the protesters in Egypt , and for those who support them elsewhere , it was not enough . 
In Tokyo , more than 200 demonstrators marched through the streets for about two hours , chanting and waving flags . 
One protester held a sign that read : `` Freedom is a demand for all nations . '' 
In Atlanta , activists rallied at a downtown street corner . 
They asked motorists to honk in their support and many cars blared as they sped past . 
In New York , demonstrators met outside the U.N. building in the freezing rain for the second weekend in a row . 
They chanted , `` Hey , hey , Ho , ho -- Mubarak must go ! '' 
and carried signs that read , `` Free Egypt , Jail Mubarak . '' 
Protesters in the West Bank city of Ramallah were forcibly disbanded when a few dozen men in plain clothes disrupted their demonstration . 
The afternoon rally against Mubarak stretched about three small city blocks . 
In London , activists rallied outside the Egyptian Embassy , while in Paris , CNN iReporters said that protesters marched in the streets . 
One demonstrator carried a sign that read , `` Tunisia , Egypt . 
Long live the revolution ! '' 
Meanwhile , protesters in Los Angeles rallied outside the Federal Building on the west side of the city . 
Some held a large banner that read , `` End U.S. Aid to the Mubarak Regime ! '' 
-- an idea echoed by many in attendance . 
`` I want democracy in Egypt . 
And I want my president to stop sending my tax dollars supporting a dictator over there , '' said demonstrator Dan Henrickson . 
CNN 's Susan Candiotti contributed to this report . 
