2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Standing at midfield at Texas ' Cowboys Stadium , the singer-actress mixed a previously sung clause with the one she was supposed to be on . 
Here 's what she sang , with the error in bold : `` O say can you see , by the dawn s early light , What so proudly we hail d at the twilight s last gleaming , Whose broad stripes and bright stars through the perilous fight What so proudly we watched at the twilight s last -LRB- unintelligible -RRB- . 
That fourth line was supposed to be : `` O'er the ramparts we watch 'd were so gallantly streaming . '' 
In a statement released by her publicist , Aguilera explained what happened : `` I got so lost in the moment of the song that I lost my place , '' the singer said . 
`` I can only hope that everyone could feel my love for this country and that the true spirit of its anthem still came through . '' 
Aguilera is n't the first person to have trouble with the song , as Time magazine 's `` Top 10 Worst National-Anthem Renditions '' will remind us . 
The list includes Michael Bolton 's effort at a 2003 playoff baseball game in Boston 's Fenway Park , where he had to pause midsong and check some notes before correctly getting through the same line that troubled Aguilera . 
Some signs of a slow return to normalcy could be seen Sunday in parts of Cairo , with shops reopening , traffic increasing and some banks opening for the first time since January 27 . 
The nation 's central bank , however , has restricted the amount of money that individuals can withdraw . 
The Egyptian stock market also could reopen this week , following days of closure because of the uprising . 
Work has also begun on restoring Egyptian artifacts damaged during the protests . 
We 'll also keep an eye this week on negotiations between Mubarak 's regime and opposition groups . 
On Sunday , Vice President Omar Suleiman offered concessions , including the future end to the military emergency law that has been in place since Mubarak came to power in 1981 , according to state-run TV . 
The two sides discussed , according to state-run TV , plans to form committees that would oversee changes aimed at creating a representative government . 
Extradition hearing for WikiLeaks founder set to begin WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange is due to appear in a London court on Monday for the start of what is expected to be a two-day extradition hearing . 
Assange , a 39-year-old Australian , is wanted in Sweden for questioning about allegations that he sexually assaulted two women in Stockholm last summer . 
Assange has denied the allegations and is fighting extradition . 
FARC to release first of five hostages Colombian rebels say they will release on Wednesday the first of five Colombian hostages they plan to free . 
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia , or FARC , has said it will release Marcos Vaquero , a mayor in Colombia , to the Red Cross . 
In December , the rebels announced plans to release the five hostages - a police major , two military service members and two municipal politicians - as a humanitarian gesture . 
North Korea , South Korea to hold first talks since November attack North Korea and South Korea are scheduled to hold working-level military discussions on Tuesday - the first inter-Korean talks since North Korean forces shelled South Korea 's Yeonpyeong Island , killing two South Korean marines and two civilians . 
North Korea said the strike was in response to the South 's navy firing into Northern waters . 
South Korea said last month that the South will demand in Tuesday 's talks that Pyongyang take responsibility for last year 's military actions , and that higher-level military talks will be held only if the North promises to refrain from further provocations . 
Obama to address group that opposed his Wall Street , health care efforts U.S. President Barack Obama on Monday is scheduled to speak in front of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , which opposed his push for Wall Street and health care reforms and , in November 's midterm elections , worked to defeat many Democrats who had backed his programs . 
The visit to the chamber is seen as part of Obama 's efforts to build bridges with the business community . 
Also in Washington , the annual Conservative Political Action Conference -- a place to be for Republican presidential hopefuls -- runs from Thursday to Saturday . 
Controversy is in the air , with some social conservative groups sitting out to protest the inclusion of a pro-gay Republican group . 
Many likely candidates for the 2012 GOP presidential nomination will be there , including Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour , Indiana Gov. Mitch Daniels , former House Speaker Newt Gingrich , former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty , former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney , former Sen. Rick Santorum , Sen. John Thune and Rep. Michele Bachmann . 
The conference ends with a straw poll asking attendees who they support for president . 
Retrial for Dutch politician accused of inciting hatred against Muslims A retrial of a right-wing Dutch politician accused of inciting hatred against Muslims is set to begin in Amsterdam on Monday . 
Geert Wilders is on trial in large part because of a controversial film he made about Islam . 
The film , `` Fitna , '' which he released online in March 2008 , features images of terrorist acts superimposed over verses from the Quran in an apparent attempt to paint Islam as a threat to Western society . 
Comments he made in a variety of media between 2006 and 2008 also form part of the case against him . 
Wilders has said he has done nothing wrong . 
His first trial was halted when three judges were dismissed for possible bias . 
Which Super Bowl commercials did well ? 
Super Bowl ads are an event to themselves . 
Check with CNN.com for a recap of the ads and a look at what viewers and critics thought of them . 
Also , check out Entertainment Weekly 's choices for best all-time Super Bowl ads and CNNMoney.com 's sneak peak of this year 's ads . 
-LRB- Update 1:48 a.m. Cairo , 6:48 p.m. ET -RRB- U.S. President Barack Obama downplays the prospect of the Muslim Brotherhood , which has voiced opposition to the United States , ascending to power in Egypt once its president , Hosni Mubarak , leaves office . 
`` They do n't have majority support in Egypt , but they are well-organized , '' Obama tells Fox News ' Bill O'Reilly on Sunday . 
-LRB- Update 1:25 a.m. Cairo , 6:25 p.m. ET -RRB- Former ABC News journalist Sam Donaldson on Sunday stood by recent compliments he gave to Al-Jazeera regarding its coverage of the Egypt protests , telling CNN 's Howard Kurtz that the network did `` a service in fanning the flames in Egypt . '' 
-LRB- Update 12:37 a.m. Cairo , 5:35 p.m. ET -RRB- The U.S. State Department issues an updated travel warning for Egypt , continuing to recommend U.S. citizens make every effort to leave the North African country . 
It also adds the U.S. government is not planning additional charter trips . 
Read the full advisory here . 
-LRB- Update 12:20 a.m. Cairo , 5:20 p.m. ET -RRB- A U.S. State Department release on Sunday says U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton spoke Saturday night with Egyptian Prime Minister Ahmed Shafiq . 
During that meeting , Clinton stressed that a `` broad cross-section of political actors and civil society '' should be part of the government 's transformation process . 
-LRB- Update 12:14 a.m. Cairo , 5:14 p.m. ET -RRB- State-run Nile TV reports that Prime Minister Ahmad Shafiq called the network to announce that Google executive Wael Ghonim , missing for more than a week , will be released Monday . 
-LRB- Update 8 p.m. Cairo , 1 p.m. ET -RRB- Multiple bursts of automatic gunfire - apparently warning shots - could be heard in Tahrir Square near the Egyptian Museum . 
The incident marked an escalation of tempers between the military and protesters . 
After the army fired the warning shots , hundreds of protesters surrounded the military positions in the square , CNN 's Ivan Watson reported . 
-LRB- Update 6:58 p.m. Cairo , 11:58 a.m. ET -RRB- Egyptian Prime Minister Ahmed Shafiq said authorities have been told `` not to bother '' human rights activists and journalists working at anti-government protests . 
If there have been such problems , they are `` not intended , '' Shafiq told CNN 's Candy Crowley Sunday . 
Arrests of journalists and human rights activists `` are not allowed at all , '' he said . 
-LRB- Update 5:40 p.m. Cairo , 10:37 a.m. ET -RRB- Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said the United States can not `` micromanage the process '' in Egypt , but that the Obama administration needs to make its goals clear . 
`` Arriving at a Democratic solution is important , which is in fact inclusive , Democratic , peaceful and rapid , '' Albright said Sunday on CNN 's `` State of the Union . '' 
-LRB- Update 5:10 p.m. Cairo , 10:07 a.m. ET -RRB- Egyptian opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei said that the situation in Egypt remains in a standoff as long as President Hosni Mubarak refuses to leave . 
`` I hope somebody will send a message , I do n't know in which way , to President Mubarak that for the sake of the country , for his own dignity , to defuse this crisis , he better step down , '' ElBaradei told CNN 's `` Fareed Zakaria GPS . '' 
Watch Zakaria 's take on whether Egypt is a revolution or a revolt . 
`` Everybody is ready to give him the dignified out he is entitled to as a former president of Egypt , '' ElBaradei told Zakaria . 
-- During his CNN interview Sunday , ElBaradei also said he would refuse to meet with the Egyptan government unless Mubarak steps down . 
Other oppositions groups , including the Muslim Brotherhood , have meet with the government . 
ElBaradei said the Egyptian people are getting confusing messages about whether Mubarak should leave office , referring to a U.S. envoy 's comments that Mubarak must stay in place during a transition of power and the Obama administration saying he should leave soon . 
-LRB- Update 3:09 p.m. Cairo , 8:09 a.m. ET -RRB- Some banks in Egypt have opened and it 's now the start of the work week in Egypt . 
Banks had been closed for days during protests . 
Meanwhile , the mood in Tahrir Square , the site of pro-Hosni Mubarak and anti-Hosni Mubarak clashes last week , was festive and peaceful as Christians and Muslims held hands and sang . 
The gathering appears to be strong as people continue to push for Mubarak to leave office . 
-LRB- Update 11:46 a.m. Cairo , 4:46 a.m. ET -RRB- It is a `` huge mistake '' for Egypt to shut down the internet or use violence against protesters , British Foreign Secretary William Hague said Sunday . 
Some banks in Egypt were open Sunday , according to the country 's minister of finance . 
Some banks opened as early as 8:30 a.m. local time . 
Banks have been closed in recent days amid anti-government protests . 
-LRB- Update 10:00 a.m. in Cairo , 3:00 a.m. ET -RRB- Egyptian Coptic Christians are expected to gather at Tahrir square to pray for those who have lost their lives since the protests started . 
Muslim protesters said they will form a ring around the Christians to protect them during the service . 
The Muslim Brotherhood said it will meet with the country 's vice president , days after the group said it would not negotiate until President Hosni Mubarak leaves office . 
Opposition activists formed a human chain outside one of the entrances to Cairo 's Tahrir Square on Saturday to prevent two Egyptian military tanks from crossing through barricades into what has effectively become an anti-Mubarak enclave . 
The death toll from the violent clashes in Cairo 's Tahrir Square has reached 11 , Egypt 's Health Ministry has said . 
Nearly 1,000 people have been injured in clashes in Tahrir Square . 
The U.S. Embassy in Egypt issued a statement indicating that several embassy vehicles were stolen in Cairo on January 28 . 
The statement was in response to an online video that showed a white diplomatic van running into anti-government protesters near Tahrir Square . 
Members of the general secretariat of Egypt 's National Democratic Party submitted their resignations , Egyptian state television reported . 
Among those submitting their resignations from leadership positions in Egypt 's National Democratic Party were Gamal Mubarak , Mubarak 's son , state television reported . 
The head of the Egyptian stock market told the nation 's official news agency that it has canceled a decision to reopen the stock market on Monday . 
The markets remain closed for now . 
A student at Ohio 's Youngstown State University was killed and 11 others , including six students , were wounded in an off-campus shooting Sunday morning , university officials said . 
No further details were immediately available about the shooting in the northeast Ohio city , and the condition of the wounded was not known . 
University spokesman Ron Cole said there was no threat to the campus , but campus police have stepped up their presence `` as a precaution . '' 
This story is developing . 
Formula One driver Robert Kubica crashed during a race in Italy . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
