Transmission details in the Network Radio Programme Information 7-day version are not updated after publication . 
For updates , please see individual day pages . 
Skip to a day of the week : BBC Radio 2 Live In Blackpool -- Dermot O'Leary is joined by two great female icons : housewife , talk show host , Tony Award-winner and Australian megastar Dame Edna Everage ; and charismatic singer from Arkansas Beth Ditto , whose band , Gossip , broke into the mainstream with 2006 release Standing In The Way Of Control . 
Gossip perform a live session for the show , which also includes four live tracks from English Indie rock band Athlete , who are joining Dermot , live , from the North Pier in Blackpool to celebrate the switch-on of the 2009 illuminations . 
Going Out With Alan Carr Former Blackpool resident Alan Carr One-time Blackpool resident Alan Carr broadcasts live as part of BBC Radio 2 's celebration of the 2009 illuminations . 
He says : `` I ca n't wait for my little city break up there in the Vegas of the north . 
I 'll be turning you all on , Friday night , then cruising up and down the esplanade , dressed as a sailor , in a tram decked out as a boat , for my Radio 2 show on Saturday night . 
Yes , only in Blackpool ! '' 
Alan will be joined aboard the tram by his usual BBC Radio 2 co-host , Emma Forbes , as they make some special pit-stops at a selection of famous Blackpool landmarks . 
Presenters\/Alan Carr and Emma Forbes , Producer\/Mark Hill Radio 2 Live In Blackpool Kate Thornton presents a special concert with live performances from Will Young , Mika , Daniel Merriweather , Pixie Lott and Newton Faulkner at Blackpool 's Empress Ballroom as BBC Radio 2 celebrates the switching on of the world-famous illuminations . 
The Nation 's Playlist At Blackpool Following his Glastonbury Festival compilation , Danny Wallace heads to Blackpool to find out what music is providing the playlist to the 2009 illuminations . 
Danny mingles with the locals and holiday-makers to find out what people are listening to and why . 
Bob Harris is joined by English singer-songwriter Sarah Jane Morris . 
Famed for her association with pop duo The Communards in the mid-Eighties and celebrating her 50th birthday this year , Sarah Jane has just finished a one woman show at the Edinburgh Festival , she has also released her 11th album , written with Dominic Miller and Martyn Barker . 
Sarah Jane and Dominic join Bob for his After Midnight acoustic session this week . 
Purcell And Dryden -- A Professional Friendship Alyn Shipton 's exploration of Dryden and Purcell 's collaboration on semi-opera King Arthur brings to life the world of Restoration theater . 
People came in and out for single acts of an opera , jostled in the stalls , and swapped seats in boxes . 
More privileged members of society claimed seats on the stage , where they could indulge in repartee with the cast -- a far cry from the hallowed atmosphere in which many modern performances of this opera take place . 
Contributor and Purcell biographer Jonathan Keates brings to life the `` olfactory cocktail '' that would assail the nostrils in a 17th-century playhouse . 
Meanwhile , Alyn taps into the latest scholarship about the genesis of this opera , often regarded as the first professional collaboration between librettist and composer . 
Dryden 's biographer , James Wynn , traces the origins of the collaboration between the two men in the preface to Dioclesian , which was signed by Purcell but written by Dryden , and explains that 17th-century authorship was a bit like the teams of writers on a present-day sitcom . 
In passing , the program considers the origin of the Knights of the Garter , the redecoration of Windsor Castle and the messy politics of Jacobites supporting the ousted James II versus William III 's Orange and Protestant sympathies . 
This provides the background to such remarkable musical treats as Purcell and Dryden 's Chorus Of Cold People , the paeon of praise to St George , and the best-known setting in the opera , `` Fairest Isle '' . 
With naked sylphs , ancient British battles and a drinking song worthy of the terraces at an England game , the program sheds new light on this most fascinating of operas . 
Andrew Carwood , regular guest conductor with the BBC Singers , presents an Early Music Show on the life and works of Eustache du Caurroy . 
Little is known about du Caurroy 's life , although it is thought that he served the French Royal court , under the reign of Charles IX , as a singer in the Royal Chapel . 
Once King Heny III came to the throne , du Caurroy was already a firm fixture in the royal music service , and he stayed there for the remainder of his career . 
By the end of the 16th century , he had gained wide recognition and esteem as a composer and teacher , and -- towards the end of his life -- accumulated several honors and benefices , including canonships in Dijon , Orleans , Bourg and Passy . 
The philosopher Marin Mersenne wrote of him : `` Du Caurroy reigns supreme for the great harmoniousness of his composition and his rich counterpoint ... all the composers of France hold him to be their master . '' 
Fine words for a composer who , it seems , is largely neglected today . 
BBC Radio 3 's New Generation Artists scheme exists to provide concert and recording opportunities for some of the finest young talent on the international music scene . 
This year , it celebrates 10 years of helping to establish and support the careers of stars such as Paul Lewis , the Belcea Quartet , Alison Balsom and Alice Coote . 
Throughout this summer 's BBC Proms season , BBC Radio 3 is broadcasting studio and concert performances by current members of the scheme , continuing tonight with the Pavel Haas Quartet , who perform the first quartet of their composer namesake . 
Also , Austrian mezzo-soprano Daniela Lehner performs Schumann 's Maria Stuart Songs -- settings of poetry supposedly written by the ill-fated Mary Queen of Scots during her incarceration . 
The treatment of love and death reflected Schumann 's own depression and illness at the time of writing this , his final song cycle . 
Argentinian pianist Ingrid Fliter performs Chopin 's Sonata No. 3 in B minor to round off this evening 's selection . 
Janek 's opera , The Cunning Little Vixen , was based on a newspaper comic-strip adventure , a story of forest-dwellers , both animal and human , and nature 's ever-turning circle of life and death . 
Some of Janek 's most engaging and luminous music was selected by Czech conductor Vaclav Talich and re-orchestrated to form this suite performed at the Royal Albert Hall by the BBC National Orchestra of Wales . 
Composer John McCabe celebrates his 70th birthday this year , and the Proms mark it with a performance of his Horn Concerto , commissioned by the BBC two years ago and performed by David Pyatt . 
Dvo k wrote his Ninth Symphony during a three-year stay in New York during the 1890s . 
He wrote the title , From The New World , himself , on the front page of his score . 
And , though Dvo k stopped short of using any actual American melodies , it is often said that spiritual song Swing Low , Sweet Chariot appears tantalisingly close to the flute in the first movement . 
Rainer Hersch , stand-up comedian and classical music specialist , remembers the brilliant and eccentric Gerard Hoffnung 's contribution to the comic side of classical music . 
Hoffnung , who died 50 years ago this month , was a cartoonist and wit whose mocking of the solemn rituals of classical music created a sensation in the Fifties . 
At a time when the symphony concert was , for the most part , a matter of great seriousness for music lovers , Gerard Hoffnung adored to see the funny side of those formalities . 
His famous cartoons took the instruments of the orchestra -- and the eccentricities of the people who played them -- and sent them up mercilessly . 
In 1956 , Hoffnung had the idea of translating the cartoons into real life . 
With a combination of realisations of his weird cartoon instruments and suitably eccentric compositions to showcase them , the first Hoffnung Music Festival took place at the Royal Festival Hall in London . 
Two further concerts followed -- around the time of Hoffnung 's untimely death at the age of 34 in 1959 . 
Later , the concerts were repeated for audiences around the world . 
For this program , Rainer Hersch delves into the BBC archives to discover Hoffnung and those who were part of those first concerts . 
On London 's South Bank , he encounters two musicians who had to grapple with these memorable , yet oddball , orchestral occasions . 
In Search Of The Holy Quail Three , like-minded , erudite men of the music world take a trip to Shetland , occasional home of the quail . 
The intrepid quail explorers are : Guy Garvey of Elbow ; BBC 6 Music presenter Martin Noble ; and BBC 6 Music presenter and ex-Fall member Marc Riley . 
The trio explore the rugged Shetland terrain and go in search of all manner of ornithological wonderment . 
The program follows the three rock-star twitchers on a journey from the city smoke all the way to Sumburgh Head on the southern tip of Shetland Mainland , to a traditional Shetland music session in a Lerwick pub and to Mousa Broch , one of the world 's largest Storm Petrel breeding colonies . 
Guillemots , arctic skuas and puffins are abundant , but can they find the elusive quail ? 
As there are no more than four seen in the Shetlands during a typical season , the chances of spotting one are slim . 
Presenters\/Guy Garvey , Martin Noble and Marc Riley , Producer\/John Leonard Peter Jukes 's play is a contemporary and offbeat thriller that takes listeners deep into the underworld of West London -- and beyond . 
Eliot is stuck in a rut . 
He 's a pizza delivery boy who is out of his depth with local loan sharks . 
When his friend Ron , a father figure and local drug don , is hospitalised with a critical heart condition , his parting gift to Eliot is his old mobile phone . 
`` Just wait for it to ring , '' he tells Eliot . 
And so it begins . 
Roy 's phone is a route to the big time . 
It thrusts Eliot into an underworld which is sometimes glamorous , often dangerous and always unexpected . 
The phone leads Eliot to an old flame , a new girlfriend , and eventually to a drop-off in Southern Spain . 
But the phone has also been bugged by the police and the drop-off is a set up . 
Only time will tell whether Eliot will walk away with the money , his freedom -- or even his life . 
The cast stars Freddy White as Eliot , Jemima Rooper as undercover cop Kathleen , Jimmy Akingbola as dodgy cabby Sparky and Richard Ridings as Roy . 
Peter Jukes is an established television writer , having penned such successful crime series as Sea Of Souls , In Deep , The Inspector Linley Mysteries and Waking The Dead . 
His recent BBC Radio 4 credits include Slavery , The Making Of , Soul Motel and Bad Faith . 
Presenter Robert Giddings explores the confrontation between creativity and fascism through the decisions made by five conductors . 
A famous photograph of a celebratory banquet at the Berlin Festival in the summer of 1929 shows a group of internationally distinguished conductors -- Bruno Walter , Arturo Toscanini , Otto Klemperer , Erich Kleiber and Wilhelm Furtwangler . 
Berlin in the Twenties had been a vibrant cultural and scientific European center and attracted world-class conductors who premired some of the most avant garde productions in Europe . 
However , as reactionary forces began more organised protests , particularly against opera and theater , tensions around artistic freedom of expression became heightened . 
The Berlin Festival of 1929 was a dazzling demonstration of the end of an epoch : not only did it feature German maestros Klemperer , Walter , Kleiber and Furtwangler , but it also attracted the entire company of La Scala from Milan under Toscanini . 
All five conductors were headstrong and often at loggerheads with administrators and fellow musicians . 
They all reacted strongly against totalitarianism and , in the Thirties , they found themselves in conflict with European fascism . 
Four of them looked elsewhere for the artistic freedom denied them by totalitarianism . 
However , Furtwangler stayed on in Nazi Germany , prompting questions about his political loyalties that still divide musicians , critics and fans today . 
Robert Giddings tells the stories of these five conductors through BBC archive recordings , including interviews with : Lotte Lehman ; Wagner 's daughter , Friedland ; Sir Adrian Boult ; George Solti ; and other significant figures in the European post-war music world . 
Danny Baker returns to Saturdays on BBC Radio 5 Live Danny Baker returns to Saturdays on BBC Radio 5 Live with a new program providing the perfect warm-up to a day of live sport . 
The show features listener stories , comedy banter , fans on the road , interactive games , special guests and an examination of the issues that occupy supporters ' minds ahead of the weekend action . 
Danny brings his unique brand of comedy to Saturday mornings , with the creative assistance of the UK 's legion of traveling fans and armchair supporters . 
11.00am-12 .00 noon BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Colin Murray returns with a new season of the `` points for punditry '' panel show . 
Colin is judge and jury as a panel of special guests fight it out over the week 's big sporting stories . 
12.00noon-9 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Mark Pougatch is live from Wembley ahead of England 's friendly international and the day 's Home Nations World Cup 2010 qualifying matches . 
There are also reports from the US open tennis in New York and the opening day of rugby union 's Premiership . 
At 3pm , there 's live commentary of the World Cup Group 9 qualifying match between Scotland and Macedonia , live , from Hampden Park with John Murray , Alistair Bruce-Ball and Pat Nevin . 
From 5.30 pm , Mike Ingham , Alan Green , Graham Taylor and Chris Waddle are live from Wembley with commentary of England versus Slovenia . 
At 7.30 pm , there 's live commentary of Poland versus Northern Ireland in the Group 3 World Cup 2010 qualifying match with Ian Brown , Simon Brotherton and Gerry Taggart . 
John Dryden , director of The Day That Lehman Died On 15 September 2008 , Lehman Brothers , one of the oldest and largest investment banks in the world , with its headquarters in New York , filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection . 
It was the largest bankruptcy filed in US history and sent the already unstable global financial markets into an uncontrollable tailspin . 
This radio drama is a fictionalised account of events over the weekend prior to the bank 's demise . 
On Friday evening , Timothy Geithner , president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York , summoned 30 of the most powerful bankers on Wall Street to discuss the future of Lehman . 
It was put to the bankers that there would be no bail out from the US Treasury for the bank and that they themselves would need to devise a rescue plan , before the stock exchange opened on Monday morning . 
Under extreme pressure , the bankers argued and negotiated , all too aware that Lehman was not the only bank of its kind in trouble . 
This drama looks at how the critical decision was made to let Lehman die . 
Written by award-winning writer Matthew Solon , the play is directed by John Dryden . 
The drama was recorded , on location , in and around Wall Street . 
The Day That Lehman Died is part of Aftershock -- a new season of programs broadcast in September on the BBC 's International News Services -- BBC World Service , BBC World News and BBC.com -- investigating the impact of the global recession . 
The Surgery On Radio 1 -- Coming Out Special On Sunday 6 September BBC Switch 's flagship social awareness show , The Surgery on BBC Radio 1 is tackling the subject of sexuality in a special two-hour Coming Out Special . 
The Surgery presenter Aled Haydn Jones will be joined in the studio by resident psychotherapist Dr Aaron Ballick , taking emails , texts and calls from listeners seeking guidance and support on all aspects of coming out -- from how to tackle telling friends and family through to sexual health issues . 
Aled says : `` Coming out is the hardest step that a gay person goes through and it can feel very lonely and daunting . 
I hope that , by hearing advice from Dr Aaron and sharing other listeners ' experiences , we can help '' . 
Presenter\/Aled Haydn Jones , Producer\/Philippa Aylott At the start of a new school year , Aled Jones says Good Morning Sunday to author Gervase Phinn , a former school teacher and inspector of schools , who now writes books and performs his one-man show about the many humorous things that children get up to in their schooldays . 
Aled is also joined by Patrick Hawes , composer of a new setting of Song Of Songs , who discusses the week 's news from a faith and ethics perspective and delivers the program 's Moment Of Reflection . 
Elaine Paige , who celebrates the fifth anniversary of her BBC Radio 2 Sunday show Elaine Paige celebrates the fifth anniversary of her BBC Radio 2 Sunday show with a special edition in which she talks to Steve Burnett , company manager of the London production of Jersey Boys . 
Steve discusses his favorite Essential Musicals , which include Damn Yankees and Sunset Boulevard . 
The show also features a new exclusive performance from the cast of Jersey Boys and Elaine launches a competition to win a once-in-a-lifetime trip to Broadway to appear in the production -- for one night only . 
Further details can be found on the website at bbc . 
This week , Brian D'Arcy looks at what it means to serve God , in a program which features much-loved hymns such as Thine For Ever God Of Love , Lift Up Your Hearts and Jesus Is Lord . 
The featured choir is the Coventry Singers , directed by Paul Leddington Wright with organist Kerry Beaumont . 
Russell Davies explores the influence of American lyricist Billy Rose , whose name has been linked to many familiar songs such as Great Day , Do n't Bring Lulu , More Than You Know and It 's Only A Paper Moon . 
Russell looks at Rose 's biography by Earl Conrad and listens to some historic recordings , including Perry Como 's Without A Song , Lonnie Donegan 's Does Your Chewing Gum Lose Its Flavour On The Bedpost Overnight ? 
, Bobby Darin 's There 's A Rainbow Round My Shoulder and Me And My Shadow by Whispering Jack Smith . 
The program also features Marty Bloom , one of Rose 's collaborators , playing `` effects '' on a 1926 Jelly Roll Morton recording ; Madeleine Peyroux in 2004 with Back In Your Own Backyard ; Frank Sinatra singing My Kind Of Town ; and Mel Torme performing a Rodgers and Hart song that mentions Billy Rose . 
Private Passions -- Anthony Bolton Michael Berkeley 's guest today is Anthony Bolton , one of the most respected and successful investment fund managers of the last three decades . 
Passionate about music , Anthony composes in his spare time , and his selection for today 's edition of Private Passions includes a carol composed by himself as well as music by Benjamin Britten -LRB- whom he cites as a major influence -RRB- , Mozart , Mahler , Richard Strauss and Thomas Ads . 
Tom Service and composer Julian Anderson examine the thinking behind Ligeti 's Piano Concerto . 
Composed between 1985 and 1988 , it is one of the composer 's most dynamic examples of music inspired by contemporary ideas about structure , patterning and rhythm . 
The mathematics of Fractals and Chaos Theory is one starting point in understanding this colorful and arresting work , as are some of the more individual and distinctive folk traditions of Africa , Indonesia and Eastern Europe . 
Tom and Julian talk to a team of celebrated contemporary music specialists -- pianist Rolf Hind , the Birmingham Contemporary Music Group and conductor Martyn Brabbins -- for an exploration of the musical workings and ideas behind this virtuoso tour de force and one of the late 20th century 's musical masterpieces . 
Period specialist Nicholas McGegan takes the helm for this large-scale performance of Handel 's most celebrated oratorio , Messiah , reaching the climax of the BBC Proms commemoration of the 250th anniversary of the composer 's death . 
The Northern Sinfonia is joined by more than 200 young voices from across the UK and a distinguished cast of soloists , including Dominique Labelle and John Mark Ainsley . 
Presenter\/Penny Gore , Producer\/Juan Carlos Jaramillo George Mackay Brown is one of the most important Scottish poets of the 20th century . 
He believed that a poet was born , not made , and his gifts might either flourish or wither depending on circumstance . 
In his case he suspected that , had he grown up in a city , he might never have written a word . 
Instead , he lived in Orkney , and the islands for him became a `` place of order , a place of remembrance , a place of vision '' , which sustained him for the rest of his life . 
Poet Kenneth Steven travels to Stromness , where George Mackay Brown remained for almost his entire life , to speak to those who remember him and his influence in the community . 
Mackay Brown was not always in keeping with local sensibilities and felt at times an outsider in Orkney life . 
Yet it was the islands which sustained him , and this BBC Radio 3 Sunday Feature examines that complex relationship between writer and place . 
The program includes contributions from Sir Peter Maxwell Davies , who met George Mackay Brown on his first visit to Orkney and collaborated regularly with him in the following years . 
Sue MacGregor reunites people caught up in the siege at the Iranian Embassy in London in 1980 , as BBC Radio 4 's The Reunion continues . 
The siege ended after six days when the Special Air Service dramatically stormed the building . 
The storming of the Embassy established both the SAS 's lethal reputation and that of Margaret Thatcher as a Prime Minister who refused to give in to terrorists . 
The siege began on 30 April 1980 when six men , armed with automatic weapons and grenades , overran the Embassy of the Islamic Republic Of Iran at Princes Gate , South Kensington , taking 26 people hostage . 
Within hours of the attack , the SAS counter-terrorism team was assembled close by . 
They built a replica of the five floor , 50-room building and began practicing their assault . 
`` As the days unfolded it was pure drama , a terrifying soap opera with all eyes glued to the Embassy 's front door , '' recalls the BBC 's Kate Adie , then a relatively unknown junior reporter who was camped out over the road opposite the Embassy . 
Joining Kate and Sue around the table are former hostages Sim Harris , who was seen crawling out the front window of the Embassy after the SAS went in ; Mustapha Kharkouti , who was thrown into the role of translator for the terrorists ; Max Vernon , one of the three specially trained police negotiators responsible for maintaining a dialogue with the terrorists ; and Robin Horsfall , an SAS commando , who took part in the rescue . 
Millions of people watched the rescue live on television , as bank holiday entertainment on all three channels was interrupted to show the real-life drama unfolding . 
This two-part drama , marking 300 years since the birth of Samuel Johnson , portrays the relationship between the poet , wit , pioneering lexicographer and king of Grub Street and his devoted fan , James Boswell . 
Starring Kenneth Cranham as Johnson , part one sees Boswell , played by Paul Higgins , traveling to London especially to seek out the great man . 
Boswell , 30 years Johnson 's junior , is in awe of the man : `` I can not help worshipping him ; he is so superior to other men . '' 
He determines to write a biography of Johnson and , encouraged by his hero , keeps journals of his conversations . 
Johnson is surrounded by leading artists and thinkers of the day such as Reynolds , Goldsmith , Burke , Garrick , Gibbon and Sheridan . 
When he paves the way for Boswell to join the `` club '' , the young man can not believe his luck . 
In part two , Boswell 's visits become more intermittent and Johnson meets Hester Thrale , wife of a wealthy brewer and MP . 
She becomes his devoted friend and confidante . 
When Hester 's husband dies , Johnson thinks she will turn to him , but she has fallen in love with an Italian opera singer and marries him instead . 
Johnson eventually sinks into a depression and dies ; and Boswell chides himself for not being a better friend . 
Barry MacSweeney wrote his first poem at the age of seven , endured a lifelong struggle with solitary hard drinking from 16 , and was nominated for the Oxford Poetry Chair at 18 . 
A protge of Northumbrian poet Basil Bunting , he was a regular at the legendary Morden Tower in Newcastle , along with Ted Hughes , Seamus Heaney , Allen Ginsberg and Ed Dorn . 
MacSweeney was a man of contradictions -- a romantic poet , a political journalist and an avid Newcastle United supporter ; vulnerable to harm , but raging against the world ; and an avant-garde writer , but also a naturalist whose writing was rooted in the Northumbrian landscape . 
His refusal to engage with the establishment was incompatible with commercial or mainstream success , and he died an alcoholic 's death on the poetry fringes . 
His work has inspired and galvanised a new generation of poets , who view MacSweeney as the lost icon of the counter-culture . 
To Tom Chivers , he is a hero of the avant-garde , and the man who inspired him to become a poet . 
A 16-year-old Tom encountered MacSweeney at a poetry reading . 
To his young fan , MacSweeney was terrifying , like a fictional villain , in a long black leather coat and tiny round glasses , and his performance was electric . 
It would be his last public reading . 
A week later he was dead . 
This is Tom 's personal journey to explore the man and the poet . 
Travelling to the Northumbrian landscape , the young poet and MacSweeney fanatic rediscovers his lost hero and investigates why his radical style was never palatable to the mainstream . 
He explores his appeal to a new generation of poets who are rediscovering MacSweeney , drawing from his idiosyncratic style and charismatic performances . 
He also finds out why , in a poetry scene that is once again revived with unusual use of language and an emphasis on the spoken word , MacSweeney is , for many young writers , the lost rebel who never sold out . 
The Christian O'Connell Solution 1\/15 11.00am-12 .00 noon BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Christian O'Connell presents the first of a new 15-part topical comedy show , which seeks to solve some of the week 's big news issues . 
For the opening program , Christian is joined by David Tennant and comedian Bob Mills to put right some of the world biggest -LRB- and smallest -RRB- wrongs in just one hour . 
They will also be offering some sage advice on David 's personal problems . 
12.00noon-6 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Colin Murray presents 5 Live Sport from Lord 's for the second One Day International between England and Australia . 
There 's also reports from the US Open tennis in New York , plus regular updates from the European Masters Golf and the day 's rugby league matches . 
At 3.30 pm there 's live commentary on Gloucester versus Bath in rugby union 's Premiership . 
7.30-8 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Donal MacIntyre and the team return for a new series of original and investigative journalism . 
Investigations from the last series included corruption in Ukrainian football , local council expenses , social housing fraud and women who pay for sex . 
10.00am-6 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA The Test Match Special commentary team present uninterrupted live commentary on the second One Day International between England and Australia from Lord 's . 
Mercury Prize 2009 -- The Music Week As The Music Week anticipates the presentation of the 18th Mercury Prize , Julie Cullen and Matt Everitt look back over the year that bookies ' favorite for the prize , Florence And The Machine , have had since they began tracking her progress on the show last December . 
There 's also the latest odds and predictions on who the prize could go to , and a round-up of the rest of the week 's biggest music news . 
Presenters\/Julie Cullen and Matt Everitt , Producer\/Tom Green Fted Brooklyn-based indie alt-rockers Grizzly Bear are Huey Morgan 's guests this week , talking about their current album , Veckatimest , which is regarded as their most accessible to date . 
Hailed by music critics as one of the finest releases of 2009 , Veckatimest is the band 's third studio album and has led to greater exposure both in the US and the UK . 
Well-known on the Brooklyn music scene , the band have previously collaborated with Dirty Projectors and Beirut and toured with luminaries TV On The Radio , Paul Simon and Radiohead . 
First up , and making their presenting debut , are The Horrors . 
The Horrors are a five-piece band from Southend-on-Sea , who formed in 2005 . 
Their critically acclaimed , Mercury-nominated second album , Primary Colours , was released in May 2009 . 
Drummer Rhys , guitarist Josh and bass player Tom have been busy digging in their crates of rare vinyl to play the A-Z British Psychedelia from the likes of The Kinks , The Zombies and Yardbirds . 
Every track they play has a wicked rock 'n' roll story behind it , which The Horrors tell as if they wish they were there . 
The guys share their touring stories and discuss what it 's like to be nominated for a Mercury Music Award . 
Bridget Kendall presents another edition of The Forum , which brings prominent international thinkers together to debate big ideas . 
Joining Bridget are novelist and screenwriter Hanif Kureishi , who examines how the act of exploring and expressing our unconscious side -- dreams , fantasies , inhibitions -- makes the writer the investigator of the forbidden , and brings him closer to himself and to others . 
British journalist and academic Martin Jacques then presents his argument that China will not only become a huge economic superpower , but will also challenge Western thoughts on culture , race and democracy , and will redefine what it is to be `` modern '' . 
Arvind Sharma , Professor Of Comparative Religion at McGill University , Montreal , will discuss how the concept of time affects what people do historically , politically and socially . 
Chris Moyles , the longest-serving breakfast DJ on BBC Radio 1 On Monday 7 September Chris Moyles becomes the longest-serving breakfast DJ on BBC Radio 1 -- overtaking Tony Blackburn 's record which was set more than 30 years ago . 
Chris began his award-winning breakfast show on 5 January 2004 and he has kept over seven million listeners entertained every week . 
Renowned for his outspoken , honest style and wit , Chris and his show have become part of the fabric of the nation . 
All week Chris and his team -- Comedy Dave ; producers Rachel and Aled ; newsreader Dom ; and Carrie who does the sport -- spend the week traveling through the UK celebrating the milestone with their listeners . 
Ten years since they first played live on the network , BBC Radio 1 join Muse at one of their homecoming shows in Teignmouth , Devon , and dedicate five hours to one of the UK 's finest rock bands . 
For fans old and new , Muse Night is a very special evening of music and content as Zane Lowe gets closer to the band and further behind the scenes than any show has done before . 
The night includes highlights from the Monday 7 September homecoming show and also features a special documentary celebrating a decade of Muse on Radio 1 . 
This week , Ken Bruce is joined by Benny Gallagher , one half of Seventies duo Gallagher And Lyle , best loved for their hits Heart On My Sleeve and I Wanna Stay With You . 
Gallagher picks his Tracks Of My Years and his choices include offerings by The Beach Boys , Don McLean , Ike and Tina Turner and Ronnie Lane . 
Plus two more valiant competitors slug it out on PopMaster , and there 's a love song , Record Of The Week and a hand-picked selection from the Album Of The Week TV presenter and comedian Graham Norton sits in for Steve Wright and the team this week . 
8.00-10 .00 pm BBC RADIO 2 -LRB- Schedule amendment 26 August -RRB- Mark Radcliffe and Stuart Maconie walk the length of Hadrian 's Wall , stopping off at venues along the route to broadcast their live show . 
They are joined by guests and musicians along the way , including indie folk band Noah And The Whale , folk quartet The Unthanks , British Sea Power and singer-songwriter Richard Hawley plus other special guests . 
Presenters\/Mark Radcliffe and Stuart Maconie , Producer\/Viv Atkinson Composer Of The Week -- Bernard Herrmann Ep 1\/5 Monday 7 to Friday 11 September Bernard Herrmann referred to himself simply as a `` composer '' rather than a `` film composer '' . 
As far as he was concerned the distinction was an important one . 
He is best remembered for the brilliant film scores he produced , among them Citizen Kane ; the classic Hitchcock thrillers Psycho , North By Northwest , Marnie and Vertigo ; Truffaut 's fantastical Fahrenheit 451 ; and Martin Scorsese 's nightmarish Taxi Driver . 
He also wrote a cache of chamber , choral and symphonic music , as well as a full-length opera based on Emily Bront 's Wuthering Heights . 
By all accounts Herrmann was as complex as any of the characters his music illustrated on the silver screen . 
He could be paranoid , irascible , abrasive and volatile , yet he remained a romantic at heart . 
He could also be generous and compassionate but , as a perfectionist , perhaps his lot in life was never to be satisfied . 
Many of his professional disappointments resulted from his inability to compromise . 
Wuthering Heights was n't produced on stage in his lifetime because he would n't adjust the score . 
In the end , Herrmann paid for a recording of the complete work . 
It was the same story when it came to his symphony : written for the concert hall , the conductor Eugene Ormandy offered to program it for the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra with the proviso that Herrmann would agree to some cuts , one might guess Herrman 's answer . 
In this week 's Composer Of The Week , Donald Macleod explores a life full of contradictions and tensions that were never fully resolved . 
Suzy Klein introduces the final Chamber Prom this year from London 's Cadogan Hall , a tribute to Purcell in his 350th anniversary year , including a delightful sequence of his solo songs and keyboard pieces , concluding with his powerful Evening Hymn . 
In addition , John Blow 's Ode On The Death Of Mr Henry Purcell is a moving response to Purcell 's genius . 
Counter-tenor Iestyn Davies and tenor Simon Wall are joined by members of the Academy of Ancient Music , directed by Richard Egarr . 
This Prom will be repeated on Saturday 12 September at 2pm . 
Palestinian-Israeli pianist Saleem Abboud Ashkar is soloist in Mendelssohn 's youthful First Concerto , which the composer completed in just three days at the age of 22 . 
Mahler 's 10th Symphony was left unfinished at his death but was triumphantly premired at the 1964 Proms in a `` performing version '' prepared by musicologist Deryck Cooke and Berthold Goldschmidt . 
Written in the shadows of failing health and a collapsing marriage to his young wife , Alma , Mahler scribbled notes in the margins of the manuscript -- at one point he writes `` to live for you , to die for you '' and over the tender , peaceful ending , when he seems to have come to some resolution , he writes just one word `` Almschi '' -- his nickname for his wife . 
Sherlock Holmes is the subject of tonight 's Proms Literary Festival . 
Why are we still so fascinated by a pipe-smoking detective with a fondness for deductive reasoning ? 
He first appeared in 1887 , he 's thought to have been born around 1854 and those in the know believe he went to Cambridge , rather than to Oxford , before sharing a room in Baker Street with a certain Doctor Watson . 
He also had a famous love of the music of Mendelssohn . 
Presenter Matthew Sweet is joined at the Royal College of Music by the author of The Victorians , AN Wilson and Steven Moffatt , co-creator of the BBC 's forthcoming modern-day TV Sherlock . 
Book Of The Week -- William Golding : The Man Who Wrote The Lord Of The Flies Ep 1\/5 Monday 7 to Friday 11 September This latest edition of Book Of The Week presents the first biography of the publicity shy author whose debut novel was rejected by many publishers before going on to sell more than 20 million copies in the UK alone . 
Drawing on a vast wealth of previously unpublished material in the Golding family archive , the writer and critic John Carey explores the life and career of the self-critical novelist who won the Nobel Prize for Literature . 
Carey 's biography examines Golding 's life and literary output in extensive detail , and draws heavily on a great deal of previously unpublished letters and journals . 
Listeners can learn about Golding 's early childhood ; his return to life as a provincial school teacher after being demobbed in 1945 ; the initial failure and subsequent success of his first novel , The Lord Of The Flies ; his frenetic and wildly successful tour of America in 1961 ; Golding 's largely fruitless attempts to research his Booker Prize-winning novel , Rites Of Passage ; and the controversy surrounding his award of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1983 . 
Written and abridged by John Carey , Emeritus Merton Professor of English Literature at Oxford University and Chief Book Reviewer for The Sunday Times , William Golding -- The Man Who Wrote The Lord Of The Flies is read by Christian Rodska , one of radio 's most accomplished and distinctive voices . 
Monday 7 to Friday 11 September Anna Maxwell Martin and Sharon Gavin star in this week 's new Woman 's Hour Drama offering , written by David and Caroline Stafford . 
Alvy from Ireland and Dorika from Hungary -- both of whom speak excellent English -- are au pairs who meet every day at the One O'Clock Club : a drop-in mother-and-child center . 
They bond over their mutual condemnation of modern parenting and their feelings of injustice , and each gradually becomes entangled in both the intricacies of the other 's life and in the delusions , hypocrisies and moral turpitude of their employers . 
Gradually the lives of the girls and their employers are turned upside down . 
Dorika , in her initial wide-eyed innocent phase , wants comfort and security for her family back home on the farm , while Alvy wants money , sex and power -- and will probably get all three if she can stay out of jail . 
Alvy steers Dorika ruinously off the rails , but it is Dorika 's dark secret -- the existence of a handsome illegal-immigrant brother living secretly in her employers ' shed -- that ultimately leads to the breakdown of marriages , livelihoods , law , order and mental health . 
Alvy is played by Sharon Gavin and Dorika by Anna Maxwell Martin . 
Best Friends , today 's Afternoon Play offering , is written by Clara Glynn and stars Shonagh Price , Louise Ludgate and Robin Laing . 
When her best friend , Charlotte , is convicted of murder , Sam is determined to turn round what she believes is a miscarriage of justice -- after all , her friend is not the first mother to be wrongly imprisoned for killing her baby . 
When Charlotte 's new baby , Emily , dies suddenly at home everyone assumes it is a case of cot death . 
But , a few days later , Sam gets an early morning call from Charlotte to say she has been arrested and is being charged with murder . 
Sam is shocked but totally convinced that it is a terrible mistake and her friend is innocent . 
However , the case goes to trial and Charlotte is found guilty of Emily 's murder . 
Sam is determined to get her friend out of prison and to right this terrible miscarriage of justice . 
Sam works in PR and , with the approval of Charlotte 's husband , David , she mounts a campaign to free Charlotte . 
A new forensic report from a paediatric pathologist is commissioned in the hope it will uncover new evidence , possibly missed by the expert witnesses at the trial . 
But the new forensic report removes any doubts from the original police forensics . 
Sam wonders if Charlotte or her husband might be guilty of the crime , or if there is another explanation . 
As the truth unfolds Sam faces dilemmas which push her friendship with Charlotte to the limit . 
Sam is played by Shonagh Price , Charlotte by Louise Ludgate and David by Robin Laing . 
Five scientists look back to their ancient forebears and examine how much of that early knowledge still stands the test of time , in a new five-part series . 
In the first program , facial surgeon Iain Hutchison examines the earliest beginnings of nasal surgery . 
He discovers that the origins lie in a Sanskrit text attributed to Sushruta -- a physician or school of physicians -- working in third or fourth century BC on the banks of the river Ganges . 
At that time , cutting off the tip of the nose was a form of punishment and a clear badge of shame . 
Iain meets Sanskrit expert Dominik Wujastyk at the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine to examine one of the early copies of the original text . 
He finds out that techniques used today using skin flaps from the cheek to reconstruct the nose were devised by Sushruta . 
However , it took centuries for this technique to reach Europe where methods were primitive by comparison . 
Other programs in the series explore early Egyptian systems of cooling and temperature control ; Aristotle 's writings on meteorology ; wound healing in Mesopotamian times ; and counting and early equations in Babylonian society . 
11.00-11 .30 pm BBC RADIO 4 -LRB- Schedule update 28 August -RRB- In 1954 , an extraordinary erotic novel was published in Paris . 
The Story Of O told the tale of female submission and a beautiful Parisian fashion photographer , O , who is blindfolded , chained , whipped , branded , pierced , made to wear a mask and taught to be constantly available for intercourse . 
Written with an almost hallucinatory erotic intensity , in spare elegant prose , the purity of the writing took the literary world in France by storm and caused a sensation . 
The author , Pauline Reage , was a pseudonym and many people believed that because of the sexual intensity of the novel , the author could only have been a man . 
Rumours circulated for years as to the true identity of the writer , and the secret of exactly who Reage was only came to light in 1994 when British journalist John St Jorre went to interview the author . 
In this program , writer and former editor of the Erotic Review , Rowan Pelling , goes in search of Reage to find out exactly who she was and why she wrote such a deeply erotic -- and often disturbing -- novel . 
Rowan talks to people who knew her and discovers that Reage was , in fact , an impeccably dressed , demure intellectual called Dominique Aury and that she had written the novel as a love letter for her lover . 
Presenter\/Rowan Pelling , Producers\/Angela Hind and Martina Hall 7.00-10 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Arlo White presents the day 's sport news and is joined by John Motson , Steve Claridge and Robbie Savage for The Monday Night Club discussing all the latest football issues . 
From 9pm , Arlo is joined by Mark Clemmit for 5 Live Football League with all the latest action and news from the Championship and Football League . 
At 10pm , a Winter Olympics Special looks ahead to next year 's Olympics in Vancouver . 
4.00pm-12 .00 midnight BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Listeners can enjoy uninterrupted commentary from the US Open tennis live from Flushing Meadows , New York . 
Beth Ditto and her band Gossip join Cerys Matthews for a chat about their new album , Music For Men . 
Responsible for tempting punk kids onto disco dancefloors , the Gossip 's breakthrough hit in the UK , Standing In The Way Of Control , can still be heard in clubs and indie discos around the country . 
The trio , Beth Ditto , Hannah Blilie and Brace Paine , were raised in Arkansas by women , wolves and cassettes -LRB- according to their biography -RRB- and , since forming in 2000 , have garnered a great deal of success and tabloid inches , breaking through to the mainstream in 2006 . 
Recently named as the biggest cult band in the UK , Wakefield 's finest , The Cribs , complete with Smiths legend Johnny Marr on guitar , join Steve Lamacq for an exclusive BBC 6 Music Hub session and interview . 
The band 's fourth album , Ignore The Ignorant , is released today and finds the band on blistering form , with Mr Marr 's melodic guitar playing adding a new-found depth to proceedings . 
As well as playing live , the band chat to Steve to about making the record and what their new member has brought to the party . 
Gideon Coe presents The Bees in concert at Summer Sundae 2005 and OMD at the NEC in 1993 . 
His archive sessions include Air , the Fiery Furnaces and the band once signed to Elton John 's Rocket label , Stackridge . 
Rozena is on the phone complaining about staying with her in-laws , as the drama continues . 
Bibi overhears Zenab saying she might spend Eid with Imran and wonders if Zenab is depressed , but her advice does n't go down at all well . 
Meanwhile , Jodie is annoyed Kuljit is too busy to help her plan the wedding ; he has n't even told his dad they are engaged . 
Later , Sway leaves a message for Kuljit telling him things have gone too far ... Rozena is played by Pooja Ghai , Bibi by Indira Joshi , Zenab by Sudha Buchar , Jodie by Vineeta Rishi , Kuljit by Sartaj Garewal and Sway by Mark Monero . 
Why Is Africa Poor ? 
Ep 3\/3 Mark Doyle crosses the continent exploring the causes of -- and possible cures for -- African poverty . 
The series tests whether the spread of democracy and modern communications tools will really stop the endemic corruption , which continues to make too many people there among the poorest on Earth . 
Multi-national corporations , many of which financially dwarf the African countries they operate in , say they now follow `` ethical '' practices which do more for local people . 
But will those practices make any difference in the face of a global recession ? 
In this final program , Mark examines what 's being done to lift Africans out of poverty . 
Foreign aid can help -- but there are limits . 
What are Africans themselves doing to harness their tremendous human and natural resources ? 
Financial crisis , globalisation , the growth of China , mass migration of workers -- these are just some of the stories that have dominated reports by Business Daily 's presenters , Steve Evans and Lesly Curwen , over the past year . 
Business Daily is the BBC World Service 's daily business current affairs program , which features news , interviews and reports , from examining the big issues facing the global economy , to demystifying the world of money and asking the big questions about free trade , technology and investment . 
As part of the Aftershock Season , Business Daily will be running a number of special editions including : an examination of the state of the US Housing market , one year on from the collapse of mortgage firms Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac -LRB- 7 September -RRB- ; a discussion with four former Lehman employees about their careers pre and post Lehmans to find out where they are one year on from the pivotal events in New York -LRB- 9 September -RRB- ; and a report from Dalian , China to cover the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting of New Champions -LRB- 11 September -RRB- . 
Business Daily is also available as a podcast at bbcworldservice.com . 
Presenters\/Steve Evans and Lesly Curwen DJ and filmmaker Don Letts explores Notting Hill as a heart of music for the past 50 years , in The Other Notting Hill . 
Starting in the shadow of the Westway , Don walks the streets and takes listeners to the hotel where Alice Cooper kept his snake in the bath . 
He tracks down the caf where Mick Jagger used to hang out , the Rough Trade shop that ignited a DIY musical revolution and Basing Street Studios , where Bob Marley threw a punky reggae party and Band Aid fed the world . 
Along the way , Don brings listeners exclusive interviews with Damon Albarn -LRB- Blur , Gorrillaz , The Good The Bad & The Queen -RRB- ; Paul Simonon -LRB- The Clash , The Good The Bad & The Queen -RRB- ; Lemmy -LRB- Motorhead -RRB- ; reggae legends Aswad ; Viv Albertine -LRB- The Slits -RRB- ; Nik Turner -LRB- Hawkwind -RRB- ; Andrea Oliver -LRB- Rip Rig & Panic -RRB- ; Huey Morgan -LRB- Fun Lovin ' Criminals -RRB- ; Michael Moorcock -LRB- author and Hawkwind collaborator -RRB- ; Joe Boyd -LRB- Witchseason Label -RRB- ; and TV presenter Davina McCall . 
Along with cab drivers , caf owners and locals , they tell the story of The Other Notting Hill . 
Presenter\/Don Letts , Producers\/Natasha Costa and Kieron Moyles Jamie Cullum continues to bring listeners highlights from this year 's 43rd Montreux Jazz Festival -- an international event which began in 1967 and has grown from a three-day event , featuring European jazz artists , into a two-week festival encompassing almost every musical genre . 
Jamie introduces music from Madeleine Peyroux , Monty Alexander and The Blind Boys Of Alabama in tonight 's second program of the series . 
The Royal Philharmonic Orchestra 's permanent guest conductor , Garry Walker A long-time resident of the Orkney Islands , the master of The Queen 's Music , Sir Peter Maxwell Davies , celebrates his 75th birthday today by conducting the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra in Mendelssohn 's sea-sprayed Hebridean overture and the UK premire of his own new Violin Concerto -- inspired by traditional Orkney folk and fiddle music -- in tonight 's BBC Prom , live from London 's Royal Albert Hall . 
It was written for tonight 's soloist , Daniel Hope , and commissioned by Mendelssohn 's own orchestra , the Leipzig Gewandhaus , who recently gave the work 's premire . 
The RPO 's permanent guest conductor , Garry Walker , makes his debut at the Proms with Sibelius 's surging `` swan hymn '' symphony . 
Celebrating his 75th Birthday year , Sir Peter Maxwell Davies reflects on his career as a composer and conductor in an edited version of tonight 's Proms Plus conversation , hosted by Martin Handley . 
Completing the celebrations on the day of Sir Peter Maxwell Davies 's 75th birthday , David Hill directs the BBC Singers in a performance of two Davies 's most important choral works , in tonight 's late-night BBC Prom , live from London 's Royal Albert Hall . 
Westerlings imagines the early Norse settlers colonising Orkney in the 8th century . 
In one of the most virtuosic works in the entire choral repertoire , George Mackay Brown 's poems are set alongside wordless `` seascapes '' , creating an enormously atmospheric piece which vividly conjures up the cold and wet and other hardships endured by the settlers , rowing their longboats across the waters from Scandinavia . 
Sightings of whales and fish , waves and birds , culminate -- at landfall -- in a haunting setting of the Lord 's Prayer , sung in the Old Norse of ancient Orkney . 
Alongside this , listeners can hear another piece with powerfully Orcadian roots : Solstice Of Light , for chorus , organ and solo tenor , sung by Ed Lyon , which sets more words by Brown charting the whole history of the Orkney archipelago . 
It begins as the islands first emerge from seas and ice , then describes the prehistoric builders of cairns and stone circles , the Celtic men and women who bring a religion of dance and light , Viking marauders who murder the islands ' own saint -- Magnus -- and , finally , brings the story into our own times of those who would rape and despoil the Orkneys in search of the treasures of today -- oil , minerals and uranium . 
Afternoon Play -- Meryl The Mounted Meryl The Mounted , today 's Afternoon Play offering , is a black comedy by Colin Hough about a woman who 's in love with her horse . 
Meryl is a mounted police constable with an unhealthy love for her horse , while Aiden is a young , smart stable boy with an unhealthy love for Meryl . 
When the Sergeant 's decapitated head is found in one of the stables , the pair begin to investigate . 
Rosalind Sydney stars as Meryl Gunn ; Scott Fletcher as Aiden Cole ; Robert Jack as Perry Wold and DCI Butler ; Una McLean as Bunty Lobe ; Sean Scanlan as Sergeant Singer and Mahogany Bob ; and James Young as Dean Gallop . 
Tuesday 8 to Thursday 10 September The A-Z Of Dr Johnson -- Johnson 's Miscellany comprises three readings featuring extracts from Samuel Johnson 's major works , introduced by his biographer , David Nokes , and read by Michael Pennington . 
Samuel Johnson , better known as Dr Johnson , was born in Lichfield in September 1709 . 
Half-blind , shambolic and poverty-stricken , he became the most admired and quoted man in the 18th century . 
In these three programs , specially commissioned to celebrate the tri-centenary of Johnson 's birth , David Nokes , Professor of English at King 's College London and author of a new biography of Johnson , introduces a series of extracts from the great man 's work . 
In chronological order , he works his way through his literary life . 
The opening program features a reading from one of his early biographies , The Life Of Richard Savage , and an extract from his most famous work , the Preface to A Dictionary Of The English Language . 
Tomorrow 's reading , meanwhile , includes two contrasting essays from The Idler series published weekly in the Universal Chronicle -- The Corruption Of News Writers And Ladies ' Journey To London . 
The final program , on Thursday , presents an extract from Johnson 's Preface to the Plays of William Shakespeare and one of the final instalments of biography and literary criticism examining the life and work of the poet Alexander Pope . 
The Mayor Of London , Boris Johnson , chooses his namesake Samuel Johnson , writer of the great dictionary , in a special edition of Great Lives . 
Though they 're not in fact related , there are similarities between them -- both studied classics at Oxford and both have been described as larger-than-life characters . 
Biographer Peter Martin and presenter Matthew Parris join Boris for a lively debate . 
7.00-10 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Mark Pougatch has all the day 's sport news and is joined by sports journalists Brian Woolnough and Shaun Custis , and the FA 's Director of Communications , Adrian Bevington , to look ahead to tomorrow night 's World Cup 2012 qualifying matches . 
From 8.30 pm , Mark Chapman presents The World Cup Years -- 1994 and takes a look back at USA '94 where there were no Home Nations representatives and Roberto Baggio and Diana Ross both famously missed penalties . 
Presenters\/Mark Pougatch and Mark Chapman , Producer\/Patrick Whiteside BBC Radio 5 Live Publicity 4.00pm-12 .00 midnight BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Uninterrupted commentary from the US Open tennis comes live from Flushing Meadows , New York . 
Steve Lamacq will present BBC 6 Music 's coverage of the Mercury Prize 2009 Steve Lamacq presents BBC 6 Music 's coverage of the Mercury Prize 2009 , live from the heart of the action at London 's Grosvenor House Hotel . 
Alongside interviews with some of the nominees and the attending great and good of the music industry , the show features live performances from the night and expert analysis of proceedings from Lammo , 6 Music news and industry insiders on the build-up to the live announcement of the winner . 
Immediate reaction and analysis of the decision follow , and listeners can hear an interview with the winner before the end of the show . 
Brian is back from Spain and pays Zenab a visit , in today 's visit to Silver Street . 
As they chat , however , Brian begins to wonder if he 's left it too late to settle down . 
Bibi , meanwhile , asks Imran about his Eid plans , but why is she so interested ? 
Elsewhere , Jodie turns up at the studio -- Kuljit is still away , despite there being a wedding to plan -- and chats to Sway about soul mates . 
Sway , however , thinks you have to be certain you 've found one before getting married . 
Brian is played by Gerard McDermott , Zenab by Sudha Buchar , Bibi by Indira Joshi , Imran by Narinder Samra , Jodie by Vineeta Rishi and Sway by Mark Monero . 
Trevor Nelson features Stevie Wonder on his Soul Show this week Trevor Nelson 's Album Of The Week is Stevie Wonder 's 1976 masterpiece , Songs In The Key Of Life . 
Having showered Berry Gordy 's Motown label with chart gold dust throughout the Sixties , Wonder became influenced by the civil rights-related empowerment of black people in the USA and decided to make a stand through his music . 
His beliefs led to his creation of legendary songs such as Is n't She Lovely , I Wish , Sir Duke and As -- tracks that have inspired a generation of musicians . 
Critical discourse often labels the album `` experimental '' and this collection of funk , soul , fusion and pop requires an element of contextualization for this to be explored . 
Songs In The Key Of Life won four Grammys in 1978 , including Album Of The Year , and featured a wealth of talent , including George Benson , Herbie Hancock , Deniece Williams and Minnie Ripperton . 
The BBC Proms bicentenary salute to Mendelssohn ends with the BBC Symphony Orchestra , under Ji Blohlvek , performing the magical overture that Mendelssohn wrote at the age of just 17 , coupled with extracts from his later incidental music to Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream , live from London 's Royal Albert Hall . 
Augusta Read Thomas 's new Violin Concerto No. 3 , subtitled Juggler In Paradise , is intended to suggest or invoke the image of the violin 's role . 
In this UK premire , co-commissioned by BBC Radio 3 , Jennifer Koh plays a rhapsodic cadenza throughout , making a path through rich orchestral textures dominated by a pointillistic `` paradise '' of bell sounds . 
And , to conclude , Blohlvek takes the orchestra on a Beethovenian tour of the Austrian countryside in his Symphony No. 6 in F major -LRB- Pastoral -RRB- . 
Jenny Cuffe reports on the UK 's first family , drug and alcohol court -- a ground-breaking experiment designed to keep children of addicts from going into care . 
Parents sign up for an intensive course of counselling and rehabilitation , agreeing to frequent drug tests and reporting regularly to the court . 
The judge tells them it 's make-or-break time and those who fail will go back to a conventional court where there is a strong chance the children will be taken away from them . 
Halfway through a three-year trial period for the court , Jenny hears from families , their lawyers , judges and the specialist team of counsellors . 
The system has proved successful in the US but Jenny explores whether it can work in the UK . 
BBC Radio 4 's tag-team talk show continues tonight with last week 's guest , Dave Gorman , taking the microphone to interview one of the country 's most successful comedians , Frank Skinner . 
Dave asks Frank about his return to stand-up , censorship in comedy and the merits of outdoor toilets . 
Iconoclasts is a live discussion program where , each week , Ed Stourton and his expert guests give a critical hearing to a policy suggestion that many people would consider outrageous . 
Each iconoclast will be tested by a panel of three expert witnesses and the audience is invited to join in the debate , as it 's happening , via texts and emails . 
This week , Ed and his guests ask whether the UK should stop trying to control immigration . 
Philippe Legrain has been a special adviser to the World Trade Organisation and an economics correspondent for The Economist . 
He 's a visiting fellow at the LSE and has published several books as well as many newspaper and magazine articles . 
He argues that no government , except perhaps North Korea 's , would dream of banning cross-border trade in goods and services , yet it is seen as perfectly reasonable for governments to try to ban the movement across borders of most people who produce goods and services . 
`` Immigrants are not an invading army , '' says Legrain , `` they are mostly people seeking a better life who are drawn to Europe by the huge demand for workers to fill the low-end jobs that our ageing and increasingly wealthy societies rely on , but which our increasingly well-educated and comfortable citizens are unwilling to take . '' 
Legrain 's views are challenged by Sir Andrew Green , Chairman Of Migrationwatch UK ; Ann Cryer , Labor MP for Keighley And Ilkeley ; and Tony Saint , former immigration officer-turned-writer . 
Also in this series , Ed and his panel of experts ask whether foreign aid does more harm than good and whether the age of consent should be lowered to 13 years old . 
Presenter\/Edward Stourton , Producers\/Peter Everett and Amanda Hancox 7.00-10 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE The build up to the World Cup 2010 qualifying matches is presented by Mark Pougatch Mark Pougatch presents all the day 's sports news and brings listeners the build-up to this evening 's World Cup 2010 qualifying matches . 
From 8pm , there 's live coverage of the decisive World Cup 2010 Group 6 match between England and Croatia , in which England can confirm their place in South Africa . 
Mike Ingham , Alan Green and Chris Waddle provide the commentary . 
There are also regular updates from the other Home Nations qualifying matches : Scotland versus Netherlands , Wales versus Russia and Northern Ireland versus Slovakia . 
2.15-10 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Uninterrupted commentary of the third One Day International between England and Australia comes live from the Rose Bowl , Southampton . 
Commentary comes courtesy of the Test Match Special team . 
Joker 's Daughter provides some mesmerising modern-day folk for Cerys Matthews in the studio this afternoon . 
Joker 's Daughter is a collaboration between Helena Costas and influential producer Danger Mouse -- last seen as one half of Gnarls Barkley . 
Helena 's sweet , childlike , ethereal lyrics mix with Danger Mouse 's lush orchestration and electronics to create self-described folk pop from a strange , uncharted world . 
Two New York-based quartets provide Gideon Coe 's concert headliners this evening -- The Ramones circa 1987 and Luscious Jackson at Reading in 1999 . 
In session are Milwaukee 's Violent Femmes and archetypal Brit bluesmen The Groundhogs , as well as Londoner Fredo Viola and Brummie post-punkers The Au Pairs . 
Brian joins Rozena and Munna in the park , in today 's midweek offering of the drama . 
Brian brings up the issue of the baby 's name and asks if Rozena only chose it because she knew it would annoy Imran . 
Elsewhere , Zenab has had enough of Rozena and Imran 's squabbling , so she and Bibi hatch a plan to get both of them to leave Zenab alone on Eid . 
Jodie , meanwhile , anxiously waits for Nadia to get back from Leeds . 
Brian is played by Gerard McDermott , Rozena by Pooja Ghai , Imran by Narinder Samra , Zenab by Sudha Buchar , Bibi by Indira Joshi , Jodie by Vineeta Rishi and Sway by Mark Monero . 
Michael Buerk visits Egypt , where citizen journalists are believed to be among the most hounded anywhere in the world , and reports on the struggle between old power and new technology for the control of cyberspace itself , as this two-part series concludes . 
Jason Manford concludes his two-part series showcasing the best comedians from the 2009 Edinburgh Fringe and features top acts selected from more than 750 shows being staged at the festival this year . 
The second program features John Bishop , Shappi Khorsandi , Adam Hills and BBC 6 Music 's very own Jon Richardson . 
It was recorded at The Assembly Rooms on Monday 17 August . 
Franz Welser-Mst conducts the incomparable Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra , live from the Royal Albert Hall , London , in this season 's last symphony by the father of the form , `` Papa '' Haydn . 
One of the first set of 12 London Symphonies , No. 97 was composed and premired during Haydn 's first visit to England in 1791-2 . 
It is followed by Schubert 's Symphony No. 9 in C Major , nicknamed `` The Great '' . 
Mark Radcliffe explores the life of Violet Carson , the actress who played Ena Sharples , the Victorian relic who dominated Coronation Street in its golden age . 
A talented classical pianist and established BBC radio star , Carson was branching out into Shakespearian roles when she got the call from Granada to play the harridan in a hairnet . 
The genteel Carson became overshadowed by her character and claimed that Ena ultimately destroyed her . 
But she left a rich legacy -- Ena Sharples was television 's prototype battleaxe and became a touchstone for northern exiles like Melvyn Bragg , Roy Hattersley and Victoria Wood . 
Mark came across women like Ena in the brick mill terraces of Bolton where his grandparents lived . 
She epitomised a particular kind of woman , who dominated life in northern working-class communities . 
Contributors include Tony Warren , who not only devised Coronation Street but the character that shaped the series , and Geoffrey Wheeler , who worked with Carson at the BBC . 
He traces the quickfire delivery of Ena back to the northern music hall tradition . 
Melvyn Bragg talks about how Ena Sharples reflected life in the black and white world of the north in the Fifties , and scriptwriter Adele Rose discusses the pivotal relationship between Ena and her bete noir , Elsie Tanner . 
Listeners can also hear an archive recording of Carson reflecting on the mixed blessing that Ena Sharples became in her career and her life , as well as clips from early episodes of Coronation Street which demonstrate the quality of the writing and Carson 's talent as one of the best actresses of her generation . 
Paul Reynolds , Michael Fenton Stevens and Alex Tregear star in this Afternoon Play offering about the common cold , class warfare and Cliff Richard . 
Tony Bagley 's comedy is set in 1959 at the Common Cold Unit where , for almost 40 years , volunteers were `` given '' a cold by the staff , then had its effects studied in an attempt to find a cure . 
There was no shortage of applicants and people came back year after year . 
For some it was a free holiday ; they were unpaid but given `` pocket money '' . 
The heyday of the Common Cold Unit was in the post-war period . 
Despite the holiday atmosphere , volunteers got a stern lecture and were expelled if rules were broken or they lied about their medical history or age . 
Barry , a union official who likes the sound of his own voice , has been coming to the unit for years . 
When his room mate , John , is accused of breaking the 30ft rule , where volunteers are not allowed to get within that distance of anyone other than medical staff and room mates to avoid infection , he is asked to leave by his doctor . 
But Barry knows that John is innocent and goes into battle for him . 
It is soon obvious that Barry 's fight with the establishment may be as much to do with his own feelings of insignificance . 
Even if he does n't quite manage a revolution , he does get an apology out of the doctor , and he manages to attract the attentions of Lillian , another outsider at odds with the staff and her own room mate . 
Before long Barry breaks the 30ft rule himself , but with more pleasurable consequences . 
Paul Reynolds -LRB- Press Gang , Trevor 's World Of Sport and Let Him Have It -RRB- stars as Barry , Michael Fenton Stevens -LRB- Nighty Night , My Dad 's The Prime Minister and Mr Bean -RRB- plays the Doctor and Alex Tregear -LRB- Harry Potter , Jam And Jerusalem and Little Britain -RRB- plays Lillian . 
7.00-10 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Eleanor Oldroyd presents the day 's sports news and is joined by sporting experts to debate the latest sports headlines in The Headline Hour . 
At 8pm , Eleanor is joined by a panel of sportswomen and female broadcasters for Ladies First to discuss some big sporting issues . 
From 10pm , two of 5 Live 's pundits get things off their chest in And Another Thing . 
4.00-11 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra presents live , uninterrupted commentary of the US Open tennis tournament from Flushing Meadows , New York . 
Gideon Coe 's archive selection tonight places the spotlight on Reading once more -LRB- both the festival and its famous Fez club -RRB- with concerts from the Magic Numbers and Rocket From The Crypt . 
Sessions include noisy guitars courtesy of The Yardbirds , Boston 's melodic but loud Buffalo Tom and some equally wistful but quieter stuff from Uttoxeter 's Leisure Society . 
At the pub , Jodie shows Sway her wedding fabric samples , as the drama continues . 
Brian , however , makes a few comments about marriage that wind Jodie up . 
Elsewhere , Zenab is pleasantly surprised when Rozena and Imran turn up together . 
They even agree on Eid arrangements , but are they being genuine or is it for Zenab 's benefit ? 
Meanwhile , Jodie and Sway get philosophical and bring up a taboo subject from the past , wondering if things might have turned out differently ... Jodie is played by Vineeta Rishi , Sway by Mark Monero , Brian by Gerard McDermott , Zenab by Sudha Buchar , Rozena by Pooja Ghai and Imran by Narinder Samra . 
In this edition of Assignment , Ed Butler examines the growing demand for reform of the world 's leading business schools . 
Some people , even within the major schools themselves , argue that they played a key role in providing the philosophical legitimacy and the education that led to the global financial crisis . 
Some of the complex financial instruments that are blamed for the credit crunch were devised by business school professors and until the last few years few , if any , of the major institutions made ethics a required part of their curriculum . 
One recent graduate from Harvard Business School describes a `` culture of arrogance and denial '' within its halls . 
While the schools themselves debate what changes they should make to their education system , the students themselves have launched an international student oath , aimed at promoting ethics among MBAs . 
But Assignment asks if anything will really change ? 
Aftershock is a new season of programs broadcast in September on the BBC 's International News Services -- BBC World Service , BBC World News and BBC.com -- investigating the impact of the global recession . 
Desmond Carrington -- After Seven English singer and entertainer Matt Munro From the table-top stage in an intimate nightclub to a full house at the London Palladium , Desmond Carrington looks at the careers of entertainers who wrote the rule book and created their own unique style . 
Under the spotlight this week is Matt Monro . 
Born in 1930 , Matt left school at 14 and began singing in public soon after . 
After completing his National Service in Hong Kong , Matt tried to make his way as a professional singer , taking a job as a bus driver to make ends meet . 
His break came when pianist Winifred Atwell heard him and introduced him to her record producer at Decca . 
That was the beginning of Matt 's rapid rise to stardom , and when EMI producer George Martin came into the picture in 1960 , Matt was swiftly guided to his first chart hit , Portrait Of My Love . 
This week 's Friday Night Is Music Night features a unique interpretation of Gustav Holst 's famous Planets Suite . 
Recorded at the Play The Field music festival in Somerset , the concert is presented and conducted by Charles Hazlewood and features his orchestra Excellent Device ! . 
Their performance of Holst 's stellar masterpiece will be interspersed with improvised electronic musical responses from the All Star band , which features Will Gregory from Goldfrapp and Adrian Utley from Portishead . 
Charles explains : `` In the gaps between the orchestra 's performance of each of the seven planets , my posse of sonic adventurers , the All Stars , will improvise spontaneous electronic responses using material sampled from what the orchestra have just played . 
It 's a highly original way of giving the audience a chance to revisit Holst 's material , but through a refracted lens , and with a contemporary twist . 
No one has ever attempted this before and I believe it will offer the audience a wonderful opportunity to climb even further inside the music . 
`` The extreme virtuosity of my symphony orchestra , Excellent Device ! 
coupled with the fact that the All Stars feature some of the most adventurous musicians around today , promises that this will be an unforgettable musical journey to the stars . '' 
With The Cory Brass Band celebrating their 125th birthday , Frank Renton celebrates some of the other bands who trace their origins back more than 100 years . 
Tonight 's show includes music from Black Dyke , Brighouse and Rastrick and The Rothwell Temperance Band . 
Actor and singer Paul Nicholas joins Claudia Winkleman for this week 's Arts Show . 
Paul made his stage debut performance as Claude in the hugely successful love-rock musical Hair . 
His next role was as Jesus in the Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd-Webber spectacular Jesus Christ Superstar . 
For his new role , Paul dons a Tudor tunic to play Jack Point in a special performance of Gilbert and Sullivan 's Yeomen Of The Guard . 
The Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra is conducted by its distinguished long-term associate and honorary member Zubin Mehta in the second of its two BBC Proms this season . 
Together , they reinvigorate Strauss 's quintessential set of `` fantastic variations on a theme of knightly character '' , Don Quixote . 
Brahms 's fourth and final symphony also ends in a vast set of variations , his gloriously late-Romantic take on a Baroque-style passacaglia , using a theme borrowed from a Bach cantata . 
Don Quixote is one of fiction 's best-loved characters and the hero of a book many consider a landmark of modern literature . 
The list of artists who 've produced their own version of the Don ranges from Daumier 's drawings , to portraits by Gustave Dore , Salvador Dali and Picasso . 
The list of musicians he inspired is impressive , too -- Telemann , Mendelssohn and , above all , Richard Strauss . 
This evening at the Proms Literary Festival , actor Andrew Sachs offers his own dramatic version of the knight , spurred on by Ian and literary critic John Mullan 's reflections on Quixote and his followers in the world of letters . 
BBC Radio 3 's New Generation Artists scheme provides concert and recording opportunities to some of the finest young talent on the international music scene . 
This year , it celebrates 10 years of helping to establish and support the careers of stars such as Paul Lewis , the Belcea Quartet , Alison Balsom and Alice Coote . 
Throughout this summer 's BBC Proms season , Radio 3 has broadcast studio and concert performances by current members of the scheme , concluding tonight with jazz trumpeter Tom Arthurs and friends performing a variety of duo and group improvisations and newly composed works . 
Presenter\/Verity Sharp , Producer\/Juan Carlos Jaramillo What Became Of The Bank Manager ? 
Clive Anderson , son of a bank manager Clive Anderson , the son of a bank manager , investigates the demise of the traditional face of our high street banks . 
For decades these reliable Captain Mainwarings kept everyone 's money safe ; were prominent in the Rotary Club ; and made it their business to know every detail of the local economy . 
Yet over the years , they were gradually phased out as cash machines and credit cards changed banking forever , and their risk-averse DNA stood at odds with the desire to `` sell , sell , sell '' . 
Clive goes in search of the reasons why his father 's profession no longer exists . 
He asks how this change reflects on consumer society today and the banking industry 's rush to lend money . 
In this program , Clive speaks to Duncan Bannatyne , multi-millionaire BBC TV Dragon whose branch bank manager set him on the road to a fortune ; Sid Brittin , a former old-style Lloyds bank manager who describes how he had a nervous breakdown under the pressure to meet new targets ; and John Hackett , HSBC 's Chief Operating Officer of Retail , who says banks are now far more responsive to their customers ' needs . 
Caroline Quentin stars as a feisty 21st-century woman who 's taken to her bed in the spare room -- and she 's not getting up . 
She 's 39 and has decided she 's not having children . 
She claims her boyfriend is in denial though , in reality , he 's in Zurich . 
Yes she 's in pain but no , she 's not giving up . 
There is a strange smell in the spare room and the ceiling needs repainting ... Christopher Green 's The Second Best Bed is a contemporary comic monologue -- with minimal risk of bedsores . 
7.00-10 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE In Kicking Off With Colin Murray , Colin is joined by Pat Nevin and Perry Groves to look ahead to the weekend 's sporting action , including the Premier League games between Tottenham Hotspur and Manchester United , Manchester City and Arsenal and Birmingham and Aston Villa . 
At 9pm , 5 Live Formula 1 with David Croft , Anthony Davidson and Holly Samos looks ahead to this weekend 's Italian Grand Prix at Monza . 
From 9.30 pm , Colin is back and joined by Tim Lovejoy for Murray and Lovejoy 's Sports Express , in which the pair take a quick-fire look at the past week in sport and look ahead to what 's coming up . 
This is also available as a podcast to download at bbc . 
8.55-10 .35 am BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA 12.55-2 .35 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra brings uninterrupted commentary of the first and second practice sessions of the Italian Grand Prix at Monza . 
6.00-11 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Uninterrupted commentary from the US Open Tennis comes live from Flushing Meadows , New York . 
Joey Tempest , front man of Sweden 's biggest-selling hard-rock band , Europe , joins Bruce Dickinson tonight . 
Melodic classic rockers Europe released their first record back in the early Eighties after winning first prize in a rock band competition . 
They shot to fame with their hugely successful single The Final Countdown and have since become tour veterans , having played more than 1,000 concerts . 
They are set to release their eighth studio album , Last Look At Eden , this month . 
Joey tells Bruce about the pressures that success has brought and explains why he chose to live in London and not Sweden , like his fellow band mates . 
Jodie is undecided about whether to have a Sikh wedding ceremony , in the last visit of the week to Silver Street . 
Sway teases her about the downside of marrying Kuljit . 
Brian discovers Jodie and Sway have a lot in common and wonders whether Jodie is marrying the right guy . 
Brian then takes Imran off for a game of darts -- he knows just how to make Imran miss-throw . 
Later , Jodie claims she is sure about marrying Kuljit , but who is she trying to convince -- Sway or herself ? 
Jodie is played by Vineeta Rishi , Sway by Mark Monero , Brian by Gerard McDermott and Imran by Narinder Samra . 
BBC World Service 's daily news interactive discussion show , hosted by Ros Atkins , finds out , first-hand , from people around the world how the global recession has affected their lives . 
The program asks whether the past year has been all doom and gloom for people , with headlines dominated by bank bailouts , food prices and sub-prime lending , or whether some have emerged unscathed from the financial turmoil . 
It also hosts a wider debate around some key topics . 
Listeners can join in this global conversation via telephone , online , via mobile and Twitter -LRB- BBC_WHYS -RRB- to share their experiences with others . 
This special edition is also broadcast on BBC World News . 
This edition of World Have Your Say is part of Aftershock , a new season of programs broadcast in September on the BBC 's International News Services -- BBC World Service , BBC World News and BBC.com -- investigating the impact of the global recession . 
