Michael Jackson was being treated for insomnia , court documents show Pop star Michael Jackson had lethal levels of the powerful anesthetic propofol in his body when he died , coroner 's office documents show . 
The findings were contained in a previously sealed search warrant which has been made public in Texas . 
The singer died in June from a cardiac arrest at his home in Los Angeles . 
Police have interviewed his doctor , but he has not been named as a suspect . 
There are reports that the coroner has concluded Jackson 's death was homicide . 
The reports , carried by the Associated Press news agency quoting unnamed police sources , have not been confirmed . 
But the BBC 's Rajesh Mirchandani in Los Angeles says homicide includes manslaughter , and investigators have been trying to establish if there is a case for that charge . 
A powerful anesthetic usually used before and during surgery Can also be used in small doses to reduce stress or anxiety Produced as a white , opaque fluid and administered intravenously Marketed under the trade name Diprivan Jackson 's doctor , Conrad Murray , has denied any wrongdoing . 
Dr Murray 's lawyer Ed Chernoff said in a statement that various details surrounding the investigation were just `` police theory '' . 
`` Dr Murray simply never told investigators that he found Michael Jackson at 11am not breathing . 
He also never said that he waited a mere ten minutes before leaving to make several phone calls . 
`` In fact , Dr. Murray never said that he left Michael Jackson 's room to make phone calls at all . '' 
Mr Chernoff added he would comment on the coroner 's report when it is officially released . 
Details of the Los Angeles County coroners ' findings were revealed when a search warrant affidavit was made public in Houston , Texas , where Dr Murray has offices . 
Dr Murray 's offices were raided last month as part of the police investigation into the singer 's death . 
The coroner 's office has not published its findings regarding the singer 's death . 
According to the affidavit , the LA chief coroner `` had reviewed the preliminary toxicology results and his preliminary assessment of Jackson 's cause of death was due to lethal levels of propofol '' . 
The documents go on to say that Dr Murray told police he had been giving Jackson propofol as part of his treatment for insomnia . 
But , he said he had been concerned Jackson was becoming addicted to the drug and had been trying to wean him off , using alternative drugs . 
But , on the morning of the singer 's death , Dr Murray is reported to have relented and given Jackson a lower dosage of propofol after a number of other drugs had not worked . 
He left the star alone to make some telephone calls and when he returned Jackson was not breathing , the LA Times reports . 
Dr Murray is known to have performed CPR on his patient while the paramedics were called , but Jackson was declared dead when he arrived at hospital . 
Dr Conrad Murray speaking on 18 August : I told the truth Bottles of propofol found in Jackson 's house show it had been prescribed by several doctors , not just Conrad Murray , but he remains at the center of the inquiry , our correspondent adds . 
Earlier this month , Dr Murray - who was employed as Michael Jackson 's personal physician for a series of concerts in London scheduled for July - posted a video message on YouTube to thank his supporters . 
`` I told the truth and I have faith the truth will prevail , '' he said in the short one-minute clip . 
