A photo caption said that Louisiana fisherman Acy Cooper Jr. was making a `` rare '' shrimping trip and that he `` is n't on the water much anymore . '' 
Cooper was making about three shrimping trips a week in September and October , according to records of the trips that he provided . 
Six months after the spill , BP 's money is changing the gulf as much as its oil Wednesday , October 20 , 2010 ; 12:55 AM VENICE , LA. -- The oil has mostly disappeared . 
And in southern Louisiana , things are finally looking normal - improbably , blessedly normal - six months after the largest oil spill in U.S. history . 
But on a truly normal evening , Acy Cooper Jr. would be out shrimping . 
Instead , one recent night , he was staying home , as he has done more often these days . 
It do n't pay me to do that when they 're going to pay my claim anyway , '' said Cooper , vice president of the state 's shrimpers association . 
Today , it is BP 's money , not its oil , that is most visibly altering the Gulf Coast . 
The company has been trying - on federal orders - to protect not just the water but the way of life there . 
But BP 's waterfall of cash has changed people 's lives profoundly . 
The oil company has already paid out $ 965 million and set aside $ 20 billion in a separate compensation fund . 
The money has been welcomed as a lifeline . 
But it has made the coast feel like an open-air economic experiment : Some hardworking fishermen think it 's in their best interest to be idle , losing market share they will need next year . 
And those who have n't been paid are looking for legal and illegal ways to work the system . 
Kenneth R. Feinberg , whom President Obama chose as compensation czar , says fishermen such as Cooper are wrong to believe he will pay them not to shrimp . 
They will be compensated for the time they could n't fish , but `` if a shrimper has the ability to earn a livelihood , there is no longer a need for an emergency payment , '' he said . 
Across the coast , Feinberg said , people are already seeing the limits of what money - even an oil company 's massive amount of money - can do to right an environmental wrong . 
`` I told 9\/11 victims when they said , ` Bring back my wife , or my son or my daughter ' - ' I ca n't do that , ' '' said Feinberg , who also oversaw compensation payouts to victims of the Sept. 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks . 
`` I ca n't compensate you in the gulf for a way of life that goes back 100 years . 
I can only compensate you for financial damages . '' 
And keeping up with that process is proving more difficult by the day . 
A few weeks ago , Feinberg 's fund adopted new policies that paid claims faster and more generously . 
The result : The rate of new claims doubled , Feinberg said . 
`` People see that their next-door neighbor is getting paid , '' he said . 
So they say , `` Why do n't we submit a claim ? '' 
It has been half a year since April 20 , when an explosion at the Deepwater Horizon rig killed 11 men . 
Two days later , the rig 's sinking set off a gray-brown geyser of crude oil , which eventually spewed 4.9 million barrels -LRB- 205.8 million gallons -RRB- , about 19 times more than the Exxon Valdez spill in 1989 . 
Scientists are still trying to measure the spill 's full impact on the gulf . 
Little oil remains on the water 's surface , and the toll of about 6,100 birds and 600 turtles was just a fraction of the animal deaths in the Alaska spill . 
There are continuing concerns about what 's happening on the seafloor . 
But it is already clear that this was not Valdez . 
