Wednesday , October 20 , 2010 ; 6:36 PM In June , President Obama tapped lawyer Kenneth R. Feinberg , 64 , to oversee the $ 20 billion account funded by BP to compensate victims of the Gulf Coast oil spill , making him the nation 's most famous mediator . 
Every week , Feinberg leaves his Pennsylvania Avenue office , where the walls are adorned with dozens of pictures and news articles chronicling his work , to spend time with fishermen and others who make their living off the coastal waters . 
In a recent interview with The Washington Post , the Brockton , Mass. , native , who also oversaw the government 's Sept. 11 Victim Compensation Fund , talked about the task ahead as he wraps up emergency claim payments and moves on to making final payments to victims . 
Excerpts follow : Have you met one-on-one with people who were affected by the spill ? 
I 've sat down personally with hundreds of people . 
I 've had town hall meetings throughout the gulf with thousands of people . 
You ca n't do this from Washington . 
You have to go down there , and that 's what I 've been doing . 
Why have the claims skyrocketed in the past two weeks ? 
People are getting paid . 
The payments are generous . 
People are saying , `` Let 's file a claim ; we might get paid too . '' 
We do n't know yet how many of them are legitimate . 
What problems are you experiencing with processing emergency claims ? 
There are 25,000 claims with absolutely no documentation . 
Thousands of them say things like , `` My neighbor got paid ; pay me too . '' 
Or they say , `` I fish off the gulf to eat . 
Send me grocery money . '' 
There are 50,000 of them with woefully inadequate documentation . 
What was wrong with the BP claim centers ? 
Why did they need to be replaced by your operation ? 
The BP claim centers served their purpose . 
It was an emergency bandage approach . 
Sometimes it went to the right people ; sometime it went to the wrong people . 
I know of situations where they paid people who were in desperate straits . 
I 've seen in many cases BP paid claimants and the payments appear to be fraudulent . 
When it comes to final payments , you are counseling people to take the money . 
Some are suspicious of whether you are looking out for their best interests , since BP is paying your firm -LRB- Feinberg Rozen LLP -RRB- $ 850,000 a month to run the program . 
What do you say ? 
