A World in Crisis Means A Chance for Greatness Aspiring U.S. politicians dream of being FDR , but rarely do the times and the person converge . 
The next president will have the chance to be a 21st-century FDR . 
For either Barack Obama or John McCain , the first duty will be to restore confidence . 
Hundreds of billions of dollars have been allotted to fix the financial breakdown . 
But fears have gripped the country . 
The new president needs not only a bold program but also the resolution to reassure . 
The parallels with FDR offer a striking starting point . 
The new administration will need to recapitalize banks . 
It will also need to offer millions of American families a lifeline by helping homeowners manage their mortgage debts while staying in their homes . 
This modernized New Deal would simultaneously extend a hand to the broad middle class while countering the continuing slide in house prices that continue to drive down communities , lenders ' portfolios and trust . 
The new president will need to overhaul a failed financial regulatory and supervisory system in a way that preserves innovation . 
He will need to establish clearing and settlement mechanisms to ensure that failing firms do not freeze credit markets , to set strong liquidity as well as capital standards for the financial sector , and to thwart irresponsible behavior . 
And beyond all that , the new team will need a fiscal-stimulus package that the New Deal left out . 
Political leadership is not just about programs and bills . 
The new president will need to use his first hundred days to build his standing . 
He must point the way to use the United States ' ingenuity and restored sense of purpose to build for the future : quality schools , basic health-care choices and worker assistance to help citizens adjust to change in a competitive world ; immigration rules that let the United States attract talent and regenerate its spirit ; and more low-carbon technology to enable growth while protecting both the environment and national security . 
Then , after opening the coffers of the U.S. Treasury , the president will need to guide both Congress and the public to rebuild savings and responsibility . 
The next president faces another historic challenge : reintroducing the United States to the world . 
He could make a good start by promptly sending the vice president and the new secretaries of state , Treasury and defense to consult with countries large and small , developed and developing , on all continents . 
In early 1989 , Secretary of State James A. Baker III visited 15 NATO allies in eight days . 
With four emissaries , the new president could reach 50 countries or more in his first months in office . 
Those envoys should have a simple message : to listen and learn . 
Of course , the new team should have some initial ideas and priorities to discuss , but taking the time to hear other world leaders ' insights and concerns will prove as shrewd an investment as recapitalizing the banks . 
In 1944 , FDR and the other architects of the postwar Bretton Woods system built for the future even as they fought the armies of the past . 
The Bretton Woods generation left two legacies : first , international institutions -LRB- such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund -RRB- and , second , an intellectual and political commitment to act multilaterally to turn the problems of an era into opportunities . 
The new president can build on that legacy by modernizing multilateralism and markets . 
A new Bretton Woods should start by recognizing that the old G-7 club of the world 's most industrialized nations needs to give way to a new steering group that includes rising economic stakeholders . 
Rather than return to mid-20th-century models , the new multilateralism needs to be flexible , not fixed . 
It must be pragmatic , too -- maximizing the strength of interconnected global actors , including not just existing institutions such as the World Bank , the IMF and the United Nations but also private-sector firms and NGOs . 
In a networked world , we need networked multilateralism . 
That should be a litmus test for a Bretton Woods 2.0 . 
The new multilateralism will need to connect , for example , growth , development , trade , energy and climate change . 
The world expects to negotiate a new climate-change treaty by the end of next year , and that depends on recognizing development interests while shifting to lower carbon growth . 
To help the `` bottom billion '' in post-conflict and fragile states , the United Nations and the World Bank need to secure development with roots deep enough to break the cycle of fragility and violence . 
A new president should build on his predecessor 's financial innovations for development , including for HIV\/AIDS treatment , the Millennium Challenge Corporation and the new Climate Investment Funds . 
The aftershocks of the developed countries ' financial crisis and recession will also require the United States to work with other countries , the World Bank and the IMF to help the most vulnerable . 
We need a human rescue , not just a financial rescue . 
With the global economy under stress , the world will be watching the president 's commitment to cutting trade barriers and wasteful agricultural subsidies in the Doha World Trade Organization negotiation . 
The rise of such developing economies as China and India provides the world with multiple poles of growth that can help a global recovery . 
But the emergence of these big new economic players also serves as fodder for scaremongers , intent on whipping up fear about the effects on living standards in the developed world . 
