BEIJING\/NEW DELHI | Tue Mar 22 , 2011 9:11 am EDT BEIJING\/NEW DELHI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - China said on Tuesday that Western air strikes on Libya risked a `` humanitarian disaster , '' adding to the chorus of criticism from big emerging powers over the U.N.-authorized campaign . 
China , with Russia , India , Brazil and other developing countries have condemned the U.S.-led air strikes on Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi as risky and unwarranted overreaching by the West . 
The shared opposition to the Libya campaign could become a point of diplomatic convergence among the `` BRICS '' bloc of major emerging economies -- Brazil , Russia , India , China and South Africa -- which hold a summit in south China next month . 
But it is unlikely to evolve into united action by this disparate group of countries , with their own mutual rivalries , said Shi Yinhong , a professor of international security at Renmin University in Beijing . 
`` Undoubtedly , many developing countries see a dangerous precedent in the Western attacks and intervention -LRB- in Libya -RRB- in what is fundamentally a civil war , '' said Shi . 
`` But Russia , China and the others will be afraid of a serious break with the United States or offending the Arab countries , so they wo n't push their opposition far , '' he said . 
`` I think the idea that the BRIC countries would act as a coalition on this is outlandish . 
They are too deeply meshed with the West to risk a split , '' Shi added . 
Western powers began the strikes against Libya over the weekend in a U.N.-sanctioned campaign to target air defenses , enforce a no-fly zone and protect civilians from Gaddafi 's forces . 
India , China and Russia -- which , along with Brazil , abstained from last week 's U.N. Security Council resolution -- have a history of opposing intervention in sovereign states . 
They opposed the U.S.-led campaign over Kosovo in the 1990s , when the Chinese embassy in Belgrade was bombed , and also opposed the U.S. led invasion of Iraq . 
Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin , compared the campaign in Libya to the Iraq invasion , saying it `` resembles medieval calls for crusades . 
Brazil 's criticisms have been relatively muted . 
On Monday , it called for a ceasefire in Libya and regretted the loss of life there . 
Of the BRICS , only South Africa supported the U.N. Resolution . 
China has been among the loudest in voicing opposition . 
`` We have noted the reports about civilian casualties from the military action against Libya by the countries concerned , and we express our deep concern about this , '' the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Jiang Yu told a news conference in Beijing . 
`` The original intent of the -LRB- U.N. -RRB- Security Council resolution was to protect the security of the Libya 's people . 
We oppose the wanton use of armed force causing even more civilian casualties and an even bigger humanitarian disaster . '' 
She added that French President Nicolas Sarkozy , a strong proponent of the most vocal proponents of the no-fly zone over Libya , will visit China at the end of March to attend a seminar on global monetary reform . 
`` What is happening in a country , within their internal affairs , no external powers should interfere in it , '' Pranab Mukherjee , India 's finance minister and leader of the lower house of parliament , told lawmakers in New Delhi on Tuesday . 
`` Nobody , not a couple of countries , can take that decision to change a particular regime , '' Mukherjee said . 
The emerging powers could maintain their more united front over Libya in the coming weeks ahead of the BRICS summit in China , said Srinath Raghavan , a senior fellow at the Center for Policy Research in New Delhi . 
`` If there is a serious ceasefire proposal or negotiated settlement , then the BRICS could well jump in diplomatically . 
They may want to then shape a global consensus if the West 's policies get in trouble , '' Raghavan said . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
American tax-payers are fed up with paying for all these wars for the next few generations ! 
The Russian Dictator Putin decries the NATO bombing of the Libyan Dictator 's missiles , as Crusades . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
