EDITOR 'S NOTE : PICTURE TAKEN ON GUIDED GOVERNMENT TOUR Libyan government soldiers react during a visit by the media at the west gate of town Ajdabiyah March 16 , 2011 . 
Picture taken March 16 , 2011 . 
SAO PAULO | Tue Mar 22 , 2011 2:12 am EDT SAO PAULO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Brazilian government called late on Monday for a ceasefire in Libya , where air attacks by the United States and its allies sought to stop the advance of Muammar Gaddafi 's forces on rebel-held towns . 
The goal of a ceasefire should be to protect civilians and pave the way for dialogue between the Libyan government and its opponents , the Foreign Affairs Ministry said in a statement made just hours after a visit by U.S. President Barack Obama to Brazil . 
`` After regretting the loss of lives because of the conflict in the country , the Brazilian government hopes that an effective cease-fire be implemented as soon as possible to allow the protection of civilians and the start of dialogue , '' the statement said . 
Last week , Brazil , China , India , Germany and Russia abstained from passing a U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force to impose a no-fly zone in Libya . 
Libya 's conflict gained momentum in late February after a wave of citizen protests against Gaddafi 's government grew into a rebel movement that took control of some territory . 
Troops loyal to Gaddafi have advanced on rebel-held towns , raising concern over the danger to civilians . 
Anti-aircraft fire rang out across Tripoli for a third night on Monday , but air attacks on Libya are likely to slow , a U.S. general said , as Washington holds back from being sucked into the Libyan civil war . 
Coalition airstrikes against Libya led by the United States , France and Britain began on Saturday during Obama 's visit to Brazil , his first stop on a trip to Latin America . 
Obama is scheduled to fly to El Salvador from Chile later on Tuesday . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
