Lewis Lapham 's collection of journalism , Theater of War , shows he was right about Bush , the ` war on terror ' and Iraq . 
Being right is n't enough , says Peter Preston Here , in 20 graceful , witty , prophetic essays , is everything that 's good about American journalism -LRB- and a rich slice of American society , too -RRB- . 
The editor of Harper 's magazine writes like a dream , researches like a punctilious professor of classical history and finds his lonely judgments vindicated time and again . 
The difficulty - and it is a difficulty - is that that good side comes with a greyer side that readers outside America ca n't ignore , a built-in impotence verging on tragic irrelevance . 
But let 's hit the high spots first . 
We have Lapham , aged 10 , remembering the day America dropped a bomb on Hiroshima , the day Buckminster Fuller saw humanity begin ` taking its final exam ' . 
So , almost six decades on , the fear of a nuclear weapon brought into Manhattan ` does n't seem much different from the fear of a nuclear weapon delivered to the same address by a Soviet submarine 70 miles east of Nantucket ' . 
He did n't buy the ` war on terrorism ' . 
He did n't buy Iraq . 
He despised the phoney build-up to a phoney war as a cowed , blinkered media played dumb and Congress became the voice of the ` frightened rich ' . 
He scorned the White House 's crude propaganda . 
` In place of Hitler or Stalin , the American armies found the remnants of a dictator more accurately compared to a psychopathic prison warden , a brutal but almost comic figure . ' 
He was right on WMDs , right on the messy aftermath of invasion , right on the hollow rhetoric of Team Bush . 
Crucially , he is right about the theater of war , a melodrama that seemingly dooms the United States , century after century , to suppress its internal tensions because of some confected outside threat , to choose a ` war ' against terrorists , drug dealers or communist remnants rather than save the poor blacks of New Orleans -LRB- or collect their bodies weeks after the flood -RRB- . 
This is passionate stuff , triumphant in its foresight and nowhere reaching for the crutch of hindsight . 
So what 's the problem ? 
Simply , alas , that Lapham 's too infinitely erudite for his , or our , good . 
Washington 2005 as the Rome of two millenniums ago ? 
Quotes up front from Auden , Marlowe , Keats and Bertrand Russell ? 
Two paragraphs at the end of an essay on global warming and mankind 's fragility manage to mention Bach , Dachau , the altars of Poseidon , Elizabethan merchants buying French cannons , the thoughts of Loren Eiseley and memories of Cisalpine Gaul . 
Well , we all like to show off a bit . 
What 's the use of 70-plus years of high-minded education if you ca n't use it in your daily business ? 
Emperor Heraclius , Suleiman the Magnificent and Donald Rumsfeld march in step through these pages . 
But you can have too much of a sumptuously referenced thing and Lapham does n't know where to stop . 
The American public is n't as stupid as its political leaders suppose , he says . 
He has faith in their wisdom . 
And the case he makes about the tacky , self-serving nature of American democracy could n't be more dazzlingly argued . 
Time after time , current events bear him out . 
But why , then , does n't that triumph of analysis catch the wise electorate 's imagination to change policies and directions ? 
It 's not a hard question to answer . 
Because Joe Public is a bit blank about Suleiman the Magnificent . 
Because Lapham seems to be writing for a coterie of curled lips , mostly within 20 miles of Fifth Avenue . 
Because he makes no real effort to break out and move the hearts and minds that might move mountains . 
There 's a nice quote from the master about politicians being trained ` to know the taste of the boot polish ' , but Mencken preached in a broader church . 
Lapham sits with others in the side chapel of Gore Vidal . 
He mocks other journalists truckling to the corporations that own their minds and pens . 
He ca n't find a single recent President to admire . 
Not Kennedy , the ` spendthrift heir ' , not Carter , nor Clinton , never mind the burning Bushes . 
America 's voters do n't require ` presidential candidates to know where to look on the map for Zanzibar or Romania ' , apparently . 
` Lack of knowledge on the topics of foreign affairs is a proof of virtue . ' 
They airily waved George W through as he flubbered away . 
But sometimes , surely , it 's necessary for political writers to get serious about deadly serious politics . 
Sometimes , they have to make the connections that move the minds of the people who matter . 
One tragedy of America 's present predicament , to be sure , is a fourth estate too cowed or corporatised to challenge the money and power which shadow their existence . 
Here comes Halliburton , contracted rebuilder of New Orleans ; you 'd laugh if you were n't crying first . 
The friends of Cheney , supposed saviors of Baghdad , have risen to a new cash challenge . 
Yet where are the voices that could make a difference ? 
Fox News has such voices . 
They turn dodgy theses into reality by the rasping certainty of their repetition . 
The right shouts with a will and calls that winning the argument . 
America 's big city chain papers have a few dissenting voices , but balance them out so they are canceled out . 
Even the New York Times and the Washington Post have mumbled into their martinis these past five years . 
And the rest , if not silent , exist only in a few small corners of intellectual refinement sprayed lightly with contempt . 
Maybe New Orleans has swilled some of that caution and intellectual scorn away . 
Maybe the spectacle of so much poverty , so much black poverty , in a toxic backyard will flush out the corners of the salons . 
Do n't bet on it , though . 
The right has already found Mr Bush not guilty and waits for the worst of the shouting to die away . 
Is Louis Lapham an adornment to American journalism ? 
Is his critique of wars not worth the fighting perceptive and exhilarating ? 
Often better than that . 
Why , then , do he and his fellow sages sit on the peripheries of influence and concern under any administration , Democrat or Republican ? 
Because , in part , they choose to ; because the sidelines fit their sense of rectitude and superior self better . 
It 's a terrible shame . 
