Al-Qaeda 's slaughter has one aim : civil war 150 died in one day in Baghdad - and Iraqis , not foreign fighters , are now the insurgency 's keenest recruits . 
Peter Beaumont investigates how this crucial shift has changed the fight The unemployed gather like blown drifts where jobs are to be had . 
They queue around the block in weary , patient lines at barracks and police stations , clutching their identity papers . 
They queue to dig ditches or shovel rubbish from the streets , or gather in the early morning in dusty streets and squares where builders tout for labourers . 
Last week the bombers came to al-Uruba Square in Kadhimiya , a Shia area of Baghdad . 
With its vast , important , gold-domed mosque , it has been a favorite for the suicide bombers . 
On Wednesday the driver of a van , pretending to seek day labourers , called men to his vehicle . 
As they approached , he detonated 220 kilos of high explosives , killing 114 people and injuring 150 more . 
This was the beginning of one of Iraq 's bloodiest days , but , despite the carnage , far from its most murderous . 
In a series of bomb explosions and shootings , 150 people would lose their lives and 500 would be injured . 
It was followed by yesterday 's toll of 30 people killed and 38 wounded in a car bombing in Nahrwan , around 30 miles from Baghdad . 
Earlier in the day police in Baghdad found nine bodies shot in the head and chest in three separate incidents , while in Baquba one man died and 17 people , including three Iraqi soldiers , were wounded when a car driven by a suicide bomber exploded near an Iraqi army patrol . 
As officials of Iraq 's Shia-dominated government , including those at the overworked Institute of Forensic Medicine , study the aftermath of the latest bombings , it is with a new fear : that they will find the bomber was not a Syrian , Yemeni , Saudi or even a Briton , but a brother Iraqi recruited by al-Qaeda . 
A year ago analysis of the identities of suicide bombers deployed by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi 's al-Qaeda in Iraq suggested the vast majority of suicide volunteers were foreign fighters smuggled across the Syrian border . 
A year on , the government , and its multinational allies , are confronting a shocking new reality : an emboldened and reinvigorated al-Qaeda that for the first time is attracting increasingly large numbers of young Iraqi Sunnis to its cause - and to die in suicide operations . 
Following a week in which Zarqawi ` declared total war ' on the country 's Shia majority after the co-ordinated series of attacks that began in Kadhimiya , British and American officials have admitted that there is growing evidence that al-Qaeda is strengthening its grip in Iraq . 
In the most alarming development , officials concede that for the first time that a significant number of suicide attacks in the country are now being undertaken by Iraqis . 
The recruitment of Iraqi suicide bombers by al-Qaeda comes at a time when Iraqi Sunnis also appear to be taking increasingly senior roles in al-Qaeda in their country , and at a time that the leadership and aims of the wider insurgency have become increasingly blurred . 
Some American officials have claimed that as much as half of Zarqawi 's organization is now Iraqi , but their British counterparts are more careful , admitting only that they are alarmed by the number of Iraqis volunteering to carry out suicide operations . 
` Everything points to the fact that Iraq has become the main point of effort for al - Qaeda now , ' said one British official . 
` There is evidence that al-Qaeda globally is sending human and financial resources to support the struggle in Iraq . ' 
What is not clear is the nature of the links between al-Qaeda 's current poster boy for international jihad and senior members of Osama bin Laden 's operation , and what role they are playing in the organization in Iraq , although some officials strongly suspect that they are involved . 
What has emerged is that al-Qaeda in Iraq has three explicit targets : to hurt the US and Britain on the ground ; to attack democracy ; and to attack Shias , whom they regard as schismatic apostates . 
` There is a feeling in al - Qaeda that Iraq is the springboard for their wider ambitions , ' said the official . 
` To that end they have upped their game in Iraq significantly in the last 12 months . ' 
That view is endorsed by a US official who told the Los Angeles Times last week : ` They are the best game in town , the most organised organization . ' 
What is doubly worrying for the US and Iraq is evidence that , where once even many Sunnis who actively supported the wider insurgency still regarded al-Qaeda and its tactics as deeply unpalatable , now - despite rejecting al-Qaeda 's vision of a return to a medieval caliphate - they are more willing to accept Zarqawi 's methods as a valid weapon in their struggle . 
The emerging picture of al-Qaeda and its operations is increasingly alarming Washington , London and Baghdad . 
Although few feel safe estimating the size of Zarqawi 's network , one places the hardcore of the organization as around 10 per cent of the total of Iraq 's insurgency , itself thought to command upwards of 20,000 committed fighters . 
By this account , Zarqawi 's organization would be between 1,000 and 2,000 in total , not including the suicide bombers who pass through its hands . 
At the head of the Iraq organization is Zarqawi and a series of key aides who co-ordinate strategy and logistics . 
Beyond this small , central group are locally com - manded al-Qaeda groups in major cities and areas of activity which are under the command of individual 'em irs ' . 
According to officials , each of these emirs , who are in charge of operations , logistics , finance and planning , is paired with a propaganda chief in charge of communicating al-Qaeda 's recruitment message to the local organizations . 
` Zarqawi 's organization is the most secretive operating in Iraq , and probably the best , ' said one British official . 
` For that reason , it has probably always looked bigger than it is . ' 
Yet the existence of such an effective terrorist organization , even if it is just a small part of the insurgency , has created another paradox that Western military and intelligence officials are grappling with : the willingness of Iraqis to fight where al-Qaeda is under assault . 
In Falluja , 40 miles west of Baghdad , and the northern city of Tal Afar ` what has been extraordinary on both occasions is the number of people who picked up weapons ' , said one official . 
` The orthodoxy had been to expect more resistance from the foreign fighters . ' 
One explanation for al-Qaeda 's new appeal to Iraqi fighters is supplied by Mowaffak Rubaie , Iraq 's national security adviser and a former Shia activist , who said last week that ` there 's no doubt ' that once-nationalistic elements of the insurgency were now drifting toward Zarqawi . 
` There 's a tendency to religionise the insurgency , ' he said . 
` Religion is a strong motive . 
You 're not going to find someone who 's going to die for Baathists . ' 
It is not only the apparent resilience of al-Qaeda in Iraq as an organization and its ability to replenish itself after setbacks that is worrying military and intelligence officials : the organization 's ability to refresh the ranks of its volunteers for suicide operations is also causing alarm . 
` What is striking , ' said one Whitehall analyst , ` is that a year ago al-Qaeda would have extravaganzas and then run out of suicide bombers , so there would be a lull . 
We had 11 on a single day last week . ' 
Iraqi and Western officials are not the only ones who are waking up to the new potential of al-Qaeda in Iraq . 
After two years and more of ignoring the problem , Iraq 's neighbors are now taking an urgent interest in the group 's ability to flourish , conscious that , after Iraq , their own regimes are in the crosshairs . 
If last week 's bombings were designed to deliver one message - the provocation of the Shias into a broadening civil conflict - Zarqawi 's declaration of total war , broadcast by al-Qaeda 's ` Jihad Media Battalion ' on the internet , had a different audience in mind . 
That audience was potential recruits , urging them to abandon moderate Sunni clerics in favor of al-Qaeda 's apocalyptic agenda . 
Describing the joint US-Iraqi assault on Tal Afar , Zarqawi sought to cast the Sunnis as victims of a vicious sectarian war . 
` Sunnis who managed to escape from the hell of the crusader bombing , ' claimed Zarqawi , ` were seized by the treacherous hands of the treacherous -LRB- Badr -RRB- corps and others , who abused and murdered the men and who desecrated the women 's honor and stole their jewellery and ornaments . 
` This is an organised sectarian war , whose details were carefully planned , against the will of those whose vision has been blinded and whose hearts have been hardened by Allah . 
` Beware , oh Sunni scholars - has your sons ' blood become so cheap in your eyes that you have sold it for a low price ? 
Has the honor of your women become so trivial in your eyes ? 
It is a declaration of war on Iraq 's Shias last week , Western officials fear , that has exploded in the middle of the rapidly souring relations between even those Sunnis and Shias who had previously sought to ignore the country 's sectarian differences . 
In the directness of its call to arms , it suggests an al-Qaeda in Iraq that is emboldened and far from worn down by the long months of war . 
It is this that is alarming US and UK intelligence officials most . 
The most frightening development of all is the way in which Sunni nationalist insurgent leaderships and al-Qaeda 's leaderships are growing closer in a number of areas . 
` There used to be a clear division in our minds between what we used to call `` terrorists '' and `` insurgents '' in Iraq , ' said the Whitehall official . 
` Now there is a blurring as these groups come closer together . ' 
From a political point of view , any closing of the gap between the wider insurgency and al-Qaeda is deeply problematic for the policy of trying to engage those insurgents who could be incorporated into Iraq 's political process , and thus isolating al - Qaeda and the hardliners . 
None of which is any consolation to the families of the dead labourers of Kadhimiya . 
