New Yorkers queued around the block to see two British political heavyweights - writer Christopher Hitchens and MP George Galloway - square up over the war in Iraq . 
Andrew Anthony flew to america to take them both on ... Outside the Mason Hall in Gramercy Park , Manhattan , a long line of people stretched around the block as they queued for the sold-out showdown between Christopher Hitchens , the English journalist and essayist domiciled in America , and George Galloway , the Respect MP for Bethnal Green and Bow . 
Billed as the Grapple in the Big Apple , this two-Brit debate on the Iraq war had galvanised and divided New York 's political classes in a manner that perhaps no native orators could achieve . 
For fans of a certain kind of muscular polemic , Hitchens v Galloway was the equivalent of an historic heavyweight prize fight . 
Indeed , so oversubscribed was the event that some were suggesting , not entirely in jest , that it should have been moved to Madison Square Garden , scene of countless boxing epics . 
As it was , in the more claustrophobic setting of a community college , tempers were running high . 
` This country is the most evil empire the world has ever known , ' announced Bill Mann , a short stocky man with a flat nose and a Brooklyn accent that made Tony Curtis sound like Gregory Peck . 
Mann informed me with unshakeable confidence that there would not be a single Hitchens supporter in the audience . ' 
I support Hitchens , ' said David Katz , a rather lugubrious-looking character standing directly behind Mann . 
Suddenly a street-corner argument was served up like an undercard bout before the main event . 
Mann presented his thesis that America had killed more people than any other nation and that the Soviet Union liberated Europe . 
` Yeah , tell that to the Poles , and the Czechs and the Romanians , ' said Katz , as he defended America 's global record on fighting for freedom . 
Katz 's speech did not go down well with the crowd and one woman , who told me that she was a ` progressive egalitarian humanist ' , became so exasperated that she stormed off . 
` It 's OK , ' explained Katz , ` that 's my wife . ' 
Further along , dressed in black and hobbling on crutches , was a man named Roy Rollin who said that he was a ` far-left Trotskyite ' backing Galloway . 
He looked like Richard III and spoke like Rick from The Young Ones . 
` Hitchens has sold his soul to the imperial bourgeoisie to ingratiate himself into the ruling class of America , ' he said . 
These days you would have to rent out an early Woody Allen comedy if you wanted to hear an American employ this kind of language , but Rollin was not joking . 
Nor was anyone else . 
The sense that the proceedings were something of a throwback to a more revolutionary era became impossible to ignore when Hitchens turned up and began distributing leaflets to the crowd . 
They listed Galloway 's various statements and political positions down the years , most of which were news to those gathered . 
To them Galloway was a plain-speaking Scot who had socked it to a Senate committee back in May . 
Some were surprised to read that he had saluted Saddam Hussein and praised other Middle East dictators like Syria 's Bashar al-Assad . 
Nevertheless , Hitchens was met with a volley of abuse , much of it from Rollin , though nothing like what was to come . 
Teetering on the elegant side of dishevelled , Hitchens cut a defiant figure shuffling along the line . 
` Have you got the sheet on fascism ? ' 
he asked , as he proffered another leaflet . 
A veteran of these kinds of meetings , he seemed to relish the contest . 
In years gone by when he was a columnist with the Nation -LRB- the voice of the American dissenting left -RRB- , he was feted by the very people who were now calling him ` disgusting ' , ` an opportunistic whore ' , and other less complimentary terms . 
Nowadays he is denounced by metropolitan radicals as a turncoat . 
First for backing the invasion of Afghanistan , following the 9\/11 attacks , and then , more controversially , for endorsing the invasion of Iraq and the toppling of Saddam Hussein in 2003 . 
Yet buried beneath the accusations and counter accusations , the sense of fringe politics betrayal and disloyalty , this dispute in a college hall also pointed to the heart of much larger issues such as anti-imperialism and principled intervention , totalitarianism and democracy , jihadi terrorism and American militarism . 
Thus it was a kind of theatrical representation of the disagreements that are currently reshaping , splitting and even destroying what was once known as the Left . 
To get a clearer picture of this fracture , I wanted to speak to Hitchens and Galloway before their clash . 
I wanted to visit their respective training camps and discuss at length their opposing outlooks away from the heated atmosphere of the ring - excuse me , stage . 
First I planned to travel to Portugal to see Galloway in his infamous holiday home . 
Then I would go to Washington , where Hitchens now makes a comfortable living as one of the most prolific and gifted political writers in the business . 
Everything seemed set until I made a cardinal error . 
Just a week before the interview with Galloway , I wrote a column that questioned his views on the relationship between free speech and religion . 
At the Edinburgh festival , he had warned in a discussion on a television adaptation of The Satanic Verses that anyone who offended religious beliefs should be aware that they would suffer ` blowback ' . 
` You should do it very carefully , ' he cautioned . 
As the comment was addressed to a panel that included Salman Rushdie , who knew all about ` blowback ' , it might have been construed as indelicate or even threatening . 
I wondered in print how Galloway could appear to be so sensitive to the issue of faith while at the same time lamenting the collapse of the Soviet Union -LRB- what he called the ` biggest catastrophe of my life ' -RRB- , an atheist state in which many people had been imprisoned for 25 years in slave labor camps for the crime of praying . 
But it seems that Galloway , the tough former boxer from Dundee , can take most things in his stride , except criticism . 
The interview was off . ' 
I do n't want to talk to you , ' he told me on the phone , ` and that 's it . ' 
This was a shame . 
I was looking forward to Portugal , and had already mentally packed my swimming trunks . 
With the possible exception of Robert Kilroy-Silk , a man with whom he has a number of uncanny similarities , Galloway is the most deeply tanned politician ever to step foot in Parliament . 
My guess was that we would have had our chat poolside . 
It might not have ranked alongside Galloway 's midnights swims with Fidel Castro in Cuba , but it would have been a welcome break from what we workers refer to as the struggle . 
There were also some questions I wanted to put to him . 
For instance , if he is so firmly committed to anti-imperialism that in any battle between North Korea , Kim Jong-Il 's slave state , and the United States he has said that he would side with North Korea , why did he appear to support the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan , a war that is estimated to have killed as many as 1.5 million people and also inspired a generation of jihadis ? 
How could Galloway denounce Arab dictatorships yet toady up to Saddam in 1994 , when he was well aware of his endless crimes . ' 
I thought the President would appreciate to know , ' he told the dictator to his face , ` that even today , three years after the war , I still meet families who are calling their new-born sons Saddam . 
I salute your courage , your strength , your indefatigability . ' 
How could he go to Syria and announce that the country was ` lucky to have Bashar al-Assad as her president ' when its people had no say in the matter . 
And was there any level of terrorist barbarity in Iraq and elsewhere that he would condemn , or was everything acceptable in the war against Western capitalism and democracy ? 
The answers would have to wait . 
Still , I hoped to talk to him in New York before or after the debate . 
In the meantime I flew to Washington DC to put another set of questions to Hitchens . 
Given that neither Hitchens nor Galloway are men who recoil from the sound of their own voice , and both have a persuasive talent with words , it would be a challenge to invent two more contrasting personalities . 
Hitchens is a former public schoolboy who went to Oxford , while Galloway attended grammar school in Dundee and graduated with honors from the uncompromising study that is the Scottish Labor Party . 
Both were drawn to the far left , Hitchens to the Trotskyist International Socialists , which he soon quit , and Galloway to what was effectively the Stalinist wing of the Labor movement . 
He is careful not to praise Stalin the man but rather his achievements in ` industrialising ' the Soviet Union - a process that led , of course , to millions of deaths . 
But perhaps their most commented-upon difference is that Galloway is a teetotaller , while Hitchens , to put it at its mildest , is not . 
I met up with Hitchens at a Georgetown restaurant after a White House party thrown for President Talabani of Iraq . 
He was with a number of Washington wonks and Kurdish supporters , and also Ann Clwyd , Tony Blair 's special envoy on human rights to Iraq . 
Clwyd had known Talabani since his days as a Kurdish resistance leader fighting Saddam . 
She could recall visiting him in the mountains when the idea that he would become president seemed so fanciful as to be absurd . 
What she could not recall was the anti-Saddam activism that Galloway insists he once took part in . 
The Respect MP claims that he was a staunch opponent of Saddam , only supporting his cause after Iraq invaded Kuwait and thereby made an enemy of the US . 
In that first Gulf War , Hitchens , too , took Iraq 's side against the US-led coalition . 
` At the time I would freely admit I really hated Bush senior , ' he told me . 
` But I quite soon began to feel like a dog being washed . 
I did know about the nature of the Saddam regime because I 'd already been in Iraq . 
I had no excuse not to know . 
I suppose I have to plead guilty to thinking of Kuwait as a royal family rather than a nation , but I knew better . 
I was fatally irresolute about this . ' 
It was a visit to Kurdistan , where he saw that Bush Snr was viewed as a hero , that changed his mind . 
For a long time he had thought that unless the Americans created a Palestinian homeland they had no business in the Middle East . ' 
I still do believe in the establishment of a Palestinian homeland but I no longer think that everything else has to be postponed . ' 
It 's this kind of analysis that has led many of his former allies to dismiss him as a neo-conservative . 
` No , ' he states , ` I 'm not any kind of conservative . ' 
All the same , he admires the neo-cons ' willingness to confront the status quo . 
` One heard people who claimed to have radical credentials say that the removal of Saddam would destabilise the Middle East . 
Well excuse me comrades , you like it the way it is ? 
Destabilisation is now a bad word ? ' 
Of course , many people surveying the instability of Iraq today do indeed question the wisdom of the intervention . 
In a perceptive essay he wrote on Churchill , Hitchens suggested a few years ago that the British wartime leader was too committed to war ` to turn back without risking ridicule or obloquy ' . 
I asked him if he ever felt aware of the same risk . 
` There is no analogy to the Churchill position , ' he replies . 
` What would it take for me to desert -LRB- the Iraqi secular and democratic forces -RRB- ? 
Well nothing , there is no way . 
It 's like saying , `` Oh I could n't very well be your friend after you 'd gone broke and been mugged , and after that burglary at your home . '' ' 
Nor is he any more tolerant of the argument that Iraq is another Vietnam . 
` There were no fascists against the Vietnam war but every fascist group is against the war in Iraq . 
I was not against the Vietnam war ; I was pro-the Vietnamese revolution . 
And I would be the same today . 
Galloway is not anti-war . 
He 's pro-war on the other side . 
He 's gone to all the trouble to make that clear and in a way I admire that . 
I think he is hypocritical insofar as he does n't always say the things in London that he says in the Middle East . ' 
Hitchens says that he no longer has any political allegiances , and something he mentioned just before we parted - after a 4am finish at his downtown apartment - seemed to point to where the chasm had opened up between himself and his opponents . 
` It 's not really an argument about the facts of the matter . 
It 's an argument about the mentality . ' 
Whatever patience or sympathy he once had with the outlook that sees the West only as the problem and never the solution had been exhausted . 
His side and Galloway 's side were separated by fundamentally opposing perceptions of reality that could not be bridged by means of reason . 
It did not bode well for the debate . 
In New York I introduced myself to Galloway before the hostilities were under way . 
He smiled and said hello then turned and walked away . 
I was beginning to accept that he was not going to talk to me . 
The event had been arranged as part of his American book tour , promoting Mr Galloway Goes to Washington . 
Tomorrow in Chicago he is speaking with Jane Fonda , a partnership that was organised , much to Hitchens 's amusement , by Eve Ensler , author of The Vagina Monologues At last Hitchens and Galloway took their positions at podiums on either side of the stage , neither looking at the other . 
Among the audience was Oona King , the former Labor MP defeated by Galloway in Bethnal Green . 
In his beard and open-necked casual blue shirt , the Englishman resembled the part-time college lecturer that he in fact is . 
Galloway , by fastidious contrast , was wearing a beige suit with a carefully co-ordinated tie , his bronze pate shining under the stage lights . 
Hitchens began his proposal - ` the war in Iraq is just and necessary ' - by calling for a minute 's silence for the 160 Iraqis murdered that morning in Baghdad by al-Qaeda . 
There were instant boos and hails of protest from some members of the audience . 
In July in Syria Galloway had given a speech celebrating the ' 145 military operations every day ' made by ` these poor Iraqis - ragged people with their sandals and their Kalashnikovs ... ' But the Iraqis killed on Wednesday were poor labourers looking for work and they were blown apart by sophisticated explosives . 
It was not clear to me at least why they were unworthy of a minute 's silence . 
In many ways , the level of debate never recovered from this indecency . 
Both speakers accused one another of sinking to the gutter and both made direct attacks on the other , though it was Galloway who was perhaps the more personal . 
Seeking to trump the ` drink-sodden former Trotskyist popinjay ' remark with which he had bested Hitchens outside the Senate committee meeting back in May , he reflected on his earlier admiration for the writer . 
He had gone on to make natural history , said Galloway , ` by metamorphosing from a butterfly into a slug ' . 
After that he then accused Hitchens of being ` ready to fight to the last drop of other people 's blood ' . 
These were prepared insults that may have pleased a section of the crowd but said nothing about the situation in Iraq today , much less the situation under Saddam . 
But the cheers that they elicited appeared to lift Galloway , or at least the volume of his voice , till he reached a pitch of finger-waving declamation that was both comical and a little frightening to behold . 
Even the moderator , the less than neutral anti-war broadcaster , Amy Goodman , was moved to ask Galloway to place the microphone further away from his mouth . 
But it was to no avail . 
` You did write like an angel , ' Galloway screamed at Hitchens , ` and now you are working for the devil . 
Damn you and damn all your words . ' 
At one of the more surreal moments in the evening , Galloway , his tan reddening as the veins in his neck did battle with his tie , accused Hitchens of ` cheap demagoguery ' . 
The ` popinjay ' may have his faults , but demagoguery is not his style . 
Instead he prefers a more urbane approach of teasing out ironies and inconsistencies . 
How , he wondered , after Galloway had invoked Cindy Sheehan , the antiwar protesting mother of a slain soldier , could he go to Syria and praise the murderers of the son then come here and offer support for the mother . 
Yet Hitchens allowed much of the goodwill he built up to dissipate when he refused to blame George Bush for the debacle in New Orleans , and resisted the idea that racism played a part in the plight of the abandoned citizens of the Gulf coast . 
It seemed almost as if he had it with the bien pensants of the left and wanted to get at them any way that he could . 
As the debate drew to a close , both speakers were eager to finish . 
Like two fighters who had no more punches to throw , they were waiting for the bell . 
Opinion was divided over who triumphed , though from where I sat Hitchens won on points . 
America may see itself as the home of democracy , but there was no vote . 
So it was left to the market to decide . 
A post-event book signing was convened and it was noticeable that the queue was almost twice as long to see Hitchens . 
In the end the evening served to confirm much of what we already knew : Galloway will ally himself with anyone , no matter what their politics , against what he calls the ` two biggest rogue states in the world ' , America and Britain . 
And Hitchens has developed a steely contempt for the defeatism of his former friends . 
` This is masochism , ' he told the audience , ` but it 's being offered to you by a sadist . ' 
Afterwards Amy Goodman told me that in the US it was hard ` to get a debate in which two people disagreed with each other ' . 
I 'm not sure that that 's true , though it might be that to get two people who disagree with each other as much as Hitchens and Galloway you have to look to Britain , which has a more rumbustious tradition in these matters . 
In any case , the two sides of what was once the left - the interventionists and the anti-imperialists - have seldom seemed so far apart , nor Iraq so far away . 
