Libyan leaders may face arrest warrants for alleged war crimes The U.N. 's special envoy to Libya says both sides told him that they were ready for a cease-fire . 
The chief prosecutor for the International Criminal Court said in a report Wednesday there are `` reasonable grounds to believe that crimes against humanity have been committed and continue being committed in Libya . '' 
The report highlighted the alleged commission of rape by Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's government , as well as the deportation or forcible transfer of citizens during the civil war that continues to rage in that country . 
It also noted war crimes , including intentionally directing attacks against civilians not participating in the fighting . 
ICC Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo issued a statement saying he will soon request arrest warrants against three individuals who are `` most responsible for the crimes committed . '' 
The individuals were not named . 
`` It is indeed a characteristic of the situation in Libya that massive crimes are reportedly committed upon instruction of a few persons who control the organizations that execute the orders , '' the report said . 
`` Arresting those who ordered the commission of crimes , should the judges decide to issue warrants , will contribute to the protection of civilians in Libya . '' 
In March , shortly after the International Criminal Court was asked to investigate the issue , a court spokeswoman said Gadhafi would probably face serious charges . 
But the prosecutor did not name the people against whom he had evidence . 
`` Even today , people in Tripoli are arrested illegally , tortured and they disappear , '' Moreno-Ocampo told CNN . 
`` We have evidence of that and we will show it to the judges . '' 
It is not clear if he plans to file charges against anyone on the rebel side , though the report mentioned `` alleged war crimes as well as other crimes against humanity '' appear to have been committed by `` different parties . '' 
He warned when he opened the probe two months ago that the rebels are subject to international law just as Gadhafi 's forces are . 
`` Now , there are people opposing Gadhafi with weapons . 
And also we would like to warn them , you can not commit crimes . 
Our business in Libya is -LRB- to -RRB- stop the crimes , '' he told CNN in March . 
Susan Rice , the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations , said the specter of ICC prosecution `` should warn those around Gadhafi about the perils of continuing to tie their fate to his . '' 
`` Gadhafi has lost any and all legitimacy to lead Libya , '' she said , remarking on `` widespread and systematic attacks '' against civilians by government forces . 
