Gulf oil spill : Will Deepwater sink the 101-year-old BP ? 
Mud-smeared BP logos , boycotts , and an almost halved market value indicate deep disgust over the handling of the oil slick Wednesday 2 June 2010 17.37 BST Crosses erected this week on Grand Isle , Louisiana , flagging up the damage from the Deepwater Horizon rig spill . 
Photograph : Patrick Semansky\/AP At a BP service station in downtown Manhattan , the British company 's green and yellow logo has been defaced with huge brown smears of mud . 
Protesters clad as oil - soaked mermaids have occupied garage forecourts , anti-BP demonstrations are taking place from Los Angeles to Florida , and a boycott BP campaign is creating a buzz on the internet . 
BP 's name is , quite simply , dirt . 
Americans are disgusted with the once proud London-based energy company . 
As political leaders threaten criminal prosecution and possible seizure of the company 's assets , and environmentalists bay for blood , BP 's stock is plummeting : it has fallen by a third since the Deepwater Horizon rig caught fire on 20 April , causing the worst oil slick in US history . 
In financial circles , questions are growing about whether BP can salvage its reputation in the US and whether the company can survive as an independent entity at all . 
`` Ultimately , we 've got no idea how much this accident is going to cost , '' said Dougie Youngson , an energy analyst at Arbuthnot Securities . 
`` People have been throwing around numbers like $ 10bn , $ 15bn , $ 20bn , but the reality is we just do n't know . 
They 've made five attempts to plug this leaking well and they 've all failed . '' 
Youngson believes there is a real possibility the Deepwater disaster could destroy BP , leading to a break-up of the 101-year-old company , which employs 80,000 people , operates 22,400 petrol stations and generated $ 239bn of revenue last year . 
He said : `` The longer this situation goes on , the more realistic that becomes . '' 
The US interior secretary , Ken Salazar , has warned that BP 's `` life is very much on the line '' . 
The company 's market value has dropped from $ 122bn to barely $ 80bn . 
John Kilduff , an energy analyst turned hedge-fund manager at Round Earth Capital , told CNBC television : `` It 's questionable whether they can continue to do business in the United States . '' 
Seemingly aware of its rock-bottom public image , BP this week hired Anne Womack-Kolton , once press secretary to the former vice-president Dick Cheney , to bolster its public relations effort in the US . 
A CBS poll found that 70 % of Americans disapprove of the way BP has handled the oil spill . 
And the worst has yet to come : so far relatively little oil has washed up on the US coast ; in the weeks ahead , images of stricken birdlife , clogged marshland and blackened beaches are likely to be ubiquitous . 
James Hoopes , a professor of business ethics at Babson College , in Massachusetts , said it was hard to imagine a worse public relations fiasco . 
`` This has to be one of the all-time disasters for corporate reputation . 
The most graceful course of action for BP would be to hang its head for a very long time and admit it has some deep issues to deal with . '' 
The company 's predicament is far worse than Exxon 's battering in 1989 when the Exxon Valdez tanker hit a reef off Alaska . 
Not only is BP a foreign company with little claim to US loyalty but it is a repeat offender : memories are raw of BP 's Texas City refinery blast in 2005 which killed 15 workers after serious safety lapses , and of the damage caused to the Alaskan wilderness in 2006 by leaking BP pipelines which , the firm admitted , had not been maintained adequately . 
`` Is BP dishonest , is it ill-intentioned ? '' 
`` I do n't think there 's any evidence to suggest those things . 
But the ethical lapse concerns a lack of caution and lack of responsibility in handling what is an inherently risky business . 
Accidents happen but there is evidence to suggest that BP is unusually accident prone . '' 
As of Tuesday , some 257,000 people had signed up to a Facebook page advocating a boycott of BP . 
Additionally , a consumer advocacy group , Public Citizen , is calling for Americans to avoid filling up at BP petrol stations for three months to punish the company . 
Tyson Slocum , director of the Public Citizen 's Energy Program , pointed out that BP had pleaded guilty to two environmental charges arising from its Texas City and Alaskan difficulties , before the Deepwater spill took place . 
With valuable , tangible , property around the world , BP is not in danger of simply evaporating like Enron , Arthur Andersen or Lehman Brothers all asset-poor business that had little left after they lost their reputations . 
Theoretically , the collapse in BP 's share price could make the firm cheap . 
Exxon Mobil and Royal Dutch Shell have been mooted as possible eventual purchasers . 
The Obama administration , which wants to cut US dependence on foreign oil money , would have a significant say ; it hands out exploration licences and is unlikely to be keen on Russian , Chinese or Middle Eastern control of strategically important American resources . 
Not everybody thinks BP is doomed . 
Charles Maxwell , an energy analyst at the US broker Weeden & Co , says he does not consider Deepwater Horizon fatal for BP . 
`` While you 're right in the melee , the battle rages harsh and hot and fierce around you , but there will come an end to it . 
They 'll drill a relief well and it will work , I 'm sure . '' 
Maxwell said reputational damage would fade since consumers barely distinguished between brands . 
He said that BP 's chief executive , Tony Hayward , who succeeded Lord Browne of Madingley as chief executive in 2007 , had not had enough time to repair the damage wreaked by his predecessor . 
To start regaining consumer trust , BP needs to show a more human face to America , said Dan McGinn , a communications expert at TMG Strategies , who suggested Hayward and his colleagues should `` emote '' more freely . 
`` Do n't make it so technical , so mechanical . 
Give us a sense of passion , that you feel people 's suffering . '' 
Corporate giants have rebounded from catastrophes before . 
The tyre maker Firestone , which seemed terminally tarnished in 2000 when it was accused of covering up flaws in products linked to hundreds of deadly accidents , turned around its reputation . 
And General Motors , which filed for bankruptcy just a year ago , is back on its feet , winning market share and praise for new models . 
`` What we do know is that you can suffer extraordinary damage in a short period of time but you can also recover , '' said McGinn . 
He added that the worst sins , in the eyes of the public , were not accidents themselves but a sense of gross incompetence , a perception of cruelty or veneer of sheer arrogance . 
`` If it comes across that you not only do n't understand but do n't care about the consequences of your actions , that 's unforgivable to Americans . '' 
A version appeared on p19 of the Main section section of the Guardian on cents Obama postpones trip to Australia and Indonesia to visit region Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
