US attorney general , Eric Holder , confirmed that a criminal and civil investigation had been opened Workers in Louisiana tackle oil from the Deepwater Horizon leak . 
BP will try again to cap the oil well later this week . 
Photograph : Ho\/Reuters The future of BP was in doubt last night after the US government launched a criminal investigation into the Gulf of Mexico disaster , the worst oil spill in American history . 
US attorney general , Eric Holder , confirmed that a criminal and civil investigation had been opened , sending BP 's shares down further before close of trading in the US . 
The shares fell 13 % on the FTSE today , wiping # 12bn off the company 's value . 
One stockbroker , Arbuthnot , captured the gloomy mood at the company , saying the disaster `` has a real possibility of breaking the company '' . 
Though Holder did not specify which companies would be in the crosshairs of the investigation , the actions of BP are likely to come under close scrutiny . 
`` We will closely examine the actions of those involved in the spill . 
If we find evidence of illegal behavior , we will be extremely forceful in our response , '' Holder said . 
He added that `` nothing is off the table at this point '' on the range of charges prosecutors could pursue , including straightforward criminal charges if they find false statements were made . 
BP said it would co-operate fully with any investigation . 
`` As our review expands in the days ahead , we will be meticulous , we will be comprehensive , and we will be aggressive , '' Holder told reporters yesterday . 
`` We will not rest until justice is done . '' 
BP 's dramatic shares slump sparked a wider plunge on the FTSE 100 Index yesterday . 
The company is a major constituent of the FTSE , accounting for around 7 % of the entire index , meaning that each 10p change in its share price moves the FTSE 100 by nearly 9 points . 
Its stock market misery also spells bad news for many of Britain 's pension funds , which invest heavily in BP shares . 
So far the group has lost around a third of its market value some # 40bn since being thrown into turmoil after the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded and sank on 20 April , killing 11 workers . 
After six weeks of failures to block the well or divert the oil , BP is now using robotic machines to cut into the twisted pipes of the well . 
Engineers are trying to break away the broken riser pipe , and then position a cap over the well 's opening . 
But even if this succeeds , it will temporarily increase the flow of an already huge leak by 20 % at least 380,000 litres more a day . 
