BP oil spill : Shares fall further Today 's losses mean that BP 's market value has plunged by nearly # 45bn , or 36 % , since the Deepwater Horizon rig caught fire and sank in April The pressure is mounting on the BP chief executive Tony Hayward after the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
Photograph : Suzanne Plunkett\/Reuters Another # 2.4 bn was wiped off the value of BP when trading began in London today , as investors continued to fear that the company 's management may not survive the Gulf of Mexico disaster . 
BP shares fell 3 % at the start of the trading session , sending its shares down to 417p , despite reports that the oil giant is promising investors that it will maintain its $ 10bn -LRB- # 6.82 bn -RRB- annual dividend payout . 
Today 's losses mean that BP 's market value has plunged by nearly # 45bn , or 36 % , since the Deepwater Horizon rig caught fire and sank in April . 
On Tuesday its shares shed 13 % following the company 's failure to block the well that is leaking tens of thousands of barrels of oil into the sea off the coast of Louisiana . 
The failure of the `` top kill '' operation in which 30,000 barrels of mud were pumped into the well over three days means oil is likely to keep leaking until a relief well is dug and BP can pump concrete into the well shaft . 
This could take until the start of August , well into the hurricane season . 
City experts are now speculating that BP could soon find itself fending off predators . 
City commentator David Buik of BGC Partners pointed out that the plunge in BP 's value will have been felt in pension pots across the country , and questioned whether the company 's management will survive . 
`` Tony Hayward has been an excellent CEO until this disaster and would appear to have been unlucky . 
However the buck sticks with the man at the top . 
If BP 's share price continues to fall , it could become a takeover target . 
There are so many imponderables over whether its liabilities would be capped or not . '' 
Hayward will tell institutional investors this week that BP 's annual dividend will not be cut , according to a report in the Times , despite the rising cost of the Deepwater Horizon disaster . 
The BP dividend was worth $ 10bn last year , about a sixth of the overall FTSE 100 dividend payout to shareholders . 
The damage to BP 's market capitalization dwarfs the $ 1bn cost , to date , of the clean-up operation . 
These costs will continue to stack up until the oil leak is finally stopped , after which BP will face compensation claims and possible fines from the US government . 
Some City analysts argue that traders have over-reacted by driving BP 's share price so low . 
Gordon Gray and James Evan of Collins Stewart said today that BP now looks undervalued versus its peers in the oil sector , unless the final cost of the liability reaches $ 40bn . 
`` We can not say with any confidence that an ultimate liability of this order of magnitude is not within the realms of possibility , '' they said , in a research note titled `` Value in the shares ? 
It 's not possible to say with confidence . '' 
President Obama announced a moratorium on certain off-shore drilling projects after the Deepwater Horizon explosion . 
Some commentators believe oil companies may find it harder to extract oil from sites far below the surface , as every one of BP 's efforts to stop the flow of oil into the sea has failed . 
