cents Analysts speculate on BP becoming takeover target cents Wind direction shift blows slick towards Florida Wednesday 2 June 2010 22.31 BST Oil cleanup workers hired by BP walk along the beach in Dauphin Island . 
Photograph : Dave Martin\/AP BP 's woes over the Deepwater Horizon oil disaster increased today when the company 's latest attempt to contain the spill foundered as a result of a saw getting stuck in the pipe from which the oil was gushing . 
Remote-controlled equipment on the sea bed , a mile beneath the surface in the Gulf of Mexico , positioned a diamond-edged saw against the bottom of the damaged pipe from which up to 19,000 barrels of oil are spewing daily . 
Engineers were hoping to make a clean cut across the pipe to allow a custom-built cap to be put on top , to siphon the oil to tankers on the surface . 
But after the saw jammed , a second device had to be taken down from a nearby ship , further delaying efforts to contain the spill , which is now in its fifth week . 
Admiral Thad Allen , leader of the federal response to the disaster , said : `` Anybody that has ever used a saw knows every once in a while it will bind up . 
That 's kind of what 's happening there . '' 
But later a source close to the operation said the operation to free the saw had been a success and the operation was continuing . 
BP 's chief executive , Tony Hayward , said today that the oil industry might have to change the way it operated in extracting deep-water oil . 
He told the Financial Times : `` We have been driving safe , reliable , operations through the company within the existing industry paradigm . 
What this causes us to question is whether that paradigm is right for the future . '' 
He conceded that BP had not been fully prepared to deal with the deep-water blow-out on 20 April . 
`` What is undoubtedly true is that we did not have the tools you would want in your tool kit . '' 
BP 's survival as an independent company is now being openly discussed in the City . 
Its share price continued to tumble today following the failed well-capping . 
Analysts are wondering whether merger talks as happened between BP and its arch rival Shell in 2007 might arise again as BP 's ability to pay dividends is questioned , and its public credibility in America , which provides 40 % of its income , plummets . 
BP 's share price fell 3 % in early trading on top of the double-digit falls seen on Tuesday , and it has now lost a third of its value -LRB- equating to # 44bn -RRB- since the Deepwater Horizon explosion . 
`` If BP 's share price continues to fall , it could become a takeover target , '' said David Buik , a financial commentator at the brokerage BGC Partners in London . 
`` There are so many imponderables over whether its liabilities would be capped or not . '' 
He said Hayward 's position seemed vulnerable . 
Hayward 's handling of the crisis has come under scrutiny following a series of gaffes . 
On Wednesday , he was forced to apologise for saying : `` I want my life back '' . 
He said the remark had been `` hurtful and thoughtless '' especially to the families of the 11 men who died in the well explosion . 
To add to the oil company 's problems , the wind has shifted and is now blowing the huge oil slick towards Florida . 
Authorities there have been laying booms along the threatened shoreline , anticipating the arrival of oil by the end of the week . 
Oil slicks have already polluted barrier islands off Alabama and Mississippi , and more than 100 miles of coastline in Louisiana . 
Speculation about BP 's future intensified after the US attorney general , Eric Holder , announced a criminal investigation of the disaster , though he did not specify BP by name . 
Analysts agreed that doubts about BP 's prospects were inevitable while the crisis continued . 
Kim Fustier , oil analyst with Credit Suisse , in London , said the risk of a dividend cut was clearly rising since potential spill liabilities could reach $ 37bn . 
But Fustier was not willing to comment on whether BP was a possible takeover target . 
Shell , which announced a $ 4.7 bn cash purchase of the US shale gas producer East Resources last week , said it never responded to that kind of speculation . 
The previous chief executive of BP , Lord Browne of Madingley , revealed in a recent autobiography entitled Beyond Business that he took BP to the brink of a merger with Shell six years ago only to be thwarted at the last minute by opposition from a handful of his own board members . 
`` We missed the boat . 
We estimated that a merger could create synergies of around $ 9bn a year in three to five years ' time . '' 
But there were also reports that Hayward had held similar discussions in 2007 when BP 's share price had been weakened by the Texas City refinery fire , in which 15 workers died . 
The plunging value of BP is a blow to British pension funds as it is estimated to provide # 1 in every # 7 paid in dividends by FTSE-100 companies . 
BP is also a big provider of revenue to the exchequer . 
It said last night that it paid $ 6.3 bn in global corporate income tax , of which $ 1.1 bn -LRB- # 690m -RRB- was in the UK . 
BP expects to pay about $ 4bn in 2009 in production taxes globally , of which # 130m would be in Britain . 
Duncan Exley , of lobby organization FairPensions , cautioned investors : `` Social and corporate governance issues have a history of precipitating crises which damage our economy and our investments . '' 
A version appeared on p18 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 11.52 BST on Thursday 3 June 2010 Follow all the top stories of the day on Twitter with the Guardian 's world news team achrisafis : French TV @itele reporting there might be up to 40 hostages taken in southern Algeria BP kidnap raid today #news 
