Overlooked among the systems that apparently failed in the Deepwater Horizon catastrophe is what could be the most crucial safety device of all : the human blowout preventer . 
Every person working on the oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico had the authority to stop action , according to the company that owned the Deepwater Horizon , if he or she considered the situation unsafe . 
Yet people exposed to an array of hazards refrained from demanding a halt , reflecting a pattern that extends to almost any office cubicle or industrial site . 
It is hard to rock the boat -- until it bursts into flames and sinks to the bottom of the ocean -- and a safety policy based on the assumption that any individual will rock the boat is likely to be flawed . 
Case in point : Michael Williams , a chief electronics technician on the Deepwater Horizon who displayed remarkable courage during the disaster and who brought those challenges into focus in testimony to a federal investigative board last month . 
He described speaking up about problems but there were limits to what he could or would do . 
Williams , an employee of rig owner Transocean , said he thought that the blowout preventer -- the last line of defense against a gusher -- had been damaged and that he had seen chunks of its black rubber innards ejected from the well . 
There was never enough time to keep up with scheduled maintenance on the rig , he said , and some parts were so old that it took a year to get replacements custom made . 
In addition , to avoid the nuisance of false alarms , a system meant to automatically warn the entire crew about fire or leaking gas was routinely deactivated . 
Meanwhile , a computer used to monitor and control drilling operations intermittently crashed , leaving the driller staring at `` the blue screen of death . '' 
In the middle of sensitive operations , the driller could switch chairs and move to backup computers , but if the backups failed , Williams said , the next step would be to `` abandon ship . '' 
Switching to a backup is not without risk , he pointed out : During the drilling of an earlier well , while the computer was out of commission for several seconds , the rig incurred a kick of gas , he said . 
At the government hearing in Kenner , La. , attorneys for BP , Transocean and the captain of the Deepwater Horizon pressed Williams about his power to shut down the rig . 
`` I want to ask whether or not you knew that you in fact not only had a right but you had an obligation to stop anything that you believed to be unsafe , '' said Kyle Schonekas , an attorney for the captain . 
`` You ever ask to stop operations on the rig because of the blue screen of death ? '' 
BP attorney Richard Godfrey asked . 
`` No , I did not . 
We had two other chairs , '' Williams answered . 
