The blown-out well in the Gulf of Mexico gushed 12 times faster than the government and BP estimated in the early weeks of the crisis and has spilled a whopping 4.9 million barrels , or 205.8 million gallons , according to a more detailed analysis announced late Monday . 
BP 's Macondo well spewed 62,000 barrels of oil a day initially , and as the reservoir gradually depleted itself , the flow eased to 53,000 barrels a day until the well was finally capped and sealed July 15 , according to scientists in the Flow Rate Technical Group , supervised by the U.S. Geological Survey and the U.S. Department of Energy . 
The new numbers once again have nudged upward the statistical scale of the disaster . 
If correct -- the government allows for a margin of error of 10 percent -- the flow rate would make this spill significantly larger than the Ixtoc I blowout of 1979 , which polluted the southern Gulf of Mexico with 138 million gallons over the course of 10 months . 
That had been the largest unintentional oil spill in history , surpassed only by the intentional spills in 1991 during the Persian Gulf War . 
The new flow rate figures came as engineers made final preparations for a `` static kill '' operation that might plug the well permanently even before a relief well intercepts Macondo at its base . 
BP announced late Monday that the procedure would be delayed , probably until Tuesday , because of a leak in the hydraulic control system on the well 's new cap . 
Macondo 's flow rate has been a major source of controversy since the April 20 explosion on the Deepwater Horizon . 
Early in the crisis , the Coast Guard and BP pegged the flow at 5,000 barrels a day , sticking with that figure even as outside scientists declared that it low-balled the actual rate . 
The flow rate team , assembled in May , tried to come up with a more solid figure . 
Scientists examining the surface slick as well as video taken by submersibles soon upped the estimate ; by early June , the government declared the flow to be 35,000 to 60,000 barrels a day . 
Even the high end of that estimate did not quite do justice to Macondo when it was at full throttle in the early weeks of the crisis . 
The new figures reflect more data , including high-definition video , sonar measurements of the oil-gas ratio , and pressure readings in the new capping stack before , and then after , the sealing of the well July 15 . 
`` We may never know the exact answer . 
But as we get more data , you 're able to shrink the uncertainty , '' said Bill Lehr , senior scientist for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and a leader of one of the teams . 
The new figures indicate that the roughly 800,000 barrels of oil that BP managed to capture with its various containment strategies -- a riser insertion tool , a `` top hat , '' and flaring from a surface rig -- represented only about one-sixth of the crude that surged into the gulf over the course of nearly three months . 
In all , about 1.2 million barrels of oil have been accounted for , either burned , captured or skimmed off the ocean 's surface . 
That 's about a quarter of the new estimate for the total spill . 
Where the other three-quarters has gone is unclear . 
Some has evaporated ; some has been consumed by microbes ; but scientists remain troubled by the possibility that large amounts of oil remain underwater in cloudlike plumes . 
`` This further confirms that a lot of the oil is still at sea . 
And we just do n't know the implications of it , '' said Ron Kendall , director of the Institute of Environmental and Human Health at Texas Tech University . 
Kendall will testify before Congress on Wednesday about his fears that dispersant chemicals have helped much of this oil sink into deep-sea habitats . 
For government lawyers preparing a case against BP , this number could help calculate the maximum civil penalty BP might face for the spill . 
If BP is not found to have acted with negligence , the penalty would be $ 1,100 per barrel . 
About 4.1 million barrels escaped into the gulf , according to the new estimate , so that fine would come to $ 4.5 billion . 
If BP is found to have acted with `` gross negligence '' in the lead-up to the spill , the maximum penalty would be $ 4,300 a barrel , which would work out to $ 17.6 billion . 
`` You 've got to go in with a number , '' said David Uhlmann , a law professor at the University of Michigan and the former chief of the Justic Department 's Environmental Crimes Section . 
`` And I think these numbers strengthen the government 's hand , '' compared with previous estimates that produced only a range . 
In all , the 4.1 million barrels estimated to have polluted the gulf would be enough to fill the Pentagon to a depth of 18 feet or to fill 260 Olympic swimming pools . 
The entire Gulf of Mexico , by comparison , would fill 880 million Pentagons , or 973 billion Olympic pools . 
John Amos at SkyTruth , an organization that uses satellite imagery to study environmental problems , said that this new figure showed how far off BP and the Coast Guard were in the crucial days at the beginning of the spill . 
`` When the next spill happens , being in the right order of magnitude with the spill estimate is going to be important , '' he said . 
The well remains pressurized and dangerous , but BP and government officials hope that will change with the static kill attempt . 
The goal is to inject mud into the well and drive the oil back to the source rock . 
First comes what BP calls an injectivity test . 
Mud will be pumped into the well from a surface ship at a gentle rate of one barrel a minute , then two barrels a minute , then three , as engineers monitor pressures and look for signs that the rogue oil is being forced back into the source rock 21\/2 miles below the seafloor . 
`` We want to confirm that we can inject the oil that 's in the well bore back into the reservoir , '' BP Senior Vice President Kent Wells told reporters Monday . '' 
