NEW YORK | Mon Jun 14 , 2010 6:55 pm EDT NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Anadarko Petroleum shares have been pummeled because of the company 's link to the Gulf oil spill , but legal experts and some investors say it may not be liable for any of the billions of dollars of cleanup costs faced by BP Plc , its partner in the offshore well . 
Anadarko owns a 25 percent interest in the well that suffered the blowout on April 20 that caused an explosion at a drilling rig , killing 11 and creating the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
The cost of the cleanup could run well into the tens of billions of dollars . 
While the contracts signed between partners in the development of oil wells call for each company to pay its proportional costs , BP , the operator of the well , could find itself footing the entire cleanup bill if Anadarko can prove the oil giant was negligent in drilling the well . 
`` The question is : is Anadarko going to be liable for cleanup costs , and I would say that 's the operator 's problem , '' said Michael Jones , adjunct professor of law at the South Texas College of Law . 
Investors are starting to bet that Anadarko , whose shares have tumbled 43 percent , may not face the financial hit that BP is likely to experience . 
It shares closed slightly higher on Monday at $ 42 , up about $ 7.50 from a year low on June 9 . 
`` There is every reason to believe that they will not be on the hook for more than the punitive cost of $ 75 million , '' said Keith Goddard , co-manager of the Capital Advisors Growth Fund , referring to statutory liability costs under current law . 
Goddard , whose firm recently bought 83,752 shares of Anadarko , said he believed the company could likely afford to pay its potential costs from the cleanup but still acknowledged there was a danger . 
For buyers of Anadarko shares , `` it 's a reasonable risk-reward -- a very low probability of losing it all and a very high probability of making a lot of money in a short period of time , '' Goddard said . 
Anadarko has said only that it was assessing various remedies around the oil spill and did not comment on potential legal strategies . 
The company 's role as solely a financial partner rather than as an operator of the well is key , if the issue were to go to trial , one lawyer said . 
`` Judges will take into account the fact that you have a completely innocent operator , '' Patrick Morris , a lawyer at the firm Johnson & Bell who represents oil companies in rig litigation . 
`` I think Anadarko 's defense could be pretty good , but it will take a long time '' for the issue to be settled . 
The potential damage to the company if it is held responsible for a quarter of cleanup costs could be devastating . 
`` It hurts -LRB- Anadarko -RRB- more pound for pound , inch for inch , than it does for BP . 
Anything over $ 20 billion total cost is going to hit Anadarko pretty hard , '' said Fadel Gheit , analyst with Oppenheimer & Co. . 
The odds that Anadarko will not face any liability could be too steep , he said . 
`` It 's a possibility , but I would n't want to make a bet on it , '' he added . 
That fear could keep the Anadarko shares under pressure as wary investors seek more clarity into just how expensive the cleanup of the oil from the Gulf and the sensitive coastal shore will be . 
`` Anadarko is one of my favorite companies on the planet , but I do n't think you can own it until the spill is stopped . 
Until you can actually stop it , the number just keeps going up , '' said Stephen Davis , associate portfolio manager at Alpine Mutual Funds . 
That fear and the uncertain impact of regulations that may be implemented by the U.S. government to prevent future accidents have meant that methods typically used by Wall Street to evaluate companies ' stocks have little merit here . 
`` People thought Anadarko was cheap at $ 70 , $ 60 , $ 50 -LRB- a share -RRB- . 
This is no longer a valuation call , '' Davis said . 
