BP 's name is so besmirched in DC that restoring its old Anglo-Iranian Oil Company moniker could hardly worsen things . 
It 's partly political posturing , but there 's a real threat too . 
Venezuelan-style expropriation may be a stretch , but Uncle Sam could still hurt the British oil giant badly . 
The typically even-tempered President Barack Obama has talked about finding some `` ass to kick , '' and BP investors , who have sold off the company 's shares sharply , are right to worry . 
Among the latest ideas aired by U.S. officials are making BP pay oil workers laid off as a result of the broad drilling moratorium imposed by the government , and forcing the company to suspend dividend payments . 
Some of these proposals test the limits of the law . 
But Uncle Sam has plenty of real sway over BP . 
Until its Gulf of Mexico fiasco began nearly two months ago , BP held pole position in America 's oil industry . 
Building on its late-1990s deals to buy Amoco and Atlantic Richfield , it had become the largest producer in federal waters in the Gulf . 
With $ 2.2 billion of annual supply contracts , it is also the top fuel supplier to the American military . 
Citigroup reckons nearly half BP 's value is , or was , attributable to its U.S. business . 
Stripping BP of existing production leases may be difficult legally . 
Once the oil starts to flow , these run in perpetuity and have very restricted termination clauses -- though lawyers in Houston are trawling for small print the government might invoke . 
Perhaps more likely is to use BP 's lamentable safety record to bar it from future U.S. production . 
While Exxon Mobil got religion on safety after the Valdez disaster 1989 , BP seemingly did not . 
Even after its lethal 2005 Texas City refinery explosion , two BP refineries accounted for 829 , or 97 percent , of the 851 `` willful '' violations found by government safety inspectors in the U.S. refining industry between June 2007 and February this year , according to the Center for Public Integrity . 
Then there are those Pentagon contracts , which must be at risk . 
All this presents a long-term threat beyond the costs related to the current disaster . 
Despite BP 's financial strength , it may eventually make BP 's U.S. operations , and indeed the whole company , candidates for possible sale -- and associated name changes that just might consign memories of BP , as well as Iran , to the seabed . 
The BP brand will certainly have to die in North America . 
Otherwise the US government should pick out a number that they think BP could survive -LRB- without bankruptcy -RRB- . 
Say it is $ 20 billion . 
Then set up an escrow account and cap the liability at that amount . 
Let the administrators of the escrow fund handle the inevitable swindles and lawsuits . 
Let BP get on with the job of stopping the oil leak and building a new corporate culture . 
Good presentation of the different choices except one thing that you fail to imagine : the qualification of a crime that could lead to hold BP CEO on the american territory and ask him for the famous caution to prepare freely his defense . 
Obama is going to make a declaration in some hours . 
`` There ai n't much he can say . 
We 're all commercial fishermen and we ca n't go out and make a living , '' he said in blazing heat in Venice , Louisiana . 
BP has to go . 
It 's very clear by now that this company cared nothing about the dangers of oil exploration\/production . 
Once a hurricane picks up that oil , BP will be responsible for singlehandedly casting a blight across the Gulf states . 
Perhaps even our eastern coastal states will suffer . 
I 'm sure it will be the darkest , most unwelcome hurricane anyone has ever seen . 
And to think that this destruction would be unleashed by a NATO ally . 
Way to represent your country BP . 
Get BP out of the picture and let our own expert salvage folks and engineers take over and get the job done . 
There are many respected Americans in the field that understand the problem and can solve it given the resources . 
Get them what they need . 
And get BP out . 
They are n't doing anything useful anyway . 
Benny ... where have you been ? 
US experts and scientists as well as staff from all other major US oil firms are already providing advise to BP . 
BP has mobilised all its available equipment to stop this leak and to reduce any damage by the already spilt oil . 
If all these experts have n't already managed it do you think asking BP to leave is going to make it better ? 
I am sure BP would be quite happy to just leave . 
It would save them helluva a lot of hassle and money , but , no , they are responsible enough to stick it out there until the damage is reduced as far as possible . 
One more thing ... what 's the point of having a separate escrow account for claims to be administered by an independent US civil service agency . 
BP has already been settling all claims on a 48 hr turn around time basis . 
I doubt any government agency would be that quick ! 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The company was founded in 1999 as Breakingviews.com and was acquired by Thomson Reuters in 2009 , becoming Reuters brand for financial commentary . 
Every day , we comment on the big financial stories as they break . 
Our expert analysis is provided by a global team of 30 correspondents based in New York , Washington , London , Hong Kong , Madrid , Dubai and Mumbai . 
For the full commentary and analysis service from breakingviews.com , including regular emails containing the latest views , contact sales@breakingviews.com . 
Breakingviews has published a selection of books for purchase and download . 
