Vessels on the surface are ready to resume collecting the oil The US fears oil may be seeping from the ocean floor near the stricken Gulf of Mexico oil well . 
The official in charge of the clean-up , Thad Allen , said if a substance leaking from the seabed was found to be methane this might mean oil was also leaking . 
He ordered BP to submit a plan to reopen the capped well if the seepage was confirmed , so that oil could be funnelled to the surface . 
But BP says it would take three days to start this process . 
During this time , the daily leakage of tens of thousands of barrels of oil , which had been capped last Thursday , could resume . 
The well began leaking oil into the Gulf after BP 's Deepwater Horizon oil rig exploded on 20 April , killing 11 workers , and capsized two days later . 
BP had hoped the cap could stay in place until relief wells stopped the leak for good . 
I direct you to provide me a written procedure for opening the choke valve as quickly as possible '' End Quote Thad Allen Letter to BP But with pressure readings from within the well lower than expected , scientists had raised concerns that oil could be leaking into the surrounding undersea bedrock . 
And in a letter to BP chief managing director Bob Dudley , Adm Allen said : `` Given the current observations ... including the detected seep a distance from the well and undetermined anomalies at the well head , monitoring of the seabed is of paramount importance ... `` I direct you to provide me a written procedure for opening the choke valve as quickly as possible without damaging the well should hydrocarbon seepage near the wellhead be confirmed . '' 
The flow of oil from the well was shut off by the cap at 1425 local time -LRB- 1925 GMT -RRB- on Thursday and testing has continued since then . 
Work on both of the relief wells designed to close off the well permanently is currently suspended because of the testing . 
The Gulf of Mexico spill has been described as the worst environmental disaster the US has seen . 
The BBC 's Laura Trevelyan explains why BP is being ordered to provide the plan The subsequent spill has affected hundreds of miles of Gulf coastline since April , with serious economic damage to the region as tourists have avoided Gulf Coast beaches and fishing grounds have remained closed . 
BP has put the costs of dealing with the disaster at over $ 3.95 bn -LRB- # 2.6 bn -RRB- . 
It has already paid out more than $ 200m to 32,000 claimants . 
The company is evaluating a further 17,000 for payment and is seeking more information on 61,000 other claims . 
British Prime Minister David Cameron is to meet Mr Obama in Washington on Tuesday , and BP - formerly British Petroleum - is expected to be a key topic of discussion . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL In June , BP placed a cap , known as an LMRP cap , over the top of the Deepwater Horizon well so oil could be collected at the surface . 
However , this continued to leak oil and has now been replaced with a better fitting device . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL When engineers removed the LMRP cap on 10 July , oil began to freely flow from the top of the blowout preventer once more . 
However , the Q4000 containment system continued to take some oil to the surface . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Engineers then bolted on a new capping stack onto the blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- . 
This allowed them to conduct a series of tests to see if the flow of oil could be stopped using the newly installed equipment . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL During the test the three ram capping stack has been closed and all sub-sea containment systems collecting the oil temporarily suspended , effectively blocking the flow of oil from the well . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Once the tests have been successfully completed , BP will resume collecting oil . 
The Helix Producer ship was recently connected to the BOP to provide another collection route in addition to the Q4000 rig . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
