2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Among the places in the running are Kennedy Space Center in Florida , the Smithsonian Institution in Washington , New York , Houston , Chicago , Seattle and Dayton , Ohio . 
Tuesday is the 30th anniversary of the first shuttle launch . 
Spaceflight anniversary -- Speaking of spaceflight anniversaries , Tuesday marks 50 years since the first time a human entered space . 
On this date in 1961 , Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin took a nearly two-hour ride into space and back aboard the Vostok 1 rocket before he and his capsule parachuted safely back to Earth . 
Civil War anniversary -- And , lest we forget , Tuesday also marks the 150th anniversary of the start of the Civil War , which began with Confederate forces ' pre-dawn shelling of the Union garrison at Fort Sumter , South Carolina . 
Over the next four years , 600,000 Americans would die and thousands of slaves would go free . 
But some of the wounds have never healed , as a CNN\/Opinion Research Corp. poll indicates . 
Conflict in Libya -- The civil war in Libya rages on after rebels seeking to oust leader Moammar Gadhafi rejected an African Union cease-fire proposal . 
The back-and-forth conflict could lead the country into violent anarchy like Somalia 's , Gadhafi 's former foreign minister warned in a BBC interview Monday . 
Federal budget -- In Washington , lawmakers are putting the finishing touches on the budget deal reached last weekend . 
Meanwhile , President Barack Obama and members of Congress are working on plans for next year 's budget , hammering out goals for taxation and spending . 
Barry Bonds trial -- The jury in former baseball star Barry Bonds ' perjury trial enters its third day of deliberations Tuesday . 
Bonds is accused of lying to a federal grand jury in 2003 about knowingly taking anabolic steroids and getting injections from anyone but his doctors . 
During a time of conflict throughout the world and crisis at home , President Obama has given us all hope with amazing speaches and a strong and forceful leadership style Who needs accountability in government and business , or jobs when you have inspiring words . 
April 12 , 2011 at 5:42 pm | Report abuse | The fact that the Russians were to be first in space is truly amazing . 
After WW2 all the German scientists , except for a handful who went to Great Britain , came to the U.S. and assisted us in our quest to go to space , whereas the Russians had no such assistance . 
I 'm still quite amazed . 
Although the US took the lion 's share of the scientists and records from Germany , Russia got their share of spoils in the way of scientists and records . 
Helmut Gr ttrup from Germany 's V-2 rocket program was moved to Russia after WWII is the first name to come to mind . 
Dimitri Ustinov Korolyov is the mastermind of the former Soviets ' space program , who developed the technology from captured German records with the help of Gr ttrup . 
Russia , just like every other major power following WW2 , used captured -LRB- not stolen , since it 's considered spoils of war -RRB- technology to get them where there are today . 
Good post , George . 
Do n't let these right-wing propagandists here fool you . 
Remember Operation Paper Clip ? 
That 's when the FBI went into Germany after WW2 to give some of these German scientists and engineers who were war criminals phoney IDs to get them out of Germany and over here to assist in our space and weapons programs . 
In fact , if Germany chose to to start a Manhatten project of their own before WW2 they would have been the first to have a nuclear weapon . 
April 12 , 2011 at 4:22 pm | Report abuse | Did this Helmut Grottrup ever exist in reality or was he a mere invention by the right-wing propagandists to mitigate the embarrasment of the West over Russia 's success in space ? 
With the C.I.A. it 's hard to tell these days . 
April 12 , 2011 at 7:48 pm | Report abuse | Houston deserves this ! 
We house and trained astronauts here ! 
We have been the eyes in the sky watching over these men and women for years . 
Allow us this opportunity ! 
ABC is reporting Houston is not gettin on ... what a joke ... Bet Kennedy gets one . 
April 12 , 2011 at 12:15 pm | Report abuse | Why is it truly amazing , George Patton ? 
Do you know something I do n't know ? 
Why are you still amazed ? 
What 's your reasoning ? 
I 'm truly curious ... Of COURSE Kennedy gets one , thats where we LAUNCH from ! 
I think houston should get Endeavour , Kennedy is getting Atlantis , and Discovery should go to the Smithsonian . 
I believe sending a shuttle to the Smithsonian was a given . 
Giving one to Kennedy Space Center also another no brainer . 
But just as obvious was leaving one at Johnson Space Center in Houston ... the Space City . 
The space program is so engrained and entrenched in the fabric of Houston and JSC that the city adopted the nickname in the 60 's . 
Our basketball team is the ROCKETS ; the baseball team is the ASTROS ! 
If politics was the basis for this short-sighted decision , better political capital could have been gained with at least sending it to Ohio ... a swing state in the forthcoming election . 
This momentous day -LRB- 50th anniversary of manned space flight & 30th anniversary of the shuttle launch -RRB- is now sullied . 
This just shows the fraud about this invasion cnn keep calling civil war . 
Uk and Paris planned on invading libya on November 2 , 2011 . 
And did did with the US and UN helps ! 
I KNOW THIS POST MIGHT BE EXTINCT BECUASE I 'm monitored . 
But stop these lies about civl war because it is an invasion for oil ! 
It 's very sad and a tragic injustice . 
Good post , TOMAS . 
I wonder why the right-wing nutjobs did n't try to block it but I 'm glad they did n't succeed if they tried at all . 
April 12 , 2011 at 7:40 pm | Report abuse | thats why they keep doing it . 
every one knows so why stop , the american ppl cant do anything bout it . 
The date in my last post is `` planned invasion on 11-02-2010 . '' 
this justifies the fact that Libya is invaded not because the man who turned deserts into productive farmlands and sleeps in tents like a camper is the wrong one in this imperialist racist crisis in libya . 
Truth is Mr. kadhafi is a leader for his people . 
Mubarak and ben ali along with the long list of the arab league were and or are leaders against their own people . 
This make col. Kadhafi and his people victims of another iraq type from , u know where ! 
He gives his best the thieves are trying to take away and give to their rich lobbysts ! 
: -RRB- That 's OK , Tomas . 
It 's still good posting . 
I get so sick and tired of all these ignorant fools blogging in here in favor of the uncalled for intervention in Libya . 
April 12 , 2011 at 11:34 pm | Report abuse | -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival in Merida , Mexico seems like they favor throwing candy instead of beads ! 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
