President Obama makes a statement on his small business jobs initiatives , Friday , June 11 , 2010 , in the Rose Garden of the White House . 
-LRB- AP -RRB- President Obama on Saturday reassured Prime Minister David Cameron that his frustration over the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico is not an attack on Britain . 
But a day earlier , Obama blasted U.S. lawmakers and Tea Party activists for criticizing his response to the nation 's worst environmental disaster , suggesting they are being hypocrites . 
`` I think it 's fair to say , if six months ago , before this spill had happened , I had gone up to Congress and I had said we need to crack down a lot harder on oil companies and we need to spend more money on technology to respond in case of a catastrophic spill , there are folks up there , who will not be named , who would have said this is classic , big-government overregulation and wasteful spending , '' he told Politico in an interview . 
Obama also suggested the criticism coming from anti-big government protesters , such as Tea Party activists , was hypocritical . 
`` Some of the same folks who have been hollering and saying ` do something ' are the same folks who , just two or three months ago , were suggesting that government needs to stop doing so much , '' Obama said . 
`` Some of the same people who are saying the president needs to show leadership and solve this problem are some of the same folks , who just a few months ago , were saying this guy is trying to engineer a takeover of our society through the federal government that is going to restrict our freedoms . '' 
But Obama sang a much different tune to Cameron on Saturday when the two leaders held a `` warm and constructive '' telephone conversation for more than 30 minutes , Cameron 's Downing St. office said . 
Cameron 's office said the prime minister `` expressed his sadness at the ongoing human and environmental catastrophe , '' but stressed BP 's economic important to Britain , the U.S. and other countries . 
Then Obama told the prime minister `` that his unequivocal view was that BP was a multinational global company and that frustrations about the oil spill had nothing to do with national identity . 
The prime minister stressed the economic importance of BP to the U.K. , U.S. and other countries . 
The president made clear that he had no interest in undermining BP 's value . '' 
Cameron is under pressure to get Obama to tone down the criticism fearing it will hurt the millions of British retirees that hold BP stock . 
The company 's stock has lost 40 percent of its value since the April 20 oil rig fire . 
Rep. Darrell Issa , R-Calif . 
, fired back at Obama over his criticism of Congress , saying hypocrisy is no excuse for inaction `` in addressing the dysfunctional and corrupt nature of the Minerals and Management Service '' -- the agency that oversees offshore drilling . 
`` If President Obama had exercised some long overdue leadership and called on Congress to address the cozy relationship between MMS and the industry they regulate , I would have been the very first person to partner with him and give MMS the overhaul it desperately needs , '' Issa said in a written statement . 
`` After 10 inspector general reports , 10 GAO reports , a congressional investigation , the real question is , why did it take such a catastrophe for the president to call for action , '' he said . 
Obama has sharpened his attacks on BP in recent days as the company struggles to stop oil gushing from its ruptured deepsea well . 
Obama has said he would have fired BP 's top executive , if he were in charge , and has supported the idea that the oil company suspend its quarterly dividend . 
In a sign the company feels the pressure , BP said Saturday that its board would meet Monday to discuss deferring its second-quarter dividend and putting the money into escrow until the company 's liabilities from the spill are known . 
BP said no decision had yet been made . 
Obama also has reproached BP for spending money on a public relations campaign and occasionally refers to `` British Petroleum , '' although the company years ago began using only its initials and is a far-reaching international corporation with extensive holdings in the United States , including a Texas refinery and a share of the Alaska oil pipeline . 
This past week , the usually measured Obama said in a television interview , `` I do n't sit around just talking to experts because this is a college seminar ; we talk to these folks because they potentially have the best answers -- so I know whose ass to kick . '' 
The Associated Press contributed to this report . 
