Like most Arab leaders , Jordan 's King Abdullah is still grappling with how best to respond to the growing crisis in Syria . 
But he is now the first Arab leader to openly say President Bashar al-Assad should step down and `` make sure whoever comes behind ... has the ability to change the status quo '' . 
His candid remarks , coupled with the Arab League 's bold suspension of Syria , are a turning point in the region 's approach to Damascus . 
Speaking in a BBC interview during a visit to London , Jordan 's monarch said if the Syrian leader acted in `` the interests of his country , he would step down but he would also create an ability to reach out and start a new phase of Syrian political life '' . 
King Abdullah still described Mr Assad as a leader who `` has reform in his blood . '' 
His greatest criticism was directed at what he called `` the system '' that did not allow for reform . 
`` I think we would delude ourselves , '' he emphasised , `` in thinking that the system would change dramatically if the individual was gone . '' 
His surprising candor comes after what he detailed as months of efforts by himself , and other leaders , to engage with an increasingly isolated Syrian president who still insists he is committed to reform . 
Thousands of Syrians have fled across the border into northern Lebanon to escape the crackdown The UN says Syria 's eight-month long uprising has cost 3,500 lives , mainly protestors but also members of Syria 's security forces involved in the violent crackdown . 
There is been no official response from Damascus yet to the king 's intervention . 
A spokesperson for the Syrian embassy in Washington , Roua Sharbaji , said : `` the Syrian president only derives his legitimacy from the Syrian people , and only the Syrian people are concerned with this matter '' . 
In an interview with the BBC World Service , she said : `` We do expect neighbouring Arab states to play a more constructive role to help Syria overcome this crisis . '' 
The Jordanian monarch said he had spoken twice to his neighbor earlier this year , and also sent his chief of royal court in June . 
If Bashar has the interest of his country -LRB- at heart -RRB- he would step down '' End Quote King Abdullah of Jordan `` It became very clear to me that they were not interested in dialogue with Jordan or a lot of other countries unfortunately , '' he remarked regretfully . 
He said the Syrian regime still believed it was in a `` fairly comfortable position and will continue to play groups off each other . '' 
He said there still was not a `` cohesive opposition '' inside Syria because it would be `` oppressed very quickly '' . 
King Abdullah has also come under unprecedented pressure for political reform in his own country . 
There are still no strong calls for an end to the Hashemite monarchy but opposition groups are calling for a stronger , more representative parliament and an elected prime minister . 
King Abdullah , who succeeded his father King Hussein in 1999 , has been talking about political reform since he came to power . 
His critics accuse him of going too slowly and being wary of far-reaching democratic reform . 
Asked why his frequent changes of prime ministers and governments - three this year alone - had not resulted in significant reform , King Abdullah replied : `` Those who are scared of change , whether it is political or economic , have been very destructive over the past 12 years . '' 
But he admitted he also had to `` shoulder responsibility '' . 
As for Syria , beyond calling on President Assad to do more to bring about political change , the king admitted no-one had a clear idea of how to move forward . 
10 June : Turkish PM condemns the `` savagery '' of the response to the unrest 19 July : Qatar closes its embassy in Damascus after an attack by Assad loyalists 8 August : Saudi Arabia condemns crackdown and recalls its envoy in Damascus 10 August : US imposes new sanctions on Syrian telecom companies and banks 18 August : US , UK , Germany and France call on President Assad to step down ; US imposes full ban on oil imports 12 November : Arab League suspends Syria from the organization 14 November : Jordanian king openly urges Mr Assad to go ; EU tightens sanctions `` If there is a life after Bashar , what is it ? '' 
Speaking of leaders across the region and beyond , he said , `` the unknown is scaring them more than the known '' . 
Mr Assad 's supporters in a country comprising many ethnic and religious minoritieas also cite fears of possible chaos and collapse as a convincing reason to stick with the current order . 
King Abdullah said concern about instability in Syria was heightened by other regional crises including the `` Iranian nuclear file '' and the absence of an Israeli-Palestinian peace deal `` which could be leading us into tremendous difficulty in 2012 '' . 
But he was adamant that no country was seriously considering military intervention . 
He warned that `` different countries have different agendas ... it would be playing ` Pandora 's box ' '' . 
Like all of Syria 's neighbors , Jordan is already giving refuge to thousands of Syrians fleeing across the border . 
The king said his country would continue to `` open our arms '' to those who had to leave . 
Syria is also a critical trade route for Jordan , providing the kingdom with essential goods , including food . 
Many tribes straddle the frontier , relying on cross-border trade . 
Tension between Arab neighbors can be explosive . 
But concern over the consequences of speaking out seems to have been eclipsed by greater worry over the mounting violence next door . 
King Abdullah said the Arab spring was `` not even half way through '' . 
He expected `` tumultuous changes '' across the region for the next few years . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
