By the CNN Wire Staff Libya Interior Minister joins revolution Libyan state TV reports `` gangs '' in Benghazi kidnapped Abdul Fattah Younis al Abidi Earlier Wednesday , al Abidi said he quit the government and supports protesters He predicted protesters will achieve victory in `` days or hours '' -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Hours after Libya 's former interior minister said he resigned to support anti-government protesters , the Libyan government said he had been kidnapped . 
Abdul Fattah Younis al Abidi told CNN Wednesday that he resigned Monday after hearing that 300 unarmed civilians had been killed in Benghazi , Libya 's second-largest city . 
He accused Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi of planning to attack civilians on a wide scale . 
But the same day , Libyan state media reported that `` gangs '' in Benghazi had kidnapped him . 
Witnesses have reported that Benghazi has essentially been taken over by the opposition . 
Witnesses also told CNN they saw Younis on Sunday and Monday in Benghazi , where he was siding with the protesters . 
CNN could not immediately confirm reports for areas beyond Benghazi . 
The Libyan government maintains tight control on communications and has not responded to repeated requests from CNN for access to the country . 
CNN has interviewed numerous witnesses by phone . 
Two people to watch Gadhafi : ' I will be a martyr ' Libyan protests threaten oil prices Eastern Libyan : I 'm a free man Libyan state television added that Libyan forces have warned those responsible for the kidnapping that they `` will be chased in their hiding places . '' 
Earlier Wednesday , al Abidi said he had quit the government and is supporting the protesters , who he predicted will achieve victory in `` days or hours . '' 
`` Gadhafi told me he was planning on using airplanes against the people in Benghazi , and I told him that he will have thousands of people killed if he does that , '' al Abidi said in an Arabic-language telephone interview Wednesday . 
He called Gadhafi `` a stubborn man '' who will not give up . 
`` He will either commit suicide or he will get killed , '' said al Abidi , who said he has known him since 1964 . 
Al Abidi called on Libyan security forces `` to join the people in the intifada . '' 
Already , he said , `` many members '' of the security forces had defected , including those in the capital , Tripoli . 
Since the recent protests in Libya started February 15 , a growing number of Libyan officials have reportedly resigned . 
Libya 's ambassador to Bangladesh , A.H. Elimam , resigned to side with pro-democracy protesters , said BSS , the official news agency of Bangladesh , citing a Foreign Ministry official Tuesday . 
CNN 's Waffa Munayyer contributed to this report . 
