Reports : Libyan pilots refuse to bomb city , eject from plane Even as Moammar Gadhafi called on the military to crack down on anti-government protesters , reports emerged Wednesday that the Libyan leader was facing growing international and domestic opposition , including from his own military . 
An opposition figure told CNN that a pilot who had been ordered to bomb oil fields southwest of Benghazi refused to do so and instead ejected from the plane . 
Citing military sources , the Libyan newspaper Quryna reported that the two people aboard -- the pilot and co-pilot -- parachuted out and that the plane then crashed into an uninhabited area west of Ajdabiya , 160 kilometers -LRB- 100 miles -RRB- southwest of Benghazi . 
Quryna itself is a sign of the changes sweeping through Libya . 
When protests began last week , it carried regime propaganda . 
But it later reported on the protests and casualty figures . 
CNN could not confirm reports for many areas in Libya . 
The Libyan government maintains tight control on communications and has not responded to repeated requests from CNN for access to the country . 
CNN has interviewed numerous witnesses by phone . 
A Libyan Arab Airlines plane was denied permission to land in Malta on Wednesday , Maltese government sources said . 
Permission was denied for `` clearance reasons , '' because officials did not know who was on board , the sources said . 
Meanwhile , Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini characterized the situation as a civil war , `` with the authorities of the capital ordering attacks against the same Libyan people -- bombings and acts of unprecedented violence . '' 
In a speech to the Italian Senate , Frattini said , `` Unconfirmed reports spoke of 1,000 deaths ; other sources have given even higher figures . '' 
He said the claim from official sources that put the total number of deaths nationwide at 200 to 300 deaths `` frankly lacks credibility . '' 
The head of the largest trauma hospital in Benghazi told CNN on Wednesday that 202 people have been confirmed dead in the city since protests began last week . 
The opposition now controls Benghazi and much of the rest of eastern Libya . 
On Wednesday , the ninth day of protests , Gadhafi faced more defections from within his regime and new international pressure to halt military actions against demonstrators . 
