Gadhafi in 2005 : To suggest Libya is not a democracy would be an insult He used elaborate fly whisk to wave away insects that were n't there Despite eccentricities , author Kenneth Timmerman says Gadhafi is cunning In 2005 Libya was a rogue state trying to redeem itself -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi is the strangest head of state I 've ever met . 
When I asked him about Libyan democracy he threatened to sue . 
`` If you or someone else says that Libya is not a democracy then it would be considered an insult , '' he said . 
`` We could go to court to redeem honor from that insult . '' 
The conversation was back in 2005 at his tent in Tripoli , a single-room structure made of colorful textiles in the middle of a heavily guarded compound . 
We sat on plastic garden furniture that had been carefully hand-cleaned by a man in an orderly 's uniform , while a small goat picked at patchy grass outside . 
Gadhafi is famous for his odd behavior , female bodyguards and bizarre ideas such as his plan to abolish Switzerland . 
We only saw very conventional male bodyguards . 
But even with their protection , Gadhafi 's manner made it hard to understand how he managed to stay in power for more than four decades . 
He did n't seem up to it . 
He appeared lethargic and his eyes , even behind sunglasses , seemed unfocused . 
2005 : Gadhafi on ending nuclear program His answers , through a translator , seemed rambling . 
Author Kenneth Timmerman , who has also met him , says Gadhafi has kept power through cunning . 
`` He 's a very , very skilled player , '' Timmerman said . 
`` He divides the country . 
He conquers the small groups . 
He 's kept the tribes squabbling amongst themselves , and up until relatively recently he has distributed some of the oil wealth to the people . '' 
Human rights groups also say that Gadhafi 's regime has killed , jailed and tortured its opponents . 
Libya today is in turmoil . 
Back then , it was in transition , a rogue state trying to redeem itself . 
Pressed by international sanctions , it had abandoned support for terrorist organizations , surrendered its weapons of mass destruction to the West and was trying to open-up its economy . 
Gadhafi told me he was angry that Libya never got the payoff it expected : U.S. esteem and investment . 
In part it was because Washington 's attention had turned to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
But it was also , no doubt , because no American president or politician would be eager to embrace the man Ronald Reagan once called a `` mad dog . '' 
In any country or company 's plans for Libya , Moammar Gadhafi was the wildcard , the unpredictable element . 
