BP oil spill blamed on management and communication failures White House report labels BP 's safety lapses ` chronic ' and says fatal Gulf of Mexico blowout could have been avoided Controlled burning in the aftermath of the Deepwater Horizon disaster . 
BP 's safety lapses have been labeled ` chronic ' . 
Photograph : Sipa Press\/Rex Features Bad management and a communications breakdown by BP and its Macondo well partners caused the oil disaster in the Gulf of Mexico , the White House oil spill commission said today . 
A report to the commission said safety lapses were `` chronic '' at the company and improvements to its systems still needed to be made . 
In its final public deliberations before delivering its findings to Barack Obama next month , the commission said the fatal blowout on BP 's well could have been avoided . 
`` The series of decisions that doomed Macondo evidenced a failure of management , and good management could have avoided a catastrophe , '' William Reilly , the co-chair of the investigation , said . 
A report by expert staff said all three companies BP , Halliburton , and Transocean were guilty of bad management . 
`` Most of the mistakes and oversights that led to the blowout were the result of management failures by BP , Halliburton Co , and Transocean Ltd , '' the staff concluded . 
However , the commission singled out BP for failing to ensure its cost-cutting measures did not further increase risks in an already dangerous environment . 
Further unchecked cost-cutting would mean `` financial pressures will likely bias decisions in favor of time and cost savings '' , technical staff said . 
The report , which reviewed seven accidents in the US and UK over the past decade , said : `` BP safety lapses appear to be chronic ; its systems safety engineering and safety culture still need improvement . '' 
The commission is holding its last public hearings today and tomorrow before delivering the official report on the blowout and clean-up effort to Obama in January . 
The commission went on to fault the three companies for poor communications . 
It said they failed to share important information which meant they did not fully appreciate the risks they were taking in the final days of the Deepwater Horizon . 
But the blame did not stop with the oil industry . 
The commission said there were huge gaps in monitoring offshore drilling . 
Oil companies are not even required to report accidents unless they are on the scale of the blowout out at BP 's Macondo well . 
`` Macondo was n't the black swan . 
It was n't a fluke , '' a staff member , Nancy Kete , told the commission . 
`` There have been a lot of incidents that have been serious enough to trigger a panel investigation . '' 
