LONDON | Tue Aug 9 , 2011 1:45 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Gold is set to widen its premium over platinum after hitting parity for the first time in 2-1\/2 years this week , with no end yet in sight to the potent cocktail of fear factors that are benefiting safe havens at the expense of cyclical assets . 
Gold prices rose above those of platinum for the first time since December 2008 late on Monday . 
The last time this happened , the situation reversed within a few days , and traders said then that the convergence of the gold-platinum ratio gave a clear signal to sell gold and buy platinum . 
Today 's backdrop is very different . 
`` Gold as a defensive asset is being driven higher at the moment by risk aversion , and platinum as a cyclical asset is under pressure because growth is slowing , '' said Michael Widmer , an analyst at Bank of America-Merrill Lynch . 
`` We were there around the great recession -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , and then you had the various stimulus packages hitting the market , and you saw the prices of the two metals starting to diverge again , '' he said . 
`` The macro picture is a bit different this time around . 
I do n't think that it is a compelling trade . '' 
In contrast to the situation in 2008 , gold 's premium to platinum is a function of its own strength , rather than a falling platinum price . 
Gold hit a record $ 1,778.29 an ounce this week as concerns over economic stability and debt crises in the euro zone and United States sparked heavy buying among investors . 
Platinum prices have eased by just over 2 percent this year , although they have not dropped in the same way as some industrial metals such as copper , which is down 8.2 percent in electronic trading , or zinc down 13.2 percent . 
Although platinum is nominally a precious metal , the bulk of its demand comes from the industrial sector , particularly carmakers who use it to make catalytic converters . 
This makes it more sensitive to threats to growth . 
This may mean it still has some way to fall , potentially further widening its discount to gold , analysts said . 
In 2008 , platinum plummeted from record highs to fall below the price of gold , said Deutsche Bank analyst Michael Lewis . 
`` Now ... this parity has occurred and we have n't priced in that recession risk yet , '' he said . 
`` There is more risk that if we get negative data , it could sustain that discount of platinum for a longer period of time . '' 
A short-term reversal in the ratio is possible . 
The current rush for safety sparked by Standard & Poor 's decision to downgrade the U.S. credit rating on Friday has sparked a 6.3 percent rally in gold prices in the past two days alone , their biggest two-day rise since 2008 . 
That kind of jump has typically been followed by a correction , as was seen in late April after gold 's initial break above $ 1,500 an ounce . 
At the same time , there are some factors that could suggest a short-term rise in platinum prices as the threat of strike action among miners in South Africa , the source of four out of five ounces of the world 's platinum supply , continues to loom . 
But any possible reversal in the fortunes of gold and platinum are likely to be brief , with the wider economic picture still overwhelmingly pointing to continued appetite for so-called havens at the expense of assets seen as higher risk . 
`` If you look at the platinum group metals and other industrial metals as well as oil , it is all a one-way street -- down , '' said Afshin Nabavi , head of trading at MKS Finance . 
`` Gold and the Swiss franc are really the only safe havens . '' 
In the longer term , gold prices will undoubtedly correct at some point , with a rise in U.S. interest rates expected to be the turning point in the yellow metal 's decade-long rally . 
Meanwhile , platinum 's underlying supply fundamentals still point to higher prices as South Africa 's mining sector faces stronger cost pressures from an increased focus on safety , rising inflation and higher wage demands . 
This should give long-term support to the metal . 
But in the current environment , few are looking that far out . 
`` On a historical basis , the ratio looks cheap , but that is not necessarily reason to buy , '' UBS analyst Edel Tully said in a research note . 
`` If we were prepared to buy the ratio now and hold it for a year or two , it would probably be a good trade , given that platinum 's fundamentals signal a lot more tightness over the medium term . 
But as investors struggle to make money in the short term , positioning for the medium term is in short supply . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
