EDITOR 'S NOTE : Credit : Reuters CAN NOT INDEPENDENTLY VERIFY CONTENT VIDEO FROM WHICH THIS STILL IMAGE WAS TAKEN A soldier walks near an army tank on a street in Hama city , in this undated still image taken from amateur video , taken August 7 , 2011 and made available to Reuters on August 8 , 2011 . 
REUTERS\/Social media website via Reuters TV AMMAN | Tue Aug 9 , 2011 7:17 pm EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian President Bashar al-Assad said on Tuesday his forces would continue to pursue `` terrorist groups '' after Turkey pressed him to end a military assault aimed at crushing protests against his rule . 
Syria `` will not relent in pursuing the terrorist groups in order to protect the stability of the country and the security of the citizens , '' state news agency SANA quoted Assad as telling Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu . 
`` But -LRB- Syria -RRB- is also determined to continue reforms ... and is open to any help offered by friendly and brotherly states . '' 
While the two men held talks in Damascus , Syrian forces killed at least 30 people and moved into a town near the Turkish border , an activist group said . 
The National Organization for Human Rights said most of the fatalities occurred when troops backed by tanks and armored vehicles overran villages north of Hama , while four were killed in Binnish , 30 km -LRB- 20 miles -RRB- from the border with Turkey . 
Washington expressed disappointment at Assad 's latest comments and said U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton expected to talk to Davutoglu after his meetings in Syria . 
`` It is deeply regrettable that President Assad does not seem to be hearing the increasingly loud voice of the international community , '' U.S. State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland told reporters when asked about the comment . 
She refused to comment directly on a 2009 U.S. diplomatic cable quoted by McClatchy newspapers last week describing Assad in unflattering terms , calling him `` neither as shrewd nor as long-winded as his father '' -LRB- former president Hafez al-Assad -RRB- . 
Despite the growing international condemnation , including a sudden wave of Arab criticism , Assad 's forces pursued an offensive in the eastern city of Deir al-Zor , residents said . 
Activists say at least 1,600 civilians have died since the uprising against Assad erupted in March , making it one of the bloodiest of the upheavals sweeping the Arab world . 
Davutoglu held six hours of meetings with Syrian officials , including a two-hour session alone with Assad . 
He told reporters on his return to Ankara that Turkey had demanded Damascus stop killing civilians and said his government would maintain contacts with all parts of Syrian society . 
Davutoglu said Turkey hoped for a peaceful transition in Syria resulting in the Syrian people deciding their own future . 
Neighboring Turkey has grown increasingly critical of the violence but earned a sharp rebuke on Sunday when an Assad adviser said Syria would not accept interference in its affairs . 
Syria has faced nearly five months of protests against Assad 's 11-year rule , inspired by Arab revolts which overthrew leaders in Egypt and Tunisia earlier this year . 
Last week Assad sent troops and tanks to quell the mostly Sunni Muslim city of Hama in central Syria and the army launched a similar assault on Sunday against Deir al-Zor . 
An armored column also pushed toward the center of the city on Tuesday , with troops storming houses and making arrests in the provincial capital of an oil region bordering Iraq 's Sunni heartland , a resident said . 
`` They are now about one kilometer from downtown . 
When they finish with one district , they move to another , '' said the resident , who gave his name as Iyad . 
Increasing the pressure on Assad , Sunni Muslim power Saudi Arabia issued a blunt warning that he risked turmoil unless he stopped the bloodshed and adopted reforms . 
Kuwait and Bahrain followed the kingdom in recalling their ambassadors . 
The withdrawal of envoys left Assad with few diplomatic friends bar Iran . 
Western states have imposed sanctions on his top officials , while states with close ties to Damascus such as Russia and Turkey have warned Assad he is running out of time . 
Nevertheless , no country has proposed military action such as that launched against Libya 's leader Muammar Gaddafi . 
In Deir al-Zor , a resident said on Monday 65 people had been killed since tanks and armored vehicles barreled into the city , 400 km -LRB- 250 miles -RRB- northeast of Damascus on Sunday . 
The British-based Syrian Observatory of Human Rights said among the dead were a mother and her two children , an elderly woman and a girl . 
Syria has expelled most independent media since the revolt began , making it hard to confirm accounts . 
Syrian authorities have denied that any Deir al-Zor assault took place . 
They say they have faced attacks since the protests erupted in March , blaming armed saboteurs for civilian deaths and accusing them of killing 500 security personnel . 
State television broadcast footage on Sunday of mutilated bodies floating in the Orontes river in Hama , saying 17 police had been ambushed and killed in the central Syrian city . 
The official SANA news agency said on Monday the military was starting to pull out of Hama after it said they had helped restore order . 
Residents said there were still tanks in parts of the city and security forces were making arrests . 
About 1,500 people were detained in Hama 's Jarajima district and troops killed three civilians , the Observatory said . 
Activists say at least 130 people were killed in Hama , where Assad 's father crushed an armed Islamist uprising in 1982 , and one group has put the death toll at over 300 . 
Like most of Syria , ruled by Assad 's minority Alawite family , Hama and Deir al-Zor are mainly Sunni cities , and the crackdowns there resonate with Sunnis , who form the majority in the region and govern most Arab countries . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Ail habeeb opposed the massacres committed by the syrian regime in Hama and other syrian cities . 
I believe in those citizens of Syria who call for reforms of the society so that it may become more democratic and open . 
What I believe the government of Syria owes to its people is the protection of the state against those parties that would disrupt civil society . 
The radical Sunni parties that are opportunist and have tainted the freedom movement in hopes of establishing an Islamic-law government , where non-Muslims are unwelcome . 
This hearkens back to the bleaker periods of Syria , when `` non-believers '' where discriminated against , driven from their land and often times slaughtered . 
For so-called `` democratic '' governments , the US and EU seem very willing to allow the Middle East to revert to the dark ages . 
There democratic principles appear to be non-existent when it comes to freedom for the people of the Middle East . 
They seem very willing to allow these people to be placed under the iron hand of Salafists . 
It appears to me that the West are the mercenaries of the extremist Wahhabis and will do their bidding in exchange for reasonable oil prices\/production and trade . 
Principles are subverted by economic interests . 
What legitimate reason was there for the West to interfere in Libya ? 
I find it very ironic , hypocritical and laughable that King Abdullah is condemning the Syrians for the violence on their own people when if it was not for the financial subsidies it grants to its citizens , it would find itself in the same boat . 
The US and EU were comparatively silent when uprisings in Bahrain and Yemen so the governments go against their people . 
We saw Saudi Arabia send troops into Bahrain to help it put down a similar demonstration for freedom . 
There were nothing more than a few innocuous passing comments from the West . 
The whole situation appears to have become rather sectarian to me and the West is siding with those radical elements who are most dedicated to its demise -LRB- but should the West expect any less given its meddling and biased policies in the region . 
I am under no illusions regarding the brutality of the Syrian army in repressing these extremists . 
Neither am I naive , nor should the world be , that all the anti-government Syrians are peaceful protesters . 
The Saudis -LRB- the ultimate Salafists -RRB- are most likely funding a large part of the violent anti-government protesters . 
They are funding the arms being sent to those radical elements in Syria through Jordan , Iraq and Turkey . 
The West should be called upon to be proponents of ethical treatment of all people not just those who are buttering their bread . 
The ONLY solution for syria is widespread Turkish military offense against the brutal regimen of Bashar alasad . 
This will prevent horrible upcoming civil war in Syria and chaos that may spread to surrounding countires . 
Syria was part of Turkey for more than 400 years before it had its independence , which obviously was a big mistake . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
