-LRB- By Melina Mara -- The Washington Post -RRB- This article was reported jointly with ProPublica , an independent , non-profit newsroom that produces investigative journalism in the public interest . 
ProPublica is supported entirely by philanthropy and provides the articles it produces , free of charge , both through its own Web site and to leading news organizations . 
In September 2005 , Timothy Geithner made one of his most visible moves as a supervisor of the U.S. banking system . 
He summoned the nation 's top financial firms and their regulators to streamline an antiquated system that threatened Wall Street 's boom . 
Billions of dollars worth of financial instruments known as credit derivatives were being traded daily , as banks and investors worldwide tried to protect against losses on increasingly complex and risky financial bets . 
But the buying and selling of these exotic instruments was stuck in a pencil-and-paper era . 
Geithner , then head of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York , pressed 14 major financial firms to build an electronic network that would cut backlogs and make the market easier to monitor . 
Geithner 's summit , held at the New York Fed 's fortress-like headquarters near Wall Street , was a success . 
By fall 2006 , the new system had all but eliminated the logjam , helping derivatives trade more efficiently . 
One financial industry newsletter honored Geithner as part of a `` Dream Team '' for his leadership of the effort . 
Yet as Geithner and the New York Fed worked to solve narrow mechanical issues in the derivatives market , they missed clear signs of a catastrophe in the making . 
When the housing market collapsed , derivatives stoked the fires that ignited inside some of the biggest banking companies . 
The firms ' failure to assess an array of risks they were taking has emerged as a key element in the multitrillion-dollar meltdown of the global financial system . 
Although Geithner repeatedly raised concerns about the failure of banks to understand their risks , including those taken through derivatives , he and the Federal Reserve system did not act with enough force to blunt the troubles that ensued . 
That was largely because he and other regulators relied too much on assurances from senior banking executives that their firms were safe and sound , according to interviews and a review of documents by The Washington Post and the nonprofit journalism organization ProPublica . 
A confidential review ordered by Geithner in 2006 found that banking companies could not properly assess their exposure to a severe economic downturn and were relying on the `` intuition '' of banking executives rather than hard quantitative analysis , according to interviews with Fed officials and a little-noticed audit by the Government Accountability Office . 
The Fed did not use key enforcement tools until later , after the credit crisis erupted , according to its records and interviews . 
Geithner defended his tenure as New York Fed president in an interview last week . 
He said he had been `` deeply concerned about risk in the system '' and worked assiduously behind the scenes to cajole banking institutions to do more to identify weaknesses and protect the financial system . 
But he also took some responsibility for falling short . 
`` These efforts to improve risk management did change behavior , but they did not achieve enough traction , '' Geithner said . 
`` We 're having a major financial crisis in part because of failures of supervision . '' 
Even as critics have questioned how he used existing power before the crisis , Geithner , as Treasury secretary , now leads the push for the biggest expansion of financial regulation since the Great Depression . 
His sweeping plan to overhaul the U.S. financial system would empower regulators to broadly analyze risk and would grant more authority to the Fed and its 12 reserve banks . 
Geithner says he is applying lessons from his five years at the most important of the Fed 's reserve banks . 
This week , he assumed an even more prominent platform , joining President Obama in London at a meeting with the Group of 20 industrialized nations to discuss global financial regulatory reform . 
Looking back at his time at the New York Fed , Geithner said : `` I wish I had worked to change the framework , rather than to work within that framework . '' 
Geithner , 47 , adopted the diplomatic approach to supervision that had long held sway at the New York Fed , a hybrid institution that is owned by the banks but implements monetary policy for the Federal Reserve . 
Like the other regional Feds , it also shares supervisory authority with the central bank . 
Six of its nine board members are chosen by the commercial banking companies it supervises . 
The board plays a role in the selection of the New York Fed president . 
