\* To deliver to German Miro refinery - source \* Other U.S. majors also close to resuming buying \* Purchase to help further normalise Libya oil trade By Dmitry Zhdannikov and Emma Farge LONDON , Sept 29 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - ConocoPhillips became the first U.S. major to buy Libyan oil following the end of international sanctions in a move to help the country restore normal oil trade after seven months of civil war . 
Trading sources told Reuters that tanker Hellas Warrior , which loaded 381,000 barrels of Sarir and Mesla crude , was bought by Conoco for delivery to France 's Mediterranean port of Fos\/Lavera , and one source said it was destined for Germany 's MIRO refinery . 
Libya 's Arabian Gulf Oil Company -LRB- Agoco -RRB- gave the cargo to Vitol in payment for oil product deliveries , and Vitol then sold it to Conoco , the sources said . 
U.S. companies were among the most active buyers of light and low-sulphur Libyan crude before the civil war and were the first to stop purchases after Washington and the European Union slapped sanctions on the government of now-ousted leader Muammar Gaddafi . 
Sanctions against Libya have been removed or eased about a month ago , but sources at U.S. firms have said it will take a few weeks before they can resume purchases of Libyan crude . 
`` We have done most of the work and are close to sorting out our internal problems to be able to buy again , '' said a source at a major U.S. firm other than Conoco . 
A source at Libya 's National Oil Corporation -LRB- NOC -RRB- confirmed that the transaction had taken place and said it expected to start dealing with U.S. oil firms directly in the near future . 
`` That deal was done through Agoco . 
We have some contacts with the United States and they tell us they can start buying again , '' he said . 
Agoco , a subsidiary of NOC , has been handling marketing operations in recent months because of international sanctions on the umbrella firm . 
The NOC source said that it would start marketing crude again by mid-October . 
Oil is slowly starting to flow again from Libya after seven months of fighting and , if fresh projections prove correct , may beat the expectations of analysts , who think it could take three years to reach pre-war output levels . 
Libyan oil industry is dominated by European players , although U.S. companies such as Conoco , Marathon , Hess and Occidental are also involved in a number of exploration and production projects in the country , the holder of Africa 's largest oil reserves . 
-LRB- Reporting by Emma Farge and Dmitry Zhdannikov , editing by Jane Baird -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
