United Auto Workers Vice President of UAW-Ford Jimmy Settles -LRB- L -RRB- and Ford Motor Co President and CEO Alan Mulally shake hands to mark the beginning of labor contract negotiations at the Rouge Center in Dearborn , Michigan July 29 , 2011 . 
NEW YORK | Sun Jul 31 , 2011 4:58 pm BST NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Ford Motor Co -LRB- F. N -RRB- shares may rise 25 percent as the company cuts debt , rolls out new models and tries to expand in China and India , where it has been a laggard , Barron 's said in its August 1 edition . 
Unlike rivals General Motors and Chrysler , Ford was able to avoid bankruptcy and government bailouts by taking on billions of dollars of debt in 2006 , when capital markets were still open . 
According to Barron 's , Ford has paid off $ 9 billion -LRB- 5 billion pounds -RRB- of the $ 23 billion of debt it then took on , could pay off another $ 2 billion by year end , and should regain investment-grade credit ratings once uncertainties over labor talks with the United Auto Workers begin to dissipate . 
The newspaper said the Dearborn , Michigan-based company has this year added U.S. market share at the expense of Japanese automakers that suffered from supply problems stemming from that country 's earthquake and tsunami . 
It said Ford is spending for the U.S. market on new Lincoln models , a make-over for its mid-size Fusion sedan , and more efficient engines for its Explorer and Edge models . 
Ford is also planning to launch 16 new cars in China and India within four years , hoping to add share in two of the world 's fastest-growing markets , the newspaper added . 
China and India are also the world 's most populous markets , with a combined population of roughly 2.5 billion . 
On Monday , Ford reported its eighth straight quarterly net profit , as revenue increased 13 percent to $ 35.5 billion . 
Its shares closed Friday at $ 12.21 , near the low end of its 52-week range of $ 10.95 to $ 18.97 . 
A 25 percent increase projects to $ 15.26 . 
-LRB- Reporting by Jonathan Stempel , editing by Maureen Bavdek -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
