March 19 , 2011 | By Jason Hanna , CNN The destroyer USS Stout launches a Tomahawk missile toward a target on Libya 's coast on Saturday . 
An international military coalition including France , the United States and Great Britain attacked Libyan air-defense and other military targets Saturday night in an operation that eventually will include enforcing a no-fly zone . 
Libyan rebels had called on international action to help them stave off assaults by Libyan government forces on their positions in Benghazi and other enclaves . 
The coalition 's intervention in Libya 's civil war comes two days after the U.N. Security Council passed a resolution authorizing the use of force , including a no-fly zone , to `` protect civilians and civilian populated areas '' from government attack . 
Here is a look at how the situation got to this point , and what the major players are saying and doing . 
THE START OF THE CONFLICT Libya 's civil war began last month , following protests that coincided with a larger wave of demonstrations in North Africa and the Middle East against governments there . 
In Libya , protesters rallied against , among other things , high unemployment and a delay in a government housing project , and they eventually called for democracy and an end to Moammar Gadhafi 's almost 42-year-long rule . 
Clashes between protesters and security forces began in Benghazi -- Libya 's second-largest city -- on February 16 , and as violence spread to other cities , opposition forces claimed control of Benghazi and other parts of eastern Libya . 
In the ensuing days , the opposition and external governments accused the Libyan regime of atrocities and rights violations , including allegations of a military helicopter firing on a crowd in Benghazi , other military attacks against civilians , arbitrary detentions and summary executions . 
Gadhafi 's regime responded that it was attacking al Qaeda , not civilians . 
GADHAFI 'S FORCES GAIN GROUND AGAINST REBELS At the beginning of March , the Libyan military stepped up efforts to reclaim areas lost to rebels . 
Pro-Gadhafi forces marched eastward , hammering rebel positions in north-central Libya 's Ras Lanuf by the end of last week and moving on to al-Brega and Ajdabiya . 
By the end of this week , Gadhafi 's forces were poised to strike Benghazi . 
ARAB LEAGUE REQUESTS NO-FLY ZONE ; U.N. COMPLIES While the rebels pleaded for help , late last week , the Arab League voted to ask the United Nations Security Council to impose a no-fly zone over Libya to `` protect the civilian population , '' league Secretary General Amre Moussa said . 
