2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Libyan rebels had called on international action to help them stave off assaults by Libyan government forces on their positions in Benghazi and other enclaves . 
The coalition 's intervention in Libya 's civil war comes two days after the U.N. Security Council passed a resolution authorizing the use of force , including a no-fly zone , to `` protect civilians and civilian populated areas '' from government attack . 
Here is a look at how the situation got to this point , and what the major players are saying and doing . 
THE START OF THE CONFLICT Libya 's civil war began last month , following protests that coincided with a larger wave of demonstrations in North Africa and the Middle East against governments there . 
no , i 'm wide awake . 
I work with all women and have seen why men think women are crazy , I of course am excluded . 
Ok Jazz7 , what movie is this from , `` You think you 've done something good here today , son . 
All you 've done was weaken a nation ; you snot nosed Harvard brat . '' 
tell me more about yourself , I want to know as much as u want to tell me about yourself , unless you are more convertible on another subject ? 
good night Cesar , when it takes so long for u to answer back I 'm not sure what happened , u have my number if you want to talk further . 
Cesar , it 's ok I have been hurt in my life that bad too . 
I wo n't ask any more questions , promise , good night sweet pea Dont know what I did Cesar r , but I will be saying good bye no hard feelings just dont understand , sorry if i scared u didnt mean to . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival in Merida , Mexico seems like they favor throwing candy instead of beads ! 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
