LONDON | Fri Jul 29 , 2011 11:36 am BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - British fund managers are heading to domestic stocks and bonds as mounting worries about sovereign debt in the euro zone and United States add to the UK 's allure as a safe haven in a volatile world , a Reuters poll shows . 
A monthly survey of 14 investment managers found the average allocation in global equity portfolios to the UK increased 3 percentage points to 15.6 percent in July from a month earlier . 
Allocations to the euro zone and the United States , where fears of possible defaults on creaking sovereign debt burdens have rattled markets , both fell during the month . 
The average exposure to U.S. equities slid to 41.3 percent , from 42.1 percent , while euro zone allocations were at 14.9 percent , from 16.3 percent a month earlier . 
Performance figures from Lipper earlier this month showed macro-economic shocks -- from the euro zone debt crisis to May 's commodities sell-off -- had helped lift the performance of domestically focused funds during the first half of 2011 . 
An annual survey published this week by British funds lobby group the IMA shows equity allocations to the UK have been declining steadily in recent years , from around 59 percent in 2006 to 42.6 percent in 2010 . 
Several of the managers and chief investment officers surveyed by Reuters said a recent deal to make private investors shoulder some of the burden of bailing out Greece to stop contagion is unlikely to resolve the crisis conclusively . 
`` Crises , packages and tactical rallies will follow -- ultimately radical , comprehensive , broad scale solutions will be needed in large size , '' said Andrew Milligan , head of global strategy at Standard Life Investments -LRB- SL . 
`` Remain moderately light in the euro and certain peripheral bonds , buy export orientated equities , but in particular prepare portfolios for considerable future volatility . '' 
Shares in British companies , which aggressively cut costs in readiness for the economic downturn , have emerged as an unlikely safe haven in recent weeks on account of strong balance sheets and resilient earnings . 
But UK fixed income is also popular , the poll shows , with allocations to Britain in global bond portfolios rising to 37.1 percent from 34.4 percent a month earlier . 
The poll echoes sentiment on currency markets in which Britain 's growing appeal as an island of relative fiscal health in spite of a still sluggish economy has driven sterling to six week highs against the dollar . 
Meanwhile , allocations in balanced portfolios by asset class remained broadly unchanged from a month earlier with average exposure to equities at 52.6 percent and bonds at 23.5 percent . 
Cash holdings were at 3.7 percent with 2.6 percent in property and 17.6 percent in alternative investments . 
`` This is not a time for the faint of heart , but bravery will be rewarded , '' said Lee Robertson , Chief Executive of Investment Quorum , a wealth manager based in London . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
