07 February 12 00:35 GMT As Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov heads to Syria for talks with President Bashar al-Assad , BBC Moscow correspondent Daniel Sandford assesses what he might hope to achieve from his visit . 
Tuesday 's visit by Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and the director of Russia 's Foreign Intelligence Service , Mikhail Fradkov , comes three days after the UN Security Council meeting in which Russia and China vetoed a resolution condemning the Syrian government 's violence against its citizens . 
Sergei Lavrov has not revealed the details of the message he says he is taking to Damascus from his own head of state , Russian President Dmitry Medvedev . 
Mr Lavrov said that those who `` hastily '' brought the resolution to a vote in the Security Council had ignored Russia 's request to wait until he had been to see President Assad . 
He described comments by American and European leaders after the vote as `` indecent and hysterical . '' 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said : `` What happened -LRB- on Saturday -RRB- at the United Nations was a travesty ... Faced with a neutered Security Council , we have to redouble our efforts outside of the United Nations with those allies and partners who support the Syrian people 's right to have a better future . '' 
Russia has caused outrage in many Western and Arab countries by blocking attempts to use the United Nations to pressure President Assad to step aside . 
If Assad 's government does eventually fall , Russia will lose its last remaining ally in the region , which makes its position look rather short-term . 
But James Sherr , Senior Fellow of the Russia Eurasia program at the Royal Institute of International Affairs , explained that while the Russian position may seem strange to some , it is actually based on a quite simple logic . 
`` Russia is a country which derives a significant amount of its influence and image in the world from maintaining a very traditional strict dividing line between internal and international affairs , '' he said . 
`` This is a selling point , because Russia is able to say : `` Look we are not the United States , we are not the EU . 
We are a reliable consistent partner '' . 
And in a world consisting still , overwhelmingly , of not terribly democratic states this is very important . 
And Russia ca n't just walk away from it . '' 
Russia has its last remaining naval base in the Mediterranean at the Syrian port of Tartus . 
Russia is also Syria 's main supplier of weapons . 
`` The base at Tartus is becoming a significant military base again , '' James Sherr said . 
`` And Syria is one of the few countries in the world to have had a consistent military relationship with both the Soviet Union and Russia . '' 
Nonetheless there are signs that Sergei Lavrov and Mikhail Fradkov may use the meeting to encourage some sort of change in Syria . 
As Sergei Lavrov explained to ABC Australia last week : `` We 're not a friend , we 're not an ally of President Assad . 
We never said that President Assad remaining in power is the solution to the crisis . '' 
But he also said : `` I do n't think Russian policy is about asking people to step down . 
Regime change is not our profession . 
It is up to the Syrians themselves to decide how to run the country , how to introduce the reforms , what kind of reforms , without any outside interference . '' 
That is where Western diplomats say a contradiction emerges in the Russian position . 
While it says that the people have a right to choose their leader , it does not allow for the international community to support a population trying to overthrow an unpopular government . 
This means that , while Russia says it is trying to prevent an escalation of the conflict , some in the Syrian opposition claim that the Russian\/Chinese veto is in fact driving them closer to all-out conflict . 
But Sergei Lavrov said that the vetoed UN Security Council resolution had not put enough pressure on opposition groups and `` armed extremists '' to also withdraw their forces from areas of conflict . 
`` Such a resolution would have meant the Security Council was taking the side of one participant in a civil war , '' he said . 
His meeting in Damascus is Russia 's chance to show that it has an alternative to end the spiralling violence in Syria . 
