BEIRUT | Sat Oct 8 , 2011 3:21 pm EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian security forces killed at least two people when they opened fire on tens of thousands of mourners on Saturday at the funeral of a Kurdish opposition figure , activists said . 
The funeral of Meshaal al-Tammo in the eastern Syrian city of Qamishli turned into a protest against President Bashar al-Assad , with mourners chanting anti-Assad slogans and calling on him to step down . 
British-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said at least two people were killed and three wounded when the funeral came under fire . 
It said at least 50,000 people had turned out for the funeral . 
Security forces also opened fire on a funeral procession for three people who were killed on Friday in the Damascus suburb of Douma , killing one mourner and wounding 10 , the group said . 
At least eight people were killed in anti-Assad protests after Friday prayers . 
Activists said on Friday that four gunmen burst into a house in the city of Qamishli , shot dead Tammo and wounded his son . 
It was not clear who was behind the attack . 
The killing of Tammo , a respected opposition figure , angered Syrian Kurds who make up about 10 percent of Syria 's 20 million population and largely support the uprising against Assad . 
One activist said he feared the killing might encourage Syrian Kurds to take up arms against Assad forces , pushing the country closer to civil war . 
`` This is a terrorist attack , a terrorist assassination . 
The Kurds might feel they want to revenge . 
We are very angry , '' said a Kurdish activist who declined to be named . 
Tammo , a charismatic figure who was released from jail earlier this year , was a critic of Assad who had also angered powerful Kurdish parties because of his criticism of Kurdish rivals . 
The United States has condemned his killing . 
Video footage broadcast by al Jazeera television showed Tammo 's coffin being carried on people 's shoulders wrapped in a Kurdish flag and covered with flowers . 
`` Leave , Leave , '' the mourners chanted . 
Fares al-Tammo , Meshaal 's son , told al Jazeera from Erbil in northern Iraq that the Kurds were angry and blamed the Syrian authorities for his father 's death . 
`` This blood is precious to them -LRB- Kurds -RRB- , they will not give up until the regime is overthrown and the execution of Bashar al-Assad . '' 
Activists in Damascus said Syrian authorities stepped up security in Kurdish areas in the capital . 
Ethnic Kurds have long complained of discrimination and staged violent protests against Assad in 2004 . 
Kurds are not allowed to teach Kurdish in schools or set up Kurdish radio stations . 
Assad has sent troops and tanks to crush protests against him since March but he has also promised reforms . 
He has ended a state of emergency and promised to hold a parliamentary election in February . 
He tried to pacify the Kurds by giving citizenship to tens of thousands of people , and casualties in Kurdish areas remained the lowest as anti-government protests swept the country . 
Many of Assad 's opponents say his reform promises are hollow and that his government has forfeited all legitimacy after killing at least 2,900 civilians , by a U.N. count . 
Syria accuses foreign powers of arming demonstrators and blames violence on armed groups . 
Deputy Foreign Minister Faisal Mekdad told the U.N. Human Rights Council on Friday that more than 1,100 security personnel had been killed in the unrest . 
-LRB- Reporting by Mariam Karouny Editing by Maria Golovnina -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
