A slow rebirth for Baghdad the beautiful Two years after US tanks rolled in , Iraq 's capital is part ruin , part building site . 
Now locals are trying to restore some color to their city It boasts alliteration but the concept seems fanciful : beautiful Baghdad . 
Iraq 's capital is famous for violence , degradation , occupation and blackouts , not aesthetic appeal . 
Everywhere there are concrete blast barriers , sandbags and razor wire . 
Rubbish lines streets which are sometimes ankle-deep in sewage . 
Bombed buildings remain in ruins . 
Giant mosques commissioned by Saddam Hussein lie unfinished on idle building sites . 
April 9 2003 was the day American troops took the city and toppled the dictator 's statue in Firdos square . 
Two years later debate over the war still rages , but one point Baghdadis agree on is that today marks the anniversary of when their city became an eyesore . 
`` The place looks awful , '' said Hussein Abd Emir , 52 , a cafe owner in Karrada , a district for the well-heeled . 
`` It 's like a military base . 
A dirty military base . 
My God , it 's ugly . '' 
But in big and small ways things are changing . 
City authorities and residents themselves are injecting color and vitality through initiatives designed to beautify Baghdad . 
Municipal workers have planted thousands of bushes and trees along thoroughfares and intersections . 
It is easy to miss them now but within six months some species will be waist-high foliage , said Mustafa al-Ubadi , 35 , pointing to freshly planted rows of leafless saplings opposite his fish restaurant on Abu Nawas street . 
Emboldened by better security and business , he plans to return paintings he stored at home for safety to the bare walls of his restaurant . 
This week trucks unloaded tonnes of soil on to the east bank of the Tigris , which is to be laid with grass , dotted with benches and linked to a new park due to open later this year . 
There will be a fountain , swings and slides , said Kadhim Radhi , 40 , a council worker at the site . 
This weekend the city will regain a favorite playground : Jadriya lake , formerly known as Saddam lake . 
Built on farmland a year before his fall , the 36-hectare -LRB- 90-acre -RRB- expanse of water with kiosks along its banks was popular with families and couples . 
But American tanks smashed the paving and when looters stole electric cables and pumps the lake drained into the Tigris , leaving the site dry and desolate . 
Six months ago the tourist board , part of the culture ministry , funded its restoration and the lake is back . 
Kiosks with pictures of Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck have been painted in vivid blue , red and yellow . 
Speedboats were tested on the lake yesterday and musicians practiced for the opening ceremony . 
`` It 's like a lung for the city , '' said Abdul Razaq Ali , a supervisor . 
He looked forward to the return of foreigners . 
`` Give me security and I 'll give you tourists , '' he said . 
Hilal Shawkat , head of the Iraqi investment firm which restored the lake , said he would build restaurants and amusement parks around the shore . 
`` This will revive the nightlife of Baghdad , '' he said , carrying an armful of glossy company brochures for architectural plans . 
One of them , entitled Happy Land in Baghdad , included a 500-room , five-star hotel near the lake . 
`` Iraq will be back to normal in two years , '' said Mr Shawkat , ignoring a burst of gunfire and sirens in the distance . 
Ordinary Baghdadis are puncturing the drab greyness with flowers and potted plants which have become more visible in homes and shops , cheering the likes of Talab Hadi , 38 , a third-generation horticulturist . 
`` Business is 10 times better than six months ago , '' he beamed . 
`` People want color . '' 
But the city is far removed from its glorious heritage . 
Said by some historians to be the site of the Garden of Eden , it was founded in AD762 by Caliph Abu Ja ` far al-Mansour and became the heart of medieval Muslim civilisation , a political capital as well as an architectural wonder immortalised in stories such as the 1001 Nights . 
The Mongols , among others , razed it several times , but Baghdad recovered and 19th century visitors proclaimed it the most beautiful city in the east . 
In the 70s it began to deteriorate . 
Saddam Hussein erected brutalist apartment blocks and kitsch monuments , and uprooted trees from river banks lest they provide cover for assassins . 
War with Iran and the first Gulf war drained resources , while economic sanctions and an explosion in population , estimated at 5.6 million , crippled the infrastructure . 
US dollars gushed with the occupation , but they did little to alleviate banes such as the green zone , a heavily fortified swath of embassies and government buildings which burned a hole in the city 's heart , closing bridges and roads . 
In addition to concrete and razor wire , the security crisis necessitated a curfew which prevents night-time street cleaning , producing mounds of waste . 
Four children collecting litter yesterday were killed by a bomb hidden in the rubbish which was probably intended for US or Iraqi security forces . 
When Saddam fell the new-found freedom eroded civic mindedness because there was no authority to fear , said Adnan Omran , 57 , a municipal manager . 
Drivers would park their cars anywhere they liked and rubbish was dumped at random . 
Increased staffing and pay have given him the means to crack down on these nuisances , starting with shops which displayed wares on pavements . 
`` What about pedestrians ? '' 
said Mr Omran , indignant . 
Six months ago Bradt Travel Guides published what was probably the first postwar guidebook for Baghdad . 
If you do not enjoy Iraq 's capital , at least appreciate the residents , it said . 
`` They are a justifiably proud people , whose city was the capital of the world when London was an overgrown village and Columbus several centuries away from America . 
`` War has not destroyed this and western condescension is met with the scorn it deserves . '' 
