A man walks past a padlock of a closed shops in Athens ' main business district , April 20 , 2011 . 
LISBON | Fri Apr 22 , 2011 9:28 am BST LISBON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Less than a month after European leaders unveiled a `` comprehensive package '' they said would fix the euro zone , their anti-crisis strategy is fraying and may be in need of a radical rethink . 
Rising public anger in northern Europe at a series of taxpayer funded bailouts is sending tremors through the political landscape , boosting anti-euro parties such as the True Finns in Finland and sparking open policy rows in European paymaster Germany . 
The emerging consensus in the markets that Greece will have to restructure its 327 billion euros -LRB- 287.7 billion pounds -RRB- in sovereign debt , in spite of the European Union\/International Monetary Fund rescue it secured one year ago , has made Europe 's promise to delay any private sector pain until 2013 look increasingly untenable . 
The flaws in the euro zone 's strategy are being exposed just as it negotiates what is expected to be an 80 billion euro aid deal for Portugal , whose own politicians have been arguing for months that the Greek and Irish bailout model is a failure . 
This comes against a backdrop of deepening recession or unexpectedly weak growth in Europe 's austerity-hit periphery , which is reinforcing doubts about whether these countries can stage the strong recoveries needed to cut their debt and win back investors once bailout funds run out . 
As resentment of bailouts rises in the north , opposition to further austerity is growing in the south , creating a dangerous dynamic that some economists and political experts believe could force changes to Europe 's strategy within a matter of months . 
`` We are at a juncture where the gravity of the economic fundamentals and public opposition to further bailouts may pull the politicians in a new direction , '' said Steen Jakobsen , chief economist at Saxo Bank . 
`` As long as their strategy is credible they will continue down the same path . 
But now it looks like we are close to a turning point . 
The current path no longer looks as credible as it once did . '' 
There are some signs that would appear to suggest Europe 's strategy is working . 
Despite an escalation of the euro zone crisis over the past few weeks which has pushed bond yields on Europe 's periphery to record highs , the euro has risen to 16-month highs against the dollar . 
But that has been driven more by expectations of further interest rate hikes from the European Central Bank than any sense that Europe is closer to solving its crisis . 
The bloc 's biggest conundrum is Greece , a country whose sovereign debt levels are forecast to rise to 160 percent of annual output over the coming years , on a par with Zimbabwe . 
Private economists have been saying for months that this debt mountain is unsustainable , but some policymakers in Europe appear only now to be waking up to that fact . 
The immediate dilemma they face is that the blueprint for their future financial safety net , the European Stability Mechanism -LRB- ESM -RRB- , which is due to be established in mid-2013 , does not give them the flexibility they need to deal swiftly and cleanly with the Greek debt problem . 
The root of the problem can be traced back to a deal on the ESM struck in Deauville , France last October between German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy . 
That deal foresaw private debt holders sharing in the pain of future debt restructurings . 
But as markets grew nervous in the weeks that followed , Germany backtracked and pushed back the threat of `` haircuts '' until 2013 . 
That move now looks misguided . 
By postponing the real pain until 2013 , the bloc has guaranteed that the threat of a tough restructuring will hang over it like a dark cloud for at least two more years , hurting not only market sentiment towards Greece but also Ireland , Portugal , Spain and possibly others . 
As Greece 's outstanding bonds mature , the EU and the IMF are pumping money into Greece by extending it emergency loans under the country 's 110 billion euro bailout deal . 
So when 2013 rolls around , European authorities and the IMF are expected to hold more than half of Greece 's total debt . 
If they then restructured Greek debt to return the country to a sustainable debt path , they would have to impose an aggressive haircut on themselves . 
And even after that , Greece might still need support from other European governments , probably for years . 
The only obvious way to avert this explosive scenario is for Europe to renege on its pledge and hit investors in Greek bonds now , accepting the risk of deterring investment in other countries ' bonds . 
`` The easiest way out would be to do the restructuring soon , '' said Charles Grant , head of the Centre for European Reform in London . 
`` Hit the private creditors and recapitalise the banks . 
It may still happen . '' 
The wild card remains public opinion and politics . 
In Germany , the junior partner in Merkel 's coalition is vowing to defend parliament 's right to veto ESM payments . 
Some lawmakers in the Bundestag want to block approval of the creation of the ESM altogether . 
The new mechanism is also running into trouble in Slovakia . 
In Finland , the True Finns party has suggested that a meeting of finance ministers in mid-May to approve a bailout for Portugal could end up producing an `` entirely different '' solution . 
Europe has seen off political challenges to bailouts in the past ; when Slovakia balked at approving plans for the bloc 's current financial safety net last year , bigger countries pressured it into line . 
But in the current climate , such pressure may not be so forthcoming . 
There are no obvious alternatives to a bailout for Portugal , which has said it will run out of funding by June if no bailout is agreed . 
But the message that the True Finns are sending out -- that taxpayer-funded bailouts are proving costly failures -- could begin to resonate among European leaders at some point . 
In Germany there is an expression `` Augen zu und durch , '' which loosely translated means : `` Close your eyes , continue down your path and hope for the best . '' 
At some point soon , this approach may no longer be an option . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
