A guide stands near the Djoser 's step pyramid in Saqqara , outside of Cairo March 5 , 2011 . 
SHARM EL-SHEIKH , Egypt | Fri Apr 22 , 2011 5:15 pm BST SHARM EL-SHEIKH , Egypt -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Hotel worker Meena George rejoiced when a popular revolt ousted Egypt 's autocratic president , but since the tourists have stopped coming , his joy has given way to fear and desperation . 
George was made redundant by his employers at the Red Sea resort of Sharm el-Sheikh , and has resorted to borrowing more and more money from his friends to survive . 
`` The revolution is good , but painful , '' said George , 33 . 
`` Many of my friends have fallen on hard times as we get laid off , because business is slow . '' 
From the Pyramids of Giza to the Red Sea resorts , tourist numbers have plummeted to just a trickle , dealing a devastating blow to the millions of Egyptians whose livelihoods depend on the 14 million or so visitors who once thronged to the country . 
At the height of the 18-day uprising that ousted president Hosni Mubarak , embassies issued travel warnings and many tour groups canceled their trips , throwing an industry that is a major source of foreign currency into crisis . 
Two months later , the chaos has largely subsided , the police who deserted their posts during protests are mostly back on the job and the travel warnings have been eased . 
But the tourists have yet to return , and Egypt 's tourism minister has forecast the industry 's 2011 revenue will be 25 percent lower than the previous year . 
`` I can hardly recall a single tourist coming into my shop recently , '' said Omar Mohamed Saed , the 59-year-old owner of a store selling copper goods in Khan el-Khalili , the main bazaar in Islamic Cairo . 
`` The uprising killed us . '' 
Saed was already struggling before the uprising as the number of Western tourists declined due to the global economic downturn . 
He said the most he had made in one day since the protests was 1,000 Egyptian pounds -LRB- 101.72 pounds -RRB- , adding he had asked his employees to work fewer days so he could afford to pay them . 
Four families live off the income from Ahmed Salamah 's Cairo souvenir shop . 
He says he is struggling to feed his own wife and three children from his now meager income . 
`` I have sold nothing since the revolution started , '' said Salamah , 36 . 
`` All day I sit in the shop and watch TV . '' 
At the Giza Pyramids , the country 's most popular attraction and a must-see destination for visitors to Cairo , not one Western tourist could be seen as the sun set on a weekday in April , one of the prime months of the year for holidaymakers . 
With fewer potential customers , the street vendors and rogue guides that typically hover near Egypt 's famous landmarks seem to be preying more aggressively on tourist wallets . 
A party of German and French tourists visiting the Pyramids recently said tourist police looked on as a gaggle of touts followed them around the site competing for their attention . 
`` One thrust an opened can of drink into my hand and demanded I pay for it , '' said German tourist Alex. As the scorching summer approaches , tourism officials are hoping for a pick-up in business from September . 
But that depends on the security situation , said Brigadier Mohammad Al-Mogati , the Arab League 's assistant for tourism security . 
Political unrest has waned , but army vehicles can still be see on some streets and embassies are now warning citizens against an increase in muggings , robberies and racketeering in Egypt . 
War is also raging in neighboring Libya . 
In Sharm , which hardly saw a whiff of the protests that shook the capital and other cities , glum-faced souvenir merchants idle outside empty shops along an almost deserted walkway at Naama Bay and in the Old Town market . 
Security has been tight at Egypt 's busiest Red Sea resort since a series of bombings by Islamist militants in 2005 killed over 80 people , most of them Egyptians , and wounded hundreds . 
Police and security guards patrol resorts , using metal detectors and airport-style x-ray machines to search those entering . 
Mubarak , who turned the town into a major tourist attraction , is now in Sharm 's hospital . 
Some residents say his presence in the resort had become a liability . 
`` Tourists come to Sharm to have a good time , '' said Galal Shabaan , a 33-year-old shop owner . 
`` You ca n't relax with Mubarak around and the spectre of protests hanging over Sharm . '' 
Despite an increasingly grim picture , Hala el-Khatib , secretary general of the Egyptian Hotels Association , said nationwide , hotel occupancy was only down by 15 percent in April compared to the same month a year ago . 
She said hotel occupancy in Sharm had recovered to 32 percent by mid-April from an abysmal 11 percent after the protests erupted on January 25 . 
But it was still a far cry from the 75 percent rate hotels in the resort are accustomed to at this time of year . 
Still , Khatib remains optimistic , and says landmarks of the revolution such as Cairo 's Tahrir Square , which became internationally renowned as the gathering place of the protests , are featuring on some tourist itineraries . 
`` Security is getting better day by day . 
People have a different view of Egypt , they have a more positive view . 
They want to include Tahrir in their program , '' she said . 
