Credit : Reuters\/Amateur Video via Reuters TV AMMAN | Fri Apr 22 , 2011 7:12 pm EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian security forces killed almost 90 protesters Friday , rights activists said , the bloodiest day in a month of escalating pro-democracy demonstrations against the rule of President Bashar al-Assad . 
The Local Coordination Committees sent Reuters a list with the names of 88 people , classified by region , the group said were killed in areas stretching from the port city of Latakia to Homs , Hama , Damascus and the southern village of Izra'a . 
It was not possible to independently confirm the figures . 
U.S. President Barack Obama condemned the violence and accused Assad of seeking help from Iran . 
`` This outrageous use of violence to quell protests must come to an end now , '' Obama said in a statement . 
`` Instead of listening to their own people , President Assad is blaming outsiders while seeking Iranian assistance in repressing Syria 's citizens through the same brutal tactics that have been used by his Iranian allies . '' 
That was an apparent reference to the suppression of anti-government protests in Iran , the biggest since the 1979 Islamic revolution , that erupted after a disputed 2009 presidential election . 
Tens of thousands of people had taken to the streets of cities across Syria in the biggest demonstrations to sweep the country so far , and called for the `` overthrow of the regime . '' 
That reflected the hardening of demands which initially focused on reforms and greater freedoms . 
The protests went ahead despite Assad 's lifting of the state of emergency the day before . 
Ending the hated emergency rule , in place since the Baath Party seized power 48 years ago , was a central demand of demonstrators , who also seek the release of political prisoners and dismantling of the security services . 
`` This was the first test of the seriousness of authorities -LRB- toward reform -RRB- and they have failed , '' activist Ammar Qurabi said . 
Washington urged Syria to stop the violence against protesters and British Foreign Secretary William Hague said emergency law should be `` lifted in practice not just in word . '' 
Friday 's violence brings the death toll to about 300 , according to rights activists , since the unrest which broke out on March 18 in the southern city of Deraa . 
Activists cited the highest toll in the nearby village of Izra'a where protesters had been trying to head for Deraa . 
Residents said 14 people were killed . 
`` Izra'a is in the dark . 
No mobile phones or landlines working . 
People have been talking from villages near to Izra'a but not in the town , '' said Wissam Tarif of human rights organization , Insan . 
Syrian television said eight people were killed and 28 wounded , including army personnel , in attacks by armed groups in the village . 
It added an armed group had attacked a military base in the Damascus suburb of Muadhamiya . 
Amnesty International said it had been told of 75 deaths , including two children and a 70-year-old man . 
Malcolm Smart , Amnesty International 's Middle East and North Africa director , urged the authorities to stop the violence : `` They must also immediately launch an independent investigation into what happened and ensure that any security forces found to have carried out these killings are brought to justice . '' 
As in the Tunisian and Egyptian uprisings , citizens are rebelling against both a lack of freedom and opportunity and security forces ' impunity and corruption that has enriched the elite while one-third of Syrians live below the poverty line . 
In the first joint statement since the protests broke out , the activists coordinating the demonstrations Friday demanded the abolition of the Baath Party monopoly on power and the establishment of a democratic political system . 
Aided by his family and a pervasive security apparatus , Assad , 45 , has absolute power in Syria . 
Protests swept the country of 20 million people , from the Mediterranean city of Banias to the eastern towns of Deir al-Zor and Qamishli . 
In Damascus , security forces fired teargas to disperse 2,000 protesters in the district of Midan . 
In Hama , where Assad 's father crushed an armed Islamist revolt in 1982 , a witness said security forces opened fire to prevent protesters reaching the Baath Party headquarters . 
`` We saw two snipers on the building . 
None of us had weapons . 
There are casualties , possibly two dead , '' said the witness . 
Syria 's third city Homs , where security forces had killed 21 protesters this week when demonstrators tried to gather at a main square , was not spared Friday either . 
`` I was in the center of Homs and in front of me I heard a security commander telling his armed men : ` Do n't spare them -LRB- protesters -RRB- , ' '' rights campaigner Najati Tayara told Reuters . 
Witnesses said security forces also shot at protesters in the Damascus district of Barzeh and the suburb of Douma . 
Al Jazeera showed footage of three corpses , wrapped in white burial shrouds , which it said were from the eastern Damascus suburb of Zamalka . 
Ahead of the main weekly prayers Friday , which have often turned out to be launch pads for major demonstrations , the army deployed in Homs and police put up checkpoints across Damascus , apparently trying to prevent protests sweeping in from suburbs . 
After prayers finished in Deraa , several thousand protesters gathered chanting anti-Assad slogans . 
`` The Syrian people will not be subjugated . 
Go away doctor -LRB- Assad -RRB- . 
We will trample on you and your slaughterous regime , '' they shouted . 
Assad 's conciliatory move to lift the state of emergency followed a familiar pattern since the unrest began a month ago : pledges of reform are made before Friday when demonstrations are the strongest , usually followed by an intense crackdown . 
Activists said some funerals for those killed Friday took place in Damascus suburbs in the evening . 
Funerals have been another platform for protesters in recent weeks and security forces have opened fire when mourners started demonstrating . 
The authorities have blamed armed groups , infiltrators and Sunni Muslim militant organizations for provoking violence at demonstrations by firing on civilians and security forces . 
Western and other Arab countries have mostly muted their criticism of the killings in Syria for fear of destabilizing the country , which plays a strategic role in many of the conflicts in the Middle East . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
They want the nation broken into cultural enclaves protected by small militias . 
National boundaries in North Africa have got to go , they are a stranglehold on multi-cultural needs . 
The Bathist party is among the most ruthless in history and this al-assad junior is no better than his father . 
They try to mask their identities with degrees and overseas educations , but unfortunately , you can take them out of the gutter but you cant take the gutter out of them . 
Even more sad in the region is that without these ruthless dictators , you would have complete anarchy in the streets . 
Too many different sects\/tribes and interests . 
Everyone in the region is worried about their personal benefit first and not that of the common good . 
The Middle East is a hopeless cause and the sooner we pull out the more we can focus on our own problems here . 
Taking out these monkeys will only create larger struggles for power which will lead to more dictators and more bloodshed . 
Just let these people alone and if they kill themselves , than that is their chosen fate . 
The Arab Spring to democracy must be worrying to Israel which depends on Arab tyrannies and the anti-Israel threat they pose militarily to keep Israel from descending into civil war . 
Without enemies that is almost certain to happen in Israel , especially if the Arab Spring Democracy Movement also gains hold and wins in the Palestinian territories , leaving only Iran as the big threat unless democracy also takes control in Persia . 
With that scenario in mind , I wonder what plans the United States has in place to deal with a potential new reality which will see its allied countries like Saudi Arabia and other oil producing sheikdoms the only major anti-democratic and anti-Israel tyrannies left in the region . 
The next six to 36-months may reshape everything including Israel and the way it governs itself . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
