Minute-by-minute timeline in BP report points to series of terrible failures leading to biggest offshore oil spill in history Wednesday 8 September 2010 16.40 BST An oil worker 's hard hat lies in oil from the BP spill on East Grand Terre Island , Louisiana . 
BP 's report today attempts to spread the blame for the disaster . 
Photograph : Lee Celano\/Reuters `` The well is blowing out ... -LRB- one of the technicians -RRB- is shutting it in now . '' 
That call was made aboard the Deepwater oil rig at 21.45 on 20 April , but was fatally optimistic . 
Within four minutes , two giant explosions had set the rig ablaze , killing 11 people and injuring 17 more . 
The `` nightmare well '' , as it had been dubbed by some workers , had become a real world horror . 
The minute-by-minute timeline in the report released by BP today , along with the astonishing catalogue of errors and failures the report details , paints a vivid picture of both the terror of that night on the rig and the extraordinary lapses in safety . 
The catastrophe , which led to the spilling of five million gallons of oil into the Gulf of Mexico , began some time before 19.55 local time , deep below the sea . 
Oil and gas started forcing its way into the well bore , breaching a cement barrier . 
Without naming the cement contractor , Halliburton , the BP investigators made their opinion clear : `` There were weaknesses in cement design and testing , quality assurance and risk assessment . '' 
Two further barriers , in the so-called `` shoe track '' at the base of the well , then failed as the intense pressure of the hydrocarbons came to bear on them . 
Next came perhaps the most crucial mistake . 
Pressure readings were taken on the well to determine whether it was under control , but despite `` anomalies '' the test was considered `` good '' . 
BP 's report accepts some of the responsibility but also blames the Transocean rig crew for reaching the `` incorrect view that the test was successful '' . 
That was at 19.55 , and all must have seemed well on the rig , but below their feet the storm was gathering . 
The report estimates that at 21.38 , hydrocarbons burst through the well and into the riser , the pipe leading up to the rig . 
Within three minutes , mud had shot up through the derrick on the rig , the first warning blast , and from here events unfolded at breakneck speed . 
As the mud spurted , a valve was closed diverting the flow to a device that separated mud from gas - another crucial mistake . 
This brought the full force of the blown well directly onto the rig , rather than venting it overboard . 
At 21.45 , as mud was `` raining down on the deck '' and the well pressure was trebling , the call was made to shut the well . 
In the following minutes , high pressure gas was discharging towards the deck , vibrating the huge rig . 
The sirens of one gas alarm after another went off , and the drill pipe pressure rose another fivefold . 
By 21.49 , just four minutes after the call to shut the well was made , the rig was plunged into darkness as all power was lost . 
The darkness of the Gulf night lasted just five seconds . 
A huge explosion hit the rig followed by another one 10 seconds later . 
The fate of Deepwater , and the biggest offshore oil spill in history , was set . 
Those four minutes contained another series of terrible failures . 
The bursting of gas and oil into the wellbore pushed up pressure readings 40 minutes earlier , but it was 40 minutes before any action was taken . 
Once again , the BP report blames the rig crew - Transocean . 
Next was the decision to route the flow of the hydrocarbons onto the rig , to the mud gas separator . 
Without that decision , `` there may have been more time to respond , and the consequences of the accident may have been reduced '' says the BP report . 
The onslaught of hydrocarbons overwhelmed the separator and allowed them to burst into parts of the rig that were not designed to suppress electrical sparks , via the heating , ventilation and air-conditioning systems , with explosive consequences . 
At 21.52 , the Mayday call went out , as the rig crew tried to ensure the blowout preventer - the 450-tonne set of valves on the sea floor and the ultimate failsafe - was in operation . 
As they did , 115 people began to leave the rig by a nearby ship . 
The coastguard were at the rig by 23.22 . 
Eleven hours later the rig sank and oil began to pour into the gulf . 
The failure of the blowout preventer was the final , catastrophic lapse . 
BP 's report found that the explosions and fire on the rig very likely disabled the `` emergency disconnect sequence '' , the primary emergency response that was supposed the seal the well . 
An automatic system , meant to kick in if power from the rig was lost , also failed , for the prosaic and appalling reason that the batteries in one control pod were flat and a crucial valve in the other was faulty . 
Two days later , the Macondo well delivered the final insult . 
Robot submarines had made it to the seabed and operated the shear valve that was meant to seal the well . 
Transocean 's response to BP 's report has been scathing : `` This is a self-serving report that attempts to conceal the critical factor that set the stage for the Macondo incident : BP 's fatally flawed well design . 
In both its design and construction , BP made a series of cost-saving decisions that increased risk in some cases , severely . '' 
Stephen Davis was on board Deepwater and told the Guardian in May about his memory of that night of chaos : the sensation of being flung five metres into a wall by a powerful explosion , the desperate , muddy scramble on a deck lit only by the reflections from a huge pillar of flame ; the look in men 's eyes before they jumped 18 metres -LRB- 60ft -RRB- into the water . 
`` You could taste the fumes , that godawful taste in your mouth . 
It was hard to breathe . 
The oxygen was being sucked out of the living quarters . 
Then all of a sudden just boom . 
It was the biggest explosion I ever heard in my life . '' 
`` The whole rig was vibrating and shaking , '' he said . 
`` It 's like we walked straight into hell . '' 
