BP 's Deepwater Horizon report does n't really spill the beans Even if BP 's finding of ` multiple causes ' of the Gulf of Mexico disaster is accepted , it is still unclear whether the company will be found grossly negligent A ship sprays water on a burning pipe in the Gulf of Mexico after the Deepwater Horizon disaster . 
Photograph : Greenpeace\/Reuters '' It 's not our accident , '' Tony Hayward said soon after the disastrous explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
It was almost the most foolish thing BP 's chief executive said in the wake of the tragedy , since few hard facts were available at the time . 
The line was quickly dropped . 
Today , almost five months later , the company has given its considered opinion over 192 pages containing much dense technical detail : it was a shared accident . 
The report detailed eight causes , including `` a bad cement job '' , as Hayward put it . 
Halliburton mixed and installed the cement , so there is one partner to share the blame . 
Transocean 's crew on the rig failed to act quickly enough , according to the report , so there 's another . 
And BP put up its own hand on various scores . 
Those contractors have their own versions of the story to present and will inevitably dispute large chunks of these findings . 
The biggest area of contention is the design of the well . 
Transocean says that it was `` fatally flawed '' . 
BP says that it was n't . 
In the end , though , the only report that matters is the one produced by the official inquiry . 
But even if BP 's finding of `` multiple causes '' is accepted , that does not tell us whether the company will be found grossly negligent or merely negligent . 
Should BP have taken greater care in supervising the work of the contractors it appointed ? 
That is a critical question . 
Halliburton and Transocean are massive corporations , with years of experience in deepwater oil production , but neither held the licence to the Macondo well . 
Anyone who disagrees , and thinks today 's report provides greater clues to the negligence\/gross negligence question , is free to speculate . 
The difference in cost to BP could be $ 30bn , a figure big enough to move the share price substantially . 
It 's hard to know what outcome is currently priced in , of course , but the shares themselves barely budged today they rose 1 % . 
The market 's snap reaction was clear enough : the report is welcome , fascinating and necessary , but does not provide all the answers . 
