BP oil spill report : the Deepwater Horizon blame game Eight big things went wrong on BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig in the Gulf of Mexico - and BP 's report is spreading the blame Cleaning up the Gulf after the oil spill : BP 's report on Deepwater Horizon disaster spreads the blame . 
Photograph : Carolyn Cole Here 's my take on the blame game : who the BP report on the Deepwater oil spill points the finger at for the astonishing catalogue of errors and failures that caused the Deepwater disaster . 
BP owned the well lease . 
Transocean were contracted by BP and operated the rig and blow out preventer - they have already condemned the BP report as `` self-serving '' . 
Halliburton did the cementing , but has not yet responded in detail to BP 's report . 
The eight big things that went wrong are , engineers tell me , a logical and plausible explanation . 
But who 's fault were they , according to BP ? 
My explanations are below , but to cut to the chase , the BP report appears to pin 4.5 of the eight problems on Transocean , one on Halliburton and 1.5 on BP , with one undecided . 
The cement that was supposed to stop the oil and gas shooting up the well pipe did n't work The report says : `` Improved engineering rigor , cement testing and communication of risk by Halliburton could have identified the low probability of the cement to achieve zonal isolation . 
Improved technical assurance , risk management and management of change by the BP Macondo well team could have raised awareness of the challenges of achieving zonal isolation and led to additional mitigation steps . '' 
BP 's verdict : Halliburton and BP to blame 2 . 
Further barriers at the bottom of the drill pipe failed to stop the hydrocarbons bursting into the well pipe The report says : `` The `` shoe track '' cement and the float collar must have failed to prevent this '' influx of oil and gas . 
BP 's verdict : As with 1 , Halliburton and BP to blame 3 . 
A key pressure test performed to see if the well was under control was accepted despite the readings showing it was not The report says the well site leaders - that 's BP - and the rig crew - that 's Transocean - formed and maintained this incorrect view despite the contradictory information . 
BP 's verdict : Transocean and BP to blame 4 . 
It took 40 minutes to realize gas and oil was shooting up the well The report says : `` Analysis indicates that the first indications of flow from the well could be seen in the real-time data after 20:58 hours . 
The rig crew and mudloggers either did not observe or did not recognize indications of flow until after hydrocarbons entered the riser at approximately 21:38 hours . 
The Transocean Well Control Handbook stated that the well was to be monitored at all times . '' 
BP 's verdict : Transocean to blame 5 . 
The surging hydrocarbons were not diverted `` overboard '' but brought onto the rig The report says : Transocean 's shut-in protocols did not fully address how to respond in high flow emergency situations after well control has been lost . 
Well control actions taken prior to the explosion suggest the rig crew was not sufficiently prepared to manage an escalating well control situation . '' 
BP 's verdict : Transocean to blame 6 . 
Diversion of the oil and gas was `` vented directly onto the rig '' The report says : `` The investigation team concludes that ... the rig crew diverted the flow of hydrocarbons ... -LRB- to -RRB- a low-pressure system , and its design limits would have been exceeded . '' 
BP 's verdict : Transocean to blame 7 . 
The fire and gas system did not prevent the explosions The report says : `` Because of the low probability of hydrocarbons being present before a well produces , only a small area of Deepwater Horizon was electrically classified -LRB- against sparking -RRB- . '' 
The blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- , the ultimate failsafe , failed The report says : `` The BOP maintenance records were not accurately reported in the maintenance management system . 
The condition of critical components in the yellow and blue -LRB- control -RRB- pods and the use of a non - -LRB- original -RRB- part , which were discovered after the pods were recovered , suggest the lack of a robust Transocean maintenance management system . '' 
BP 's verdict : Transocean to blame Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : BP oil spill report : the Deepwater Horizon blame game | Damian Carrington This article was published on guardian . 
