CDC Recommends Flocked Swabs and Copan-Manufactured Viral Transport Media for Collection ... \* Reuters is not responsible for the content in this press release . 
As the situation with the novel H1N1 -LRB- Swine Flu -RRB- virus continues to evolve , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention -LRB- CDC -RRB- continue to update their document Interim Guidance on Specimen Collection and Processing for Patients with Suspected Influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- Virus . 
The objective of this document is to provide guidance on appropriate specimen collection , storage , processing , and testing for patients with suspected swine-origin influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- virus infection . 
One of the most widely used methods for detection of H1N1 flu virus is to collect a nasopharyngeal swab sample . 
The CDC recommends the use of synthetic tip swabs , such as Flocked Swabs , which exhibit a superior recovery of viruses . 
Several independent scientific studies published in the Journal of Clinical Microbiology and presented at Clinical Virology Symposium show that the quality of the sample taken using Copan Flocked Swabs is comparable to the quality of a sample collected from a nasopharyngeal aspirate or nasal was , which are considered the gold standard for upper respiratory virus samples . 
The open structure of Copan Flocked Swabs acts like a soft brush that efficiently dislodges and collects cells and mucus , then releases the sample immediately when put in a viral transport medium . 
In Ontario , the Agency for Health Protection and Promotion also lists Flocked Swabs as the preferred type of swab for respiratory virus sample collection on its latest version of LABstract on H1N1 Flu Virus -LRB- human swine influenza -RRB- , Updated Guidance for Laboratory Testing , Hospital Setting . 
Copan Flocked Swabs are easy to use , are less invasive and cause minimal discomfort for the patient . 
Copan holds a worldwide patent on Flocked Swabs . 
To transport H1N1 viral specimens collected using swabs , the CDC also recommends that the swab specimen collection vials should contain 1 - 3ml of viral transport medium -LRB- e.g. containing , protein stabilizer , antibiotics to discourage bacterial and fungal growth , and buffer solution -RRB- , such as the BD Universal Viral Transport System , which is manufactured by Copan and distributed in different parts of the world under the Copan brand name Universal Transport Medium -LRB- UTM -RRB- . 
Copan UTM is room temperature stable and available in vials containing 1 or 3 ml of transport medium for different applications . 
About Copan Diagnostics , Inc. . 
With a reputation for innovation in preanalytics , Copan is the leading manufacturer of collection and transport systems in the world . 
Copan offers a complete range of microbial sampling products used for traditional culture analysis and molecular diagnostic assays . 
For more information , visit www.copanusa.com SOURCE Copan Diagnostics , Inc. . 
Gabriela Powers , Marketing Manager , 1-800-216-4016 , Gabriela.powers@copanusa.net An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
