Nurse Practitioners in the Front Lines of Obama Health Care Reform Era : University ... \* Reuters is not responsible for the content in this press release . 
Tue May 5 , 2009 1:30 pm EDT Nurse Practitioners in the Front Lines of Obama Health Care Reform Era : University of Miami President Donna E. Shalala , Pennsylvania Governor Edward Rendell to Outline How Largest Group of U.S. Health Professionals Will Play Expanded Role as Primary Providers Whether Dealing with Pandemic or Acute Shortage of Physicians , Nurse-Managed Health Centers Seen As A Key Solution to Health Care Crisis Health care reform is going to mean that nurse practitioners will play a more front-and-center role in treating patients , especially the more than 46 million Americans who currently lack health care insurance and are underserved by today 's health care system . 
Whether treating patients with the H1N1 swine flu virus or other illnesses , nurse-managed health centers -- an innovative delivery model for primary and preventive care , especially for low-income and vulnerable populations -- should expand significantly to increase the capacity of the nation 's over-strained health care delivery system . 
That will be the message of speakers at the phone-based news conference to be held Friday -LRB- May 8 , 2009 -RRB- at 10:30 a.m. EDT by the American Academy of Nursing -LRB- AAN -RRB- and its `` Raise the Voice '' -LRB- RTV -RRB- campaign . 
Involving more than 1,500 professionals and organizations , the nationwide RTV campaign is designed to harness the power of nurses , nurse practitioners and other professionals to provide needed primary health care , health promotion and disease prevention through `` disruptive solutions '' such as community-based care . 
That is , care delivered by advanced nurse practitioners and related professionals in a holistic , patient-centered way . 
The goal of a national network of 200 Nurse-Managed Health Centers -LRB- NMHCs -RRB- nationwide , many of them associated with schools of nursing , is consistent with the call from President Obama to double the number of community health care centers . 
The American Academy of Nursing 's `` Raise the Voice '' campaign receives support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation ; the news conference is supported in part by the Independence Foundation . 
News event speakers will be : -- University of Miami President Donna E. Shalala , former Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services -LRB- HHS -RRB- and Chair of the Advisory Committee of the `` Raise the Voice '' campaign of the American Academy of Nursing ; -- Pennsylvania Governor Edward G. Rendell ; -- National Nursing Centers Consortium Executive Director Tine Hansen-Turton ; and -- Independence Foundation President Susan E. Sherman . 
TO PARTICIPATE : You can join this live , phone-based news conference -LRB- with full , two-way Q&A -RRB- at 10:30 a.m. ET on May 8 , 2009 by dialing 1 -LRB- 800-RRB-860-2442 . 
Ask for the `` nurses\/health care reform '' news event . 
Every day across America , the Academy and its members create and execute knowledge-driven and policy-related initiatives to drive reform of America 's health care system . 
