Tuesday 12 April 2005 01.52 BST A report to the UN human rights commission in Geneva has concluded that Iraqi children were actually better off under Saddam Hussein than they are now . 
This , of course , comes as a bitter blow for all those of us who , like George Bush and Tony Blair , honestly believe that children thrive best when we drop bombs on them from a great height , destroy their cities and blow up hospitals , schools and power stations . 
It now appears that , far from improving the quality of life for Iraqi youngsters , the US-led military assault on Iraq has inexplicably doubled the number of children under five suffering from malnutrition . 
Under Saddam , about 4 % of children under five were going hungry , whereas by the end of last year almost 8 % were suffering . 
These results are even more disheartening for those of us in the Department of Making Things Better for Children in the Middle East By Military Force , since the previous attempts by Britain and America to improve the lot of Iraqi children also proved disappointing . 
For example , the policy of applying the most draconian sanctions in living memory totally failed to improve conditions . 
After they were imposed in 1990 , the number of children under five who died increased by a factor of six . 
By 1995 something like half a million Iraqi children were dead as a result of our efforts to help them . 
A year later , Madeleine Albright , then the US ambassador to the United Nations , tried to put a brave face on it . 
When a TV interviewer remarked that more children had died in Iraq through sanctions than were killed in Hiroshima , Mrs Albright famously replied : `` We think the price is worth it . '' 
But clearly George Bush did n't . 
So he hit on the idea of bombing them instead . 
And not just bombing , but capturing and torturing their fathers , humiliating their mothers , shooting at them from road blocks - but none of it seems to do any good . 
Iraqi children simply refuse to be better nourished , healthier and less inclined to die . 
It is truly baffling . 
And this is why we at the department are appealing to you - the general public - for ideas . 
If you can think of any other military techniques that we have so far failed to apply to the children of Iraq , please let us know as a matter of urgency . 
We assure you that , under our present leadership , there is no limit to the amount of money we are prepared to invest in a military solution to the problems of Iraqi children . 
In the UK there may now be 3.6 million children living below the poverty line , and 12.9 million in the US , with no prospect of either government finding any cash to change that . 
But surely this is a price worth paying , if it means that George Bush and Tony Blair can make any amount of money available for bombs , shells and bullets to improve the lives of Iraqi kids . 
You know it makes sense . 
Terry Jones is a film director , actor and Python . 
He is the author of Terry Jones 's War on the War on Terror Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article was published on guardian . 
