Why has the American capital system run amok , taking so many for a ride ? 
According to four recent books , the complicity reaches high and low : reckless financiers , dishonest mortgage brokers , credulous consumers and home buyers . 
But the blame starts at the top , where those in charge -- the Bush administration , Congress , the Federal Reserve and financial industry leaders -- closed or averted their eyes as the crisis approached . 
THE NEW PARADIGM FOR FINANCIAL MARKETS The Credit Crisis of 2008 and What It Means By George Soros | Public Affairs . 
$ 22.95 George Soros is a billionaire speculator whose voice is amplified by real money . 
His distaste for the Bush administration runs deep : He put millions of dollars into Sen. John Kerry 's 2004 presidential campaign . 
Yet his account of the credit crash is personal and revealing , not mere political bashing . 
He admits that he did n't recognize that the crisis was about to break and came out of virtual retirement in 2007 to trade again , hoping to limit the damage to his funds . 
Soros blames former Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan for not intervening to slow the mad real estate boom that led to the subprime mortgage disaster . 
Under Greenspan 's leadership , the Federal Reserve kept short-term interest rates too low for too long and ignored the spread of impenetrable financial investments , such as complex mortgage-based securities , which expanded risks of default beyond any reckoning . 
When risk ca n't be figured out and markets turn down , panic often follows . 
`` The newly invented methods and instruments were so sophisticated that the regulatory authorities lost the ability to calculate the risks involved , '' Soros writes . 
He calls this a `` shocking abdication of responsibility on the part of the regulators . '' 
FINANCIAL SHOCK A 360 Degree Look at the Subprime Mortgage Implosion , and How to Avoid The Next Financial Crisis By Mark Zandi | FT. 270 pp . 
$ 24.99 Financial Shock by economist Mark Zandi is a clear primer on how and why the crisis occurred . 
Zandi is chief economist and co-founder of Moody 's Economy.com , and his even-handed analysis is often sought by journalists -LRB- including by me in my former role as a Washington Post business reporter -RRB- . 
His lucid book explains the credit default swaps -LRB- CDSs -RRB- ; structured investment vehicles -LRB- SIVs -RRB- ; collateralized debt obligations -LRB- CDOs -RRB- ; CDOs of CDOs , called CDOs-squared ; CDOs-cubed ; and other instruments of financial jabberwocky that caused the credit contagion . 
Most notorious , Zandi says , were the CDOs , `` essentially just a mutual fund for bonds and loans . '' 
These funds filled up with subprime mortgage loans whose risks were unknowable to investors . 
Financial firms pocketed lucrative fees for selling CDOs , and buyers could get them for 7 percent down , the rest borrowed . 
Such highly leveraged deals promised rich payoffs , but delivered cataclysmic losses when the bubble burst . 
It is no surprise to see someone like Soros urging effective regulation of financial market risk . 
But it is significant that Zandi , an adviser to Sen. John McCain 's presidential campaign , agrees with Soros . 
The current crisis , at bottom , is about a serious loss of confidence in U.S. financial markets . 
`` Financial markets work on trust , '' he says . 
`` Without trust , money markets quickly break down . '' 
THE WORLD IS CURVED Hidden Dangers to the Global Economy By David M. Smick | Portfolio . 
$ 26.95 A consultant and founder of the International Economy quarterly , David M. Smick takes his title from Thomas J. Friedman 's The World Is Flat . 
`` For the financial markets , '' Smick argues , `` the world is curved . 
We ca n't see over the horizon ... That is why the world has become such a dangerous place . '' 
Smick built his career through the classic Washington practice of networking and advice-giving , and his analysis is sprinkled with stories of encounters with big players in global finance . 
He describes his sweaty-palmed interview with Singapore 's legendary leader Lee Kuan Yew , who blasted Smick for his confidence in U.S. markets , then gave him a consulting contract . 
It 's classic name-dropping , but it enlivens his account . 
Smick views the country 's economic setbacks from the perspective of a committed globalist who fears that Americans will start demanding barriers to trade and investment , provoking an even greater crisis . 
His book argues that the United States can and must compete in a world with shrinking boundaries because there really is n't another choice . 
BAD MONEY Reckless Finance , Failed Politics , And the Global Crisis of American Capitalism By Kevin Phillips | Viking . 
$ 25.95 Kevin Phillips is alarmed by the increasing gap in wealth between the richest Americans and the rest of the population . 
Other analysts see this trend coming from political choices , the unplanned chaos of global markets and individual avarice . 
Phillips , author of American Dynasty and American Theocracy , spies the shadowy hand of the financial elite pulling the strings . 
According to him , since the 1980s , Wall Street and its Washington allies have set out to tie the U.S. economy to the money sector and let manufacturing companies and factory workers fall by the wayside . 
`` The flight of the economy from tangibles to money manipulation is enriching a broad cross section of the upper-echelon institutions and practitioners of U.S. finance , '' he writes . 
He blames this nefarious plan for the current economic crisis and argues that it dooms the United States to second-class status , behind China . 
The pitch of Phillips 's alarms has led one reviewer to call him a modern Thomas Paine . 
But the sweep of his claims creates a big burden of proof that he does n't even attempt to meet . 
Is there a powerful cabal at work to carry out a sinister `` financialization '' of the U.S. economy ? 
Phillips ducks : `` This book will not try to prove or disprove any particular backstage role '' by Wall Street and Washington power brokers . 
He is `` not interested in becoming a conspiracy investigator , '' he insists . 
But his work edges closer to Dan Brown 's than he should want . 
Of the four books , Zandi 's account of the internal threats to U.S. prosperity is most clinical while Smick provides a global perspective . 
Soros , who calls himself a `` failed philosopher '' attempts in his tenth book to put this crisis into a complex theoretical context and asks readers to make one more try to grasp it . 
All four authors agree on the growing vulnerability of American financial well-being . 
Alone among the major economies , the United States is critically dependent on countries that sell us oil , electronics and the things that fill our shopping bags . 
Americans have stopped saving . 
The Bush administration and Congress have let budget deficits fly . 
And now the country relies on foreigners to plow dollars back in to keep the economy going . 
The authors warn that this financial dependence , like our energy dependence , is eroding the nation 's choices . 
These four experts see the credit shock as a probable turning point toward an even tougher future . 
Budget deficits will have to be faced . 
Painful spending decisions on health care and social security must be made . 
The economy 's rewards must flow more fairly . 
`` Henceforth , American consumers ... have to find ways to live within their means , '' Zandi says . 
`` Their unlimited freedom to spend , as well as their dominant role in the global economy , -LRB- has -RRB- reached an end . '' 
Peter Behr is a contributing writer to the C.Q. Global Researcher and a former Washington Post business writer and editor . 
