Thu Jun 30 , 2011 6:27 pm BST -LRB- Adds details of fund , investment strategy -RRB- LONDON , June 30 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - ASR Real Estate Investment Management -LRB- ASR REIM -RRB- plans to raise 300 million euros -LRB- $ 426 million -RRB- this year for a new fund with exposure to 1.1 billion euros in Dutch prime retail property , giving investors access to high streets where space is scarce . 
ASR REIM , a unit of Dutch insurer ASR Netherlands , said the ASR Dutch Prime Retail Fund is seeded with a core portfolio of 210 Dutch prime properties as well as another 280 million euros in investment opportunities . 
The close-end fund is targeting returns of 7 to 9 percent and a dividend of 5 percent , Dick Gort , ASR REIM 's chief executive told Reuters . 
The fund aims to raise another 800 million euros after 2011 and plans to invest the new equity in additional real estate , he said . 
`` We are planning at the moment how should we do that . 
Should we do that directly , should we do that indirectly , should we do that in the Netherlands should we do that in Europe -- maybe global , '' Gort said . 
He said that in principle there would be no gearing on the fund , and while there was the possibility of adding some gearing to it , it would be more working capital . 
The portfolio comprises about 65 percent high street space , with property on all of the main Dutch cities ' high streets , Gort said , adding that vacancy was below 1 percent . 
The Dutch retail market outperformed in income growth and had low-volatility capital growth , which has resulted in positive total returns for the last 10 years , ASR REIT said . 
Properties in the fund include single town-centre units , regional shopping centres and supermarkets , covering a lettable area of over 300,000 square meters . 
`` Over time we anticipate bringing additional Dutch funds of a similar high quality to the market for institutional investors from other real estate sectors , '' Gort said in a company statement . 
-LRB- $ 1 = 0.705 Euros -RRB- -LRB- Reporting by Karen Foster ; Editing by David Holmes and Jane Merriman -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
