WASHINGTON -- The House approved a bill Friday to boost safety standards for offshore drilling , remove a federal cap on economic liability for oil spills and impose new fees on oil and gas production . 
Democratic leaders hailed the bill as a comprehensive response to the Gulf of Mexico oil spill and said it would increase drilling safety and crack down on oil companies such as BP . 
Companies with significant workplace safety or environmental violations over the preceding seven years would be banned from new offshore drilling permits . 
Republicans and some-oil state Democrats opposed the measure , calling it a federal power grab that would raise energy prices and kill thousands of American jobs because of the new fees and liability provision . 
Rep. Nick Rahall , D-W . 
Va. , the bill 's main sponsor , said the legislation would be a tribute to the 11 oil rig workers who were killed when the BP well exploded in April by creating strong new safety standards for offshore drilling , ending the revolving door between government regulators and industry and holding BP and other oil companies accountable for accidents . 
`` While we may not know the exact cause of the incident , we clearly know what contributed to it . 
A culture of cozy relationships that had regulators interviewing for jobs on the same rigs they were supposed to be inspecting , '' said Rahall , who is chairman of the House Natural Resources Committee . 
The legislation , which passed 209-193 , has yet to be taken up in the Senate , where partisan disagreements will likely delay final consideration of a joint House-Senate bill until after the August congressional recess . 
The House bill includes a provision sponsored by Rep. Charlie Melancon , D-La . 
, that would modify a six-month moratorium on deepwater drilling , so that some drilling permits could be approved on a rig-by-rig basis if the Interior Department determines a rig meets new safety requirements . 
The drilling moratorium imposed by Interior Secretary Ken Salazar would remain in effect , and Salazar would retain power over whether to approve a permit . 
The bill also would remove the current $ 75 million cap on economic damages to be paid by oil companies after major spills and increases to $ 300 million the financial responsibility offshore operators must demonstrate in most cases . 
And it would create new `` conservation '' fees on oil and natural gas extracted from land or water controlled by the federal government . 
Those provisions prompted sharp criticism from Republicans . 
`` In typical Democrat fashion , this bill overtaxes , over-regulates , and costs American jobs , '' said Rep. John Mica , R-Fla . 
Rep. Doc Hastings of Washington state , the top Republican on the House Natural Resources Committee , said removing the liability cap could devastate small and medium-sized drillers . 
Hastings called the new fees on oil and gas production a `` $ 22 billion energy tax '' that would cost jobs and raise energy prices . 
The Congressional Budget Office estimates that the $ 2 per barrel fee on oil and a similar fee on natural gas could bring in $ 22.5 billion over the next decade . 
Earlier Friday , the House approved a separate bill to extend whistleblower protections to oil and gas workers who report hazardous conditions or other problems . 
The whistleblower bill will be added to the oil spill legislation when it is sent to the Senate . 
`` A whistleblower may be the only thing standing between a safe workplace and a catastrophe , '' said Rep. George Miller , D-Calif . 
, the bill 's sponsor . 
`` No worker should ever have to choose between his life and his livelihood . '' 
Rep. Jay Inslee , D-Wash . 
, said the bill setting new drilling standards and removing the liability cap was the least Congress could do to respond to such a major catastrophe . 
Rahall said the legislation would end a `` trust-but-don ` t-verify '' attitude about safety where drilling plans were rubber stamped by federal regulators and industry often wrote its own rules . 
The bill would put into law actions already taken by the Obama administration to break Interior 's former Minerals Management Service into three parts , separating safety enforcement and regulation from economic activities such as issuing oil leases and collecting royalties . 
Since the BP spill the agency has been renamed the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Enforcement and Regulation , and a new director , Michael Bromwich , has been appointed . 
Associated Press writer Frederic J. Frommer contributed to this story . 
