LONDON | Tue Mar 8 , 2011 10:32 am EST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A frontline in Libya 's civil war looked to be consolidating on Tuesday , dividing the country in two along historic a provincial boundary , leaving key oil facilities stuck in the middle of the emerging conflict . 
The eastern city of Benghazi looks to have firmly thrown off control by Muammar Gaddafi , but the veteran leader looks to have managed to clamp down on unrest in the capital Tripoli and is besieging and battling to cement his control in nearby towns . 
Experts say the western conflict -- particularly the outcome of any uprising in Tripoli itself -- could decide Gaddafi 's fate . 
So could bargaining with the leaderships of major tribes . 
In the meantime , fighting seemed on Tuesday to be stalling along the coastal front between Benghazi and Gaddafi 's hometown of Sirte -- an area that includes oil ports and refineries . 
`` In the short term , we 're looking at the de facto division of the country , '' said Control Risks analyst Henry Smith . 
The dividing point on the coastal strip looks to be around the oil refining and export towns of Brega and Ras Lanuf -- scene of recent fighting and air strikes . 
If confrontation along that front remains violent , it may further jeopardize oil sales . 
Oil sources told Reuters that both ports were now closed to traffic , although the eastern port of Tobruk -- now under control of the Benghazi-based opposition -- remained open . 
Businesses and diplomats face an awkward prospect of having to deal with a divided country , where payment to authorities in Tripoli may no longer ensure oil shipments from the east , and where relations may need restoring with a leader in the capital who Western powers said they wanted overthrown without delay . 
The example of Ivory Coast , divided since 2002 , is a reminder of how such civil conflicts can become entrenched . 
Both sides insist they will shortly triumph and reunite Libya . 
The rebels say Gaddafi is only just hanging on , playing down suggestions of looming de facto partition of the country . 
`` Gaddafi only has small pockets in Tripoli and other towns , '' said Ashour Shamis , a Libyan writer and editor of a pro-opposition online newspaper . 
`` All he has is his family . 
Libya is not divided . 
It has never been divided . '' 
But while many analysts believe there is widespread discontent with Gaddafi in western Libya , he may have enough troops and equipment to crush urban pockets of resistance and deter protesters from taking to the streets in the capital . 
His chances of demolishing the eastern opposition may be tougher , however , reflecting partly distance from the capital , but also deep-rooted differences between the historic provinces of Cyrenaica , around Benghazi , and Tripolitania , which Italian colonial rulers united to create modern Libya 80 years ago . 
`` The area around Benghazi has always been the center of resistance against both the Gaddafi regime and before it the Italian occupation , '' said Smith at Control Risks . 
The eastern rebels have taken the flag of the old monarchy from Cyrenaica , ousted by Gaddafi in a military coup in 1969 . 
Gaddafi has long relied heavily on members of his own Gaddadfa tribe from around Sirte , using them in key positions particularly in core `` regime protection '' units . 
But he has also built alliances with other groups through marriage and important government appointments . 
That has allowed him to weather previous tribal uprisings by groups such as the eastern-based Warfalla , widely seen as Libya 's largest tribe . 
Together with the second largest tribal group , the Margarha , they rebelled in 1993 against Gaddafi demanding greater representation in government . 
The revolt failed and a number of Warfalla leaders were killed , imprisoned or driven into exile -- although experts say they still retain a considerable presence within the military . 
After negotiations behind closed doors , the Margarha were able to maintain better ties with Gaddafi . 
However , many believe loyalties in the final analysis will also come down to more immediate personal decisions and relationships as commanders and leaders wait to back the winning side . 
Many tribes themselves break down into multiple subgroups . '' 
`` We 've seen various statements from various figures about the loyalty of their tribes , but it 's far from clear that structures are that simple , '' said Control Risks ' Smith . 
`` There will be a lot of people aiming to sit on the sidelines to see which way things go . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
