Has Volkswagen discovered the Holy Grail of carmakers ? 
Full Article Libya no-fly zone talks , protracted conflict looms RAS LANUF , Libya | Tue Mar 8 , 2011 2:16 pm IST RAS LANUF , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Britain and France spearheaded a drive at the United Nations for a no-fly zone over Libya as battles raged across the country and Muammar Gaddafi 's son said a civil war would erupt if his father stepped down . 
The White House pushed back against rising pressure from some U.S. lawmakers for direct intervention in Libya , saying it first wanted to figure out what military options could achieve in this oil-producing desert state which is wracked by conflict . 
Civilians were surrounded by Gaddafi forces in two western towns , Misrata and Zawiyah , and in the east warplanes hit the rebel-held oil terminal town of Ras Lanuf as strikes and counter-attacks pointed to an increasingly protracted conflict . 
Two Arab papers and al Jazeera television said Gaddafi was looking for a pact allowing him to step down , but there was no official confirmation of the reports . 
Gaddafi in public has vowed to fight on and never leave Libya . 
One of Gaddafi 's sons , Saadi , said in an interview with Al Arabiya television his father had not yet thrown his army into full battle against the rebels , saving it to shield Libya against foreign attack and to protect `` sensitive sites '' . 
`` The tribes are all armed , there are forces from the Libyan army and the eastern region is armed . 
The situation is not like Tunisia or Egypt , '' said Saadi . 
`` If something happened to the leader , who would be in control ? 
A civil war would start . '' 
The battlefield in eastern Libya around important oil terminals has become mired in attack and counter-attack between the loose-knit rebel army of young volunteers and defectors and the Libyan armed forces in a buffer zone of barren landscape between the east and the west of Libya . 
The largely inexperienced rebels lack the firepower of their rivals . 
They have no warplanes to back them up and rely mostly on heavy machineguns , anti-aircraft weapons and rocket propelled grenades . 
They travel by 4x4 pick-up trucks . 
But their agility , often fairly chaotic at the front , has given them a degree of protection from Gaddafi 's forces , who have proved more effective at quashing the rebellion in the west around the Libyan leader 's Tripoli powerbase . 
U.N. aid coordinator Valerie Amos said the fighting across Libya meant that more than a million people fleeing or inside the country needed humanitarian aid . 
`` Humanitarian organizations need urgent access now , '' she said . 
`` People are injured and dying and need help immediately . '' 
The United Nations appealed for $ 160 million for an operation over the next months to prepare shelter , food and medicine . 
British Foreign Secretary William Hague said London was working with its partners `` on elements of a resolution on a no-fly zone , making clear the need for regional support , a clear trigger for such a resolution and an appropriate legal basis '' . 
A French source said France also was working with its U.N. partners on a no-fly zone resolution . 
Gulf states called for a no-fly zone and an urgent Arab League meeting . 
Western allies differ over how a no-fly zone might be implemented . 
The United States has said it would involve a large-scale military operation , including strikes on Libyan air defences , but some military analysts have said it could be limited to preventing flights in Libyan airspace , without a big preliminary campaign . 
U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates , in Afghanistan where foreign forces have struggled for a decade , said action should be taken only with international backing . 
The White House said all options were on the table , including arming rebels . 
Russia , a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council with veto powers , said it opposed foreign military intervention . 
NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen stressed the need for U.N. authorisation . 
`` I ca n't imagine the international community and the United Nations would stand idly by if Gaddafi and his regime continue to attack their own people , '' he said . 
NATO has launched 24-hour surveillance of Libya with AWACS reconnaissance aircraft , the U.S. ambassador to NATO said . 
U.S. President Barack Obama said he wanted to `` send a very clear message to the Libyan people that we will stand with them in the face of unwarranted violence and the continuing suppression of democratic ideals '' . 
As the international community sought to isolate Gaddafi 's government , Japan said on Tuesday it had imposed sanctions on Libya , including freezing assets of Gaddafi and several other Libyans , in line with a U.N. Security Council resolution . 
`` Based on the U.N. resolution , the cabinet agreed that Japan would carry out these measures , for the sake of unity with the international community , '' Japanese Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda told a news conference after a cabinet meeting . 
In the rebel-held city of Misrata , the wounded were being treated on hospital floors because of a catastrophic shortage of medical facilities in the besieged city , a resident said . 
Misrata is the biggest city in the west not under the control of Gaddafi , and its stand against a militia commanded by his own son has turned it into a symbol of defiance . 
Zawiyah , just 50 km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- from Tripoli , was in rebel hands despite a government forces ' push , Sky television said . 
In the east , warplanes launched strikes on the rebel-held oil town of Ras Lanuf 600 km -LRB- 400 miles -RRB- east of the capital Tripoli . 
One ripped through a car carrying a family . 
Shipping sources said the fighting had closed the Ras Lanuf terminal and the oil port of Brega . 
Brent crude prices rose above $ 118 a barrel on Monday before falling back to $ 115 and U.S. prices pushed to their highest level since September 2008 . 
Youcef Yousfi , president of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries , said there were no plans for a crisis meeting of the group and high prices were short term . 
The Libyan government says it is fighting against al Qaeda terrorists and maintains its security forces have targeted only armed individuals attacking state institutions and depots . 
Al Jazeera quoted sources from the rebel interim council as saying it rejected Gaddafi 's proposal to quit because it would have been an `` honorable '' exit for him . 
The channel said Gaddafi had wanted guarantees of safety for him and his family and a pledge they not be put on trial . 
Jadallah Azous Al-Talhi , a former prime minister , earlier appeared on state television to urge rebels to `` give a chance to national dialogue to resolve this crisis '' . 
Ahmed Jabreel , an aide to rebel leader Mustafa Abdel Jalil , said : `` Any negotiations must be on the basis that Gaddafi will step down . 
There can be no other compromise . '' 
So far tens of thousands of migrant workers have fled but few Libyans . 
`` If we get a massive outflow of Libyans , this would create a refugee situation , so we appeal to all countries to keep their doors open and be ready to provide assistance as humanitarian law requires , '' U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres said . 
