\* Source says Gaddafi may want financial guarantees \* Libyan leader has vowed to fight on , not to leave Libya BENGHAZI , Libya , March 8 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A Muammar Gaddafi envoy offered to hold talks on the Libyan leader 's exit but the rebel National Libyan Council rejected negotiations with a leader they do not trust , a rebel spokesman said on Tuesday . 
Arab media had reported that the Libyan leader had reached out to the council to offer talks on Gaddafi 's departure , which is the central demand of rebels who have seized swathes of the country mainly in the east from the Libyan leader 's control . 
A council source on Monday told Reuters he had heard of a proposal that Gaddafi hand power to the head of parliament and leave Libya with a guaranteed sum of money . 
He had also said the council saw the cash element as an obstacle . 
In fiery and defiant speeches , Gaddafi has vowed to fight on and has told his supporters he will never leave Libya . 
Officials from the council , which is based in the rebel-held eastern city of Benghazi , did not confirm any Gaddafi proposal on Monday , but on Tuesday a spokesman confirmed it was made . 
`` I confirm that we received contact from a Gaddafi representative seeking to negotiate Gaddafi 's exit , '' a media officer for the council , Mustafa Gheriani , told Reuters . 
`` We rejected this . 
We are not negotiating with someone who spilled Libyan blood and continues to do so . 
Why would we trust the guy today ? '' 
The Libyan government or Gaddafi 's representatives have not issued any comment on such a proposal but his son , Saadi Gaddafi , told an Arabic channel that if the leader did step down Libya would descend into civil war . 
The head of the rebel council , Mustafa Abdel Jalil , told Al Arabiya television by telephone : `` Now the first demand is that he announces his departure , and only after that perhaps Libyans will stop pursuing him for crimes . '' 
`` There are indirect contacts with the Americans at the presidential level , '' he added , without giving details . 
Al Jazeera also cited Abdel Jalil as saying that there was `` no chance for Gaddafi 's rule over Libya to continue '' . 
It quoted an Al Jazeera correspondent saying there were talks about mediation by a foreign state to secure a safe exit for Gaddafi . 
