Aid agencies say women distribute food more fairly to their families The UN has begun a large-scale aid distribution in Haiti 's capital , aiming to feed two million people nearly three weeks after the deadly earthquake . 
Only women will be able to collect the aid from 16 centres , exchanging vouchers for sacks of rice to give to their children and families . 
The aid effort comes as 10 Americans were detained by Haitian authorities . 
They are suspected of trying to take more than 30 children out the country without proper authorisation . 
Haitian Social Affairs Minister Yves Christallin said police had arrested five men and five women traveling with 33 children on the border with the Dominican Republic . 
`` This is an abduction , not an adoption , '' Mr Christallin said , according to Agence France Presse . 
The mistake we made is we did n't understand additional paperwork was required But the BBC 's Rupert Wingfield-Hayes , in Port-au-Prince , says the Americans could be in deep trouble as some of the children may not be even orphans . 
An international charity , SOS Children 's Villages , which is now looking after the children , says at least one of them , a little girl , said her parents were alive . 
George Willeit , the spokesman for the aid group in Port-au-Prince , told journalists the girl said she had believed she was being taken to a boarding school or summer camp . 
Mr Willeit said many of the children were also found to be in poor health , hungry and dehydrated . 
One of the smallest , just two or three months old , was so dehydrated she had to be taken to hospital , he added . 
Haitian authorities said none of the children , some as young as two months , had documentation or proof that they were actually parentless . 
The leader of the Idaho-based group , Laura Silsby , said the arrests were the result of a mistake . 
`` Our understanding was that , we were told by a number of people including Dominican authorities that we would be able to bring the children across , '' she said . 
`` The mistake we made is that we did n't understand there was additional paperwork required . '' 
But our correspondent says the regulations are very clear - each case of child adoption must be approved by the government . 
Karen Allen , BBC News , Port-au-Prince In the grounds of a former children 's hospital , in one of the worst-affected areas of Port-au-Prince , there is a queue of about 200 women snaking around the building . 
It 's all very orderly - the women are coming in and collecting a bag of rice which is to be shared between two families . 
Some distance away , behind security tape , the men are being held back . 
The reason is that , in the past , food distribution points have been trigger points for potential violence and scuffles . 
The UN estimates that up to a third of the population will be reliant on some kind of relief in the months to come . 
Even before the earthquake , he adds , child-smuggling was a massive problem in Haiti , with thousands of children disappearing each year . 
In the capital Port-au-Prince , the UN 's World Food Programme -LRB- WFP -RRB- has begun feeding families - distributing food only to women - at a series of 16 sites across the capital . 
Each woman will receive a 25kg -LRB- 55lb -RRB- bag of rice , enough to feed her family for two weeks . 
Only women will be allowed to collect earthquake relief supplies , because - the WFP says - this has proved that is the best way to get food to the people who need it . 
The WFP will work with the local authorities to ensure that men in need of assistance are not excluded , it said . 
`` Up until now the nature of this emergency has forced us to work in a ` quick and dirty ' way simply to get food out , '' said Executive Director Josette Sheeran . 
`` This new system will allow us to provide food assistance to more people , more quickly through a robust network of fixed distribution sites . '' 
The WFP says it has reached 600,000 people with over 16 million meals since the earthquake , amid huge logistical problems caused by damage to local infrastructure . 
Meanwhile , doctors working to treat survivors voiced concern over the US halting the evacuation of the critically injured to the country . 
Dr Barth Green , Dr Cathy Burneit and Dr David Pitcher describe difficulties in Haiti A senior US medic told the BBC that scores of people injured in the earthquake could die if the US did not resume emergency evacuations soon . 
`` The consequences - in the kids with crushed chests and on ventilators and respirators , and some of the adults - are they will die , '' Barth Green , a senior American doctor at a field hospital in Port-au-Prince airport , told the BBC . 
The US military stopped the flights to Florida on Wednesday . 
A White House spokesman told the BBC the move was due to `` logistical issues '' , not because of a row over medical costs as had been reported earlier . 
Hundreds of patients with spinal injuries , burns and other wounds have been evacuated to the US since the 12 January quake that killed up to 200,000 people . 
