Haiti , disabled people and disasters When catastrophes strike , it 's often hard to comprehend the impact of numbers . 
Human stories and human connections are what brings the reality home to you . 
When I heard about Haiti 's earthquake , it was horrifying to discover tens of thousands of people had died , with many more injured or homeless . 
But amidst my overall feeling of shock and distress , I was particularly concerned about one person , Gerald Oriol , a disability and community activist who contributed to the World Report on Disability and Rehabilitation , on which I work at WHO - the World Health Organization . 
Gerald is a young disabled man working for a voluntary organization called Fondation J'Aime Haiti . 
I was put in touch with him via a humanitarian colleague who had met him in Port-au-Prince . 
My friend told me that , because the roads are so bad in Haiti , the UN sometimes would fly Gerald around the country in their helicopters , so he could support disabled people in outlying areas . 
After some emails back and forth , Gerald wrote his testimony for the World Report . 
Despite having never met him , I felt a connection , and so it was for him that I was most anxious , as soon as the news came through of the quake . 
I was encouraged to see that his website was still online , until I realized it is probably hosted outside the country . 
I emailed , and hoped for the best . 
Disabled people are among the most vulnerable when disaster strikes . 
They may be left behind in the evacuation of buildings . 
Environmental barriers - such as destroyed roads and pavements - are a greater obstacle to those with mobility issues . 
People who require regular medication or treatment are likely to lose out . 
For those disabled people living in emergency shelters , latrine arrangements may be inaccessible . 
And where food aid is distributed in refugee camps , disabled people are often at the back of the queue and so may go hungry . 
Evidence shows , for example , that many of those who died in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina were older or disabled people . 
The same goes for the Boxing Day tsunami , and other natural disasters . 
At WHO , we are trying to mainstream disability . 
In other words , rather than leaving the issue to a small specialist team , the hope is that all the technical departments address disability issues in their work . 
One of the clusters at WHO is Health Action in Crisis , and they were among our earliest collaborators . 
Together , we are working with an NGO to prepare a checklist for relief coordinators , to alert them to the particular vulnerabilities of disabled people . 
The next step is to promote training , so that humanitarian staff can be prepared and will understand what to do . 
There may also be a need to stockpile supplies so that disabled people 's specific needs are met and that emergency aid can include catheters , insulin or other regular medications , as well as the usual food and drugs . 
Emergencies are not just about immediate response , but about reconstruction and recovery . 
In the aftermath of a disaster , there is a huge need for rehabilitation services , so that people who experienced lasting injuries can return to active life . 
Many people in Haiti will have experienced paralysis , head injury , amputations and other traumatic injury due to the earthquakes , not to mention emotional distress arising from shock and bereavement . 
The only chink of light in the darkness is that perhaps , if sufficient aid is forthcoming , reconstruction efforts for homes , public buildings and other infrastructure will result in better and more barrier-free facilities than before . 
Every day since the quake , I have been hoping to hear a response from Gerald . 
When I woke up this Sunday , I checked my email again . 
This time , I was so relieved to get an email direct from him in Port-au-Prince . 
He wrote to me and other supporters : `` There is no word to describe the scope of the catastrophe in Haiti . 
The people are under extreme distress and face considerable challenges and needs -LRB- drinking water , food , shelter , medical attentions , etc. -RRB- . 
However , in this time of crisis , the people of Haiti have shown great solidarity and patience . 
For the past two days , I and the rest of the team have been working with a few disadvantaged communities in Port-au-Prince . 
Together with the communities , we have been burying corpses to avoid the spread of possible diseases . 
We have also been providing transport to medical centers ... Terrible , just terrible but we must muster all our strengths . 
On a personal note , my immediate family is safe . 
I have not yet reached the extended family ... however , many friends have perished . 
Thanks and take care ! 
Let us be strong for Haiti . '' 
Thanks go to Fondation Jaime Haiti and also to Lisa Gordon - Help Age International - on behalf of Disasters Emergency Committee , for permission to publish these photos . 
At 10:49 am on 02 Feb 2010 , Lisy wrote : As well as mentioning the DEC , given the contents of this article surely it should also mention Whirlwind Wheelchair ? 
Would like to see more articles like this please . 
And very glad to hear that Gerald Oriol has survived this dreadful catastrophe . 
I would be interested to learn more about his work and those of other international campaigners . 
