In hiding with a Syrian activist 's family By Sue Lloyd Roberts BBC News , Syria Only men join the protests following attacks on women by pro-government thugs His mother grabs him before he can do himself an injury . 
His baby brother wakes up and starts crying . 
The sound of angry , childish rage fills the small apartment . 
`` I am sorry , '' says their mother , Om Khaled , with tears running down her face . 
`` They ca n't help it . '' 
I am hiding in Homs - the so-called capital of the Syrian revolution - with the family of a political activist . 
The city has been in a state of near siege , surrounded by President Assad 's army for seven months now . 
I am getting a taste of what this means from a woman and a mother 's point of view . 
Many of Homs ' shops have been closed At least the men can do something - they can either drive tanks and fire their weapons , if they are on the one side , or prepare their anti-government slogans and march in the now daily demonstrations , if they are on the other . 
Women and children are virtual prisoners . 
Since pro-government thugs started kidnapping , raping and even killing women , few dare leave their homes . 
The sound of gunfire over the city is constant . 
All the shopping , from the few stores which are open , is done by the men . 
But Om Khaled 's husband , Mohammed , also has a revolution to organise . 
He has forgotten to buy nappies for the baby for over a week now . 
Broadcast on Saturdays at 1130 BST on BBC Radio 4 and weekdays on BBC World Service That way , at least she knows where he is . 
For her , it means non-stop cooking , washing up and looking after the children . 
And then there are the revolutionary hours - meetings go on until four in the morning and the revolutionaries sleep until midday on sofas and on the floor . 
The children have to be persuaded not to disturb them . 
And now she has me sleeping on the floor as well , adding to her work and anxiety . 
I try to lighten her burden by playing with the children and helping in the kitchen , a routine which is interrupted when I am accompanied down the stairs from the fourth floor apartment by Mohammed , to be taken by car to attend demonstrations and record interviews . 
With the schools closed and no sport or entertainment possible , the daily demonstrations and the killing are now the only show in town '' I am wearing a hijab and sunglasses but still I arouse suspicion . 
`` You 've got a foreigner staying with you ! '' 
the woman on the third floor says to Om Khaled accusingly , after she has seen me on the stairs one day . 
`` She 's a cousin of my husband from Kuwait , '' she says in reply , hoping this will account for my foreign-ness . 
If the family were caught harbouring a foreign journalist , it would end in imprisonment and torture for Mohammed . 
Mohammed takes me on a tour of the city and points out the signs of six months of attack by President Assad 's army - burned-out bus shelters , buildings pockmarked with shell holes , piles of uncollected rubbish in the street . 
`` They punish the areas where demonstrations take place , '' he explains , `` by cutting the services . 
We have plenty of rats but we can be without water , electricity and communications for days . '' 
We drive past schools which have been attacked and are closed . 
Some are being used as prisons for the protesters . 
They are covered in graffiti . 
One rather unnervingly says `` We want Freedoom '' -LRB- with a double `` o '' -RRB- . 
I try to imagine what it must be like to be a mother of older children -LRB- many families have eight or more -RRB- . 
How could she persuade teenage boys to stay at home ? 
With the schools closed and no sport or entertainment possible , the daily demonstrations and the killing are now the only show in town . 
As the capital of the revolution , Homs has borne the brunt of the casualties . 
Of the more than 3,000 believed to have been killed over the last seven months - and many believe the figure is much higher - over 1,300 have been killed in Homs , including children . 
True to the Arab tradition and even in these exceptional times , Om Khaled is a generous and kind host , lending me pyjamas , a sleeping bag and everything I left behind when I was smuggled into the city . 
She refuses to accept gifts or payment for my stay but I can see the relief in her eyes when I eventually leave . 
`` You must come and stay with me in London when this is all over , '' I say . 
`` When it 's all over , '' she says , reaching for her son as he makes a break for the door . 
`` I pray to God it will be over before Khaled is old enough to make it out on to the street . 
How to listen to From Our Own Correspondent : BBC Radio 4 : A 30-minute program on Saturdays , 1130 . 
Second 30-minute program on Thursdays , 1100 -LRB- some weeks only -RRB- . 
Hear daily 10-minute editions Monday to Friday , repeated through the day , also available to listen online . 
