Booms are being used against the oil off Louisiana Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said the British company had missed `` deadline after deadline '' in its efforts to seal a blown-out oil well . 
But he said BP had agreed to pay clean-up costs beyond the current US $ 75m -LRB- # 52m -RRB- liability limit . 
Mr Salazar is due to visit the disaster site on Monday with other officials . 
The oil leak began more than a month ago , when a drilling rig operated on behalf of BP exploded , killing 11 people . 
Tens of thousands of barrels of oil have spewed into the ocean since then from the well 's ruptured riser pipe , 1,524 m -LRB- 5,000 ft -RRB- beneath the surface The spill has reached Louisiana and is threatening Florida and Cuba . 
`` If we find they 're not doing what they 're supposed to be doing , we 'll push them out of the way appropriately , '' Mr Salazar told reporters after visiting BP 's US headquarters . 
Mark Mardell BBC News , Washington Ken Salazar is threatening a move that would make a rodeo hero proud : he says his boot is on BP 's neck , but he is ready to push them out of the way The BBC 's Madeleine Morris in Washington says Mr Salazar 's comment is the strongest language yet used by a US official towards BP . 
Although it is within the government 's power to push BP aside , our correspondent says BP is the only organization with the knowledge to deal with a situation like this at such a depth . 
Washington is coming under increasing criticism for its response to the disaster , as well as pressure to assume control from BP . 
Most of the information about the extent of the spill as well as measures to plug the leak have come from BP itself , leading to allegations the American government has been too reliant on the company for dealing with the spill , our correspondent adds . 
Mr Salazar said the government had sent a team of scientific `` all-stars '' to BP 's headquarters in Houston . 
Ken Salazar expresses doubt over BP 's attempts at clearing up oil spill `` They have pushed BP in every way that they can to kill the well and they have pushed BP in every way that they can to stop the pollution , '' he said . 
`` If there is a way to kill this well , they will find it . 
If there is a way to stop this pollution from spreading , they will find it . '' 
He said the best option at the moment was to proceed with a `` top kill '' which involves injecting heavy drilling fluids into the ruptured pipe . 
Mr Salazar added that there was `` no question '' that BP was doing its utmost to resolve the situation `` because this is an existential crisis for one of the world 's largest companies '' . 
`` Do I have confidence that they know exactly what they 're doing ? 
No , not completely . '' 
At least 5,000 barrels of oil have been spewing out daily Speaking on Saturday , President Barack Obama blamed the spill on `` a breakdown of responsibility '' at BP . 
BP 's efforts suffered a new setback when it reported that its containment method on the ocean floor was capturing much less of the leaking oil than three days ago . 
Its managing director , Bob Dudley , said it would press ahead with a series of short-term options while working on a relief well not due to be completed before August . 
`` We will keep trying , we will not wait until August , '' he told CNN . 
`` There is no certainty at these kinds of depth . '' 
The chief of the US coast guard , Admiral Thad Allen , acknowledged on Sunday that the government was forced to rely on BP and the private oil sector to try to plug the spill . 
`` They have the eyes and ears that are down there . 
They are necessarily the modality by which this is going to get solved , '' he said . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
