WASHINGTON | Thu Jun 17 , 2010 1:50 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The good news for BP : it will probably be able to write off some or all of a new $ 20 billion oil spill escrow fund from its taxes . 
The bad news : it could create yet another public relations headache for the beleaguered oil giant . 
Under pressure from the Obama administration , BP acquiesced on Wednesday to fork over $ 20 billion for a fund to pay damages to individuals and businesses harmed by the massive leak still gushing at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico . 
Tax experts say it would be natural for BP to deduct the costs paid out under the fund . 
Indeed , they have a duty to shareholders to maximize the firm 's value . 
`` Corporations have liabilities all the time for damages and they are deductible either as a loss or a business expense ; it happens all the time , '' said Walker Johnson , partner at Steptoe & Johnson in Washington , D.C. Exxon did the same thing after its oil disaster over two decades ago but was criticized for it . 
The final costs to Exxon shareholders from the 1989 Exxon Valdez tanker disaster were less than the headline cleanup figures , as many costs were deductible . 
But Boeing Co decided to forego seeking a tax deduction for any of a $ 615 million settlement with the government in 2006 over ethics charges , under pressure from lawmakers . 
`` The company 's goal is going to be write off as much as possible , '' Edward McNally , a lawyer at Kasowitz , Benson , and a former U.S. prosecutor who headed the criminal division in Alaska during the Exxon Valdez litigation . 
`` On the other hand , we live in a representative democracy and people are very adverse to the idea that a large corporation gets ` special tax breaks ' as a result of paying us what they owe us for their own missteps , '' McNally added . 
BP was not available for comment on whether it would take a tax deduction for the fund . 
Under the plan , a new independent claims process will be set up to pay for damages to people and businesses . 
BP has agreed to contribute $ 20 billion over a four-year period at a rate of $ 5 billion per year , including $ 5 billion this year . 
BP will provide assurance for these commitments by setting aside $ 20 billion in U.S. assets . 
Asked whether the tax issue came up during the negotiations for the escrow fund , U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder told reporters it did not , and he was unsure whether it would be part of the discussion as they work out the final terms of the fund . 
Frank O'Donnell , president of the advocacy group Clean Air Watch , said there would likely be a swift negative reaction from the public and lawmakers if the escrow fund proves to be a tax writeoff . 
`` I think that the American public would be justifiably outraged to realize it is subsidizing this horror show , '' O'Donnell said . 
He also said lawmakers are under pressure to craft a legislative response to the oil spill , and the tax deductibility issue would be a leading issue on the agenda . 
WHICH SIDE OF THE FENCE ? 
To be sure , BP will likely not be able to deduct everything , including penalties and any fines for crimes . 
`` Expenses that are penalties , that are designed to punish , to deter future wrongdoing , those most likely ... would not be tax deductible , '' said Anthony Sabino , a law professor at St. John 's University . 
`` It 's a matter of taking an item and saying which side of the fence does it fall upon . '' 
Companies can , however , deduct punitive damages awarded in lawsuits from their taxes , an ability some U.S. lawmakers have been trying to change . 
Earlier this week , Senate Majority leader Harry Reid introduced a proposal to disallow such deductions in a pending tax bill . 
The timing of any tax deductions will depend on how the fund is structured , tax experts say . 
If BP keeps the funds on its books , but earmarked for the fund , no deduction can be taken until money is paid out , according to Johnson . 
If the fund is independent and there is no way of BP getting a refund for funds paid into it , they would be deductible . 
For David Heikkinen , an analyst with Tudor , Pickering , Holt , the question is whether or not the deductions will hold . 
`` Those expenses can be categorized as tax-deductible , '' he said . 
`` The question is , will the government allow them to be deducted ? 
`` Under today 's tax law , those are deductible costs . 
Everything seems like it can change , '' Heikkinen said . 
