WASHINGTON | Thu Jun 17 , 2010 5:18 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A Republican U.S. representative apologized to BP CEO Tony Hayward on Thursday , saying BP was victim of a White House `` shakedown '' by having to set up a $ 20 billion Gulf oil spill fund , a comment that angered both Democrats and Republicans . 
Joe Barton of Texas , a major recipient of oil and gas industry campaign contributions , received such ridicule for his unusual apology to the oil giant that he later retracted his statement . 
At the start of a congressional hearing featuring testimony from Hayward , Barton said it was `` a tragedy of the first proportion that a private corporation can be subjected to what I would characterize as a shakedown , a $ 20 billion shakedown . '' 
`` I 'm speaking totally for myself , I 'm not speaking for the Republican Party ... but I 'm ashamed of what happened in the White House yesterday , '' Barton told Hayward . 
Hours later , Barton retracted his statement , after Vice President Joe Biden condemned the comments as `` outrageous '' and the Republican leaders of the House of Representatives issued a joint statement denouncing them . 
`` I apologize for using the term ` shakedown ' with regard to yesterday 's actions at the White House in my opening statement this morning , and I retract my apology to BP , '' Barton said . 
He added : `` I regret the impact that my statement this morning implied that BP should not pay for the consequences of their decisions and actions in this incident . '' 
Barton 's statement had put his own Republicans on the defensive and gave hope to Democrats searching for any way to fend off expected losses to Republicans in November 2 congressional elections . 
At the White House , President Barack Obama shook his head in response and said , `` I do n't know why anyone would say that , '' said spokesman Robert Gibbs . 
Obama on Wednesday pressured BP to set up the compensation fund for the Gulf spill during a meeting at the White House . 
`` I find it incredibly insensitive , incredibly out of touch , '' Biden told reporters . 
`` There 's no shakedown . 
It 's insisting on responsible conduct and a responsible response to something they caused . '' 
Barton 's position was politically perilous because Americans largely blame BP for the devastating spill and want the huge company to pay for it . 
His stance was bound to be unpopular in the Gulf region , where the spill is wreaking havoc on the economy -- fishermen are out of work and hotel and restaurants are struggling in an area heavily dependent on tourism . 
Republican House leaders John Boehner , Eric Cantor and Mike Pence disassociated themselves from Barton . 
`` Congressman Barton 's statements this morning were wrong . 
BP itself has acknowledged that responsibility for the economic damages lies with them and has offered an initial pledge of $ 20 billion dollars for that purpose , '' they said . 
Even Hayward disagreed with Barton 's description of the escrow account as a `` slush fund . '' 
`` I certainly do n't think it was a slush fund , '' he told the hearing . 
The White House 's Gibbs said Republicans should ask themselves whether Barton should be their party 's leading representative on the House Committee on Energy and Commerce . 
There was some talk of Barton losing his position . 
But Barton was not alone among Republicans who question the $ 20 billion fund . 
Georgia Representative Tom Price , chairman of the Republican Study Committee , a group of conservative House members , issued a statement arguing the same point . 
Price said BP 's willingness to go along with the White House 's new fund suggests that the Obama administration is `` hard at work exerting its brand of Chicago-style shakedown politics . '' 
And former Texas Republican Representative Dick Armey , who was House majority leader and is a leading voice in the conservative Tea Party movement , told a Christian Science Monitor breakfast this week that Obama lacks the constitutional authority to set up such a fund . 
In addition , conservative Republican Representative Michele Bachmann of Minnesota told the Heritage Foundation think tank that the escrow account was a `` redistribution-of-wealth fund . '' 
Barton is the biggest recipient of oil and gas industry campaign contributions in the House of Representatives , according to the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics . 
Its data showed that Barton has collected $ 1,447,880 from political action committees and individuals connected with the oil and gas industry since 1989 . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Chicago style politics is at it again . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
