Gulf oil spill : BP well is ` dead ' five months after it blew BP finally shuts off well that ruptured on 20 April , which caused explosion on Deepwater Horizon rig , the deaths of 11 workers and billions of pounds of damage Sunday 19 September 2010 22.02 BST Vessels work around the Deepwater Horizon rig , site of the Gulf oil spill . 
Photograph : Win Mcnamee\/Getty Images With a final shot of cement , BP permanently `` killed '' its well in the Gulf of Mexico that ruptured in April and unleashed the worst oil spill in American history , US officials confirmed today . 
`` We can finally announce that the Macondo 252 well is effectively dead , '' retired coast guard admiral Thad Allen , who oversees the US government response to the disaster , said in a statement . 
`` After months of extensive operations , planning and execution under the direction and authority of the US government science and engineering teams , BP has successfully completed the relief well by intersecting and cementing the well nearly 18,000 ft -LRB- 3.4 miles -RRB- below the surface , '' Allen added . 
President Barack Obama , whose approval ratings were hurt by public discontent over the government 's initial response to the spill , welcomed an `` important milestone '' . 
Obama said his administration was now focused on making sure the Gulf coast `` recovers fully from this disaster '' . 
`` This road will not be easy , but we will continue to work closely with the people of the Gulf to rebuild their livelihoods and restore the environment that supports them , '' the president said . 
On Thursday , a relief well bored into the bottom of the Macondo well to pump in cement and seal the reservoir for good . 
BP pumped cement for seven hours on Friday , and finished a pressure test early today that showed the well was dead , Allen said . 
The well ruptured on 20 April , causing an explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig that killed 11 workers . 
The spill polluted the coasts of four Gulf states , prompted a ban on new deepwater drilling and left BP 's image in tatters in the United States , home to 40 % of its business . 
Oil has not leaked into the sea from the well since BP engineers sealed it on 15 July with a cap . 
The well had gushed more than 16 times as much as the 257,000 barrels of oil spilled by the Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska in 1989 . 
A version appeared on p23 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 11.29 BST on Monday 20 September 2010 The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off stuartmillar159 : I stand corrected RT @flashboy : @stuartmillar159 NO STUART THAT IS WHAT RAIN ACTUALLY IS 
