Parts of Homs were bombarded for weeks The Red Cross has been unable to access the wrecked area of Baba Amr , in the Syrian city of Homs , for a third day . 
The agency said it had begun to hand out food and blankets to people who had fled Baba Amr to nearby areas . 
Syrian officials told the Red Cross that Baba Amr had to be cleared of booby traps , but activists said troops were carrying out reprisal attacks . 
Meanwhile , the bodies of two foreign journalists killed in Homs are due to arrive in Paris later . 
The bodies of Remi Ochlik and Marie Colvin had been put on an Air France flight from Damascus on Saturday evening . 
Rebels from the Free Syrian Army withdrew from Baba Amr late last week after weeks of shelling from government forces . 
A seven-lorry Red Cross convoy has been waiting to enter Baba Amr for three days . 
Ban Ki-moon : `` We continue to receive grisly reports of summary executions , arbitrary detentions and torture '' The government gave permission for the agency to access the area , but has since refused to let the convoy through . 
The BBC 's Jim Muir , in neighbouring Lebanon , says the Red Cross and Red Crescent have now begun to help those who fled Baba Amr , giving them blankets to help deal with the bitter cold . 
The ICRC said a 15-strong team had been dispatched to the Abil area , south of the city . 
ICRC spokesman Hicham Hassan told Reuters : `` The plan is to continue to the neighborhoods of Inshaat and Tawzii in order to assist -LRB- local -RRB- populations and families displaced from Baba Amr . '' 
The Red Cross said it did not know how serious the situation was in Baba Amr . 
`` We really do n't know how many people are still in there . 
It 's all a bit of a mystery to us , '' said the UK spokesman of the ICRC , Sean Maguire . 
Witnesses and activists say conditions in the district are terrible , with no power and little food , water and medical supplies . 
Syrian state TV has been broadcasting pictures of deserted streets laden with debris . 
Paul Conroy : `` We left behind what I fear is going to be the next Rwanda , the next Srebrenica . '' 
The Syrian authorities say there are mines and potential booby traps in Baba Amr that need to be cleared before the Red Cross can enter . 
But there have been unconfirmed reports of revenge killings and summary executions by Syrian forces in Baba Amr and opposition activists believe the delay is to cover this up . 
The reports speak of mass arrests of males over the age of 11 , with the local co-operative building being turned into a detention center . 
One report alleged that a lorry-load of bodies from Baba Amr was seen on a nearby road . 
There were also reports of explosions , shootings and shelling in other districts of Homs . 
UN chief Ban Ki-moon said on Friday that the international community had failed in its duty , and called for unity . 
`` Continued division emboldens the Syrian authorities in their violent path , '' he said . 
Paul Conroy , a Sunday Times photographer who fled Syria after being wounded in Homs , told the BBC that what was happening in Baba Amr was `` systematic slaughter '' . 
`` I 've done a fair few wars , I 've never seen anything on this level , '' he said . 
Activists say 7,500 people have been killed since the uprising against President Bashar al-Assad began almost a year ago . 
The government blames `` terrorists and armed gangs '' for the violence . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
