LONDON | Wed Sep 21 , 2011 3:22 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - UK unconventional gas company Cuadrilla Resources could sell first shale gas recovered from its Lancashire project by mid-2013 , its chief executive told Reuters , despite an exploration suspension after scientists measured tremors in the area . 
The Lichfield-based company has valued the amount of shale gas in place -- not the recoverable volume -- at its site near Blackpool at 200 trillion cubic feet , the top end of what is estimated can be recovered from Europe 's largest reserves in Poland . 
`` If we were to have a field development plan we would guess that one or two years from next summer is when we 'd start selling gas on a well-by-well basis , '' said Cuadrilla Resources Chief Executive Mark Miller . 
Fracking work -- an exploration method used to retrieve gas trapped in rock formations by injecting high-pressure water , sand and chemicals -- at the site in the Bowland Basin was suspended in June after scientists measured two earth tremors in the area . 
But Miller is confident the government will allow his company to continue operations after reviewing a report into the incidents due to be submitted to the energy ministry -LRB- DECC -RRB- early next month . 
`` I am convinced that when the report is out the public , DECC and the regulatory authorities will look at that and be confident we can carry forward our fracking operations without any issues , '' Miller said . 
Countries like France have adopted a harsh stance against shale gas on grounds that it damages the environment and banned all exploration work . 
The UK government has not made any comments about banning the technology and a parliamentary report in May said there was no need to impose a moratorium on conventional gas drilling . 
Within six to eight months Cuadrilla Resources will have carried out further tests to estimate how much of the vast reserves it can recover . 
The company 's high-end case foresees drilling 800 wells over 16 years and hopes for a 20 percent recovery margin per well , Miller said . 
Cuadrilla Resources has a five-year licence until 2013 to explore for gas in the Bowland Basin and will decide next summer whether to apply for a production licence . 
The firm estimates its business could generate 5-6 billion pounds in tax revenue for the government over 30 years and 120 million pounds in income for local councils . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
