Syria crisis : Valerie Amos describes Homs ` devastation ' Baroness Amos -LRB- top left , in red -RRB- spent little more than an hour in Homs UN humanitarian chief Valerie Amos has said parts of the Syrian city of Homs have been `` completely devastated '' . 
She said that it felt like the city had been closed down entirely . 
Baroness Amos visited the city on Wednesday , briefly entering the bombed-out Baba Amr district . 
Aid teams have waited days to go there , but aid officials said most residents had gone to areas already getting aid . 
The government retook the district last week after fierce shelling . 
Activists say troops committed massacres since they entered . 
Damascus blames rebels for many deaths . 
International media organizations are heavily restricted in Syria , making it impossible to verify the claims of either side . 
The rebel Free Syrian Army left the city last week in the hope , it said , of protecting civilians from further violence . 
Meanwhile there have been loud explosions and heavy shelling in Idlib , opposition sources said , amid fears the northern city could become the next major flashpoint as international attention is focused on Homs . 
Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut Lady Amos has managed to do something that an International Red Cross convoy , waiting nearby , has been prevented from doing since last Friday - to visit the shattered quarter of Baba Amr . 
So she 'll have gained at least some impression of the scale of destruction the area has suffered , from nearly a month of siege and pounding by artillery and tanks . 
But much of the superficial damage , the rubble and broken glass , has been cleared away in a big clean-up operation that 's been going on for the past three days . 
The Red Crescent volunteers are reported to have concluded that the area remains largely deserted , though Syrian state televison has shown a number of families returning . 
But activist groups are still reporting more killings - most recently , the butchering of two families , of 13 and seven people , including women and children , in nearby farmland . 
Such allegations ca n't be verified , and neither Lady Amos nor the Red Cross would be able to check them out . 
She 's seeking unhindered access for humanitarian aid to all trouble spots . 
What she 's been given so far is very much less than that . 
Opposition groups said 39 people were killed throughout the country on Wednesday , of whom 26 were in Homs , six in Idlib , three in Deraa and two each in suburbs of Damascus and Aleppo . 
The UN says more than 7,500 people have died as a result of the violence in Syria over the past 12 months . 
The UN aid chief spent less than an hour in Baba Amr assessing its humanitarian needs . 
She then moved on to other districts of the city , before returning to Damascus . 
Baroness Amos ' said there were security issues in the city and that she heard gunfire there , her spokeswoman Amanda Pitt said . 
`` She says that the parts they saw were completely devastated , '' Ms Pitt said , quoted by AFP news agency . 
`` She said Homs feels like a city that has been completely closed down . '' 
She was also not being allowed to enter opposition-held areas despite government assurances she could visit the whole country . 
The Red Crescent has not yet been able to deliver any aid to Baba Amr . 
`` The Syrian Arab Red Crescent stayed inside Baba Amr for about 45 minutes , '' International Committee of the Red Cross -LRB- ICRC -RRB- spokesman Hicham Hassan told Reuters news agency . 
`` They found that most inhabitants had left Baba Amr to areas that have been already visited by the ICRC and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent in the past week . '' 
He said the ICRC aid had been delivering aid to other areas where people needed help , including Hama , Idlib , Deraa , areas on the outskirts of Damascus and the eastern city of Raqqa . 
Staff from the ICRC were not with them as they were delivering aid to the village of Abil outside Homs at the time permission was given , and it is unclear whether they will be allowed to follow the Red Crescent in . 
Baroness Amos has been urging the Syrian government to grant access to battle-scarred cities . 
One woman told the BBC 's Paul Wood how two of her brothers were detained , and one was killed She is scheduled to meet the head of the Syrian Red Crescent , Abdulrahman Attar , on Thursday . 
Syrian Foreign Minister Walid Muallim told her that the government would co-operate with her team and was trying to help civilians , according to Syrian state news agency Sana . 
US President Barack Obama has described the situation in Syria as `` heartbreaking '' but said US unilateral military intervention in the country would be a mistake . 
He said President Bashar al-Assad would fall , as other dictators had fallen , but the US would try to achieve this by working to isolate Syria . 
`` The notion that the way to solve every one of these problems is to deploy our military , that has n't been true in the past , and it wo n't be true now , '' said Mr Obama . 
The US says it is proposing a new UN Security Council resolution demanding an end to violence in Syria . 
Russia and China have vetoed two previous resolutions , saying they were unbalanced and only demanded the government stop attacks . 
China , however , announced on Wednesday that it had already removed most of its workers from the country . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
