Based on measurements taken in June , scientists have recreated the shape and distribution of oil in a massive plume in the Gulf of Mexico -- evidence the spill may not vanish as quickly as hoped . 
Blue indicates low methane concentrations , red high . 
Science\/AAAS Is the Gulf getting cleaner ? 
Or does oil there pose a long-term hazard ? 
It seems to depend mostly on whom you ask . 
Scientists have discovered an oil plume at least 22 miles long , 3,000 feet deep in the Gulf of Mexico -- suggesting that the tens of millions of gallons of oil that leaked from a broken BP well could persist far longer than expected . 
Whether the plume 's existence poses a significant threat to the Gulf ecosystem and sea life is not yet clear , the researchers say . 
`` We do n't know how toxic it is , '' said Christopher Reddy , a Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute -LRB- WHOI -RRB- marine geochemist and oil spill expert and one of the authors of the study . 
`` But knowing the size , shape , depth , and heading of this plume will be vital for answering many of these questions . '' 
The existence of the plume , which was concretely pinned to the blown-out well , seems to contradict a five-page report released August 4 by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- , which claimed `` a vast majority '' of the BP oil spill is now completely gone . 
The remaining 25 % consists of residual oil buried in sediments and sand , the report claimed . 
Researchers and scientists as well as environmental groups and Gulf residents immediately disagreed with the report , calling it `` misleading if not totally inaccurate . '' 
Yet despite the seeming contrast between the government report and their new findings , Reddy refused to describe this new evidence as a contradiction . 
`` What the government has done and other universities are trying to do is constrain a budget , '' he said , arguing that it was too early to determine whether this finding was a smoking gun or just `` a penny in a very big checking account . '' 
`` I ca n't tell you how much oil is in the plume , '' he noted , so it does n't contradict the government 's report that only 26 % of the leak remains . 
And the picture will change as more chemical analysis is done , Reddy pointed out . 
But one thing is clear : There 's definitely still oil down there . 
`` We 've shown conclusively not only that a plume exists , but also defined its origin and near-field structure , '' said Richard Camilli the other lead researcher from WHOI , of the 1.2 mile wide , 650 foot high plume . 
The team 's observations were made during a June 19-28 scientific cruise aboard the National Science Foundation owned ship Endeavor . 
It was halted by the onset of hurricane Alex. Since measurements ended nearly two months ago , the scientists admit they are unsure what has happened to the plume . 
`` We do n't know where these hydrocarbons are . 
We saw them in June , '' Reddy said . 
The findings were based on two technologies : an autonomous underwater vehicle called Sentry and an underwater mass spectrometer . 
By integrating the two , researchers were able to detect even minute quantities of petroleum as well as other chemical compounds , something previous investigators were unable to achieve using conventional profiling . 
They discovered consistent concentrations of hydrocarbons throughout the plume . 
Given the makeup and concentration -- in excess of 50 micrograms per liter -- the researchers concluded that the plume could not have developed from natural seepage . 
Further analysis of the samples will provide a clearer picture of the plume structure as well as a better estimate of the total amount of spilled oil . 
It will also give insight into what sort of threat the plume poses . 
`` The plume is not pure oil , '' Camilli said . 
`` But there are oil compounds in there . '' 
It may require a few months of laboratory analysis and validation , Reddy said . 
Both researchers were surprised by the size and concentration of the plume . 
`` -LRB- The plume -RRB- is persisting for longer periods than we would have expected , '' Camilli said . 
`` Many people speculated that subsurface oil droplets were being easily biodegraded . '' 
The underwater oil was also remarkably stable , hanging at around 3,000 feet beneath the surface . 
`` We do n't have any indications as to why it 's set up at that water depth , '' he said , an area meriting additional research . 
Another unexpected result was the lack of `` dead zones , '' regions of significant oxygen depletion as a result of microbe metabolism . 
`` The oxygen data from the plume layer are telling us it is n't being rapidly consumed by microbes near the well , '' said Benjamin Van Mooy , a geochemist on the research team . 
`` The hydrocarbons could persist for some time . 
So it is possible that oil could be transported considerable distances from the well before being degraded . '' 
