In taking the top job at Treasury two years ago , Hank Paulson said he would n't be content to keep the seat warm . 
He was running Goldman Sachs , the preeminent investment bank , and he had no need to come to Washington if he was n't going to make an impact . 
Until Sunday , it was pretty hard to see where Paulson 's impact lay . 
His environmental interests had not caused a sprouting of green policies . 
His strong contacts in China had fostered a bilateral talkfest but no tangible breakthroughs . 
And his efforts to manage the financial crisis had been conventional and tentative -- until his bold gamble on Lehman Brothers . 
President Bush 's first Treasury secretary , Paul O'Neill , trumpeted his distaste for bailouts while still bailing out Argentina , Brazil and Turkey . 
Paulson began in similar vein , declaring his belief in markets while presiding over the March bailout of Bear Stearns , extending credit from the Fed 's discount window to all investment banks , and nationalizing Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , the two monster mortgage-lending companies . 
Going into the weekend , most people assumed that Paulson would do the same again . 
But instead he refused to extend taxpayer-backed loans to Lehman , causing prospective buyers of the firm to walk away and forcing Lehman to declare bankruptcy . 
After the Bear Stearns bailout , it seemed that a new financial doctrine had been born . 
It used to be said that a bank was `` too big to fail , '' meaning that its collapse would cause heavy losses at other banks that had lent to it , inflicting unacceptable pain on the economy . 
Bear 's rescue seemed to inaugurate the doctrine of `` too entangled to fail , '' which held that even a small bank could not be allowed to go down if it had enmeshed itself in the vast and opaque swaps markets . 
The argument was that a collapse of a major swaps player would sink the banks on the other side of those swaps . 
If , say , Morgan Stanley had controlled its exposure to a falling dollar by selling that risk to Bear , bye-bye to Bear could mean bye-bye to Morgan . 
In refusing to bail out Lehman , Paulson put an end to the too-entangled doctrine . 
He gambled that he could let Lehman fail without sowing market pandemonium , not least because Lehman 's demise had been predicted for weeks , allowing players in the swaps market to take steps to protect themselves . 
As of Monday afternoon , Paulson 's bet had generated some scary moments . 
Stocks fell , and credit markets were naturally repricing the risk of lending to banks . 
But there was no instant catastrophe . 
If Paulson 's gamble pays off , it could affect the character of globalization . 
For the past two decades or so , international finance has developed largely on U.S. terms and in the U.S. image . 
The Federal Reserve has stood behind the dollar , which is the world 's dominant reserve currency , and the world 's faith in the dollar has allowed the Fed to cut interest rates in response to global shocks such as Russia 's default in 1998 without risking a run on the currency . 
Meanwhile , U.S. banks have dreamed up funky new financial instruments that have been marketed all over the world . 
To a considerable extent , the globalization of finance has meant its Americanization . 
The first 12 months of this crisis scrambled that equation . 
The Fed cut interest rates , as it often does in response to trouble . 
But this time the world lost confidence in the dollar , which failed to play its traditional role as a safe store of value in tough times and instead seesawed wildly . 
The innovative U.S. banks lost billions of dollars and were forced to turn for help to the new masters of finance -- foreign sovereign wealth funds . 
And U.S.-style financial innovation suffered a massive reputational blow . 
No less a commentator than Paul Volcker , the former Fed chairman , has emerged to denounce it . 
The longer the financial turbulence goes on , the greater the likely backlash against U.S.-style financial globalization . 
But Paulson 's gamble -- if it succeeds -- could limit the damage . 
By refusing to use the Fed 's balance sheet to bail out Lehman , he may have saved the Fed from becoming further bogged down in its crisis-management role , freeing it to focus more on preserving the value of the dollar . 
And by repealing the too-entangled doctrine , Paulson may have strengthened market penalties for banks that mismanage modern financial instruments -- thereby increasing the chances that sophisticated , market-based finance can flourish safely . 
Shocking though it may sound now , there is much to like in U.S.-style financial globalization . 
America 's critics may be tempted to celebrate the dollar 's dethronement , but ordinary savers from Brazil to Belarus are grateful for an international store of value . 
The critics may say that the newfangled financial instruments are inherently dangerous , but this is only true when they are combined with excessive borrowing . 
The challenge over the next year or so is to preserve the good parts of the system while embracing necessary change . 
Paulson 's willingness to throw the dice has made the world hold its breath , but it shows that he knows what the stakes are . 
