Tuesday , September 16 , 2008 ; 4:30 PM Just a day after filing for bankruptcy , Lehman Brothers is heading into court today to gain approval of the sale of some of its assets . 
Lehman , the fourth largest investment bank , has been in discussions with Barclays to sell parts of its business after the British bank backed away from acquisition talks this weekend . 
The cash infusion from such a sale of will make the bankruptcy process easier , said Art Hogan , chief market analyst at Jefferies & Company . 
`` It is not good for Lehman shareholders . 
But in terms of overall , for the market , it makes the unwinding process that much smoother , '' Hogan said . 
The market has been roiled by the demise of Lehman Brothers and the quick sale of Merrill Lynch to Bank of America for about $ 50 billion this weekend . 
Both helped send U.S. and global markets plummeting over the past two days . 
The Dow Jones industrial average bounced between positive and negative territory today , but closed up about 142 points , or about 1.3 percent . 
That comes after closing down 504 points yesterday -- the biggest point drop in seven years . 
The technology-heavy Nasdaq and Standard & Poor 's 500-stock index were also up about 1.3 percent and 1.75 percent , respectively . 
Despite the market jitters , the Federal Reserve kept its benchmark interest rate steady today . 
The interest rate will remain at 2 percent , where it landed in April after an aggressive rate cutting campaign over the last year . 
`` Strains in financial markets have increased significantly and labor markets have weakened further . 
Economic growth appears to have slowed recently , partly reflecting a softening of household spending , '' the Federal Reserve said in a statement . 
But , the statement said , the Fed expects inflation to `` moderate '' later this year or next . 
By keeping rates the same , the Fed is signaling that it believes the market can work through its problems , said Joseph Brusuelas , chief U.S. economist at California-based Merk Investments . 
It shows that the Fed understands that `` private-sector solutions are the preferable method of working through the current issues and that market discipline remains the best solution . '' 
The possibility of a Fed rate cut seemed unlikely last week but gained support among investors after Lehman 's bankruptcy and Bank of America 's purchase of Merrill Lynch restructured the financial market . 
Before that , economists and analysts believed that the Fed had finished cutting rates and might begin raising them next year . 
`` This was the right move . 
This helps calm the markets , '' said Robert MacIntosh , chief economist for Eaton Vance in Boston . 
`` Frankly I do n't think more cuts would have done any good . '' 
But much of the attention today is on AIG , the country 's largest insurer , which is facing a cash crunch . 
Worries about its stability have intensified since several ratings agencies lowered the company 's rating late yesterday , which could make it more difficult to raise funds . 
New York has agreed to allow AIG to use $ 20 billion from its own insurance subsidiaries to ease a financial crunch . 
But that does not appear to be enough to calm investor fears . 
The company 's stock closed down by 21 percent . 
That follows a 61 percent drop yesterday . 
In an CNBC interview , former AIG chief executive Maurice `` Hank '' Greenberg said the company will go bankrupt without outside help from the U.S. government or other investors . 
`` If the rating agencies do n't give them breathing space , then there 's no alternative . 
And that would be a disaster , '' he said . 
Oil prices took another tumble today , falling to about $ 91.15 a barrel as declining demand and the overall economic turmoil pulled down prices . 
Also , consumer prices fell 0.1 percent in August , led by a 3.1 percent decline in energy prices , according to Labor Department figures released today . 
It was the first monthly consumer prices decline since October 2006 and could be a good future indicator , Kenneth Beauchemin , an U.S. economist for Global Insight , said in a research note yesterday . 
`` With fuel prices remaining subdued into September , we can look forward to another tame consumer price report next month , with perhaps more to follow , '' he said . 
Goldman Sachs , the large investment banker , reported a 70 percent drop in third-quarter net income but still managed to produce a profit . 
The firm reported net income of $ 845 million , or $ 1.81 a share , during the quarter and $ 6.04 billion in revenue , which was better than analysts expected . 
Goldman 's shares fell about 2 percent for the day . 
`` They certainly made money in a very difficult market , '' said Hogan . '' 
