Ewen MacAskill explores two very different angles on the war in Iraq with Jon Lee Anderson 's The Fall of Baghdad and Clare Short 's An Honourable Deception ? 
New Labor , Iraq and the Misuse of Power 304pp , Simon & Schuster , # 15 Jon Lee Anderson , an American foreign correspondent for more than 20 years , latterly for the New Yorker , first went to Iraq in 2000 . 
He was in Baghdad in the run-up to the war , during the bombardment , the immediate aftermath and several times since . 
His articles in the New Yorker are often admired by other journalists for their easy flow , color and interviews , and he has successfully translated this into book form . 
Much of the opening concentrates on the frustrations of western journalists trying to cover Saddam 's Iraq : the seemingly endless and arbitrary restrictions imposed by the much-detested ministry of information , with its threats and demands for bribes ; and , given the widespread fear of Saddam , the difficulty of trying to find out what the Iraqi people were really thinking . 
Through persistence , the job could be done . 
Anderson is good at going back to a limited number of contacts over and over again until he establishes trust ; one of them -LRB- Ala Bashir -RRB- becomes a central character in his book : he was an artist but also one of Saddam 's personal doctors . 
He covers much the same ground as the Scandinavian journalist Asne Seierstad in her 101 Days : A Baghdad Journal . 
Against the background of her success with The Bookseller of Kabul , Seierstad will probably sell more copies than Anderson , but he has written the broader , less personalised account . 
They were both brave to stay in Iraq during the war ; many journalists who had planned to remain , in the end opted to or were told by their desks to leave . 
There was a danger that the siege of Baghdad would be long and bloody ; that the Iraqi secret police , the Mukhabarat , might seize journalists as hostages or take revenge on them for the bombing ; or that Saddam might unleash chemical or biological weapons . 
One of the weaknesses of Anderson 's book is that the fall of Baghdad , in the end , turned out not to be an epic siege . 
The question then is whether there is enough to justify 400 pages . 
The answer is maybe , mainly because of what has happened . 
Noting the first anniversary of the fall of Baghdad , he writes : `` A year had gone by , but it seemed as if Baghdad had not really fallen at all - or perhaps it was still falling . '' 
Anderson , rightly , identifies the US killing of 17 demonstrators in Fallujah about two weeks after the famous fall of the Saddam statue as a `` historic watershed '' . 
The Iraqis took their revenge , and by the end of the spring `` it was becoming clear that the Americans were faced with an intensifying guerrilla insurgency in Iraq '' . 
A problem with too many books written by journalists about war is that they tend to be mainly about the journalists and less about the population that is suffering . 
Anderson does write probably too much about his colleagues but he also writes movingly about the general population and the suffering . 
On a visit to a hospital , an Iraqi doctor introduces him to 12-year-old Ali , a victim of the war . 
His torso is blackened and both his arms burned off . 
His stumps `` looked like something that might be found in a barbecue pit '' . 
Did he like sports ? 
Yes , volleyball and soccer . 
His mother and father and one of his brothers had been killed , but he had not yet been told . 
On the whole , though , there is not enough in the book about the Iraqis , especially the poorest , in part because western journalists ' contact with the Iraqi population was often so difficult . 
There was a brief window of a few months immediately after the war when it was possible for western journalists to travel anywhere and talk openly to almost anyone but Anderson , understandably given he had just covered the war in Iraq , had gone home for most of this period . 
A definitive account of the innermost life of Iraqis before , during and since the war has still to be written , and maybe it will require an Iraqi rather than a western journalist to write it . 
Clare Short 's book is not directly about the Iraqis . 
It deals with the still contentious way in which Tony Blair and his government , of which she was a part , took Britain to war alongside the US . 
Some politicians can make money from their books by selling publication rights to newspa pers , an expensive but easy source of `` exclusives '' . 
One of the problems with Short 's combined biography and rant against Blair 's administration is that there is little that is exclusive . 
We already know she feels duped by Blair over the war - the `` honorable deception '' - and the extent of feuding between Blair and Gordon Brown , and the British bugging of Kofi Annan . 
This lack of news interest is a back-handed compliment . 
She was always too honest and open , whether in the Commons or in front of a newspaper reporter or a BBC microphone . 
She did not hold back to ensure largesse when the rights to her book went out to auction . 
Her diary entries , though sparse , form the best part of the book . 
There is an immediacy about them , the views not influenced by hindsight , particularly her references to Brown , whom she would like to see replace Blair . 
Her critique is that the US and Britain rushed to war in Iraq with unseemly haste and for the wrong reasons . 
She recalls various conversations with Blair and concludes that he seemed to have been manipulating her , making promises to keep her on side and to delay her resignation , a postponement that damaged her credibility . 
She , too , may have been at fault , hearing what she wanted to hear , not wanting to lose her beloved department . 
But her verdict on him is uncompromising : `` The question is , does Tony Blair even realize that he so often gives promises and breaks his word and has so little respect for the truth ? '' 
Her public opposition to the war angered colleagues , who accused her of being sanctimonious and undisciplined . 
But she was saying in public and to Blair what many of them thought privately but were not prepared to say , either publicly or to Blair . 
by Clare Short This article appeared on p12 of the Guardian review section of the Guardian on 01.35 GMT on Saturday 12 February 2005 Latest news and views from the Guardian 's books team paullaity : Read this : clever and funny and rightly cutting . 
