Liberals will blame anybody else for atrocities rather than accuse murderous Islamic terrorists There are plenty of signs that Paris could be next . 
French intelligence agents found a message on an Arabic website from the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat , a demented Algerian outfit which is close to al-Qaeda . 
France was ` our first enemy ' , the terrorists said . 
The ` only way to discipline France is jihad , martyrdom and Islam ' . 
At the end of last month , French police arrested nine alleged Islamists in a suburb of Paris and claimed they were planning to bomb the Metro . 
Nicolas Sarkozy , the French Interior minister , said the risk of an attack was currently ` at a very high level ' . 
Marc Hecker , from the French Institute for International Relations , said it was ' a real error ' to believe that France would be left in peace because President Chirac opposed the Iraq War . 
But as it 's impossible to blame Iraq , what or who will get the blame if the rucksacks start exploding at the Gare du Nord ? 
Will the liberal world look Islamism in the face and see a cult of slaughter and self-slaughter powered by messianic faith , the Jewish conspiracy theory of European fascism , imperialist dreams of world domination and a loathing of democracy , pluralism , religious tolerance and the emancipation of women ? 
I live in hope , but the record suggests everyone but the perpetrators will be held responsible . 
If the French ca n't be blamed for their part in the downfall of Chirac 's old friend , Saddam Hussein , then maybe their support for the Algerian government will be used to explain the killings . 
How about the ban of headscarves in French schools ? 
My money is on the headscarves but , frankly , the favored ` root cause ' could be the effect of the Common Agricultural Policy on poor world farmers or the provocation given by bikini-wearing holidaymakers at Club Med resorts in North Africa or the behavior of French paratroopers during the Algerian War of Independence in the 1950s . 
If you think I 'm exaggerating , consider the attempts to show that the bombs in Bali were the fault of liberal democracies . 
Before a single fact on the motives of the killers was available , the Independent on Sunday declared : ` There can be little doubt that the bombs in Bali are linked to issues surrounding the war . 
It is no coincidence that Australia , whose citizens are likely to be the majority of the victims , is fully committed in Iraq . ' 
Actually , there could be a great deal of doubt , not least because the majority of the dead were Indonesian Hindus , who I assume the Islamists were happy to designate as pagans before murdering them . 
Pamela Nowicka of Tourism Concern , which campaigns for eco-friendly holidays , had doubts of her own . 
She decided that what mattered was that the dead tourists were tourists rather than Australians . 
` Many in the global south regard tourism as a new form of colonialism and cultural imperialism , ' she wrote in the Guardian . 
` While that may be hard for the suntanned holidaymaker to take on board , for the millions of ordinary people servicing their needs - the waiting staff , room cleaners , receptionists , shop workers , guides , massage ladies and taxi drivers - the linkage is clearer . ' 
Except that the bombers were n't disgruntled room cleaners and taxi drivers . 
They were members of a totalitarian movement which is against every principle Ms Nowicka professes to support . 
The first economic consequence of their killings will be to put cleaners and taxi drivers out of work . 
I could go on - Mark Curtis , a historian from the Noam Chomsky school , wrote a piece which blamed the bombs on British support for General Suharto 's coup a mere 40 years ago - but what needs saying is that no mainstream commentator mentioned that we have the grievance of Indonesian Islamists on the record . 
It has nothing to do with the foreign policy of the first Wilson administration or stingy tipping in Bali 's restaurants . 
After the 2002 explosions in Bali killed 200 , Osama bin Laden declared : ` Australia is the one that we have warned before not to participate in Afghanistan , not to mention its continued awful chapter in East Timor . 
They ignored our warning and they woke up to the sound of explosions in Bali . ' 
My guess is that people do n't want to look at al-Qaeda 's condemnations of Australia 's role in saving -LRB- largely Catholic -RRB- East Timor from destruction by the militias of -LRB- largely Muslim -RRB- Indonesia . 
It 's too frightening to contemplate ; it takes you into the darkness to confront Islamism 's impossible and therefore unappeasable demand for a caliphate and reminds you of its imperial urge to dominate Muslims and subjugate all others . 
Avoidance of what al-Qaeda stands for began in 9\/11 and has become endemic since . 
My favorite piece of victim blaming was after the Madrid bombings . 
For a few hours , there was a rumor that they were the work of ETA and Eddie Mair , the presenter of Radio 4 's PM news show , duly had a go at a representative of the Spanish government , alleging that Madrid 's refusal to talk to Basque nationalists was the root cause of the atrocity . 
By the next day , it was clear that Islamists , not Basques , had attacked Madrid . 
Without pausing for breath , Mair duly wanted to know if the presence of Spanish troops in Iraq was the root cause of the atrocity . 
The identity of the bombers was irrelevant . 
The Spanish had to be the cause of their own suffering . 
Perhaps it is too easy to mock . 
When confronted with an ideology which mandates indiscriminate killing on an industrial scale , it is natural to seek rational explanations of the irrational ; to pretend that Islamism is merely a reasonable , if bloody , response to legitimate concerns which could be remedied if we elected wiser leaders . 
Yet the masochism - ` Kill us , we deserve it ! ' 
- the subliminal dislike of democracy and the willingness to turn al-Qaeda into the armed wing of every fashionable campaign from sustainable tourism to the anti-war movement will in the end disgrace the liberals by making them ridiculous . 
Charles Clarke should learn that clarity does n't begin at Home The Home Office is attempting the revolutionary tactic of treating the British public as adults . 
This may be foolish . 
The only adult thing about millions of British voters is that they are over 18 . 
None the less , it was cheering to see Charles Clarke publish vast amounts of supporting evidence last week to explain why he wanted to hold suspects without charge for three months . 
For years now , the government has felt no need to justify its assaults on civil liberties . 
It has simply dismissed its critics as ` BMW-driving , civil-liberties lawyers ' and other decadent dilettantes . 
The act of writing out a justification destroys self-delusion by forcing you to be clear . 
I 'm not sure if it will help sell other Home Office policies . 
How would an honest description of its ban on the incitement to religious hatred read ? 
` We are so worried about religious extremists that we want to give them the chance to send their critics to prison . ' 
A bit windy , perhaps . 
Let 's try : ` We 'll fight religious bigotry by protecting religious bigotry . ' 
Nearer the mark , I think , and more succinct . 
On identity cards , intellectual clarity would demand that Mr Clarke begins : ` We 're so worried by crime , terrorism and illegal immigration that we want to impose a new law-and-order tax on the public . 
Our estimate is it will raise # 6 billion . 
Others say # 18bn . 
Let 's split the difference and call it # 12bn . 
Now we wo n't spend it on capturing criminals , terrorists and illegal immigrants . 
That would be mad . 
Rather than wasting money on new police officers , we will force people who are n't criminals , terrorists and illegal immigrants to carry an expensive piece of plastic . ' 
Does it work for you ? 
I do n't think the new openness will last . 
As a true friend of the Home Office , I advise it to go back to its traditional policy of always complain , never explain . 
