We 're all to blame for the oil spill It 's our addiction to cheap fuel that drives the high-risk , poorly regulated sector producing business models like BP 's Who 's to blame for the Gulf oil spill ? 
Many commentators point the finger at BP and the United States government . 
This focus is understandable but gives an incomplete picture of how moral responsibility is distributed in this kind of case . 
Getting a better idea of distribution is important for blame and punishment but also for prevention : we do n't want this to happen again . 
Ascribing responsibility here can be knotty , owing to the wide range of actors involved in oil production . 
What BP does in this context depends on other corporate actors . 
Oil companies tend to work with subcontractors , which increases the parties involved . 
BP works with Transocean , Halliburton , Cameron International , and other outfits . 
It will be difficult to evaluate if and to what extent they share responsibility for the disaster . 
But apart from the companies at large and their managers , there 's a category that usually remains out of sight : the engineers and other people directly involved in well control and related operations before , during , and after an accident . 
Research on a near disaster with a platform in the Norwegian Sea , the Snorre A blowout , shows that it is useful to pay attention to the capabilities people should have in order to deal successfully with a crisis . 
Ger Wackers and I have argued that in the Sorre A case , the crew managed to recover the platform partly by using their imagination to try to understand what was happening and decide what to do . 
For instance , the crew had to improvise when trying to control the well . 
Improvisation is intrinsic to good engineering and management : it 's not free-floating fantasy but depends on knowledge , skills , and experience . 
If we want to prevent similar disasters , then , companies and regulators need to support structures that promote the exercise of imagination by those who are involved with the operation and management of oil platforms . 
They need to invest more in the people need to cope with such crises . 
However , there 's more than the management and engineering side of the disaster . 
Responsibility spills over to the financial and business dimension of oil production . 
As previous contributors have argued , multinationals such as BP seem to go for fast growth and shareholder returns , making profit without carrying the real environmental and other costs of their actions . 
These financial choices and ways of doing business can be detrimental to safety right down to drilling rig level . 
Mix continuous underinvestment in maintenance and safety with insufficient regulation and you get an accident that is waiting to happen . 
Moreover , and perhaps most important , we should not only consider responsibility for oil production but also for oil consumption . 
Business and finance are not isolated from our own choices . 
Companies such as BP can only do what they do because we want what they sell . 
We 're all too happy with cheap oil . 
As citizens , many of us support politicians and political parties who continue to stimulate oil production and the related financial and economic structures . 
Politicians generally pay lip service to green economics but let people do business as usual . 
So far , President Barack Obama is no exception , and neither are most leading politicians in the UK and the rest of Europe . 
But who voted for them ? 
As consumers , we continue to depend on oil in various ways and therefore maintain the oil-hungry system that makes oil companies drill in deep water and undertake other risky activities . 
Addicted to oil , we are directly responsible since we continue to drive cars with combustion engines and travel by plane . 
Indirectly we also rely on oil as we buy goods and services that depend on oil for their production and transportation . 
If we discuss oil production disasters , therefore , we should also discuss how we live . 
Safety is not the main issue here , sustainability is . 
If we are eager to blame BP and the US government for the disaster and their shortcomings in dealing with it , we should remind ourselves that these actors can only operate and govern in this way because we , as citizens and consumers , support them and help maintain the structural environment in which they operate . 
The oil stain is a local problem ; the responsibility stain spreads out all over the world . 
This brief analysis is not a substitute for more precise legal investigations and public inquiries that will follow in the wake of the disaster . 
However , it can inform these investigations by reminding us that the problem is not just far away in the Gulf . 
The real disaster is of a global nature , and has firm roots in our lifestyle and the political choices we make as individuals and as a society . 
Their spill , therefore , is also our responsibility . 
