BP contingency plan for dealing with oil spill was riddled with errors Document approved by US government listed dead scientist as expert and said oil was unlikely to ever reach shore Wednesday 9 June 2010 19.00 BST Contract workers from BP use skimmers to clean oil from a marsh in Louisiana . 
BP 's plan stated : ` Due to the distance to shore and the response capabilities that would be implemented , no significant adverse impacts are expected ' . 
Photograph : Win Mcnamee\/Getty Images A BP contingency plan drawn up to deal with a catastrophic oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico was riddled with errors and miscalculations , including the naming of a long-deceased scientist as a recommended expert on wildlife contamination . 
Running to 582 pages , BP 's Regional Spill Plan for the Gulf was approved by the US government last year . 
But an analysis by the Associated Press has found that it made false assumptions about the extent , direction and consequences of any possible spill from deepwater drilling off the coast of Louisiana . 
Under a heading of `` sensitive biological resources '' , the document lists walruses , sea otters , sea lions and seals as potential victims of an oil spill , although none of these are found in the Gulf region . 
According to the plan , even in the event of a leak 10 times worse than the present one , oil would not reach the shore because drilling operations are too far out to sea : `` Due to the distance to shore -LRB- 48 miles -RRB- and the response capabilities that would be implemented , no significant adverse impacts are expected . '' 
Yet oil has already contaminated marshland on the Louisiana coast and tar balls have appeared on beaches as far away as Florida . 
Officials have been obliged to ban tourists from swimming on several miles of contaminated beaches in north-west Florida and Alabama . 
The plan lists a firm called Marine Spill Response Corp as a group able to supply equipment to respond to a spill . 
But the website listed for the company links to a defunct Japanese-language web page . 
BP maintains in the document that it can scramble sufficient vessels to pick up as much as 20m gallons of oil from the water each day an assumption that now appears highly optimistic . 
And a method of calculating the volume of a spill based on the darkness in color of the sheen of contaminated seawater produces an underestimate , with internationally accepted formulas delivering figures as much as 100 times higher . 
Among the liaison people listed in the event of an emergency is Bob Lutz , named as a wildlife expert at the University of Miami . 
But AP says Lutz , a sea turtle expert , left Miami two decades ago to head the marine biology department at a university in Boca Raton , and died four years before BP 's plan was approved . 
The document 's errors are likely to add to a rapidly growing public impression that BP was under-prepared for a serious accident . 
A version appeared on p7 of the Main section section of the Guardian on Guardian experts reveal the hidden world of urban wildlife , with detailed guides on where to find it and what to look out for . 
