Battle to bring BP to account for oil spill intensifies Senior politicians in the US gather to co-ordinate their approach to oil spill , while embattled chief executive Tony Hayward has been summoned to Washington US speaker Nancy Pelosi has promised legislation to address the consequences of the oil spill by August . 
Photograph : Susan Walsh\/AP The battle to bring BP to account for the Gulf of Mexico disaster intensified as senior politicians in the US gathered to co-ordinate their approach to the oil spill , hours after beleaguered chief executive Tony Hayward was summoned to Washington . 
Nancy Pelosi , speaker of the House of Representatives , met with seven committee chairmen to discuss how to proceed in the fight with ` big oil ' . 
Following the meeting , she declared that Congress will write and pass legislation by August that addresses the consequences of the Deepwater Horizon explosion on 20 April . 
Dubbed the `` spill bill '' , this could include new controls on off-shore drilling , higher fines for spillages , and more compensation for those affected . 
Pelosi 's meeting was seen as an attempt to bring more order to the Democratic party 's response to the ongoing catastrophe . 
At least fifteen house and Senate committees have held , or are planning , hearings into the disaster . 
Four separate meetings are scheduled to take place today alone . 
This has led to fears of a turf war , as politicians scrabble to be seen to be taking a tough line on BP ahead of this autumn 's mid-term elections . 
`` You have all of the house , a third of the Senate and a very motivated White House eager to look responsive , '' Kevin Book , an analyst with ClearView Energy Partners , told Bloomberg , flagging up how many lawmakers face re-election . 
But the scale of the investigations into the Deepwater Horizon disaster has also yielded benefits . 
For example , the energy and commerce committee has already held five hearings and obtained a slew of documents from the companies involved with the Deepwater drilling . 
The house select committee on energy independence and global warming forced BP to release live footage of the leak from its robot submarines . 
And the Senate committee on energy and natural resources exposed rifts between BP , rig operator Transocean and contractor Halliburton , when senior executives all tried to pin the blame on each other . 
Tuesday 's meeting also gave a taste of the fury that many in Washington feel against BP . 
Edward Markey , chairman of the house energy and environment subcommittee , claimed that BP was `` either lying or they are grossly incompetent '' as he castigated the company for underestimating the amount of oil spewing into the ocean following the Deepwater Horizon explosion . 
Up to now , BP has been represented at many of these hearings by Lamar McKay , its head of American operations . 
That will change next week , though , when Hayward appears before the energy and commerce subcommittee on oversight and investigations . 
It wrote to Hayward yesterday , inviting him and another BP employee to a hearing next Thursday . 
The subcommittee will grill Hayward about the causes of the Deepwater Horizon rig explosion . 
`` The subcommittee anticipates that its members may have questions requiring technical knowledge of the Deepwater Horizon rig operations , well design , and safety measures and , accordingly , we ask that you be accompanied by a BP employee or official with sufficient knowledge to answer these questions under oath , '' said the committee in a letter to Hayward released last night . 
Earlier this week Democratic congressman Anthony Weiner showed how little respect many on Capitol Hill have for BP . 
He told TV viewers that the company was essentially lying about the disaster : `` Whenever you hear someone with a British accent talking about this on behalf of British Petroleum they are not telling you the truth . 
That 's the bottom-line , '' Weiner said . 
There is also evidence that the sheer amount of scrutiny may be overwhelming BP . 
Politicians in Mississippi had invited BP , Transocean and Halliburton to appear at a hearing at its state capital this week , but the three companies declined . 
BP reportedly explained that its key officials would be tied up in Washington instead . 
BP 's shares fell another 3.7 % today to 393p , on fresh fears that the company will be forced to scrap its dividend . 
They have now lost almost 40 % of their value since the Deepwater rig exploded , wiping nearly # 50bn off BP 's market capitalization . 
Later today the house transportation and infrastructure committee will hold a hearing called Liability and Financial Responsibility for Oil Spills under the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 and Related Statutes . 
The house science and technology committee will discuss the need for better methods to fight oil spills , at a meeting titled Deluge of Oil Highlights Research and Technology Needs for Oil Recovery and Effective Cleanup of Oil Spills . 
The house energy and commerce committee will probe the current situation in the Gulf of Mexico at a hearing called Beneath the Surface of the BP Spill : What 's Happening Now , What 's Needed Next . 
And the Senate environment and public works committee will examine The Big Oil Bailout Prevention Liability Act of 2010 , a bill under which the maximum cap for damages would be raised to $ 10bn -LRB- # 6.9 bn -RRB- from $ 75m . 
House committees holding hearings into the oil spill Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Battle to bring BP to account for oil spill intensifies This article was published on guardian . 
