\* Greenstream restart boosts Italy energy supply security \* First tests at Greenstream pipeline run at 3 mcm a day \* Eni , NOC aim to restart offshore platform of Sabratah in Nov -LRB- Adds analyst reaction -RRB- MILAN\/LONDON , Oct 13 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Italian oil major Eni and Libya 's National Oil Corporation -LRB- NOC -RRB- launched tests of the Greenstream pipeline on Thursday as they aim to fully restart the flow of Libyan gas to Italy , boosting Italy 's gas supplies ahead of winter . 
Libya was Italy 's third-biggest supplier of gas after Algeria and Russia and covered about 12.5 percent of its gas needs before flows via Greenstream were suspended in February because of civil war . 
The volumes of gas shipped during the testing period mark the preliminary restart of pipeline operations after nearly eight months , Eni said in a statement . 
The first tests will entail a flow of 3 million cubic metres of gas per day . 
`` The restart of Greenstream pipeline will allow us to face the coming winter with a greater level of supply security and also offset other possible risks with foreign -LRB- energy -RRB- supplies , '' Italian Industry Ministry Undersecretary Stefano Saglia said in a statement . 
Eni Chief Executive Paolo Scaroni has said he hopes to begin gas exports through Greenstream in October . 
`` We will be able to increase production towards the end of November , '' Eni Exploration & Production Director General Claudio De Scalzi told Sky TV . 
The 520 km Greenstream pipeline runs from Mellitah to Gela on the Italian island of Sicily and has a capacity of 8 billion cubic metres . 
The mere fact that test flows have resumed should reverse the prevailing sentiment that European gas markets are undersupplied , Societe Generale analyst Thierry Bros said in a research note . 
He said the prospect of material Libyan supplies reaching Italy this year could create a supply glut domestically , forcing Eni to cancel some deliveries from Gazprom under take-or-pay obligations . 
This would require Eni to pay for gas it did not use , a situation it has largely avoided during the Greenstream outage . 
`` If material volumes of Libyan gas were to arrive in Italy during winter 2011\/12 , other suppliers -LRB- Russia , Norway and\/or Qatar -RRB- would need to curb supply to avoid flooding the European market , '' Bros said . 
Moreover , a quick return of Libyan supplies could drive European gas prices lower across the board , reversing prevailing views of a looming shortage caused by cutoffs in Middle Eastern supply and greater demand in Asia . 
Rapid stockpiling during summer months and diminished demand across Europe makes the region more susceptible to a downside shock , he added . 
Test flows of Libyan gas to Italy may also ease supply shortages caused by the closure of the Switzerland-Italy Transitgas pipeline on Tuesday , after heavy rainfall and snow melt exposed sections of the link 's southern leg . 
Italy has boosted imports of gas from Russia and northern Europe and has drawn more on its gas stocks to offset shortfalls in imports from Libya , Saglia said . 
Since spring , Italy has managed to replenish its gas reserves to about 87 percent of capacity , despite the lack of Libyan gas and aims to completely rebuild the stocks by the end of October , Saglia said . 
The first tests have run with 3 million cubic meters of gas per day , produced by the Wafa field , located about 500 km southwest of Tripoli in the Libyan desert , Eni said . 
The Wafa field , which largely supplies the Libyan domestic market for power generation , has been producing gas throughout the conflict to provide power to the local population , it said . 
NOC and Eni , which are equal partners in Greenstream BV , the company that operates the pipeline , as well as in the Mellitah Oil & Gas Company , operator of production fields in Libya , have been working together to restore production at all their joint fields in Libya , Eni said . 
Eni also said it was working with NOC and Mellitah Oil & Gas to restart gas output in November at the offshore platform of Sabratah , about 110 km off Libya 's coast in the Bahr Essalam gas field . 
They also aim to restart the associated treatment and processing facilities at the Mellitah terminal on the western part of the Libyan coast , from where Greenstream transports gas to Italy . 
Bahr Essalam field is an important source of gas supply for Greenstream , and resuming production there will trigger a gradual increase of the volumes available , Eni said . 
