cents Freeze on drilling has put thousands out of work cents Giant oil tanker sent out to boost collection capacity The site of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Jae C. Hong\/AP The political and financial pressure on BP escalated sharply yesterday as the US government demanded compensation for thousands of oil industry workers laid off as a result of a freeze on drilling in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The demand sent the company 's shares plummeting on Wall Street amid worries over long-term survival prospects . 
In an unexpected addition to BP 's already huge liabilities from America 's worst ever oil spill , the White House said it would press the company to pay the salaries of staff laid off as a result of a six-month moratorium imposed by the Obama administration on exploration activity in the Gulf . 
The freeze means a halt to work on 33 existing oil rigs , affecting thousands of jobs . 
The warning , together with fears that the gush of oil in the gulf could be even worse than estimated , sent BP 's American shares down 15.8 % in a late fall on the New York Stock Exchange , pushing them to their lowest level since 1996 . 
This was despite hopeful news from BP 's operation to plug the undersea leak as it was revealed that the company collected 15,000 barrels of oil on Tuesday . 
As many as 15 Congressional committees are investigating the oil spill and at one of many hearings yesterday , the US interior secretary , Ken Salazar , said he would ask BP to repay the salaries of workers laid off by the moratorium on drilling . 
The White House press secretary Robert Gibbs later went further , saying the freeze is `` a result of the accident that BP caused '' . 
He added : `` It is an economic loss for those workers and those are claims that BP should pay . 
We believe it 's an economic damage caused by this , not unlike losing business at your bait and tackle shop . '' 
There were signs last night that BP was heading for a showdown with the administration over the issue . 
A BP source told Reuters that `` at some point a line has to be drawn '' . 
As it struggles to stem the oil gushing from its ruptured undersea well , BP has dispatched a giant oil tanker , the Loch Rannoch , from its North Sea operations off the Shetland Islands to the Gulf of Mexico . 
The ship will help to increase the capacity to collect oil from 18,000 barrels per day to 28,000 a capability which , if required in full , would exceed the US government 's top estimates of the scope of the spill , which range from 19,000 to 25,000 barrels per day . 
`` We continue to make progress , '' said Thad Allen , the US coastguard admiral overseeing the operation . 
`` I 'm not going to declare victory on anything until I have absolute numbers . '' 
Earlier , Allen had shown impatience with BP 's handling of compensation claims from shrimpers , fishermen , property owners and tourism workers . 
To date , BP has made interim payments of $ 5,000 to many of those lodging claims which has been dismissed as inadequate by victims ' lawyers . 
In a letter to BP 's chief executive Tony Hayward , Allen said : `` We need more detail and openness from BP to fulfil our oversight responsibilities to the American people and ensure that you are meeting your commitment to restore the gulf coast . '' 
In Washington , political scrutiny on the oil company is increasing . 
Nancy Pelosi , speaker of the House of Representatives , has met with chairmen of seven committees to co-ordinate a fight with so-called `` big oil '' . 
She pledged legislation by August to address the causes and consequences of the Deepwater Horizon disaster , which began when a BP oil rig caught fire and sank on 20 April , killing 11 workers . 
Anger boiled over at one hearing as a Texan shrimper , Diane Wilson , interrupted evidence by interior secretary Ken Salazar to a senate committee by walking to the center of the room and pouring a beaker of amber-coloured oil over her hair , face and body to protest at the possibility of a cap on BP 's liability . 
She told senators : `` With this BP disaster , I am seeing the destruction of my community and I am outraged . '' 
The dive in BP 's shares on Wall Street raises the prospect of a fresh slump when London Stock Exchange opens this morning . 
BP 's stock has already fallen by 40 % since the explosion . 
The firm is under pressure from the Obama administration to halt dividend payouts to investors . 
Each of the rigs affected by a freeze on drilling employs between 180 and 280 workers . 
But the International Association of Drilling Contractors maintains that as many as 46,000 jobs depend on these deepsea drilling operations . 
