Has US bloodlust for BP gone too far ? 
The oil spill could be down to BP 's failings , but bankruptcy would destroy livelihoods and pensions on both sides of the Atlantic Barack Obama walks away after making a statement to the media flanked by co-chairs of BP oil spill commission . 
Photograph : Mark Wilson\/Getty Images As each day goes by , the disastrous oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico becomes more gruesome . 
Oil-drenched birds and turtles wash up along the shoreline , pristine beaches are polluted by balls of tar and an oily slick laps at Louisiana 's ecologically fragile marshland . 
Understandably , Americans are livid . 
But has the bloodlust directed at BP gone too far ? 
Egged on by catch-all protest coalitions , a `` seize BP '' campaign is organising demonstrations in major cities calling on the US government to snatch the British company 's US assets . 
A `` boycott BP '' action group advocates shunning BP service stations . 
Placards abound with slogans such as `` God bless America go to hell BP '' and `` BP billionaire polluters '' . 
The wife and children of BP 's chief executive , Tony Hayward , are under police protection following threats . 
Urged by political strategists to act more angrily , Barack Obama shed his uncharacteristic cool this week and declared that if it was up to him , BP 's boss would be fired . 
The White House now wants BP to pay not only for cleaning up the Gulf , but also for the cost of jobs lost on 33 other oil rigs because of a government-imposed six-month moratorium on offshore drilling . 
And the US department of justice is threatening legal action to halt BP 's dividend payouts to investors . 
Anthony Weiner , a usually sensible Democratic congressman , declared : `` Whenever you hear someone with a British accent talking about this on behalf of British Petroleum , they are not telling you the truth . '' 
With something close to relish , financial pundits are mooting a BP bankruptcy . 
A New York Times columnist , Andrew Ross Sorkin , guessed that the cost of the gulf disaster could reach a staggering $ 40bn -LRB- # 27bn -RRB- , making corporate collapse a real possibility -LRB- calmer industry experts put the cost at $ 5bn to $ 15bn -RRB- . 
A prominent , albeit retired , oil analyst , Matthew Simmons , has been touring television studios to declare that the oil spill was `` entirely BP 's fault '' and that the company will be bust within months . 
Predictions of doom are self-perpetuating in business and BP 's stock price has duly plummeted by 40 % . 
The company 's market value has fallen by nearly # 50bn , even though BP makes a profit of more than # 11bn annually . 
Perhaps it 's time , though , to pause for breath . 
It is n't yet clear exactly what happened on the Deepwater Horizon platform in the hours leading up the catastrophic fire on April 20 that sent the rig under water , killed 11 people and left BP 's Macondo spewing oil . 
This accident may well be down to BP 's failings but should n't we wait until we know for sure before we become not only judges but executioners ? 
Of the 126 people working on the Deepwater Horizon , only eight were BP employees . 
BP had a 65 % share in the well , while a partner , Anadarko , had 25 % . 
The rig was owned and operated by a US firm , Transocean . 
A failed blow-out preventer was made by another US firm , Cameron , while Halliburton , the oil services firm once run by Dick Cheney , carried out cement work that was supposed to seal the well . 
BP was calling the shots on the project and it is tempting to rush to judgement on the British firm , given its dismal US record . 
Neglect and lax safety oversight caused an explosion at BP 's Texas City oil refinery in 2005 , killing 15 workers . 
The following year , poor maintenance prompted BP 's pipelines in Alaska to spring a leak , sending oil gushing into the Arctic wilderness . 
There have been allegations , as yet unproven , that BP was cutting corners on the Deepwater rig perhaps by filling the well with unstable water , rather than drilling mud . 
Nevertheless , there are plenty of questions outstanding . 
Just this week , a US congressional committee asked Transocean to explain apparent poor staffing on the rig on the night of the gulf disaster . 
There were 18 employees on shift that evening , the lowest number in a fortnight of records , and there were no engineers , electricians , mechanics or subsea supervisors . 
BP is n't allowed to suggest that others might share responsibility that amounts to `` finger pointing '' , which prompts howls of political outrage . 
Irrespective of liability , it is worth pondering whose interests a BP bankruptcy would serve . 
Although based in London , the company has been effectively Anglo-American since its 1998 merger with Amoco it employs 80,300 people , of whom 29,000 are in the US . 
Some 40 % of its shares are held in the UK , while 39 % are held in the US . 
A collapse of BP would destroy livelihoods , damage pension funds and wipe out savings on both sides of the Atlantic . 
For critics of `` big oil '' , that 's hardly a cause for tears . 
But BP 's failure would n't dent America 's reliance on fossil fuels even slightly . 
Ironically , the real beneficiaries would be other big oil companies . 
The US government is n't likely to let a Russian , Chinese or Middle Eastern buyer pick up the assets of a crippled BP . 
The richest , most likely buyer of valuable remnants would be ExxonMobil , which , lest we forget , is a company that defines hardline . 
Until very recently , Exxon spent millions funding groups that deny global warming . 
Of all the major energy companies , it has been the slowest to invest in renewable energy in 2007 , it made a profit of $ 40bn but put just $ 100m into a research project on wind , solar and green technology . 
And before the Gulf of Mexico disaster , Exxon was the worst oil-spiller in US history . 
BP has n't done itself many favors . 
Initially , the company woefully underestimated the scale of the spill . 
And BP 's chief executive has produced a string of cringeworthy remarks . 
The company was ill-prepared for such an unprecedented disaster but has finally made some progress in plugging the leak . 
Yet BP has consistently promised to foot the bill for cleaning up the gulf and to meet all valid compensation claims . 
Many will argue that BP deserves to die , and anger is entirely understandable . 
But critics should be careful what they wish for . 
America is a nation with a tradition of due process and everybody even `` big oil '' is entitled to a fair trial . 
cents This article was updated at 1pm on 10 June 2010 Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Has US bloodlust for BP gone too far ? 
| Andrew Clark This article was published on guardian . 
