Al Gore 's lawyer seeks to lead BP oil spill cases WILMINGTON , Delaware | Mon Sep 27 , 2010 4:58 pm EDT WILMINGTON , Delaware -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A high-profile attorney who represented former Vice President Al Gore in the 2000 presidential election recount has made a surprise bid to lead the mammoth U.S. legal cases tied to the Gulf oil spill . 
David Boies , a New York litigator , is entering a crowded field of plaintiffs ' lawyers also angling for a prime role in the lawsuits against BP Plc and other corporate defendants . 
He has submitted an application for a seat on a committee that will oversee the cases , according to court documents . 
Other applicants for committee seats include well-known plaintiffs ' attorney Mark Lanier of Texas , and California lawyers Elizabeth Cabraser , who battled Exxon Corp over the Valdez spill , and Thomas Girardi , who helped reach a settlement in a case made famous by the film `` Erin Brockovich . '' 
`` There 's a lot of money at stake , '' said Richard A. Nagareda , a professor at Vanderbilt Law School in Nashville , Tennessee . 
`` That 's why so many people are applying and why the appointment to the committee is so contentious . '' 
Lawsuits have been filed around the country against BP and others as a result of the oil spill , the largest in U.S. history . 
In August , many of these cases were consolidated in a federal court in New Orleans . 
Judge Carl Barbier asked the lawyers who have brought lawsuits to submit applications for a seat on the committee . 
A seat comes with the power to generate fee work for years and gives the attorneys the ability to shape the direction of the case . 
The judge overseeing the case said he will consider an applicant 's willingness to commit to years of legal work , ability to work with others and experience in complex litigation . 
Boies , chairman of law firm Boies Schiller & Flexner , championed Gore 's case in the Bush v Gore U.S. Supreme Court case in 2000 that catapulted George W. Bush to the White House . 
He is also known for overseeing the U.S. Department of Justice 's antitrust case against Microsoft Corp. . 
Boies , who applied to help lead the BP-related cases on Friday , did not immediately return a call for comment . 
The judge said he would only consider applications from lawyers with cases before the court . 
Boies described in his application the work his firm has done on the case , which includes touring docks and clean-up sites and talking to fishermen , deckhands , hotel owners , elected officials and the owner of an oyster-shucking plant . 
Melissa Willett of Boies Schiller 's Washington office , who submitted the application for Boies , said the firm had cases pending in the oil spill litigation . 
Boies 's arrival on the scene was not well-received by all attorneys . 
`` I 'm completely surprised , '' said Daniel Becnel , a Reserve , Louisiana , attorney who is well-known in Southern legal circles for his career fighting maritime lawsuits over spills and rig explosions . 
`` I do n't think lawyers in the South need someone to tell us what to do in an admiralty case since most of us have dealt with it for 40 years , '' said Becnel . 
The case in U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana is In re Oil Spill by the Oil Rig `` Deepwater Horizon '' in the Gulf of Mexico April 20 , 2010 , No. 10-MDL-2179 . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Hals , editing by Steve Orlofsky -RRB- . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
