WASHINGTON | Wed Mar 30 , 2011 6:16 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - President Barack Obama has signed a secret order authorizing covert U.S. government support for rebel forces seeking to oust Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi , government officials told Reuters on Wednesday . 
Obama signed the order , known as a presidential `` finding '' , within the last two or three weeks , according to government sources familiar with the matter . 
Such findings are a principal form of presidential directive used to authorize secret operations by the Central Intelligence Agency . 
This is a necessary legal step before such action can take place but does not mean that it will . 
As is common practice for this and all administrations , I am not going to comment on intelligence matters , '' White House spokesman Jay Carney said in a statement . 
`` I will reiterate what the president said yesterday -- no decision has been made about providing arms to the opposition or to any group in Libya . '' 
News that Obama had given the authorization surfaced as the President and other U.S. and allied officials spoke openly about the possibility of sending arms supplies to Gaddafi 's opponents , who are fighting better-equipped government forces . 
The United States is part of a coalition , with NATO members and some Arab states , which is conducting air strikes on Libyan government forces under a U.N. mandate aimed at protecting civilians opposing Gaddafi . 
Interviews by U.S. networks on Tuesday , Obama said the objective was for Gaddafi to `` ultimately step down '' from power . 
He spoke of applying `` steady pressure , not only militarily but also through these other means '' to force Gaddafi out . 
Obama said the U.S. had not ruled out providing military hardware to rebels . 
`` It 's fair to say that if we wanted to get weapons into Libya , we probably could . 
We 're looking at all our options at this point , '' he told ABC News anchor Diane Sawyer . 
In Washington , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton insisted to reporters that no decision had yet been taken . 
U.S. officials monitoring events in Libya say neither Gaddafi 's forces nor the rebels , who have asked the West for heavy weapons , now appear able to make decisive gains . 
While U.S. and allied airstrikes have seriously damaged Gaddafi 's military forces and disrupted his chain of command , officials say , rebel forces remain disorganized and unable to take full advantage of western military support . 
People familiar with U.S. intelligence procedures said that Presidential covert action `` findings '' are normally crafted to provide broad authorization for a range of potential U.S. government actions to support a particular covert objective . 
In order for specific operations to be carried out under the provisions of such a broad authorization -- for example the delivery of cash or weapons to anti-Gaddafi forces -- the White House also would have to give additional `` permission '' allowing such activities to proceed . 
Former officials say these follow-up authorizations are known in the intelligence world as '' ` Mother may I ' findings . '' 
In 2009 Obama gave a similar authorization for the expansion of covert U.S. counter-terrorism actions by the CIA in Yemen . 
The White House does not normally confirm such orders have been issued . 
Because U.S. and allied intelligence agencies still have many questions about the identities and leadership of anti-Gaddafi forces , any covert U.S. activities are likely to proceed cautiously until more information about the rebels can be collected and analyzed , officials said . 
`` The whole issue on -LRB- providing rebels with -RRB- training and equipment requires knowing who the rebels are , '' said Bruce Riedel , a former senior CIA Middle East expert who has advised the Obama White House . 
Riedel said that helping the rebels to organize themselves and training them how use weapons effectively would be more urgent then shipping them arms . 
Sending in weapons would arguably violate an arms embargo on Libya by the U.N. Security Council imposed on February 26 , although British , U.S. and French officials have suggested there may be a loophole . 
Getting a waiver would require the agreement of all 15 council members , which is unlikely at this stage . 
Diplomats say any countries that decided to arm the rebels would be unlikely to seek formal council approval . 
An article in early March on the website of the Voice of America , the U.S. government 's broadcasting service , speculated on possible secret operations in Libya and defined a covert action as `` any U.S. government effort to change the economic , military , or political situation overseas in a hidden way . '' 
The article , by VOA intelligence correspondent Gary Thomas , said covert action `` can encompass many things , including propaganda , covert funding , electoral manipulation , arming and training insurgents , and even encouraging a coup . '' 
U.S. officials also have said that Saudi Arabia and Qatar , whose leaders despise Gaddafi , have indicated a willingness to supply Libyan rebels with weapons . 
Members of Congress have expressed anxiety about U.S. government activities in Libya . 
Some have recalled that weapons provided by the U.S. and Saudis to mujahedeen fighting Soviet occupation forces in Afghanistan in the 1980s later ended up in the hands of anti-American militants . 
There are fears that the same thing could happen in Libya unless the U.S. is sure who it is dealing with . 
The chairman of the House intelligence committee , Rep. Mike Rogers , said on Wednesday he opposed supplying arms to the Libyan rebels fighting Gaddafi `` at this time . '' 
`` We need to understand more about the opposition before I would support passing out guns and advanced weapons to them , '' Rogers said in a statement . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Or maybe his goal is food riots , reduction of large parts of major cities to rubble , and a cart load of dollar bills for a loaf of bread to make a socialist take over easier ... Maybe he 's not just inept , but malevolent . 
Are we arming the next terrorists attack on the US ? 
If I know Al Qaeda fighers are with the Libyan rebels , SURELY Obama knows Al Qaeda fighers are with the Libyan rebels . 
Either Obama is foolish or he has bad intentions for the United States . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
