AJDABIYAH , Libya | Wed Mar 30 , 2011 11:32 am EDT AJDABIYAH , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Rebels beat a rapid retreat east on Wednesday , ceding land and a series of oil towns as quickly as they had taken them after Muammar Gaddafi 's forces unleashed rockets and artillery on lightly armed rebel forces . 
Aided by Western air strikes , rebels had made a two-day charge along more than 200 km -LRB- 125 mile -RRB- of barren coast and seized strategic oil terminals . 
They have now retreated , giving up gains to Gaddafi 's better armed troops . 
The failure of the rebels to hold ground and put pressure on Gaddafi , despite more than 10 days of Western-led air strikes , is likely to unsettle the United States , Britain , France and others who want to see the Libyan leader step down . 
Hundreds of rebel pick-ups mounted with machine guns and other vehicles streamed east of Brega with little sign of order , heading toward Ajdabiyah , a town that rebels took five days to retake from Gaddafi even after air strikes were launched . 
`` We are going to Ajdabiyah , '' said rebel fighter Mohamed al-Abreigi . 
`` We will gather there and , God willing , we will head back to Brega today . '' 
Dozens of rebel vehicles gathered at the western gate to Ajdabiyah , a town which lies about 140 km -LRB- 90 miles -RRB- south of the rebel stronghold of Benghazi . 
But rebels did not seem to be regrouping into defensive positions there . 
One man in military fatigues shouted : `` Civilians inside , civilians inside . '' 
When asked what was happening , one rebel said : `` We do n't know . 
They say there may be a group -LRB- from Gaddafi 's forces -RRB- coming from the south . '' 
To the south is open desert . 
Ajdabiyah , battered by the to-and-fro of fighting , stands at the gateway to the rebel held east of Libya . 
It is located on a key junction with one route heading to Benghazi and another northeast to the oil port of Tobruk near the Egyptian border . 
Libyan families were fleeing north to Benghazi as news of the retreat spread . 
The road out of Ajdabiyah was packed with cars carrying families and their belongings . 
Rebels had advanced beyond the coastal town of Bin Jawad , about 525 km -LRB- 330 miles -RRB- east of the capital Tripoli . 
But as they approached Gaddafi 's hometown of Sirte , they came up against the Libyan leader 's heavier weaponry . 
`` Gaddafi 's forces have Grad -LRB- rockets -RRB- which have a range of 40 km -LRB- 25 miles -RRB- ... If we had Grads we could liberate Libya in a day , '' said rebel fighter Ezzedine Saleh . 
Another fighter , Muftah Mohammed , told Reuters : `` Kalashnikovs , RPGs -LRB- rocket-propelled grenades -RRB- and light rockets -- these are our weapons . '' 
Rebels regularly appeal for better weapons from the West and more air strikes . 
But even some members of the rebel movement have admitted that one of the biggest challenges is keeping discipline in their enthusiastic but inexperienced force . 
Few rebel fighters have much formal military training . 
They have proved keen to race to the front but equally swift to fall back with little sign of order when big guns fire at them . 
Their own weapons offer little to block Gaddafi 's advance . 
`` Where is the French air force ? 
We wo n't be able to get to Sirte except with help from the French air force , '' said rebel Rafa Abbas near Ras Lanuf , moments before aircraft roared overhead . 
A series of loud booms followed . 
A rebel fighter , Ahmed , returning from Ras Lanuf , told Reuters : `` The French planes came and bombed Gaddafi 's forces . '' 
But the apparent aerial attack showed no sign of slowing down Gaddafi 's advance or halting the pace of the rebel retreat . 
Some 10-15 km -LRB- 6-10 miles -RRB- west of Brega , around a dozen rebel fighters stopped by the road and trained their guns south into the Sahara . 
Wisps of smoke could be seen in the distance . 
`` They -LRB- Gaddafi 's forces -RRB- are coming from the desert , '' yelled one fighter . 
Another fired his Kalashnikov rifle in the air to scare away a group of camels . 
There was no sign of the rebels forming any determined defense of the sprawling oil town of Brega . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The fact is that a substantial number of the rebels will include jihadist agitators -LRB- assuming U.S. intel has not relied entirely on Gaddafi 's claims over the past few years -RRB- who have encouraged , supported , incited and even spearheaded the revolution , and will not be without honor in any new government that the West will have to deal with . 
How does one arrange security and intel with a future government whose security includes Al Qaida or jihadist moles and even open sympathizers ? 
John McCain might want also to consider mission-creep against forces that know how to make strategic retreats , how to ambush , how to cache and deploy heavy arms in and around cities -LRB- and just how much they have cached -RRB- , inaccessible to air strikes , how well motivated G 's forces really are , etc. . 
The U.N. has fashioned a general economic noose for G. , the coalition is striking systematically at his forces ' materiel , and there is no turning back . 
But there is no reason to ramp it up either . 
This is a war of attrition , nothing more , nothing less . 
There has been way too much talking by the coalition diplomats when the Libyan rebels need air power , long range artillery\/rockets , and tanks . 
Are all these US and NATO Politicians and Military general completely STUPID . 
Common sense appears in very short supply . 
A civil war is raging in Libya . 
Gadhafi has a trained military army . 
The rebels have no trained military army . 
WE can knock out all Gadhafi 's air power etc but that still leaves his ground soldiers . 
And UN 1970 resolution is to protect civilians only . 
So how do you stop Gadhafi troops when they enter cities without us killing civilians . 
Answer you need to put `` boots on the ground '' to fight Gadhafi troops and then we have another IRAQ to suck up lives and squander tax dollars . 
And the UN resolution 1970 is ignored . 
Has anyone learned any lessons ... . 
And remember there are 6 or 7 dictators in countries around Libya who crush their people , so will we bomb them also . 
These med-evil countries live by the Sharia Law and have been killing each other for centuries . 
They are not going to stop . 
We should get the hell out , and let them murder one another . 
Once their OIL is gone , we will have NO interest in them . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
