Thursday , August 5 , 2010 ; 5:07 PM BP has finished pumping cement into the blown-out Macondo well in the Gulf of Mexico as part of its efforts to permanently plug the source of the nation 's worst oil spill , the company said Thursday . 
Engineers started the cementing operation at 10:15 a.m. EDT and completed it at 3:15 EDT . 
It was the second step in the `` static kill , '' in which heavy mud was first pumped into the well from the surface to stop it from leaking crude into the gulf . 
BP said in a statement that the static kill procedure will `` complement '' a separate effort to plug the well through a relief well that is nearing completion in a technique known as the `` bottom kill . '' 
Earlier , the company announced that retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad W. Allen , the national incident commander for the disaster , had authorized the cementing operation , which was under consideration following the successful effort to pump mud into the well . 
The development comes a day after the Macondo well became an apparently harmless hole in the seafloor , clogged with 13-pound-per-gallon gunk , and barely more of a threat to spew oil into the Gulf of Mexico than to start gushing lemonade . 
On the 107th day of the Deepwater Horizon disaster , the well that tormented the nation had flatlined . 
Federal officials then green-lighted the cementing of the well , already jammed with mud , late Wednesday . 
Federal waters are reopening gradually to fishing . 
The oil slick , the once-horrific expanse of red-orange mousse and silver sheen , has largely disappeared , federal scientists said Wednesday , even though the amount of oil left is more than four times that dumped by the Exxon Valdez . 
The Obama administration breathed a sigh of relief , holding a midday news conference featuring top officials who claimed credit for guiding BP in getting the well under control . 
Officials hastened to remind the public that Macondo wo n't be incontrovertibly dead until a relief well drills into it near its base and plugs it with cement . 
But even the cautious Allen , the official in charge of the federal response to the disaster , called the static kill a `` fairly consequential '' event and a `` very significant step . '' 
About three-quarters of the nearly 5 million barrels of oil that escaped Macondo has evaporated , dissolved or been dispersed by chemicals , skimmed by boats , burned , weathered and , most important , devoured by the Gulf of Mexico 's permanent oil-eating microbial workforce , according to a study released Wednesday by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and Interior Department . 
`` Mother Nature is assisting here considerably , '' said NOAA administrator Jane Lubchenco . 
This should terminate , once and for all , the more apocalyptic scenarios for the demise of the gulf and the spread of oil to Atlantic shores . 
There is no sign that the oil is going to ride the Loop Current onto the beaches of South Florida , the Outer Banks , Bermuda , Ireland and so on . 
Just a month ago , the spill was an uncontrolled calamity : Macondo mocked the technological skills of the world 's petroleum engineers , and oil was slathering birds and turtles and tar-balling hundreds of miles of coastline . 
The turning point came when BP put a new tight-fitting cap on the well July 12 and closed the valves three days later , cutting off the ugly geyser of oil that had become a dominant image of the summer . 
Federal scientists have said that vigilance would be called for even after the static kill procedure worked , which , according to BP in a 2 a.m. announcement , it did . 
BP sent out a bulletin declaring success after spending eight hours pumping mud into the well from surface ships . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
