The `` greatest environmental disaster '' in U.S. history -- which has appeared at times to leave a high-control White House powerless -- seemed to have lost its power to scare . 
A few hours after BP 's well was declared virtually dead , the Obama administration announced Wednesday that only about 26 percent of the oil spilled in the Gulf of Mexico was unaccounted for . 
`` A significant amount of this , '' said Jane Lubchenco , head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , `` is a direct result of the very robust federal response efforts . '' 
But , in interviews , scientists who worked on the report said the figures were based in large part on assumptions and estimates with a significant margin of error . 
Some outside scientists went further : In a situation in which many facts remain murky , they said , the government seemed to have used interpretations that made the gulf -- and the federal efforts to save it -- look as good as possible . 
`` There 's a lot of ... smoke and mirrors in this report , '' said Ian MacDonald , a professor of biological oceanography at Florida State University . 
`` It seems very reassuring , but the data are n't there to actually bear out the assurances that were made . '' 
The government 's accounting of the spilled oil , called an `` oil budget , '' was announced Wednesday at the White House . 
It appeared to answer the most troubling question : Of the 4.9 million barrels -LRB- 205.8 million gallons -RRB- that poured out of the well , only 827,000 barrels were siphoned to vessels on the surface . 
Where did the rest of it go ? 
Where there had been mystery , now there was a pie chart . 
It showed that 5 percent of the total oil had been burned and that 3 percent had been skimmed off the surface . 
An additional 25 percent had evaporated or dissolved . 
About another quarter had been `` dispersed '' -- broken into tiny droplets by chemicals or by the force of being blasted out of the well . 
The dispersed oil , Lubchenco said , `` is in the process of being very rapidly degraded naturally , and so Mother Nature is assisting here considerably . '' 
She said , however , that `` diluted and out of sight does n't necessarily mean benign . '' 
Those facts did not seem to support a statement that White House climate and energy czar Carol M. Browner made Wednesday on NBC 's `` Today '' show . 
An initial assessment showed that `` more than three-quarters of the oil is gone . 
The vast majority of the oil is gone , '' she said . 
At best , the report shows that three-quarters of the oil could be on its way out : It does not say that it has vanished . 
The remaining 26 percent or so of the oil was still unaccounted for , although Lubchenco said that did not necessarily mean it is still causing ecological harm . 
Asked how much of the success of the cleanup should be attributable to BP , White House press secretary Robert Gibbs said the cleanup `` would have been different '' if federal officials had not pushed the company to work faster . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
