WASHINGTON | Tue Dec 14 , 2010 6:13 pm EST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The U.S. Justice Department is expected to announce as early as Wednesday its first significant legal action stemming from the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , a federal government source familiar with the matter said . 
The source said the action involved the filing of civil lawsuits , rather than criminal charges , stemming from the worst offshore oil spill in U.S. history and that it was expected to be announced at a news conference as early as Wednesday . 
The Deepwater Horizon drilling rig blowout , which began in April and was finally sealed in September , fouled resort beaches and fishing grounds , and led to hundreds of lawsuits against BP Plc and its partners over lost revenues and wages . 
In June , Attorney General Eric Holder announced in New Orleans that the U.S. government had launched a criminal and civil investigation into the oil spill . 
The Wall Street Journal reported on Tuesday the Justice Department is expected to join the hundreds of civil lawsuits that have been filed as a result of the spill and will allege violations of environmental protection regulations , which could trigger penalties under such laws as the Clean Water Act and the Oil Pollution Act . 
`` We 're not confirming it , '' a Justice Department spokesman said of the newspaper report . 
But the source , who declined to give further details , confirmed the government 's civil filing in federal court was expected on Wednesday . 
The hundreds of civil lawsuits stemming from the spill have been consolidated in a New Orleans federal court and are being led by a committee of lawyers who represent injured workers and businesses . 
The Justice Department has said in court filings it has claims stemming from the spill including the destruction of natural resources as well as lost tax and royalty revenues . 
Penalties against BP under the Clean Water Act could top $ 20 billion if a court determines there was gross negligence . 
In September , the Justice Department wrote to the court to say it might join the litigation and it requested a special `` track '' just for government lawsuits . 
Alabama and Louisiana have also sued over the spill . 
The Justice Department said at that time it wanted to be separated from the decisions of the attorneys leading the civil lawsuits , most of which were brought for economic losses . 
The judge has not decided the issue . 
The April 20 explosion aboard the Transocean Deepwater Horizon rig killed 11 workers and injured 17 others . 
Holder has vowed to hold accountable those responsible for the spill . 
-LRB- additional reporting by Tom Hals in Wilmington ; Editing by Tim Dobbyn and Gunna Dickson -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
