Dr Conrad Murray : Trial timeline Dr Murray was raised on the Caribbean island of Grenada by his maternal grandparents -LRB- photo : Houston Chronicle -RRB- Michael Jackson 's personal physician , Dr Conrad Murray , has been convicted of the involuntary manslaughter of the pop superstar . 
BBC News looks back over the events that led to the court case , his conviction and sentencing . 
1983 Conrad Murray graduates from Texas Southern University in Houston with a degree in pre-medicine and biological sciences . 
He continues his medical studies in Nashville , Tennessee , before completing his training in California and the University of Arizona where he studies cardiology . 
2000 Dr Murray opens a practice in Las Vegas , expanding with a second clinic in Houston in 2006 . 
Serving both ends of the community , he also provides medical care to deprived areas . 
2006 Dr Murray meets Michael Jackson after treating one of his children in Las Vegas , and the pair strike up a friendship . 
May 2009 Dr Murray is hired by promoters AEG Live , at Jackson 's request , as the star 's personal physician ahead of his This Is It 50-date concert comeback in London . 
He is put on a salary of more than $ 150,000 -LRB- # 96,000 -RRB- a month . 
Jackson was rehearsing for his 50-date London residency when he died 25 June 2009 Dr Murray finds Jackson unconscious in the bedroom of his Los Angeles mansion . 
Paramedics are called to the house while Dr Murray is performing CPR , according to a recording of the 911 emergency call . 
He travels with the singer in an ambulance to UCLA medical center where Jackson later dies . 
28 June 2009 Los Angeles police interview Dr Murray for three hours . 
His spokeswoman insists he is `` not a suspect '' . 
22 July 2009 The doctor 's clinic in Houston is raided by officers from the Drug Enforcement Agency -LRB- DEA -RRB- looking for evidence of manslaughter . 
28 July 2009 Dr Murray 's home is also raided . 
The search warrant allows `` authorised investigators to look for medical records relating to Michael Jackson and all of his reported aliases '' . 
A computer hard drive and mobile phones are seized , and a pharmacy in Las Vegas is later raided in connection with the case . 
29 July 2009 Court documents filed in Nevada show that Dr Murray is heavily in debt , owing more than $ 780,000 -LRB- # 501,000 -RRB- in judgements against him and his medical practice , outstanding mortgage payments on his house , child support and credit cards . 
29 August 2009 Jackson 's death is ruled a homicide by the Los Angeles coroner , who says the cause of death was `` acute propofol intoxication '' . 
A cocktail of drugs - also including sedatives Midazolam and Diazepam , the painkiller Lidocaine and the stimulant Ephedrine - were detected in his body . 
Footage of the raid on Dr Murray 's clinic 21 November 2009 Court documents reveal that Dr Murray bought five bottles of propofol in May 2009 , at around the same time he was hired as Jackson 's physician . 
The papers show that the doctor spent $ 853 -LRB- # 515 -RRB- to purchase the drug in Las Vegas , and then transported it to Los Angeles . 
The DEA says he has not broken any laws in doing so . 
8 February 2010 Dr Murray is charged with involuntary manslaughter . 
He pleads not guilty and is released on $ 75,000 -LRB- # 48,000 -RRB- bail . 
The judge says he can continue to practice medicine , but bans him from administering anesthetic agents , `` specifically propofol '' . 
14 June 2010 Judge Michael Pastor refuses a request to bar Dr Murray from practising medicine in California . 
25 June 2010 Michael Jackson 's father , Joseph , files a wrongful death lawsuit against the physician . 
8 December 2010 California medical board allows Dr Murray to keep his medical licence . 
4 January 2011 Preliminary hearings begin . 
Prosecutors allege that Dr Murray `` hid drugs '' before calling paramedics on the day Jackson died . 
They also state that he did not perform CPR properly and omitted to tell paramedics that he had given Jackson propofol . 
11 January 2011 Dr Murray is ordered to stand trial for involuntary manslaughter . 
He faces up to four years in prison if found guilty . 
Dr Murray appears in court in Los Angeles 25 January 2011 The doctor officially enters a plea of not guilty . 
`` I am an innocent man , '' Dr Murray says in court . 
3 March 2011 The trial is delayed to allow both sides more time to prepare . 
April 2011 Jury selection begins . 
Because of the high-profile nature of the case , 500 people are called to the preliminary selection process . 
Potential jurors face a 30-page form , which asks questions such as `` have you ever considered yourself a fan of Michael Jackson ? '' 
2 May 2011 The trial is delayed again , as Dr Murray 's lawyers ask for extra time to prepare for new prosecution witnesses . 
25 July 2011 Rehearsal footage from Michael Jackson 's This Is It tour can not be used as evidence , the judge rules . 
30 August 2011 Michael Jackson 's dermatologist is barred from giving evidence at the trial . 
Dr Murray 's lawyers had planned to argue that Arnold Klein had administered the singer with painkillers for `` no valid reason '' but prosecutors said they were attempting to transfer responsibility for his death away from Dr Murray . 
Testimony from five other doctors who treated Jackson is also disallowed . 
24 September 2011 The jury is finalized . 
Half of the chosen panelists are Caucasian , five are Hispanic and one is African-American . 
The jurors have a wide range of professions , including a bus driver , paralegal and a bookseller . 
27 September 2011 Opening arguments take place in the televised trial . 
Prosecutors say Dr Murray acted with `` gross negligence '' and gave Jackson a lethal dose of propofol . 
The defense claim Jackson administered too much of the sleeping aid himself . 
The doctor maintained his innocence throughout the trial 29 September 2011 Jackson 's bodyguard , Alberto Alvarez , testifies that on the night Jackson died , Dr Murray ordered him to pick up vials of medicine before phoning for an ambulance . 
`` In my personal experience , I believed Dr Murray had the best intentions for Mr Jackson , '' Mr Alvarez said . 
30 September 2011 Paramedics tell the court that , as they tried to revive Jackson , Dr Murray failed to inform them that he had given the star propofol . 
4 October 2011 Dr Thao Nguyen , an emergency room cardiologist says she and a colleague tried to resuscitate Jackson for more than an hour at Dr Murray 's insistence but believed the efforts were futile . 
6 October 2011 A recording of Jackson bemoaning his unhappy childhood is played to jurors . 
In the audio , recorded six weeks before the star 's death , the star appears to slur his speech as he tells Dr Murray about his plans for the This Is It tour . 
8 October 2011 Dr Murray reveals in a recorded interview with police that , on the night of 25 June , he injected Jackson with several sedatives but the pop star remained wide awake . 
He is heard telling detectives : `` He 's not able to sleep naturally '' . 
12 October 2011 Dr Murray 's defense backs out of claims Jackson swallowed a fatal dose of propofol when he was alone . 
Prosecution witness Dr Christopher Rogers , the medic who carried out the singer 's post mortem , said it was more likely that Dr Murray mistakenly gave him too much . 
13 October 2011 Jackson fans continue to line up against the courtroom wall from 7:30 am in the hope of winning a draw for one of the few seats in the public gallery . 
Dr Christopher Rogers : `` It 's reasonable to believe that the doctor had an imperfect control over the dose '' 20 October 2011 The prosecution 's final witness , propofol expert Dr Steven Shafer , tells the court that Dr Murray made 17 flagrant violations when administering the drug to Jackson . 
Dr Shafer said the drug should never be used to treat insomnia . 
24 October 2011 After a short break in the trial , Dr Murray 's lawyers call their first witnesses . 
Dr Allan Metzger , a friend of Jackson 's for over two decades , testifies the singer had requested anaesthetics from him as a sleep aid . 
26 October 2011 Nutritionist and holistic nurse Cherilyn Lee tells the court she warned Jackson about using the sedative propofol to help him sleep . 
She told him : `` No one who cared or had your best interest at heart would give you this '' . 
After refusing to supply Jackson with the drug in April , she never saw him again . 
27 October 2011 Dr Murray weeps in court as former patients praise his medical skills and describe him as kind and generous . 
`` The reason I came here to help Dr Murray is I know his love , his compassion , his feeling for his patients , every one of them and I just do n't think he did what he 's accused of doing , '' Gerry Causey , from Utah , tells the court . 
28 October 2011 It is likely Jackson was addicted to the painkiller Demerol , defense witness Dr Robert Waldman tells the trial . 
Dr Waldman says records from Jackson 's dermatologist show he had large doses of the drug in the months before his death and that insomnia is a symptom of Demerol withdrawal . 
31 October 2011 Witness for the defense Dr Paul White concedes during cross-examination that Dr Murray deviated from accepted medical standards in his care for Jackson . 
He admits the drug is not usually used to treat insomnia , describing it as `` complete off-label use of the drug '' . 
Dr Murray looked sombre as the verdict was read out in court 1 November 2011 Dr Murray tells Judge Michael Pastor he will not testify in his own defense . 
He says he made his decision `` freely and explicitly '' . 
3 November 2011 The case against Dr Murray goes to the jury following closing statements . 
The prosecution concludes by saying the doctor 's care of Jackson had been `` bizarre '' . 
The defense maintains Dr Murray was not responsible and that the singer caused his own death while his doctor was out of the room . 
`` If it was anybody else , would this doctor be here today ? '' 
defense lawyer Ed Chernoff says . 
7 November 2011 Dr Conrad Murray is found guilty of involuntary manslaughter after nine hours of jury deliberations . 
The doctor was remanded in custody without bail until he receives his sentence . 
29 November 2011 Dr Conrad Murray is sentenced to four years in county jail . 
Judge Michael Pastor says the evidence in the case showed him guilty of a `` continuous pattern of lies and deceit '' . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
