May 21 : Oil is seen on an island near the South Pass of the Mississippi River on the coast of Louisiana . 
AP May 19 , 2010 : Plaquemines Parish President Billy Nungesser and La. . 
Gov. Bobby Jindal tour through the Roseau Grasses that marks the coastline of Southeast Louisiana where oil has washed ashore . 
AP GRAND ISLE , La. -- Officials closed the public beach here Friday as thick gobs of oil resembling melted chocolate washed up , a very visible reminder of the blown-out well that has been spewing crude into the Gulf of Mexico for a month . 
Up to now , only tar balls and a light sheen had come ashore . 
But oil was starting to hit the beach at this island resort community in various forms -- light sheens , orange-colored splotches and heavier brown sheets -- said Chris Roberts , a local official who surveyed the area Friday morning . 
`` It 's difficult to clean up when you have n't stopped the source , '' said Roberts , a councilman for Jefferson Parish , which stretches from the New Orleans metropolitan area to the coast . 
`` You can scrape it off the beach but it 's coming right back . '' 
BP PLC was leasing the Deepwater Horizon rig when it exploded April 20 , killing 11 workers and triggering the massive spill . 
The company conceded Thursday what some scientists have been saying for weeks : More oil is flowing from the leak than BP and the Coast Guard had previously estimated . 
There has been frustration with the pace of efforts to stop the oil , and BP said Friday that it will likely be at least Tuesday before crews can begin a process known as a `` top kill '' that would stop the flow by shooting heavy drilling mud into the well . 
Brown and vivid orange globs and sheets of foul-smelling oil the consistency of latex paint have also begun coating the reeds and grasses of Louisiana 's wetlands , home to rare birds , mammals and a rich variety of marine life . 
A deep , stagnant ooze sat in the middle of a particularly devastated marsh off the Louisiana coast where Emily Guidry Schatzel of the National Wildlife Federation was examining stained reeds . 
`` This is just heartbreaking , '' she said with a sigh . 
`` I ca n't believe it . '' 
Ralph Morgenweck of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service said countless animals could be feeling the effects of the spill , though workers have found only a handful hurt or injured . 
The BP executive in charge of fighting the spill , Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles , said he understands the public is frustrated with the response . 
He told the CBS `` Early Show '' on Friday that in the worst case scenario , the gusher could continue until early August , when a new well being drilled to cap the flow permanently could be finished . 
But Suttles said he believes the rich Gulf environment will recover , in part because it is a large body of water and has withstood other oil spills . 
`` I 'm optimistic , I 'm very optimistic that the Gulf will fully recover , '' Suttles said on CBS . 
A live video feed of the underwater gusher , posted online after lawmakers exerted pressure on BP , shows what appears to be a large plume of oil and gas still spewing into the water next to the stopper-and-tube combination that BP inserted to carry some of the crude to the surface . 
The House committee website where the video was posted promptly crashed because so many people were trying to view it . 
At least 6 million gallons have gushed into the Gulf since the explosion , more than half of what the Exxon Valdez tanker spilled in Alaska in 1989 . 
A growing number of scientists believe it 's more . 
BP spokesman Mark Proegler told The Associated Press on Thursday that the mile-long tube inserted into a leaking pipe over the weekend was at one point capturing 210,000 gallons of oil a day -- the total amount the company and the Coast Guard have estimated is gushing into the sea -- but some was still escaping . 
He would not say how much . 
Suttles said Friday that the pipe is capturing an average of about 84,000 gallons a day , though the amount varies depending on what 's happening on the seafloor . 
Washington , meanwhile , has turned up the pressure on BP . 
The Obama administration asked the company to be more open with the public by sharing such information as measurements of the leak and the trajectory of the spill . 
BP has been accused of covering up the magnitude of the disaster . 
Also , the Environmental Protection Agency directed BP to employ a less toxic form of the chemical dispersants it has been using to break up the oil and keep it from reaching the surface . 
BP is marshaling equipment to try the `` top kill , '' which involves pumping heavy mud into the top of the blown-out well to try to plug the gusher . 
If it does n't work , the backup plans include a `` junk shot '' -- shooting golf balls , shredded tires , knotted rope and other material into the well to clog it up . 
`` We 're now looking at a scenario where response plans include lighting the ocean on fire , pouring potent chemicals into the water , and using trash and human hair to stop the flow of oil , '' said Michael Brune , executive director of the Sierra Club , in a letter to President Barack Obama calling for a formal moratorium on new offshore drilling permits . 
`` If this is the backup plan , we need to rethink taking the risk in the first place . '' 
Patience was wearing thin among state and local officials who called on Obama to take a larger role in the fight against oil invading the Louisiana coast . 
`` We 've given BP enough time , '' said Jefferson Parish Councilman John Young . 
