By Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut The scars of the Syrian conflict are plain to see on the streets of Homs After more than 10 months and 5,000 deaths , an end to the crisis ravaging Syria remains a distant prospect . 
The only sure thing is that in the coming months , many more people will die violent deaths as the conflict becomes increasingly desperate and ugly . 
There is no visible way towards a resolution of the struggle between a regime determined to cling to power , and a revolt which long ago passed the point of no return . 
In the regional domain , the Arab League 's latest proposals have been rejected out of hand by Damascus , and dubbed `` unachievable '' by opposition activists . 
The new league formula for ending the crisis is likely to become the standard adopted by Syria 's international critics , which will generally increase the outside pressure on Damascus and its allies but is unlikely to produce practical results in the near future . 
The new Arab plan was modelled on the template fashioned for Yemen by the Gulf states , under which the embattled President Ali Abdullah Saleh left his country on Monday having devolved power to his deputy . 
The league suggested President Bashar al-Assad should do the same in Syria . 
Its plan called for a dialogue between regime and opposition , formation of a national unity government , election of a constituent assembly , a new constitution , a referendum , and free elections . 
It was immediately dismissed by the Syrian authorities as part of the `` ongoing conspiracy '' against the country , and a `` blatant interference '' in its affairs . 
Area : 5.25 million square miles Profile compiled by BBC Monitoring President Assad has long since launched what he calls a `` comprehensive reform process '' himself , involving the drafting of a new constitution and the holding of `` free '' multi-party elections in the coming months . 
While his plans have no credibility with the opposition or its external supporters , there was no way he was going to abandon them and accept outside diktats . 
The Arab plan also called for the regime and its opponents to begin a dialogue under League auspices within two weeks . 
That seems unlikely to happen . 
Neither side wants it . 
The regime is averse to holding talks other than under its own umbrella . 
Most activists reject talking to a regime which they say has spilled too much blood for reconciliation to be possible . 
The only part of the Arab League initiative that seems to have survived so far is the observer mission on the ground in Syria , whose mandate was renewed by the Arab foreign ministers for a second month on Sunday . 
The monitors ' report has not been made public , though their commander , Sudanese General Mohammad al-Dabi , spoke about it at length at a news conference in which he attributed violence to both sides . 
Recourse to the UN is a scenario long espoused by much of the Syrian opposition and many activists on the ground , who want outside intervention to establish safe havens which they could use as launching-pads for ` liberating ' the rest of the country '' He argued that the mission had helped bring down the level of bloodshed , although activists say more than 800 people have been killed by security forces since the observers began deploying in late December . 
The credibility of the mission - and the unity of purpose of the League effort - have already been diminished , certainly in the eyes of the Syrian regime , by Saudi Arabia 's withdrawal from the observer team . 
The mission could be terminally jeopardised if the League were to refer the whole affair to the UN Security Council , a step which now seems likely . 
The man leading the League campaign to end the Syrian crisis , the Prime Minister and Defense Minister of Qatar , Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim Al Thani , said that if Syria failed to adopt the new peace prescription , the League would hand the matter over to the Security Council . 
In such a situation , Damascus would clearly be tempted to retaliate by asking the observer teams to leave , since the initiative on which their presence was based would have ended . 
Syrian forces are digging in , with no clear way out of the conflict Recourse to the UN is a scenario long espoused by much of the Syrian opposition and many activists on the ground , who want outside intervention to establish safe havens which they could use as launching-pads for `` liberating '' the rest of the country . 
But there is no clear way forward in the international arena either . 
Divisions there were neatly underlined on Monday , when the European Union announced another round of sanctions against Syrian individuals and companies , while Russia was reported to have agreed to supply Damascus with 36 military jets -LRB- which will , however , have to be paid for -RRB- . 
How solid the regime 's pillars of support really are , and how much they will be eroded as conditions deteriorate , is hard to predict '' Russia has made it clear that it regards even condemnation of Syria at the UN Security Council , far less the imposition of sanctions or any form of military intervention , as a red line . 
A Council resolution would be needed to cover anything approaching the kind of intervention many of the regime 's opponents would like to see . 
With Russia and China poised to veto , that is simply not going to happen unless something changes radically . 
So for the moment at least , Syria 's fate seems to be left largely to the internal dynamics of the conflict . 
There , the trend in some areas has been increasingly towards an armed insurgency . 
Whole army units have yet to break off , and by and large the capital Damascus and the second city Aleppo remain relatively untroubled , although many people there are reported to feel that the tide is coming in . 
But in other areas , the impression is of a slow fraying of the regime 's authority and control . 
In parts of the third city , Homs , and other places such as Idlib province to the north-west , Zabadani in the west near Lebanon , and even some of the townships around Damascus , the control of security forces appears to be nominal , patchy or even non-existent . 
Whether this represents recognition of realities by the regime , or temporary restraint in deference to the presence of the Arab observers , is not clear . 
Since the monitors deployed , the authorities have made some gestures towards implementing the agreement covering their presence . 
They have released some detainees , allowed some foreign journalists in with constraints . 
The unrest has now spread to the outskirts of Damascus , where thousands attended the funerals of 12 people killed in the past three days in Douma -LRB- photo : AFP\/HO\/LCC -RRB- The mission commander , General al-Dabi , said that security forces had also stopped shooting at demonstrators , though activists dispute that . 
But the Arab League resolution on Sunday reported that there had been only `` partial and insufficient progress in implementing some of the commitments taken on by the Syrian government '' when it signed the protocol . 
It is hard to imagine that the monitors , if they stay , will be able , as per their mandate , to verify the regime 's complete compliance with the governing protocol which calls for all armed elements to be withdrawn , all detainees released , and all violence ended . 
More likely , perhaps , the situation will simply grind on , with more armed attacks by rebels - three Syrian Army brigadiers have been killed in the past week alone - and further repression by regime forces and their militia auxiliaries , the shabbiha , drawn almost entirely from Mr Assad 's Alawite community . 
It and other minorities such as the Christians have largely continued to support the regime against a revolt which is generally based among the poorer sections of the majority Sunnis . 
Fearing a takeover by Islamist militants , some middle-class Sunnis and merchants favored by the regime have also tended to stick with the regime . 
As the situation has worsened , confessional sentiment has also risen , aggravating fears of a slide into sectarian civil strife and disintegration . 
How solid the regime 's pillars of support really are , and how much they will be eroded as conditions deteriorate , is hard to predict , especially once economic factors kick in harder as sanctions are tightened . 
But barring an unpredictable collapse or an internal coup of some kind , the regime seems to have enough hard-core support - and the determination - to defend its grip on power for months to come , if not longer . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
