Zawahiri urged militants in other countries to join the Syrian uprising Al-Qaeda 's leader has backed the anti-government uprising in Syria , urging the opposition not to rely on the Arab League or the West for help . 
In a video message , Ayman al-Zawahiri said the Syrian rebels had the right to use whatever means they saw fit to get rid of a `` cancerous regime '' . 
Egyptian-born Zawahiri , 62 , took over as head of al-Qaeda after the death of Osama Bin Laden in May 2011 . 
The Syrian government blamed al-Qaeda for two blasts in Damascus in December . 
That double suicide bombing killed 44 people . 
Zawahiri , who has a $ 25m -LRB- # 15m -RRB- US bounty on his head , addressed his video message to the `` Lions of Syria '' . 
He urged them to depend on their own efforts and sacrifices , and not on what he called the `` failed states of the Arab League , the West , or Turkey '' . 
`` If we want freedom , we must be liberated from this regime . 
If we want justice , we must retaliate against this regime , '' he said in the video . 
Arab League ministers are meeting in Cairo on Sunday to discuss the crisis in Syria , following the league 's decision to suspend its observer mission in the country last month . 
Zawahiri called on militants in Iraq , Jordan , Lebanon and Turkey , to rise up and support what he called `` their brothers in Syria '' . 
There have already been reports of Islamic militants crossing into Syria from Iraq . 
It is the clearest sign yet of involvement by al-Qaeda in the uprising in Syria , as it takes on increasingly an aspect of armed insurgency as well as popular protest , says the BBC 's Jim Muir , in neighbouring Lebanon . 
US officials are reported to believe the recent suicide car bombings in Damascus and Aleppo were the work of al-Qaeda . 
Opposition activists have blamed the Syrian government itself for the attacks . 
If violent Islamic extremists are becoming increasingly involved , it is going to muddy the waters of an already very complex situation , our correspondent says . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
