12 February 12 15:38 GMT The head of the suspended Arab League observer mission to Syria has resigned as League foreign ministers meet to decide their next move in the crisis . 
League Secretary General Nabil al-Arabi told its members in Cairo they had to move quickly to end the `` vicious cycle of violence '' in Syria . 
The League is expected to approve Jordan ex-Foreign Minister Abdul-Illah al-Khatib as special envoy to Syria . 
Meanwhile , al-Qaeda 's leader has backed the Syrian uprising . 
In a video message , Ayman al-Zawahiri told the opposition not to rely on the West or Arab countries for support . 
Zawahiri - who took over the leadership of al-Qaeda following the death of Osama Bin Laden in May 2011 - described the Syrian government as a `` cancerous regime that suffocated the free people of Syria '' . 
He called on Muslims to offer whatever help they could . 
Controversial Sudanese General Mohammed al-Dabi , who led the month-long Arab League observer mission to Syria , submitted his resignation on Sunday . 
Human rights groups criticised him for his actions in Darfur , where Sudan is accused of genocide by the International Criminal Court . 
The Arab League suspended its mission in Syria at the end of January , after it failed to halt the violence . 
Mr Arabi said the failure of international diplomacy - referring to a UN resolution vetoed by Russia and China last weekend - had put a special responsibility on the league . 
`` It is imperative for us to move swiftly in all directions , to halt the vicious cycle of violence , '' he said in his opening words to the Arab League meeting . 
Mr Arabi confirmed to the BBC that the League was discussing a call to send peacekeepers to Syria . 
A draft resolution by the League is calling for an end to the observer mission and a halt to all forms of diplomatic co-operation with Syria . 
Damascus has already been suspended from the Arab League . 
The draft also calls for tighter economic sanctions . 
Meanwhile Reuters quoted Saudi Foreign Minister Saud al-Faisal as saying the League should `` open all channels of communication with the Syrian opposition and give all forms of support to it '' . 
A delegation from the Syrian National Council -LRB- SNC -RRB- , a coalition of major opposition parties , is in Cairo , hoping to be recognized by more Arab countries . 
`` We want the Arab countries to decide how to best co-ordinate their initiatives to take us in the same direction , in the right direction , '' said Basma Kadmani of the SNC . 
`` We have been very reassured of everyone 's agendas . 
It is a priority to deal with the Syria issue . '' 
The members of the Gulf Co-operation Council -LRB- GCC -RRB- , which expelled Syria 's ambassadors from its member countries during the week , met ahead of the Arab League talks on Sunday . 
GCC and Arab League member Saudi Arabia is also circulating a draft resolution at the UN General Assembly , similar to the one vetoed in the Security Council by China and Russia . 
The draft resolution `` fully supports '' the Arab League peace plan published last month , which called on President Bashar al-Assad to hand over power to his vice-president , and make way for the rapid formation of a national unity government including the opposition . 
Saudi officials say they have not formally presented the resolution to the Assembly yet . 
The General Assembly is scheduled to discuss Syria on Monday , when it will be addressed by the UN 's High Commissioner for Human Rights , Navi Pillay , but no vote on the resolution is expected by then . 
There is no power of veto at the General Assembly but its resolutions have no legal force , unlike those of the Security Council . 
There were reports of a respite in the bombardment of Homs on Saturday night and Sunday morning , but shelling later resumed . 
At least four people were killed in the Baba Amr neighborhood of the city on Sunday , the Syrian Observatory on Human Rights said . 
At least 35 died on Saturday . 
Activists say more than 400 people have been killed since security forces launched an assault on opposition-held areas on the city last Saturday . 
Meanwhile , government forces entered the town of Zabadani , outside Damascus , after a rare ceasefire was apparently negotiated . 
Human rights groups say more than 7,000 have died throughout Syria since March . 
The government says at least 2,000 members of the security forces have been killed combating `` armed gangs and terrorists '' . 
