Brazilian did not wear bulky jacket Relatives say Met admits that , contrary to reports , electrician did not leap tube station barrier Thursday 28 July 2005 18.32 BST Jean Charles de Menezes , the Brazilian shot dead in the head , was not wearing a heavy jacket that might have concealed a bomb , and did not jump the ticket barrier when challenged by armed plainclothes police , his cousin said yesterday . 
Speaking at a press conference after a meeting with the Metropolitan police , Vivien Figueiredo , 22 , said that the first reports of how her 27-year-old cousin had come to be killed in mistake for a suicide bomber on Friday at Stockwell tube station were wrong . 
`` He used a travel card , '' she said . 
`` He had no bulky jacket , he was wearing a jeans jacket . 
But even if he was wearing a bulky jacket that would n't be an excuse to kill him . '' 
Flanked by the de Menezes family 's solicitor , Gareth Peirce , and by Bianca Jagger , the anti-Iraq war campaigner , she condemned the shoot-to-kill policy which had led to her cousin 's death and vowed that what she called the `` crime '' would not go unpunished . 
`` My cousin was an honest and hard working person , '' said Ms Figueiredo who shared a flat with him in Tulse Hill , south London . 
`` Although we are living in circumstances similar to a war , we should not be exterminating people unjustly . '' 
Another cousin , Patricia da Silva Armani , 21 , said he was in Britain legally to work and study , giving him no reason to fear the police . 
`` An innocent man has been killed as though he was a terrorist , '' she said . 
`` An incredibly grave error was committed by the British police . '' 
Mr de Menezes was shot seven times in the head and once in the shoulder at 10am last Friday after being followed from Tulse Hill . 
Scotland Yard initially claimed he wore a bulky jacket and jumped the barrier when police identified themselves and ordered him to stop . 
The same day the Met commissioner , Sir Ian Blair , said the shooting was `` directly linked '' to the unprecedented anti-terror operation on London 's streets . 
The following day Sir Ian apologised when detectives established that the Brazilian electrician , on his way to a job in north-west London , was not connected to attempts to blow up three underground trains and a bus in the capital . 
The Independent Police Complaints Commission has began an inquiry which is expected to take several months . 
Yesterday it emerged one armed officer involved has been given leave , and two have been moved to non-firearm duties . 
Ms Figuerdo condemned Sir Ian 's decision to authorise the leave , saying she wanted to see the man who shot her cousin , and he should be in jail . 
The body of Mr de Menezes is being flown to Brazil tonight for a funeral tomorrow . 
Simultaneously , a memorial service will be held at Westminster Cathedral , with TV coverage beamed live to Brazil . 
Ms Peirce condemned Sir Ian 's statements on the case , saying there had been a `` regrettable rush to judgment '' . 
She was astonished that the phrase `` shoot to kill '' was being used as if it was a legitimate legal term ; the family would demand `` transparency '' both as to the facts of what had happened and on the policy . 
She added that the family were ready to cooperate with the complaints body , and she saw no reason for delay : `` They know what their questions are and we see no reasons why they should not be answered . 
