CNN Student News - 3\/9\/11 Download PDF maps related to today 's show : THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT . 
CARL AZUZ , CNN STUDENT NEWS ANCHOR : CNN is one example . 
So is CNN Student News . 
In fact , you could be an example , and you 're going to see how and what we 're talking about in the next few minutes . 
I 'm Carl Azuz . 
CNN Student News takes off right now . 
AZUZ : After three weeks of fighting between people who support and oppose Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi , other world leaders are calling the situation in Libya a civil war . 
Rebels have taken control of several cities . 
The Libyan army has fought to regain some of those cities . 
Officials estimate more than a thousand people have died in the violence . 
There were reports yesterday that Colonel Gadhafi was negotiating with rebel leaders , saying he would step down if they could promise that he 'd be able to leave the country safely and that he and his family would not be put on trial . 
But later on both sides denied these reports . 
Some rebel leaders said the negotiations never happened , and a government spokesman called the reports lies . 
The international community is trying to find ways to end the violence in Libya . 
And one suggestion is a no-fly zone over the country . 
What that would mean is that no military planes could fly over Libya without permission . 
The United Nations Security Council is talking about it , and the idea has a lot of support from countries in the Middle East . 
NATO , the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , is already running ` round-the-clock surveillance flights over Libya . 
AZUZ : In neighboring Egypt , about a thousand people showed up for a pro-women demonstration yesterday . 
Women were a major part of the protests that forced former President Hosni Mubarak out of power from Egypt last month . 
But this protest turned into a shouting match when groups of men started yelling anti-feminist chants , like `` go home , that 's where you belong . '' 
There were men on both sides of these protests . 
The people who organized the women 's march said they 're demanding `` fair and equal opportunity for all Egyptian citizens -- beyond gender , religion or class . '' 
AZUZ : Secretary of State Hillary Clinton made a similar point at an event that commemorated the 100th anniversary of International Women 's Day . 
When referring to the political unrest in the Middle East and North Africa we 've seen lately , Secretary Clinton said women `` have just as much right as the men to remake their governments . '' 
She and first lady Michelle Obama honored 10 women with the International Women of Courage Award . 
Secretary Clinton said the women 's courage comes from putting others ' well-being before their own . 
And Mrs. Obama said the awards send a message to women that `` you are never alone in your struggle . '' 
TOMEKA JONES , CNN STUDENT NEWS : See if you can I.D. Me ! 
In the U.S. , I was first celebrated in Mobile , Alabama . 
I 'm an annual event whose colors are purple , gold and green . 
In French , my name translates to `` Fat Tuesday . '' 
I 'm Mardi Gras , known as Carnival in other parts of the world . 
AZUZ : Mardi Gras is the last day of the Carnival season . 
This whole celebration lasts for several days , but it always ends on Fat Tuesday , also called Shrove Tuesday , and that was yesterday . 
A lot of cities host Mardi Gras celebrations , and it might have started in Mobile . 
But most people associate the annual event -- in the U.S. anyway -- with New Orleans . 
The typical attendance for Mardi Gras : more than a million people . 
They show up for the parties and for the parades , and those are organized by social clubs called `` krewes ; '' `` krewe '' with a `` k '' . 
Traditionally , when the clock strikes midnight at the end of Fat Tuesday , a group of New Orleans police march down the city 's famous Bourbon Street , announcing the end of Carnival . 
CHRISTINE ROMANS , CNN BUSINESS CORRESPONDENT : It 's not only the uber famous who can brand themselves . 
Digital media , Twitter and Facebook make it easy for almost anyone to create a brand . 
From skateboarder Tony Hawk ... ROMANS : It 's something that you started before everyone was trying to become a brand . 
TONY HAWK , PROFESSIONAL SKATEBOARDER : The first thing , you have to have something to offer , you know what I mean ? 
I do n't really believe in being famous just because you 're famous . 
ROMANS : ... To chef Paula Deen . 
PAULA DEEN , CHEF : You know , you kind of have to reinvent yourself . 
You know , you have to keep things fresh . 
I did start this little lunch business called The Bag Lady , y ' all . 
ROMANS : What about the average person ? 
Could creating your own brand give you an edge ? 
SAM CHAKO , JOB SEEKER : I do n't know how to market myself to get employers to notice me . 
FORD R. MYERS , CAREER COACH : The market is too tough . 
Unemployment numbers are still high . 
Every candidate needs to find a way to stand out . 
ROMANS : So , how do you create your own brand ? 
Career counselor Ford Myers has some tips . 
MYERS : Every candidate can identify what is their unique selling proposition or what is their special brand . 
Look through their own background , their own resumes , their letters of recommendation , their performance reviews and find what stands out . 
ROMANS : Leadership and management author Bill Taylor has a cult following . 
ROMANS : You walk into the boardroom ... BILL TAYLOR , AUTHOR , `` PRACTICALLY RADICAL '' : Right . 
ROMANS : When you walk into the job interview , when you walk into your dining room ... ROMANS : Are we all becoming brands ? 
TAYLOR : I think , you know , being a brand is not being flamboyant . 
It works for Lady Gaga . 
It would n't work for you in your organization . 
Being a brand , as everybody knows , when I meet Christine Romans , this is what she stands for , this is the impact she was trying to have . 
AZUZ : All right , last week , we told you the story about how the people of Christchurch , New Zealand found a time capsule after an earthquake leveled parts of their city . 
We tried to get you thinking about what you would leave for the next generation to discover . 
What would you put in your own time capsule ? 
Here 's what some of you had to say about it . 
iPod : very popular choice for many of you . 
Cassidy says `` songs contain everything about a generation : the moods , language and technological advances of our time . '' 
Leah would also leave an iPod , but added that she 'd leave `` 20 bucks , because so many people have been tight on money due to the economic status '' of the country . 
She said she 'd also include a note saying why she left each thing in order to tell people about the world 's turmoil . 
But , if she could leave something out , it would be the note because history , she says , should n't repeat itself . 
Lucus wants to include fast food wrappers in the time capsule . 
He feels the world is slowly becoming obese from the fast food people eat . 
Sierra wants to include a book . 
I thought this was interesting . 
Sierra thinks that books are the highs and lows of humanity on pieces of paper . 
And finally , Ben says he would n't leave a thing because , according to him , the economy , the violence : it 's just not worth preserving for future generations . 
AZUZ : Really interesting insight , if a little cynical there . 
All right , our next story is one we think will get a lot of you talking on our blog . 
St. Augustine High School in New Orleans uses corporal punishment -- paddling -- to discipline students . 
This past Friday , students at the school held a rally in support of the policy . 
The students actually want to keep paddling . 
It 's been part of St. Augustine for its entire 60 year history . 
But the school stopped corporal punishment this year after the local Archbishop said paddling does n't belong in a Catholic school . 
He said , `` I believe hitting a child , or a young man , does not build character . '' 
And the Archbishop said a study showed that St. Augustine does n't have any safeguards in place to prevent the paddling from turning into abuse . 
Listen to this , though . 
They say corporal punishment is part of the tradition that makes St. Augustine work . 
This can not be argued . 
This can not be changed . 
JACOB WASHINGTON , ST. AUGUSTINE HIGH SCHOOL STUDENT : You 're not just taking away a form of discipline . 
You 're taking away a form of life at St. Augustine . 
AZUZ : You 've heard what the Archbishop had to say . 
You 've heard some of the students ' opinions . 
Now , we want to hear yours ! 
Head to our blog at CNNStudentNews.com . 
Tell us your reaction to what 's going on at St. Augustine . 
We 're looking forward to reading what you have to say . 
But one thing we want you to remember , on our blog , it is first names only . 
Please do n't give us any more info than that . 
AZUZ : Finally today , many of you saw it , that PIXAR movie `` Up '' ? 
This is the real-life version ! 
A team of scientists and engineers wanted to see if they could pull off the movie 's stunt of lifting a house with a bunch of balloons . 
Took them two weeks ; all they needed were 300 massive balloons ! 
The house made it all the way up to 10,000 feet , flew around for about an hour . 
We wonder if they were careful of insects that high up though . 
AZUZ : I mean , after all , you could run into some huge houseflies . 
And after two weeks of hard work , it 's nice to see the project get off the ground . 
But imagine if it had n't worked . 
That would really burst their bubble . 
All right , we 're gonna take off before these puns balloon out of control . 
But we are gonna be back tomorrow to float some more headlines by you . 
