My friend and I sit on the sofa and catch up after the holidays . 
We are two healthy , 60-something women ; we talk about our children and grandchildren , we share our dreams . 
And then I say : `` I think more about death now . '' 
`` You , too ? '' 
she replies , at first surprised and then reassured . 
`` I think about it all the time . '' 
Not just because we 're aging . 
It 's because of the toxic economy . 
Like many Americans , we are suffering from a strain of financial illness that targets older men and women . 
We are too old to start over and rebuild a nest egg ; we are too young to depend on what is left in our retirement savings to sustain us for the nearly 30 years that statisticians estimate we are likely to live . 
As a result , a dark angst spreads among us . 
My friend tells me about her sister , who went to the doctor for a repeat mammogram because she had a suspicious lump : She was half hoping for a cancer diagnosis so she could say to herself , Finally it will be over . 
What a dangerous mind game of desperation ! 
The lump proved benign . 
The woman has moved on . 
But the global epidemic of financial illness has prompted a common complaint : I can not afford to live too long . 
I can not afford to live out my normal life expectancy . 
This is crazy , given that older people are healthier and more active and have more options than in previous generations . 
My friend and I ought to be really excited about being longevity pioneers . 
But we 're not dancing . 
At the annual meeting of the Gerontological Society of America a few months ago , the title of a symposium warned : `` New Economic Woes Hit Boomers , Seniors Hardest . '' 
More recently , a conference at the International Longevity Center in New York explored the `` Impact of Economic Crisis on Older Adults . '' 
There is an effective treatment , the experts agree : Keep working , put off `` retirement . '' 
If unemployed , get a new job . 
But that 's like telling a patient there is a cure but it 's probably out of reach . 
In the current crisis , there are few jobs for anyone , and even fewer for older people . 
`` We 're seeing an increase -LRB- in unemployment -RRB- at older ages , '' Richard W. Johnson of the Urban Institute said at the Gerontological Society meeting . 
Studies also show that older men and women take longer to find a new job and usually face a substantial pay cut . 
One reason is ageism . 
The plight of the older worker was dire even before this meltdown . 
In 2006 , a 62-year-old man in Ohio chose an unorthodox financial plan : He robbed a bank , waited for the police to arrest him , then asked the judge for a three-year prison term -LRB- a wish that was granted -RRB- because he had n't been able to find a real job with benefits in several years and he could no longer support himself on the outside . 
`` There is age discrimination out there , '' Timothy J. Bowers told the judge , according to news reports . 
