'' This Story : Read + | Watch + | LONDON , Jan. 26 -- Iceland 's coalition government collapsed Monday , the first government to fall as a direct result of the global economic turmoil . 
Prime Minister Geir Haarde said he and his cabinet would resign immediately . 
As personal savings have been wiped out and joblessness has soared , Icelanders -- once among the world 's wealthiest people -- have taken to the streets in protest , banging pots and pans and throwing eggs and toilet paper at Haarde and other parliamentary leaders . 
Protests have mounted throughout Europe , where the political backlash to the crisis is growing . 
In Ireland , Britain , Spain and other countries where bankruptcies and home foreclosures are rising , polls show that approval ratings of leaders are sinking . 
In Eastern Europe and Greece , where there is less of a government safety net , protesters have spilled onto the streets by the thousands . 
Last month 's collapse of the Belgian government , which had been wrestling with long-standing conflicts , was also hastened by the banking crisis , analysts said . 
Perhaps nowhere has the economic crash been more spectacular than Iceland , an island with 300,000 residents on the edge of the Arctic Circle . 
Last fall , its largest banks went bust and the value of its currency plummeted . 
In recent days , protests intensified as no leader took responsibility for the crash , prompting police to use tear gas for the first time in half a century . 
People felt that the government was `` playing the violin while the Titanic was sinking , '' best-selling Icelandic author Andri Sn r Magnason said in a telephone interview from Reykjavik , the capital . 
`` Everybody who has a loan is paying 20 percent interest , '' and even those who own modest homes find their salaries can not cover what is owed , he said . 
Haarde announced Friday that he would call early elections and said he would step down . 
He cited health reasons and said doctors were treating him for cancer . 
But ahead of those planned elections , Haarde 's Independence Party could not come to terms with the Social Democrats , its main partner in the two-year-old coalition that was scheduled to stay in power until 2011 . 
The Social Democrats have called for the firing of the central bank governor and for closer ties with the rest of Europe . 
The nation had purposefully sought to stay outside the European Union but now many believe that if Iceland had the euro as its currency instead of the krona , this crisis would not be so severe . 
Foreign Minister Ingibjorg Gisladottir , head of the Social Democratic Alliance party , is expected to start talks immediately with smaller parties in an attempt to form a new government that would rule until the new election . 
She has been receiving treatment for a brain tumor and said she does not want to be prime minister . 
`` Iceland is certainly leading the way of the social protests and the political fallouts , '' said Simon Johnson , former chief economist at the International Monetary Fund and senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington . 
`` I think it 's going to spread ; we 're in a phase now we 're beginning to see all the political fallout . '' 
Simon Tilford , chief economist at the Center for European Reform , said the severity of the economic downturn in Britain has `` ended any chance '' that Gordon Brown 's Labor government will be reelected when he calls elections sometime before mid-2010 . 
Iceland 's economy is forecast to shrink by almost 10 percent this year . 
Its banks , which had expanded into global powerhouses , had embraced risky investments that far exceeded the reserves of the nation 's central bank . 
The country was forced to accept a bailout from the IMF . 
Staff writer Anthony Faiola in Washington and special correspondent Karla Adam in London contributed to this report . '' 
