From oil drillers that have closed down rigs to retailers that have liquidated stores , companies across America are reshaping themselves with breathtaking speed to adjust to the rapidly spreading financial crisis . 
Biotech firms are slashing research budgets to conserve cash . 
Trucking companies are outfitting vehicles with speed governors and installing onboard driver monitors to conserve fuel . 
Companies that can afford it are scooping up competitors to enhance their own prospects . 
Pfizer , the world 's largest drugmaker , helped stir up the mergers and acquisitions market yesterday with a deal to purchase rival Wyeth for $ 68 billion in cash , stock and debt . 
Analysts said that while Pfizer 's pursuit of an acquisition was tied less to the economy than it was to the company 's need to fill a stagnant drug pipeline with promising new medicines , the downturn did play a role in its announcement that it would cut 8,000 jobs . 
But for many companies the financial crisis is playing a major role in how they operate , prompting changes in business models or partnerships that never would have been considered in flusher times . 
`` We think what 's happening now is the entire system is hitting the brakes very rapidly , '' said Chuck Mulloy , a spokesman for Intel , the computer chipmaker that is shuttering its last manufacturing plant in Silicon Valley and cutting more than 5,000 jobs worldwide . 
Like others , Intel was caught off guard by a rapid deterioration in business . 
In mid-October , the company forecast fourth-quarter sales of $ 10.3 billion . 
Within 10 weeks , more than $ 2 billion of the anticipated revenue had vanished , with actual sales coming in at $ 8.2 billion . 
`` Demand just fell off the cliff -- unprecedented in the 40-year history of this company , '' Mulloy said . 
A falloff of a similar magnitude has hit the oil and gas industry , where drillers are pulling out of the Barnett Shale in Texas and other exploration areas that had been booming just months ago . 
A sharp drop in oil and gas prices has precipitated the decline . 
`` We 've seen a cascade of rig-count declines beginning in December and accelerating here , '' said Richard Mason , publisher of the Land Rig Newsletter , which estimates that the number of oil and gas rigs has fallen by a third from their peak in October . 
That translates into a loss of 700 rigs and 14,000 jobs . 
`` Exploration and production companies are acting a whole lot like consumers . 
That is , they 're not spending anything at the moment until they get a little more clarity as to how this will all evolve , '' Mason said . 
`` The irony is the industry had been scrambling to add people for nearly half a decade , and all of a sudden , after they put them to work , the market collapses . '' 
There was less of a boom-bust cycle at Expo , the chain of home furnishing showrooms owned by Home Depot . 
Expo had never been a big success , but the company held onto it for years -- until now . 
`` The Expo business has not performed well financially and is not expected to anytime soon . 
Even during the recent housing boom , it was not a strong business , '' Home Depot said in a statement yesterday announcing that it would close the 34-store chain over the next two months . 
`` Continuing this business would divert focus and resources '' from Home Depot 's namesake stores , the retailer said . 
The shutdown follows bankruptcy filings by several regional department stores and the liquidation underway at Circuit City . 
