By the CNN Wire Staff Libya troops using rape as a weapon ? 
`` There are rapes . 
The issue is who organized them , '' says Luis Moreno-Ocampo He says information says women were taken from checkpoints and raped by police Moreno-Ocampo : `` Viagra is a tool of massive rape '' He did not say how many women may have been raped since the start of the war The Hague , Netherlands -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Security forces in Libya are allegedly using sexual enhancement drugs as a `` machete '' and gang-raping women they stop at checkpoints , the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court has said . 
Luis Moreno-Ocampo told CNN Monday that the court in The Hague will investigate allegations of institutionalized rape in the war-torn country . 
`` There are rapes . 
The issue is who organized them , '' Luis Moreno-Ocampo told CNN 's Nic Robertson . 
`` They were committed in some police barracks . 
Were the policemen prosecuted ? 
Moreno-Ocampo said the criminal court has information about women who were stopped at checkpoints and , because they were carrying the flag of the rebels , were taken by police and gang raped . 
He also said there were reports of the use of male sexual enhancement drugs , which he called a `` tool of massive rape . '' 
`` There 's some information with Viagra . 
So , it 's like a machete , '' he said . 
`` It 's new . 
Viagra is a tool of massive rape . 
`` So we are investigating . 
We are not ready to present the case yet , but I hope in the coming month , we 'll add charges or review the charges for rapes . '' 
Rape as a weapon of war in Libya NATO airstrikes target downtown Tripoli In late April , various media organizations -- including Foreign Policy magazine -- reported that Susan Rice , the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations , told a closed-door U.N. Security Council hearing that Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi has been distributing Viagra pills to his troops `` so they go out and rape . '' 
The magazine , which attributed the information to a U.N. diplomat in the room , said Rice did not offer any evidence to support her claim . 
Pfizer , the maker of the drug , could not be reached early Tuesday morning for comment . 
It was also not clear whether Moreno-Ocampo used the term `` Viagra '' as a catch-all for male sexual enhancement drugs in general . 
Perhaps the best-known alleged rape case in Libya is that of Eman al-Obeidy . 
Al-Obeidy received worldwide attention on March 26 , when she burst into the Rixos Hotel in Tripoli while journalists staying there were having breakfast . 
She told reporters she had been taken from a checkpoint east of Tripoli and held against her will for two days while beaten and raped by 15 men loyal to Gadhafi . 
While notable for the international attention it received , al-Obeidy 's case may not be an exception . 
Moreno-Ocampo did not say how many women might have been raped in Libya since the start of the civil war . 
`` The shooting is in the public space . 
The arresting people is so massive , so pervasive , '' said Moreno-Ocampo . '' 
-LRB- But -RRB- what happens inside the barracks with women is more difficult to know . '' 
Also Monday , the ICC sought the arrest of Gadhafi and two relatives , linking them to `` widespread and systematic '' attacks on civilians as they struggle to hold power in Libya . 
