May 2 : Water from the Gulf of Mexico washes ashore on an island near the South Pass of the Mississippi River near Venice , La. -LRB- AP -RRB- . 
VENICE , Louisiana -- Federal officials shut down fishing from the Mississippi River to the Florida Panhandle on Sunday because of the uncontrolled gusher spewing massive amounts of oil into the Gulf of Mexico , and the environmental disaster is still expected to take at least a week to cut off . 
Even that toxic scenario may be too rosy because it depends on a low-tech strategy that has never been attempted before in deep water . 
The plan : to lower 74-ton , concrete-and-metal boxes into the gulf to capture the oil and siphon it to a barge waiting at the surface . 
Whether that will work for a leak 5,000 feet below the surface is anyone 's guess ; the method has previously worked only in shallower waters . 
If it does n't , and efforts to activate a shutoff mechanism called a blowout preventer continue to prove fruitless , the oil probably will keep gushing for months until a second well can be dug to cut off the first . 
Oil giant BP PLC 's latest plan will take six to eight days because welders have to assemble the boxes . 
President Barack Obama toured the region Sunday , deflecting criticism that his administration was too slow to respond and did too little to stave off the catastrophe . 
Satellite images indicate the rust-hued slick tripled in size in just two days , suggesting the oil could be pouring out faster than before . 
Wildlife including sea turtles have been found dead on the shore but it is too soon whether the spill , caused by an April 20 oil rig explosion , was to blame . 
Even if the well is shut off in a week , fishermen and wildlife officials wonder how long it will take for the gulf to recover . 
Some compare it to the hurricane Louisiana is still recovering from after nearly five years . 
`` It 's like a slow version of Katrina , '' Venice charter boat captain Bob Kenney said . 
`` My kids will be talking about the effect of this when they 're my age . '' 
More than 6,800 square miles of federal fishing areas , from the mouth of the Mississippi to Florida 's Pensacola Bay were closed for at least 10 days on Sunday by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . 
NOAA Administrator Jane Lubchenco says government scientists are taking samples from the waters near the spill to determine whether there is any danger . 
Fishermen still were out working , however : They have been dropping miles of inflatable , oil-capturing boom around the region 's fragile wetlands and prime fishing areas . 
Bad weather , however , was thwarting much of the work ; Alabama Gov. Bob Riley said 80 percent of the booms laid down off his state over the previous three days had broken down . 
He said boom along other coasts is breaking down also . 
The Coast Guard and BP have said it 's nearly impossible to know exactly how much oil has gushed since the blast , though it has been roughly estimated to be at least 200,000 gallons a day . 
At that rate , it would eclipse the 1989 Exxon Valdez tanker spill -- which dumped 11 million gallons off the Alaska coast -- as the worst U.S. oil disaster in history in a matter of weeks . 
`` None of us have ever had experience at this level before . 
It ai n't good , '' said Bob Love , coastal and nongame resources administrator with the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries . 
`` The longer it goes , the more fish and wildlife impacts there will be . '' 
Even if the oil stays mostly offshore , the consequences could be dire for sea turtles , dolphins and other deepwater marine life -- and microscopic plankton and tiny creatures that are a staple of larger animals ' diets . 
Moby Solangi , director of the Institute for Marine Mammal Studies in Gulfport , Miss. , said at least 20 dead sea turtles were found on the state 's beaches . 
He said it 's too soon to say whether oil contamination killed them but that it is unusual to have them turning up across such a wide stretch of coast , spanning nearly 30 miles . 
None of the turtles have oil on them , but Solangi said they could have ingested oily fish or breathed in oil on the surface . 
Necropsies will be performed Monday . 
The situation could become even more grave if the oil gets into the Gulf Stream and flows to the beaches of Florida -- and potentially whips around the state 's southern tip and up the Eastern Seaboard . 
Tourist-magnet beaches and countless wildlife could be ruined . 
Obama has halted any new offshore drilling projects unless rigs have new safeguards to prevent another disaster . 
On Sunday he called the spill a `` massive and potentially unprecedented environmental disaster , '' and made clear that he was not accepting blame . 
`` BP is responsible for this leak . 
BP will be paying the bill , '' he said , rain dripping from his face in Venice , a Gulf Coast community serving as a staging area for the response . 
Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano has said any comparison between the ruptured BP oil well and Katrina was `` a total mischaracterization '' and that the government has taken an `` all hands on deck '' approach . 
Plaquemines Parish president Billy Nungesser met with Obama Sunday in Venice and said the president 's `` let 's - get-it-done approach was overwhelming . '' 
He said he hopes that the president pressures BP to approve funding for a plan to have fishermen start laying oil-sopping booms very soon . 
Obama acknowledged the booms have n't been working well out in the choppy gulf , Nungesser said . 
After the oil rig explosion , which killed 11 people , the flow of oil should have been stopped by a blowout preventer , but the mechanism failed , as have continuing efforts to activate it . 
`` As you can imagine , this is like doing open-heart surgery at 5,000 feet , with -- in the dark , with robot-controlled submarines , '' BP PLC Chairman Lamar McKay said on ABC 's `` This Week . '' 
He defended his company 's safety record . 
Charlie Holt , drilling and completing operations manager for BP in the Gulf of Mexico , said Sunday it 's still unclear why the blowout preventer failed . 
But he suggested something could be in the way , or it could be damaged . 
`` There is nothing unique about the situation that should have prohibited the BOP from working as designed , '' Holt said of the device . 
The containment boxes being built to stop the leak -- 40 feet tall , 24 feet wide and 14 feet deep -- were not part of the company 's original response plan . 
But they appear to be the best hope for keeping the oil well from gushing for months . 
The approach has been used previously only for spills in relatively shallow water . 
Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen said engineers are still examining whether the valves and other systems that feed oil to a ship on the surface can withstand the extra pressures of the deep . 
`` This is a completely new way of dealing with this problem , '' said Greg Pollock , commissioner of the oil spill prevention and response program at the Texas General Land Office . 
`` Generally speaking , nobody 's ever tried anything like this on this scale . '' 
If the boxes do n't work , BP also has begun work on its only other backup plan : two relief wells that will take as long as three months to drill . 
Bob Fryar , senior vice president for BP in Angola , said the Bureau of Minerals Management has approved a plan to drill the wells . 
BP wants to drill two in case one does n't work . 
He said teams are working 24 hours a day on every possible solution . 
He said 389 people reported to an emergency center at BP 's Houston office alone . 
`` What BP 's doing is is throwing absolutely everything we can at this , '' he said Sunday . 
`` We ceratainly want to do everything we can , everything we can possibly think of , as a company , as an industry . '' 
BP has not said how much oil is beneath the seabed the Deepwater Horizon rig was tapping when it exploded . 
A company official , speaking on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the volume of reserves , confirmed reports that it was tens of millions of barrels . 
Fryar said any numbers being thrown out are just estimates at best . 
The rig was operated by BP and owned by Transocean Ltd. . 
Teams working to contain the spill have had limited success using airplanes to drop chemical dispersants meant to break up the oil , and rough seas have prevented ships from skimming crude from the surface . 
In Alabama , National Guard soldiers arrived on the state 's Dauphin Island to build a berm meant to buffer part of the island against the slick . 
Massive Oil Spill Washes Ashore in the Gulf One Year Later , Images of Gulf Oil Spill From Space Still Powerful Sign up for free e-mail news alerts from FoxNews.com and FoxBusiness.com . 
