For Bailout Money , GMAC Agrees to End Deal With GM The auto financing giant GMAC relinquished its exclusive right to provide financing to people buying General Motors vehicles in exchange for up to $ 6 billion in federal aid . 
The deal abruptly ends a 10-year contract between GM and GMAC , according to the lender 's filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday . 
In the past , whenever GM offered vehicle financing and leasing specials , such as below-market interest rates , it did so through GMAC . 
The lender paid an annual fee to GM for the exclusivity and was required to meet sales targets . 
Now , over the next two years , the automaker can offer incentive programs through other lenders under certain requirements , the filing said . 
After that period , the terms will gradually loosen until 2013 , when GM will have the right to offer programs through any lender -- including GMAC -- without any restrictions or limitations . 
The agreement also releases GMAC from meeting specific sales targets and the obligation to provide leases . 
`` I do n't see anything negative in this new arrangement , as long as GMAC is still supportive of GM 's effort to sell cars , '' said Jack Fitzgerald , owner of Bethesda-based Fitzgerald Auto Malls . 
The changes , effective Monday , follow the Federal Reserve 's approval of GMAC to become a bank holding company , making the lender eligible for a slice of the Treasury Department 's $ 700 billion financial rescue package . 
Chrysler Financial , that automaker 's credit arm , also has applied for aid under the Troubled Asset Relief Program . 
Yesterday , Chrysler said it received a $ 4 billion loan from the Treasury through the auto rescue package signed into law by President Bush two weeks ago . 
Under the GMAC deal , the government received 5 million preferred shares in GMAC that pay an 8 percent dividend -- a larger payout to taxpayers than the 5 percent dividend on its investments in banks -- in return for a $ 5 billion capital injection in the company . 
Treasury said it would also lend up to $ 1 billion to GM so that the automaker would invest in the firm and support its reorganization . 
The financial crisis has hit GMAC hard , and losses have mounted in both its mortgage and auto loan businesses . 
Overall , GMAC lost $ 5.59 billion in the past three quarters . 
Unable to find other funding sources and running low on cash , the finance arm shrunk its ability to make loans . 
GM 's auto sales have suffered as a result . 
Bank holding status gives GMAC a chance at survival by providing it with access to new sources of funding . 
But , as a bank holding company , this wholly owned division will also need to change . 
The Fed has required GM and Cerberus Capital Management , which own the lender , to divest a significant chunk of their ownership because commercial companies are not allowed to own banks . 
This week , the company showed signs of healing . 
On Tuesday , GMAC said it would make car purchases easier by offering financing to customers with credit scores above 620 . 
On Wednesday , it completed a complicated debt deal to raise cash needed to help it survive this historic auto sales slump . 
But it fell short of its goal . 
The same day , GM received an initial $ 4 billion of its $ 13.4 billion bailout from the government . 
Despite this recovery , Fitzgerald said he worried that , as a bank holding company , GMAC might stray too far from its roots . 
Captive financing companies like GMAC are critical to marketing vehicles in large volumes , he said . 
`` GM has had all the benefits that Ford Motor Credit provides to the Ford Motor Company , '' he said . 
`` If GMAC does all that , fine . 
If it does n't , GM will have to create another GMAC of its own . 
It 's just the way it is . '' 
