BP 's Gulf well holds enough oil to spew out for two years , claim experts Figures based on testimony of BP 's Tony Hayward 's suggest huge devastation if Gulf oil spill is not halted Protesters stand behind BP 's chief executive , Tony Hayward , as he arrives to testify in front of the US Congress . 
Photograph : Haraz Ghanbari\/AP BP 's out-of-control well will go on spewing oil into the Gulf of Mexico for the next two years or more if all attempts to contain or plug the gusher fail , oil industry experts said today . 
The estimates , based on new figures supplied by BP 's chief executive , Tony Hayward , during seven contentious hours of testimony to Congress on Thursday , suggest the potential environmental and economic devastation would far outstrip the damage done so far by the ruptured well , which has been spewing for 60 days . 
Hayward told a Congressional committee on Thursday the reservoir still held 50m barrels , providing fresh urgency to efforts to contain the oil , or seal off the gusher completely with a relief well . 
Using the government 's present flow estimates of up to 60,000 barrels a day , BP 's well could go on gushing for two to four years , unless it is stopped . 
BP and the administration say they are containing a rising share of the oil from the well , and hope to plug the gusher completely by August , when two relief wells will be complete . 
BP said today that the relief wells were within 60 metres of the ruptured well . 
The consequences of failure are enormous . 
`` If it went uncontrolled it could certainly leak for two years and certainly longer than that , said Philip Johnson , a professor of petroleum engineering at the University of Alabama . 
But he said the leak rate would fall sharply over time once the natural gas in the reservoir is exhausted . 
`` That is the driving force , '' he said . 
`` As soon as that is gone , it wo n't leak at any serious rate . '' 
Hayward 's statement to Congress represents the first definitive word so far from BP on the potential it saw in the Macondo well . 
BP exploration plans , submitted to the US government , had suggested production in the order of 15,000 barrels a day , a figure confirmed by Hayward to Congress . 
But the 50m figure cited by Hayward took some industry insiders by surprise . 
There have been reports the reservoir held up to 500m barrels the figure quoted by Hayward 's questioner , Joe Barton , a Republican from Texas . 
`` I would assume that 500m barrels would be a more likely estimate , '' said Tadeusz Patzek , the chairman of the department of petroleum and geosystems engineering at the University of Texas at Austin . 
`` I do n't think you would be going after a 50mbarrel reservoir so quickly . 
This is just simply not enough oil to go after . '' 
BP spokesmen said that Barton was referring to recoverable oil rather than the total size of the reservoir . 
`` We have n't made an assessment of the reserves as far as I know , '' said Toby Odone , a BP spokesman . 
`` You start evaluating the reservoir once you complete the well . 
Obviously we did n't get to that point . '' 
The figure was one of the few kernels of solid information offered up by Hayward , who was widely criticised for stonewalling and obfuscation in his appearance before Congress . 
The performance did little for BP 's financial position . 
Its shares fell back today after Moody 's cut the company 's credit rating to A2 . 
Moody 's said it was concerned about the escalating costs of the oil spill , and warned the $ 20bn -LRB- # 13,5 bn -RRB- compensation fund agreed earlier this week might not cover all of BP 's liabilities . 
`` This assessment reflects a substantial upward revision of the estimated size of the leak , the continued failure to bring the leaking Macondo well under control , and the mounting costs and claims for damages , '' the ratings agency said . 
`` Uncertainty over the ultimate cost for massive litigation claims and other contingent liabilities will be an overhang on BP 's creditworthiness that will persist for years to come , '' it added . 
Ken Feinberg , who was appointed to oversee the $ 20bn claims fund , has promised to turn around claims within 60 days . 
However , Hayward did get a vote of sympathy from John Hofmeister , a former president of Shell , who has himself testified to Congress on six occasions . 
He noted Hayward was operating under the threat of criminal investigation , and said he would have taken a similar legalistic approach were he in the same situation . 
`` It 's not possible for a CEO to know everything that is going on at every level of production , '' he told MSNBC television . 
`` The Congressmen are very unfair to demand he know what happened at a meeting that took place four or five levels below him . '' 
A version appeared on p40 of the Main section section of the Guardian on Our selection of best buys Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
