BP acknowledges this photo of its Gulf oil spill command center in Houston was altered by a contract photographer . 
Illustration : BP Josh Halliday : Oil giant tries to win back credibility after admitting staff used Photoshop to alter photographs of command center Continue reading ... It was only a matter of time before the BP oil spill got the viral video treatment . 
This is the work of UBC Comedy ... so how will the BP executives handle the clear up of that desk after the Deepcoffee Horizon spillage ? 
I know only one thing about football that Pel is the best player of all time . 
And here 's a thank you from the official Brazilian World Cup networking site , loosely -LRB- Googley -RRB- translated as ' I Live the Selection ' . 
His last and 1,284 th goal . 
Elsewhere we have an advertising stunt that might bring a smile to your face -LRB- please do not try this at Tottenham Court Road tube -RRB- , Obama 's Oval Office speech about BP and a kid whose tooth was pulled out with a rocket . 
That last one sounds like social services should be involved and his face just before take-off is a picture but that 's a very smart way to do it . 
And nice editing , Dad . 
Guardian Viral Video Chart . 
Compiled by Unruly Media and heavily edited by Jemima Source : Viral Video Chart . 
Compiled from data gathered at 16:00 on 17 June 2010 . 
The Weekly Viral Video Chart is currently based on a count of the embedded videos and links on approximately two million blogs . 
Andy Lintner on Beowulfe.com is doing his part for the Deepwater disaster with a map mashup that compares the size of the slick to anywhere in the world . 
Transposed to the UK , the results are horrifying . 
Lintner created the map using data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , which collates data from high-resolution satellite images that are tracking the spread of the slick in the Gulf on changing currents . 
The same site has the live video feed from the camera fixed on the leak 5,000 feet down , an estimate of the amount of crude spilt so far that you can adjust according to the best - and worst - assessments and links to volunteer , write to the government and donate to the clean-up effort . 
Lintner also links to the US Environmental Protection Agency site , which is soliciting ideas and technological solutions that could help clean up . 
The Guardian 's Environment site passed 186 readers ' ideas to BP last week after a flood of responses to a similar call , and there 's more on the Deepwater Horizon section . 
Latest from the PDA reading list 
