BP oil spill : People in New Orleans loathe the company but they 're OK with the British A friend thought it would be amusing to introduce me as a BP representative Protesters in New Orleans . 
Photograph : Mark Ralston\/AFP It looks as if the Louisiana Shrimp and Petroleum Festival is still going ahead this year . 
`` Please join us for our 75th annual festival to be held September 2-6 , 2010 , in picturesque downtown Morgan City , Louisiana , '' says its website . 
`` This is an event that will prove that oil and water really do mix . '' 
Morgan City , a small town dependent on both shrimping and the oil trade , lies about 70 miles west of New Orleans and is still untouched by the BP oil slick . 
But you 'd have thought that the disaster , which threatens the very survival of Louisiana 's seafood industry , would have made Morgan City feel a little uneasy about celebrating `` the unique way in which these two seemingly different industries work hand-in-hand culturally and environmentally in this area of the ` Cajun Coast ' , '' but it does n't seem to have . 
I 've been staying for a few days with my old friend Julia Reed and her husband John in their magnificent , Greek-revival house in the Garden District of New Orleans , a leafy neighborhood of Victorian merchant palaces far removed from the noise and congestion of the picturesque French Quarter . 
They had just bought and renovated their house when they precipitately had to abandon it to Hurricane Katrina , which it mercifully survived almost intact . 
It was in Julia 's book about the experience that I learned of the existence of the Shrimp and Petroleum Festival , an heroic but doomed attempt by Louisianians to persuade themselves that the two main sources of their livelihood are compatible . 
The importance they attach to both industries explains the fact that there is almost as much anger with President Obama for ordering a moratorium on deepwater oil-drilling , thus threatening the survival of the Louisiana oil industry , as there is with BP for polluting its fishing grounds and oyster beds . 
A visitor to New Orleans at the moment would n't realize at first that anything was amiss . 
The oil that is washing up elsewhere on the state 's shores does n't yet encroach on its main city , which , having finally emerged from the Katrina nightmare , is full of life and bustle . 
But you soon sense the anxiety and anger that people are feeling the `` small people '' , as the chairman of BP misguidedly called them this week . 
They are not only fearful for their futures ; they feel overlooked and neglected by Washington . 
New Orleanians are convinced that elsewhere in America such a disaster would not have been allowed to happen ; or that if it did happen , in , say , New York or California , urgent and decisive action would have been taken by the federal government to mitigate its effects . 
President Bush 's botched response to Hurricane Katrina , and a belief that the Mississippi would never in any case have broken its banks if the levees had been properly maintained , has left New Orleanians drained of confidence in Washington and its ways . 
Despite President Obama 's four visits to the area , his promise to restore the Gulf Coast to its former glory , and his widely lauded achievement in getting BP to put aside 20 billion dollars to cover compensation claims , an opinion poll yesterday found that most Louisianians think that Bush handled Katrina better than Obama is handling the oil disaster . 
The president must partly blame himself for this perception . 
Despite being begged to take control of the clean-up away from the hated BP , he has looked too often like a helpless observer of events . 
When he said he would fire Tony Hayward , the BP chief executive , if he were working for him , and that he was looking around to see `` whose ass to kick '' , he merely reinforced this impression . 
Carl-Henric Svanberg 's insistence on Wednesday that he cared about `` small people '' is the latest in a series of gaffes by BP that have convinced Louisianians that the company is arrogant and heartless . 
-LRB- `` We 're not small people , '' said one New Orleans resident , quoted in the Washington Post . 
`` We 're human beings . 
They 're no greater than us . 
We do n't bow down to them . '' -RRB- 
Before Svanberg 's `` slip in translation '' Hayward had been the main culprit . 
When he said `` I would like my life back '' , he seemed to forget that 11 oil rig workers had lost their lives for ever . 
And it did n't go down well when he said that the `` oil spill '' -LRB- as it is strangely called , even when millions of tonnes of the stuff are involved -RRB- was small compared to the size of the ocean ; or when he said he anticipated getting `` lots of illegitimate -LRB- compensation -RRB- claims '' because `` this is America '' . 
There is no doubt that BP is hated in New Orleans . 
The popular Rivershack Tavern has created a new cocktail called `` gold shit '' in honor of the company that `` has ruined our waters '' . 
A friend of mine filled up his car at a petrol station at which the BP sunburst logo had been clumsily covered up by the shell emblem of a rival oil company . 
Even so , I ca n't say I have found any evidence that loathing of BP has turned into loathing of the British in general . 
But it could be there and unspoken , for New Orleanians are habitually polite to tourists , whoever they may be . 
There was one ugly moment at Felix 's oyster bar on the Rue Iberville when an American friend thought it would be amusing to introduce me as a BP representative . 
There was a momentary look of murder in the oyster shucker 's eyes , but he must have decided it was a joke , for he was perfectly friendly thereafter . 
I rewarded him with a large tip . 
cents This article was amended on 18 June 2010 . 
The original referred to New Orleans as Louisiana 's capital . 
This has been corrected . 
