Fri Nov 18 , 2011 9:19 am GMT NEW DELHI -LRB- AlertNet -RRB- - Up to three million people in Afghanistan are facing hunger , malnutrition and disease after a severe drought wiped out their crops and extreme winter weather risks cutting off their access to vital food aid , a group of aid agencies warned Friday . 
Poor rains earlier this year destroyed 80 percent of wheat crops in the country 's north , northeast and west , leaving impoverished farming communities with little food to eat , said the nine charities which included Oxfam and Save the Children . 
With food prices almost doubling since last year , families are being forced to skip meals , borrow money or migrate . 
Access to life-saving aid is now in jeopardy as heavy snowfall will , within weeks , block roads and risk avalanches . 
`` Villagers are telling us that this year the drought has destroyed everything . 
Their food stocks are already low , and they are worried about how they will get through the coming months , '' Oxfam 's country director Manohar Shenoy said in a statement . 
`` Time is running out to be able to provide communities with the help they most desperately need before a harsh winter makes many areas inaccessible . 
Snow is already falling and many mountainous areas are likely to be cut off within weeks . '' 
Afghanistan 's harsh winter which lasts from November to March often results in heavy snowfall of up to 13 feet deep , blocking remote mountain passes and leaving hundreds of thousands of villagers isolated for months . 
As winter sets in , people are feeling the effects of the drought by cutting down on meals , moving across the border to Pakistan and Iran or taking loans to buy food , driving them into debt . 
Schools have closed as children are being put to work . 
Despite 14 of Afghanistan 's 34 provinces -- including Faryab and Badakhshan -- being hit by the drought , an October emergency appeal by the United Nations for $ 142 million has only so far only been 7 percent funded by international donors . 
Aid workers warned that if the international community does not respond and aid supplies are not stockpiled in affected areas in the coming weeks , children are at risk of dying . 
`` Families are facing being cut off for winter without enough food and clean water , '' said David Skinner , Save the Children 's Afghanistan country director . 
`` We know children are going hungry , and with malnutrition levels already high in Afghanistan , unless aid efforts are ramped up , children could die because they do not get enough to eat . '' 
-LRB- AlertNet is a global humanitarian news service run by Thomson Reuters Foundation . 
