Alleged Libyan rape victim speaks out NEW : Eman al-Obeidy says men used rifles to sodomize her NEW : She says she has tried to leave Libya , but authorities have thwarted her attempts NEW : Her father begs the international community to come to his daughter 's aid Al-Obeidy says she was interrogated for 72 hours after being dragged from a hotel Watch an interview with Eman al-Obeidy , the woman who claims she was raped by forces loyal to Libyan leader Gadhafi , on `` AC360 '' , tonight at 10 p.m. ET . 
-LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Eman al-Obeidy , the woman who burst into a Tripoli hotel to tell journalists she was beaten and raped by forces loyal to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi last month , is no longer in custody but says she still fears for her life . 
In two telephone interviews with CNN 's `` AC360 , '' al-Obeidy spoke about her alleged abuse . 
At times in tears , at other times defiant , she recalled men pouring alcohol into her eyes and repeatedly using rifles to sodomize her . 
Al-Obeidy said has since been stopped trying to leave Libya and that she has nightmares . 
`` My life is in danger , and I call on all human rights organization ... to expose the truth and to let me leave now . 
I am being held hostage here , '' she said . 
`` They have threatened me with death and told me I will never leave prison again , if I go to the journalists or tell them anything about what 's happening in Tripoli . '' 
Al-Obeidy said she spent 72 hours under interrogation after being dragged away from the Tripoli hotel where she tried to tell journalists about her alleged abuse . 
Interrogators poured water on her face and threw food at her during the relentless questioning , which ended only after she was examined by a doctor to prove she had been raped , al-Obeidy said . 
`` And when the test came , it verified that I was raped and tortured ... then I was freed . '' 
She said the public statements from a state TV anchor and government officials , who initially called her mentally ill , drunk and a prostitute , have ruined her reputation . 
Al-Obeidy said her spirits and morale are low and that she has nightmares now . 
`` They did not give me a chance to respond , '' she said . 
The attempt to discredit al-Obeidy as a promiscuous , un-Islamic woman ties into the idea of sexual shaming in a conservative Muslim society where it 's commonly believed that a woman who has been raped has lost her honor , said Mona Eltahawy , a columnist on Arab and Muslim issues . 
Woman alleges rape by Gadhafi forces Libyan woman speaks out about rape For a woman in such a society to come forward to claim she has been raped is no small thing . 
`` No one would do that unless they were raped , and especially in a conservative society , '' Eltahawy told CNN . 
Al-Obeidy burst into the Rixos Hotel in Tripoli on March 26 while international journalists staying there were having breakfast . 
She told reporters she had been taken from a checkpoint east of Tripoli , held against her will for two days and raped by 15 men . 
`` They had my hands tied behind me , and they had my legs tied , and they would hit me , while I was tied and bite me in my body . 
And they would pour alcohol in my eyes so that I would not be able to see and they would sodomize me with their rifles , and they would not let us go to the bathroom . 
We were not allowed to eat or drink , '' she told CNN 's `` AC360 , '' speaking through a translator . 
`` One man would leave and another would enter . 
He would finish and then another man would come in , '' al-Obeidy said . 
She said another woman being held captive was able to untie her hands and feet , allowing al-Obeidy to escape . 
When CNN saw her in March , al-Obeidy 's legs and face were bruised and she had blood on her right inner thigh . 
Her visible injuries appeared to support her allegations , but CNN could not independently verify her story . 
Government officials tried to subdue her , scuffling with reporters in the process and eventually dragged her away . 
Al-Obeidy said she is no longer in government custody and has spent time with her sister . 
But she said she can not leave the house where she is staying as officials from the police or army will pursue her . 
She said that when she tries to leave the house , officials chase her down and take her to a police station . 
But police do n't know what to do with her since she is not charged with a crime , and she is released . 
Al-Obeidy said she has been abducted by Gadhafi forces three times -- the first time from the hotel , the second time when she tried to escape to Tunisia last week and a third time on Sunday . 
She said the abduction Sunday and accompanying threats were an effort to prevent her from taking her complaints to a police investigations unit . 
In spite of the danger , al-Obeidy said the most important thing to her is that her voice reaches the world . 
`` I would like to direct a word to all the people watching us in America that we are a peaceful people and we are not members of al Qaeda . 
We are a simple people and moderate Muslims -- not extremists -- and we are not asking for anything expect for our freedom and dignity and the most basic human rights which are denied to us , '' she said . 
Her father said Monday he has still not spoken to his daughter and begged the international community to come to her aid . 
`` What is happening to her is wrong . 
What can I do ? 
I have no power to do anything . 
I urge the human rights organizations and all international humanitarian movements to get involved and help us , '' said Atiq Al-Obeidy . 
CNN 's `` AC360 '' spoke with al-Obeidy Sunday and Monday . 
CNN conducted a third phone interview with her Monday . 
CNN 's Saad Abedine contributed to this report . 
Watch Anderson Cooper 360 weeknights 10pm ET . 
For the latest from AC360 click here . 
