July 6 : Barges lined up to block oil are seen from the air in Chef Menteur Pass , which connects the Gulf of Mexico and Lake Borgne to Lake Pontchartrain , in New Orleans , La. . 
AP NEW ORLEANS -- The exasperation with BP felt by residents of the Gulf states is spreading to shareholders -- and some are taking the oil giant to court . 
Since the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig disaster on April 20 , BP shares have lost about $ 85 billion in value . 
The toll for institutional investors who hold 79 percent of the company -- including public and private pension plans -- is around $ 67 billion . 
BP 's suspension of its quarterly dividend has only exacerbated the damage . 
At least five individual investor suits have been filed , BP employees are suing over the slide in value of company stock in their 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans and the New York state comptroller intends to sue over losses to his state 's public employee pension fund . 
Unlike the across-the-board Wall Street meltdown of 2008 that swept away hundreds of billions of dollars , the damage to U.S. pension plans caused by one plunging stock is minimized by the diversification of their investments . 
The BP individual retirement savings plan has a sizable investment in BP shares , but it 's reasonable compared with the Enron plans that got wiped out in that company 's collapse . 
Even so , the plans are n't happy about the red number BP has dropped on their financial statements . 
Last month , New York State Comptroller Thomas DiNapoli pledged to sue BP , alleging the company misled investors about its safety procedures and its ability to respond to an oil spill and therefore inflated the stock 's price in violation of securities laws . 
DiNapoli 's office plans to file a motion to join four individual shareholder suits filed in Louisiana and California to form a class action , under which all shareholders , including other pension plans , could join . 
The $ 133 billion New York State Common Retirement Fund , which DiNapoli serves as trustee , held 19 million BP shares at the time of the disaster . 
The fund has since trimmed its holdings to 14.6 million shares . 
During that time , BP suspended its dividend , which is attractive to pension plans because of the investment income it provides . 
The fund has n't released an exact loss from the sale , citing the pending court action . 
BP has refused to comment . 
Feeding the frustration , for both shareholders and Gulf Coast residents , has been BP 's inability to cap its undersea well 40 miles off of Louisiana . 
Oil has now been gushing for 79 days . 
BP is drilling two relief wells that are expected to shut off the leak by mid-August . 
Analyst Pavel Molchanon , who follows BP for Raymond James Financial Inc. , said if that happens , BP would likely reinstate a dividend in 2011 , but Molchanon says U.S. investors should expect less than the 80 cents per share they were getting each quarter before the spill . 
As for BP workers , a suit filed in Illinois federal court seeks class action status on behalf of all employees with company retirement accounts . 
Its complaints echo those raised by DiNapoli . 
As of Jan. 1 , BP stock made up nearly 30 percent of BP employee accounts , or about $ 2.45 billion worth of retirement savings , said Mike Alfred , CEO of BrightScope , a San Diego-based firm that rates about 50,000 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans . 
The legal argument likely will center on whether BP workers were allowed to take excessive risk by having too much money in company stock , Alfred said . 
In perhaps the most high-profile case of this type , Enron Corp. employees received stock that became worth hundreds of millions of dollars -- only to see it become worthless as the company fell apart in 2001 amid scandal . 
`` The amount of the BP stock in those plans is not exceptional , '' Alfred said . 
`` There are many more plans that have more company stock . '' 
Steven Davidoff , a professor at the Ohio State University law school , says history shows that once a class action is granted and large numbers of plaintiffs join in , companies try to settle to avoid the possibility of unmanageable damage awards . 
Davidoff said the potential settlement value for BP shareholders likely will be less than in cases where a company has `` a record of malfeasance at high management . '' 
`` This is not so much a fraud case as a nondisclosure case , '' Davidoff said . 
The plans that have n't sued are still big enough to get management 's attention . 
`` We do intend to engage BP in a corporate governance discussion at the appropriate time because the shareowner losses are severe given the catastrophic failures related to the oil spill , '' says Patricia Macht , a spokesperson for the California Public Employees Retirement System . 
Calpers , with $ 205 billion in assets , said it has n't altered its basic five-year `` buy-and-hold '' strategy -- although the value of its BP holdings fell from about $ 585.7 million on April 20 to $ 289.2 million on June 30 . 
It 's still just a paper loss -- and Calpers retains its shareholder voting power . 
That power could be used at annual shareholder meetings to vote against upper management and board directors . 
But BP 's next annual meeting does n't occur until April . 
Many observers say a shake-up is possible before then , likely involving CEO Tony Hayward . 
BP did not return a request for comment on any potential conversation with Calpers . 
Other pension funds , including the $ 96.7 billion Teacher Retirement System of Texas , the $ 47 billion Pennsylvania State Employees Retirement System and the $ 8 billion Louisiana State Employees Retirement System say their BP holdings represent only a tiny fraction of their total investments . 
None would say what their next action might be . 
Alabama 's four state pension dumped their BP stock . 
The executive director of the Retirement Systems of Alabama , David Bonner , said 6.25 million shares were sold in June . 
The funds lost just over $ 4 million overall on the transactions . 
But since the funds accumulated $ 25.9 million in dividends over 15 years , `` We 're $ 21 million ahead , '' Bonner said . 
BP 's traditional employee pension fund has n't lost a dime on BP shares : The fund 's rules forbid it to either buy company stock or make company loans . 
According to the fund 's 2008 audit , the latest year for which figures are available , its top holding was in rival Royal Dutch Shell with 3.1 percent of its assets invested . 
