June 16 : A drilling rig operates in the Gulf of Mexico at the site of the Deepwater Horizon disaster . 
AP BP PLC is pushing to fix its runaway Gulf oil well by July 27 , possibly weeks before the deadline the company is discussing publicly , in a bid to show investors it has capped its ballooning financial liabilities , according to company officials . 
At the same time , BP is readying a series of backup plans in case its current operations go awry . 
These include connecting the rogue well to existing pipelines in two nearby underwater gas and oil fields , according to company and administration officials . 
Much of the additional planning has been pushed by the U.S. government , which has urged BP to develop what one official called the `` backup to the backup plan . '' 
Both BP and the federal government are concentrating on their next steps , particularly because of uncertainty caused by the imminent hurricane season and the protracted political and financial damage caused by the endless spill . 
Both BP and the Coast Guard continue to state publicly they 're aiming to have a fix in place in early to mid-August . 
BP has discussed its backup plans only with administration officials , who in turn have briefed President Barack Obama . 
The July 27 target date is the day the company is expected to report second-quarter earnings and will speak to investors . 
BP also wants to show progress by July 20 , the day U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron is scheduled to visit the White House . 
`` In a perfect world with no interruptions , it 's possible to be ready to stop the well between July 20 and July 27 , '' said the head of BP 's Gulf Coast restoration unit , managing director Bob Dudley , in an interview . 
He added that this `` perfect case '' is threatened by the hurricane season and is `` unlikely . '' 
On Wednesday , on a visit to the Discoverer Enterprise , the ship that 's collecting oil from the well , Dudley got word of a nine-day period of clear weather starting Friday , a period that could prove critical to the effort . 
