Rescuers could hear knocking and finally managed to free the trapped man A 24-year-old man has been rescued alive from the rubble of a ruined hotel in Haiti 's capital , Port-au-Prince , 11 days after the earthquake . 
It came hours after Haiti 's government declared a formal end to the search for survivors . 
Onlookers cheered as Wismond Exantus - smiling and apparently in a good condition - emerged on a stretcher from what remains of the Napoli Inn Hotel . 
He later told reporters that soft drinks and snacks had kept him going . 
It took two-and-a-half hours for the rescue of Wismond Exantus to take place . 
It might never have happened , had not a member of his family approached a Greek journalist on the street and said they had heard noises coming from underneath a building . 
The Greek journalist said he also heard the noises , and approached a Greek rescue team . 
They then went into operation in combination with French and American teams , and pulled the man free from the rubble . 
As he was gingerly put on a stretcher and carried towards a waiting ambulance , Wismond Exantus smiled . 
He did n't say anything but he was , if not totally unharmed , clearly in a very good state of health . 
`` I survived by drinking Coca-Cola and I ate some little tiny things , '' Mr Enso , who worked in the hotel 's grocery store , told news agency AFP from his bed in a French field hospital . 
`` Every night I thought about the revelation that I would survive , '' he was quoted as saying by the Associated Press agency . 
French medic Gilles Gueney said : `` It 's amazing but he has no fractures , no broken bones . 
He 's very dehydrated and is now on a drip . '' 
He added that Wismond Exantus was expected to be out of hospital `` in a day or two '' . 
Greek , French and US rescue teams were involved in the two-and-a-half-hour operation to bring him out of the remains of the hotel . 
A French rescue worker , Lt Col Christophe Renou , described his survival as `` a miracle '' . 
He said rescuers - who had been alerted by the man 's family - had managed to get water to him while they worked to dig him out . 
Lt Col Renou said the man had probably been helped by the fact that the 5-6m -LRB- 16-20ft -RRB- of debris above him was largely wood , rather than concrete . 
He said the man had told his rescuers that another four people were trapped with him but that they had stopped moving a couple of days earlier . 
The BBC 's Adam Mynott , in Port-au-Prince , says some Haitians have questioned the announcement that search-and-rescue operations are to end - and the discovery of Wismond Exantus will have lent weight to their argument . 
Speaking before Mr Enso 's rescue , UN spokeswoman Elizabeth Byrs in Geneva said the decision to end the search for survivors was `` heartbreaking '' but that it had been taken on the advice of experts . 
Emmannuel Buso , 21 - rescued after 10 days Marie Carida , 84 - saved after 10 days Mendji Bahina Sanon , 11 - trapped for eight days Lozama Hotteline , 25 - pulled out after seven days Elisabeth Joassaint , 15 days - buried for seven days , half her life Ena Zizi , 69 - rescued after seven days She said most search-and-rescue teams would now be leaving Haiti , although some with heavy lifting equipment might stay to help with the clean-up operation and with aid distribution . 
Two people , an 84-year-old woman and a 21-year-old man , were pulled alive from the rubble in Port-au-Prince on Friday . 
The woman , who was found in the wreckage of her home seriously injured and severely dehydrated , was taken to the main city hospital for treatment . 
The 21-year-old man , Emmannuel Buso , was rescued by an Israeli search team and is said to be in a stable condition . 
Speaking from his hospital bed , he described how he had had no food , and had drunk his own urine to keep thirst at bay . 
An estimated 1.5 million people were left homeless by the 7.0-magnitude quake , which some have estimated has killed as many as 200,000 people . 
At least 75,000 bodies have so far been buried in mass graves , Haiti 's government has said . 
Many more remain uncollected in the streets . 
The UN says 130,000 people have now been relocated out of Port-au-Prince , easing the pressure on overcrowded camps in the city . 
Organisers of the `` Hope for Haiti Now '' telethon , led by George Clooney and Haiti-born rapper Wyclef Jean , said it raised more than $ 57m -LRB- # 35m -RRB- for the aid effort . 
Broadcasting on the radio daily at 0910 local time -LRB- 1410 GMT -RRB- Twenty-minute program in Haitian Creole Broadcasting on FM in Haiti 's six largest cities Also available on satellite and online , and via social media Friday night 's event , which was shown on all major US TV channels , YouTube and on MTV in the UK , set a new record for disaster relief telethons , said Lisa Paulsen , head of the Entertainment Industry Foundation . 
The BBC has started a new radio service in Creole , one of the country 's main languages . 
The 20-minute long daily broadcast , called Connexion Haiti , will try to give people up-to-date information about the basic services they need to survive - such as where to find food , clean drinking water , medical assistance and shelter . 
