Hope for Haiti Now footage courtesy of MTV Organisers of the `` Hope for Haiti Now '' telethon say it has raised more than $ 57m -LRB- # 35m -RRB- for the victims of the Haiti earthquake . 
Friday night 's event set a new record for disaster relief telethons , said Lisa Paulsen , head of the Entertainment Industry Foundation . 
Some of the world 's top celebrities took part in the broadcast from New York , Los Angeles , London and Haiti . 
It was shown on all major US TV channels , YouTube and on MTV in the UK . 
More than 100 Hollywood and music stars took part . 
Some of them performed while others , including director Steven Spielberg , singer Stevie Wonder and TV star Ellen DeGeneres , took telephone pledges from viewers . 
The actor George Clooney , who organised the event , said : `` At the core of every religion is the belief that we care for one another , we take care of each other especially in times of need . 
`` The Haitian people need our help , they need to know they 're not alone , they need to know that that we still care . '' 
Haitian-born rapper Wyclef Jean - who set up the charity foundation Yele Haiti - Bruce Springsteen , Jennifer Hudson , Mary J Blige and Shakira performed in New York . 
Madonna sang Like A Prayer with the backing of a choir , while Sting sang Driven To Tears . 
Rihanna , meanwhile , performed a cover version of Bob Marley 's Redemption Song , which she has released to raise money for the people of Haiti . 
Jay Z debuted a song , Stranded -LRB- Haiti Mon Amour -RRB- with U2 's Bono and The Edge . 
It featured Jay Z rapping about the earthquake while Bono and singer Rihanna 's lyrics included `` Not going to leave you stranded . '' 
Actress Julia Roberts took donations from the public for the people of Haiti As well as musical collaborations , the show broadcast shocking images from the earthquake and interviews with Haitians . 
Many of the stars donated money themselves : Madonna gave $ 250,000 -LRB- # 155,000 -RRB- , Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie gave $ 1m -LRB- # 620,000 -RRB- and supermodel Giselle Bundchen gave $ 1.5 m -LRB- # 0.93 m -RRB- . 
Clooney had donated $ 1m during the telethon , his spokesman told Reuters news agency . 
Actor Leonardo DiCaprio signed a cheque for $ 1m to the Clinton Bush Haiti Fund , which was started by former presidents Bill Clinton and George W Bush . 
As well as donations from viewers , more money will be raised through the sale of songs performed on the show , via iTunes . 
