The BBC is tracking aid from Oxfordshire , including these wheelbarrows It was the early hours of the morning when the British Airways flight arrived at the international airport at Santo Domingo , capital of the Dominican Republic . 
Among the aid , which BA had carried free of charge , was 50 tonnes of supplies organised by Oxfam - emergency equipment paid for by the UK 's Disasters Emergency Committee 's Haiti Earthquake Appeal . 
The fundraising effort has already reached more than # 30m in one week . 
The aid , which the BBC has been tracking from Oxfordshire , was swiftly unloaded and then the process began of preparing the cargo to be transported by truck approximately 250 miles to the Haitian capital Port-au-Prince . 
The flight also carried supplies from the UN 's World Food Programme and Unicef . 
With the airport there heavily congested , road transport from the neighbouring Dominican Republic has been an important way to get aid to the Haitian people affected by the earthquake . 
This country is a popular tourist destination , but the airport at Santo Domingo is even busier than normal with up to 40 extra flights per day bringing aid into the country . 
Loading up the lorries here in the UK is straightforward but once the consignment gets to Haiti , can Oxfam be sure it will reach the people who need it ? 
Multiple aid agencies are involved , and around the edges of the main runway the work of loading and unloading aid is a continual process . 
Oxfam says that with the announcement that the search for survivors is over , the focus should be on helping the Haitian people . 
`` The end of search and rescue efforts does not mean we can slow down . 
Relief and recovery for the survivors is the priority now , '' says Mark Fried , spokesman for the relief agency . 
`` Hundreds of thousands who lost everything but their lives need water for drinking and washing . 
They need latrines to contain the spread of disease . 
They need shelter and simple household items like cooking pots . '' 
On Friday , respected medical journal The Lancet accused aid agencies and non-governmental organizations of competing against each other rather than working together . 
Without naming any organization , an editorial in the journal said : `` NGOs are rightly mobilising , but also jostling for position , each claiming that they are doing the most for earthquake survivors . '' 
However , aid workers on the ground say that claim is unjust . 
`` I think every organization wants to do its best to put in place the means that they need , '' says Florent Mayolle , a logistics manager with Oxfam International and who is working in the Dominican Republic . 
Florent Mayolle is working for Oxfam International in Dominican Republic `` That is why , maybe , you can feel a little bit of competition . 
But now we are forgetting about that and trying to organise ourselves in a way that there is good co-ordination . 
That is the most important thing for us now . '' 
Referring to the operation to bring in the British aid , as well as supplies from Denmark , Henrik Hansen of the World Food Programme agrees . 
`` In crises like this aid agencies do come together , '' he says . 
`` In this particular case , Oxfam requested the World Food Programme provide warehouse capacity and overland transport to Haiti - and we provided those services . '' 
While it was a complicated operation getting the aid organised and on a flight from Stansted to the Dominican Republic via Denmark , where it also picked up supplies , the hard part will be to ensure the aid gets to the people who need it most when it arrives in Haiti , where it was due to arrive on Sunday . 
This is another area where the overall relief effort in Haiti has been criticised - with claims of poor distribution and confusion - with some areas even getting too much supplies and others too little . 
But aid agencies point to the scale of the disaster in a country that was already lacking in infrastructure , and say the picture is slowly improving . 
`` People have to understand that we can not send goods if we are not able to receive it in Port-au-Prince , '' says Florent Mayolle . 
`` So we need first to prepare the goods in a good manner , and to send it with security and to be able to receive the goods and afterwards to distribute it properly . 
`` Until now we had some problem of security , we did n't have the warehouse for storage . 
We will not be able to send it to lie on the ground without security - it is not possible . '' 
The Disasters Emergency Committee is co-ordinating an appeal to help the people of Haiti There are 13 charities involved including the British Red Cross , Islamic Relief and World Vision Donate via the DEC website or by calling 0370 60 60 900 With the warehouse and transport arranged - the small convoy of trucks carrying British aid was able to set off on Saturday afternoon . 
Because convoys are only crossing the border twice a day due to security considerations , the drivers were waiting there overnight before completing their journey . 
The aid included a wide range of material , from tools that will be useful in improving sanitation to latrine slabs and water tanks . 
Oxfam says it is working in seven sites across the Haitian capital - trying to provide help to more than 90,000 people . 
For all the main agencies the process of getting supplies to Haiti has been fraught with difficulties , and in the weeks and months to come lessons may well have to be learned from the experience of the last few days . 
But among aid workers on the ground there also seems to be an endless amount of goodwill and determination - backed by the generosity of people in countries around the world . 
