If I knew how dangerous it would be , I might have reconsidered taking the job . 
Becoming Reuters Baghdad bureau chief after the fall of Saddam Hussein presented a huge safety risk . 
But I did n't expect the danger would still be as intense after more than two years . 
The office , protected by guards armed with Kalashnikovs , was turned into a fortress . 
Driving around was only possible in armored cars . 
Now I know why there was n't a queue of Reuters staff for the assignment . 
But I joined the wire service 11 years ago , inspired by the journalism of the Vietnam war , looking to travel and write . 
I joined the trainee scheme fresh from university . 
Under the guidance of Fleet Street veteran George Short , I wrote imaginary dispatches about coups and crises - and the verdicts could be brutal . 
As I was only fluent in English - an anomaly among the participants on the scheme - Dublin was my first destination with Reuters in the mid-1990s . 
The first time I was in the office by myself when a big story broke was very stressful . 
My finger hovered nervously over the enter key on the keyboard - then it was straight to the nearest pub . 
Much of the organization 's work is covering the financial markets and I was sent to Frankfurt to report the chemical and pharmaceutical sectors . 
It was a high-pressure environment , competing with Bloomberg and Dow Jones to be first with the news ; wins and losses were measured in milliseconds . 
It was never an ambition to be doing that , so when the Jakarta bureau was short-staffed in 1998 I jumped at the chance to go . 
I landed at the right time . 
Indonesia had been stable for 30 years , but within a week of my arrival , the capital exploded in rioting - for the first time I was at the center of a huge international story and being tear-gassed . 
The anxiety I experienced then returns every time I am in a new country . 
But it prepared me for the dangers I faced during the 1999 East Timor crisis , underlined by the death of a Dutch journalist . 
Thankfully , I was under the guidance of Kurt Schork , a truly inspirational figure who was later killed in Sierra Leone . 
From there I was posted in Bangkok , a regional hub covering several countries , which involved a lot of traveling . 
Burma was a tragic place to visit , but I was lucky to be there when Aung San Suu Kyi was released from house arrest . 
Amid scenes of mass celebrations , it reminded me why I loved being a reporter : to meet amazing people from around the globe . 
When the Afghanistan war started in 2001 , I was itching to go in . 
But frustratingly , I had not completed the requisite training back in Britain . 
I rushed home to do it , enabling me to be based in Kandahar , albeit after the fall of Kabul . 
The only reason I was there was in case Osama bin Laden was captured nearby , but in reality , little was going on . 
In this job you often find yourself marooned somewhere for weeks because something could happen and we must be there if it does . 
I do envy my newspaper colleagues , because they have the time to pursue their own stories , confident that wire services can tell the main story of the day as a backup . 
Yet I do n't feel in direct competition with them , apart from in terms of finding scoops . 
I like the adrenaline ; as soon as something happens , you have to report it . 
In Kandahar , though , I proved you can make a story out of anything by chatting to locals . 
My war reporting experience saw me sent to Kuwait ahead of the Iraq war in 2003 . 
The plan was to be embedded with the US military and I underwent chemical and biological warfare training . 
But as the war became delayed , I faced a personal dilemma : my sister was getting married at the start of April and I had to decide whether to invade Iraq with the US Marines or attend the wedding . 
It would have been the biggest story of my life , but I went home . 
After the war I was able to go into Basra and from there I took on the Baghdad job . 
I do n't think anybody in journalism has experienced conditions like those in the Iraqi capital and faced a comparable level of risk for such a sustained period of time . 
The main stress was n't for my own safety - running things from the office , I did n't go out much - but for my team of around 50 Iraqi staff who were putting themselves in extreme danger . 
On leave for a couple of weeks , I would try to de-stress in England or on a beach in Thailand . 
But I would get depressed when I switched on CNN and saw the carnage from Iraq . 
I found it astonishing that I worked there and would question the wisdom of going back . 
On my return , I would wonder whether the holiday was worthwhile . 
After two years in the role - one of the longest serving journalists in Iraq since the war - I felt it was time to get out a couple of months ago . 
Leaving behind my Iraqi colleagues was hard , because they will still have to live through the difficult conditions . 
When I was back in London , I was n't due to be working , but on July 7 I raced into the office to help with the coverage of the bombings . 
I thought I had left behind multiple suicide bombings and I did n't expect to be writing about them happening at home . 
Jobs Correspondent , Reuters -LRB- 1994 - -RRB- , including postings in Dublin , Jakarta , Bangkok , Kuwait and Iraq Career high The Iraqi elections were amazing to cover . 
I was worried about the safety of my staff and thought the polls would be overshadowed by bloodshed . 
But millions turned out to vote and Reuters was quoted by President Bush at the end of the day Career low When friends and colleagues are killed covering a story . 
We 've had many losses in the Baghdad bureau and I fear there will be more casualties Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : How to be ... Andrew Marshall , former Reuters Baghdad bureau chief This article appeared on p56 of the MediaGuardian section of the Guardian on 23.52 BST on Monday 5 September 2005 . 
