Monday 5 September 2005 00.00 BST A Sunni Arab teenager who died saving Shias during last week 's stampede disaster in Baghdad has been hailed as a hero whose sacrifice should unify Iraq . 
Othman al-Ubeydi drowned after rescuing at least three people who tumbled into the Tigris when Shia pilgrims panicked at rumors of a suicide bomber among them , leading to 1,005 deaths . 
The 19-year-old student 's face was on newspapers and television screens yesterday and the provincial council said that a street would be named after him . 
Mr Ubeydi was sitting down to breakfast last Wednesday when loudspeakers from his Sunni mosque said Shias needed help at the al-Aima bridge , where Iraq 's deadliest disaster since the 2003 invasion was unfolding . 
While hundreds were crushed to death on the bridge , hundreds more jumped or fell into the river . 
Witnesses said that the teenager , a strong swimmer and wrestler who trained at a gym , repeatedly dived in and saved between three and seven people . 
However he was exhausted when he tried to save a large woman , and she reportedly pulled him under . 
Iraq 's government and media called Mr Ubeydi a martyr of national unity whose heroic sacrifice should reconcile Shias and Sunnis , rival Muslim sects which have edged towards civil war . 
`` He showed that we are all brothers , '' said the Shia prime minister , Ibrahim al-Jaafari , while visiting the family . 
Mr Ubeydi 's father , Ali , said that his studious son had passed the supreme test of humanity , setting an example for the country . 
`` He turned his soul into a bridge to save others . '' 
One newspaper , Itijah al-Akhar , illustrated the theme with a bridge in the shape of two hands shaking . 
Another paper , Al Mada , showed a flower growing from a cactus . 
A state television network , al-Iraqiya , showed Shias and Sunnis chanting together . 
Um Qasim , 54 , a Shia who lost her son to an insurgent attack , said that Mr Ubeydi was a hero . 
`` We are one nation , '' she added . 
Iraqi Sunnis , a once dominant minority , have been marginalised since the fall of Saddam Hussein . 
Their insurgency against the Shia-led government has produced escalating tit-for-tat assassinations and massacres . 
However , few expect Mr Ubeydi 's story to turn back the sectarian tide . 
Though there was no suicide bomber , many Shias blamed last week 's stampede on a climate of fear fostered by the insurgents . 
A subsequent spate of attacks against Sunnis was thought to be a backlash , and a unity rally near the bridge at the weekend fizzled out . 
Shots were exchanged between the Shia west bank of the Tigris and the Sunni east bank . 
Saddam is scheduled to go on trial on a charge of mass killing on October 19 , Iraq 's government spokesman confirmed yesterday , adding that several of the ousted dictator 's associates , including one of his half-brothers , would face trial with him . 
`` They will be tried for the execution of 143 citizens , '' he said , referring to reprisals for an assassination attempt on Saddam in the Shia village of Dujail in 1982 , after which more than 140 male villagers were killed . 
