Fema boss Michael Brown , in a starched white shirt , briefs President George Bush and other officials on Hurricane Katrina . 
Photograph : Jim Watson\/AFP\/Getty CVs always get a bit of a polish when you apply for a new job . 
That brief disastrous part-time role becomes valuable experience , points fall off the driving licence , and even the odd GCSE grade can get promoted . 
But the rest of us are n't even touching America 's disaster chief when it comes to chutzpah , writes David Fickling . 
The Federal Emergency Management Agency -LRB- Fema -RRB- director , Michael Brown , who was today taken off the job of overseeing the Hurricane Katrina relief effort amid criticism of his agency 's laggardly response to the disaster , spent most of his working life as a lawyer . 
So when it came to writing his official biography someone must have thought it would be a good idea to bung in something a bit more related to emergency management . 
Continue reading ... The government wants to overhaul the university admissions system , changing it from a complicated muddle of deadlines and form-filling to a new complicated muddle of deadlines and form-filling . 
It 's always going to be that complicated because it involves assessing the skills of around 1 million students and then trying to shoehorn them into the right courses . 
Continue reading ... Oliver King is our new politics editor . 
He writes : While it 's easy to dismiss the current Conservative leadership contest as little more than a political beauty contest , the race is about far more than a job title . 
The future of party policy is up for grabs and senior Tories are seizing on the opportunity to dump on policies they never liked in the first place . 
According to this morning 's Daily Telegraph , Andrew Lansley , the party 's cerebral shadow health secretary , wants to drop their `` patients ' passport '' policy , their idea of cutting waiting lists by letting patients use NHS money to subsidise private operations . 
While he never said so explicitly in a speech on Wednesday to the NHS confederation , there is little doubt about what he meant . 
He told his audience : `` It is most important to engage the public positively with choice and competition extended to everyone , than to be directed into a benefit for a minority . '' 
The point being that giving patients half the cost of a # 5,000 hip operation only helps if you can afford to fund the other half . 
Continue reading ... The non-evacuation of New Orleans is one of the harder to understand events of the last few months . 
First , that while an evacuation order was given the only choice for those who could not leave , who were too frail or did not have cars , was to stay in their homes or a shelter . 
Second , that when evacuation buses were laid on there are several thousands who would not go . 
Presumably they do not want to leave the city and their possessions behind , or , amid the nightmarish toxic waters and rotting flesh , do not believe it can get any worse . 
For the second time this summer the first was in the Gaza Strip we are to see forced evacuations . 
Another international story , but this time intriguing rather than hard to understand , is the illness of Jacques Chirac . 
He left hospital today but , as Jon Henley will report in his World Dispatch there are allegations of a cover up over the state of his health . 
In Britain , the chancellor , Gordon Brown , has announced that five countries and Bill Gates are to support his International Finance Facility to raise money to immunise children in the developing world . 
At the Oval , England appear to be close to the end of their first innings , perhaps not as close as bowler Glenn McGrath would like , but it can not be long before they are in the field . 
If you are an undecided voter ahead of next week 's German election , there 's only one place to turn . 
So far more than 2 million Germans have already logged on to Wahl-O-Mat - an online guide to which party most corresponds with your views . 
Undecided voters have to answer a series of 30 questions . 
Some of them are overtly political : do you think , for example , that Germany 's strict dismissal protection laws should be relaxed ? 
Others are more general : should there be a speed limit on Germany 's autobahn , and should compulsory military service be abolished ? 
There is also foreign policy : do you agree that Turkey should be in the EU ? 
And drugs : should hashish should be legalised ? 
You can agree , disagree , say you are `` neutral '' or , if you are an inveterate fence-sitter - skip to the next question . 
At the end you click on `` result '' . 
Wahl-O-Mat lists the five parties in order , with the one most compatible with your views at the top . 
Founded in the Netherlands , Wahl-o-Mat was first used in Germany during the last election in 2002 , when some 3.6 million wavering voters logged on . 
It 's run by the Bundeszentrale f r politische Bildung -LRB- Federal Agency for Political Education -RRB- , an independent body . 
With record numbers of Germans still undecided this time , it could yet play a crucial role in determining whether Angela Merkel can put together a centre-right coalition , or is forced into a grand alliance with Gerhard Schr der 's SPD , as now seems likely . 
The results , of course , can be reassuring , surprising , dismaying , or baffling and may not coincide wih your own apparent preferences . 
When I tried it earlier this week , the Wahl-O-Mat told me I should vote for the Linkspartei , Germany 's new anti-business Left party , followed by the pro-business Liberal FDP , an unlikely pairing . 
Next came the Greens , followed by the SPD , with the CDU bottom - a result that surely refutes the claim made by some of you bloggers out there that I 'm some sort of CDU stooge . 
Anyone interested in German politics should give it a spin . 
There are many things that distinguish a Green party conference - opening today in the picturesque city of Lancaster - from the run-of-the-mill get-togethers of the big three parties . 
It is not just the pagan worship meetings -LRB- with them being held at dawn , this correspondent has yet to make it to one -RRB- , the recycling bins -LRB- it is embarrassing to consider how many forests must perish to provide journalists with printouts of speeches - most of which go straight in the bin - at the other three -RRB- or the number of small children happily galivanting around the conference floor as the looming environmental Armageddon is discussed from the podium -LRB- the Greens seem to be particularly fertile , as well as child-friendly -RRB- . 
What takes a little time to sink in , at least for the seasoned political anorak such as your correspondent , is what is n't here . 
There simply is n't any commercial or corporate sponsorship of the event . 
Continue reading ... A deeply shocking account by two paramedics stranded in New Orleans alleges that police lied to residents , saying buses were waiting to evacuate them - and then fired shots above their heads when they tried to reach them . 
It 's well worth reading in full , and gives the lie to claims that officials did all they could to help people escape the stricken city . 
Larrie Bradshaw and Lorrie Beth Slonsky were attending a conference in the city when the hurricane struck . 
Unable to find transport , they pooled money with around 500 people staying in the same hotel and paid $ 25,000 for buses to come and pick them up . 
`` We later learned that the minute they arrived at the city limits , they were commandeered by the military , '' the account says . 
Continue reading ... It is the debate that barely dare speak its name : should they rebuild ? 
Should they move it ? 
Several US commentators and the odd brave politician are starting to ask the questions , faced with the dizzying cost of rebuilding and fears over the low-lying city 's future vulnerability . 
Many evacuees have said they will not return . 
There may not be much evidence of people doing , as Barbara Bush put it , `` very well '' out of the disaster but it seems certain that many will make new lives elsewhere . 
A lot of the homes destroyed by Hurricane Katrina were not insured and the insurance payments for those that were could be spent anywhere . 
In today 's lead article on Slate , editor at large Jack Shafer argues that the city should not be rebuilt , and being careful to praise its history and people , lists its problems before Katrina hit : the old housing stock , the failing schools , the crime . 
Sure there will always be the higher-lying areas and the tourist-draw of the historic French Quarter , until a `` big one -LRB- new hurricane -RRB- hits '' , but he answers `` Do n't refloat '' , to the question of rebuilding . 
Shafer cites a professor in earth and sciences who says that New Orleans `` wants to be a lake '' and should never have been built in the first place . 
There is also at least one politician who has dared to question the pledges to rebuild : speaker of the House Dennis Hastert . 
He said in an interview that spending billions on a city that is below sea level `` does n't make sense to me '' , although he rowed back on the issue in a later statement . 
Other commentators have asked whether the city should be rebuilt on land less vulnerable to hurricanes and levee breaks . 
A New York Times piece entitled Putting Down New Roots on More Solid Ground said the city 's population had been declining anyway : down from a zenith in 1960 of some 630,000 people to around 445,000 in the last census . 
It is estimated that some 250,000 of the evacuees wo n't come back . 
The relief effort for Hurricane Katrina may have been slow getting off the ground - but internet scam artists have shown no lack of initiative , writes David Fickling . 
Fraudsters now see a major disaster as perfect bait to draw in the unwary : the aftermath of the south Asian tsunami saw dozens of such scams , and Katrina seems to have sparked even more . 
The FBI reports that more than 500 sites have been advertising Katrina relief services , with 300 established last Friday alone . 
Some are no doubt legitimate and sincere , but several have already been fingered for alleged illegal practice . 
Continue reading ... Until this week , there was little doubt who was going to win Germany 's general election the conservative leader Angela Merkel . 
Her Christian Democrat party -LRB- CDU -RRB- was comfortably ahead in the polls and would , it appeared , have little difficulty in putting together a centre-right government along with its coalition partner , the liberal Free Democrats -LRB- FDP -RRB- . 
The latest survey published by Forsa yesterday , however , suggests that , with 10 days to go , there are distinct signs of a late swing towards Gerhard Schrder 's Social Democrats . 
The poll shows the SPD up three points , to 34 % , with the Greens on 7 % and the new Left party on 8 % . 
While the CDU are still ahead on 42 % , the FDP is marooned on just 6 % . 
For the first time in weeks , Mrs Merkel 's conservative coalition has just 48 % , compared to 49 % for the left parties . 
Continue reading ... England won the toss and are batting first in the crucial final Ashes Test at the Oval . 
Openers Strauss and Trescothick have just notched up their 50 , and you can follow all the action with Guardian Unlimited Sport 's over-by-over commentary and live desktop scorecard . 
Our hard-pressed sports team are also rounding up reaction to the glorious victory\/humiliating defeat -LRB- depending on which bit of the UK you 're from -RRB- in last night 's Northern Ireland v England World Cup qualifier . 
Emergency officials in Louisiana have 25,000 body bags ready as they , like everyone else , try to work out exactly how many people died as a result of Hurricane Katrina . 
President Bush has asked Congress for an additional $ 51.8 bn in disaster aid . 
In other news , eBay is reportedly in talks to buy the internet phone company Skype ; we 're expecting interest rates to be held at 4.5 % when the Bank of England announces its decision at midday ; and this afternoon we 'll hear which of these writers has made it onto the Man Booker Prize shortlist . 
And to the student in the hostel opposite our office who has put a poster in his\/her bedroom window offering that he\/she `` will strip for internship '' , here are the conditions on which we actually consider people for work experience placements . 
Sir John Major playing with his muse at the Oval . 
Photograph : Frank Baron It is almost a cliche to say that while sport is the subject of many great works of non-fiction , it has underperformed compared to other areas of human endeavor , for instance love and war , when it comes to the literary word . 
Continue reading ... The comments from Barbara Bush yesterday on how things are `` working very well '' for the `` underprivileged '' survivors of Hurricane Katrina are attracting a lot of interest on blogs today . 
After touring a relief center in Texas , the First Mother is reported to have told the Public Broadcasting Service : What I 'm hearing , which is sort of scary , is they all want to stay in Texas . 
Everyone is so overwhelmed by the hospitality . 
And so many of the people in the arena here , you know , were underprivileged anyway , so this is working very well for them . 
The American Flyer blog also pulls up the remarks below from Mrs Bush - which have something of a congruent tone - on Good Morning America in March 2003 about speculation in the media before the US-led invasion of Iraq on the scale of US fatalities . 
Why should we hear about body bags , and deaths , and how many , what day it 's gonna happen , and how many this or what do you suppose ? 
Oh , I mean , it 's not relevant . 
So why should I waste my beautiful mind on something like that ? 
The blogger comments : `` So look out . 
If you were n't born with a silver spoon in your mouth , you may just get poked in the eye with Bush 's compassion stick . '' 
Barbara Bush is , at the time of writing , the top search on Technorati , which detects more than 4,000 mentions . 
Continue reading ... A plumber shows a ` builder 's cleavage ' . 
Photograph : Getty Guardian readers may have missed the Sun 's `` Save Our Jugs '' campaign to allow chesty barmaids to keep the right to wear low-cut tops . 
The Sun will be claiming victory today after the EU parliament voted to leave it to member states to legislate on whether employers would be made responsible for their workers ' exposure to sunlight . 
MEPs thereby conceded that barmaids could , if they chose , wear low-cut tops , even in the beer garden . 
Continue reading ... is part of a Guardian Unlimited gallery , in conjunction with Panos Pictures , to mark the UN summit on the millennium development goals . 
Photograph : Zed NelsonNext week the UN meets to review progress on eight '' millennium development goals '' set in 2000 with a range of aims including eradicating extreme poverty and hunger and getting all children into school . 
The millennium declaration provided a bold view of a better world , but we 're far from achieving the vision outlined five years ago . 
`` There is little cause for celebration '' , according to the UN 's Human Development Report released today , which describes meeting the goals as `` the single greatest challenge facing the development community - and arguably the world '' . 
`` Every hour more than 1,200 children die away from the glare of media attention . 
This is equivalent to three tsunamis a month '' , the report says . 
`` The promise to the world 's poor is being broken Time is running out . '' 
It calls on world leaders to seize the final chance to fulfil their promises on poverty and health . 
Continue reading ... Tony Blair meets the Indian prime minister Manmohan Singh on a visit to Delhi . 
Photograph : John D McPugh\/Getty The Guardian 's political editor Michael White has spent this week traveling to China and India with the prime minister , as he arranges trade deals , meets heads of government , and plays some very bad football . 
He writes from Delhi : The prime minister was up early this morning and in stockinged feet , he and Mrs Blair laid a wreath and threw red rose petals on the memorial to Mahatma Ghandi , the father of Indian independence . 
Now the PM has gone on to visit an HIV\/Aids clinic while his entourage of businessmen are making contacts and hopefully trading deals of mutual benefit . 
The EU commission president , Jos Manuel Barroso , is also in tow , as Mr Blair has been wearing both his European and British hats on his visits to China and India this week . 
He 's spent the first day of each trip representing the political , economic and cultural interests of the EU , as the president of the council of ministers , and the second day as prime minister pushing the interests of Britain . 
A voter at a Cairo polling station shows his finger dipped in ink to indicate he has voted in Egypt 's presidential elections . 
Photograph : Khaled Desouki\/AFP\/Getty Today 's presidential election is the first time Egyptians have been able to pick an alternative to their leader , Hosni Mubarak , but few expect to see change , writes David Fickling . 
Mamduh Shawqi sees the whole process as a play : `` The candidates are hilarious people , which makes you think they were probably all chosen by the current system to play the role of candidates , '' he writes . 
The disillusion of many bloggers sits side-by-side with a weary excitement at the remote possibility of change . 
Ritzy Mabrouk delivers a potent picture of Cairo holding its breath as election day dawns , but concludes the election is a `` dirty mess '' . 
Others see more potential in the contest . 
Continue reading ... Forget about the policies - one of the most intriguing aspects of next week 's general election in Germany has been the bands , or at least the campaign songs , used by the parties to stir up the voters . 
Everyone knows by now that the Christian Democrats have been using the Rolling Stones song Angie , from the album Goats Head Soup , as their theme tune . 
But what about the others ? 
Well , traveling down to Cottbus last week for a rally of the new Linkspartei - or Left party - I was astonished to hear the band afterwards break into 70s British glam rock . 
Not just any old glam rock , but The Sweet 's classic Blockbuster the first song I ever bought -LRB- you know , the one with the wailing police siren in it . 
It goes ` a-wooo ' , ` a-wooo ' , etc -RRB- . 
Admittedly , most of the east German pensioners rapidly left , but I was enthralled . 
Continue reading ... David Blunkett 's objection to an in-depth interview he gave `` as a favor '' to a student appearing in the London Evening Standard raises a few questions about the ethics of using quotes given in the belief that they will never be published , writes Claire Cozens . 
The secretary of state for work and pensions , who resigned from government last year after an investigation found he helped secure a visa for his former lover 's nanny , claims he did not grant his permission for the interview to be published . 
The interview , in which Mr Blunkett discussed his complex personal life , his political ambitions and the problems of coping with his disability , has gained widespread coverage in the media since it was published yesterday . 
The team surrounding the UN secretary-general , Kofi Annan , freely admits he has taken a battering over the last year , mainly because of the investigation into the Iraq oil-for-food program , writes Ewen MacAskill . 
When he set up the investigation in April last year , he can not have imagined that both he and the organization he serves would be so severely criticised in the report published today . 
He has been undermined mainly by the disclosures about the behavior of his son , Kojo , whose former employer Cotecna was one of the successful bidders for one of the Iraq contracts . 
In spite of the criticism , he says he is not planning to resign and intends to see out the remainder of his tenure , due to end in December next year . 
But the investigation has left him weak and vulnerable . 
The UN summit next week , the biggest-ever meeting of world leaders , was supposed to be the high point of his stewardship of the UN as world leaders commit to meeting targets for poverty reduction and universal primary education for all . 
Instead , the summit will end up diluting the final document , mainly at the behest of the US , which opposes the financing of the development targets , objecting even to the term `` millennium development goals '' . 
Continue reading ... More than a week after Hurricane Katrina hit , the evacuation of New Orleans continues . 
This time it is enforced . 
After those who could not leave it is the turn of the estimated 10,000 who would not . 
We have an interactive guide to where the evacuees are going and will be rounding up on Newsblog the latest on the web on the recovery . 
A report on the UN oil-for-food program , which Kofi Annan said he wished the organization had never got involved in , is released at 3pm today . 
The preface -LRB- read it here -RRB- was released yesterday , accusing the UN of `` corrosive corruption '' , so what we will be looking out for today is Mr Annan 's response . 
Diplomatic editor Ewen MacAskill will be blogging about what the report means for the UN and some of its most determined critics . 
On Online blog , Bobbie Johnson is writing about the preparations for Apple 's expected iPhone , and is hoping to report live from a north London satellite link-up with San Francisco where more details will be revealed . 
On Newsblog , there is a certain amount of anticipation in air as England prepare for the final Ashes Test against Australia . 
We will be looking at cricket and literature , particularly the news that the sound of leather on willow has inspired John Major to write poetry . 
Hurricane Katrina , and its terrible aftermath , are being covered in great detail by the international media and in the blogosphere . 
It is a complex , moving and quickly developing story , and it can be a challenge to reach out and grab the best coverage and comment . 
Below is an attempt to round up some of today 's best links on the hurricane and the recovery efforts that are following , complementing an earlier Newsblog round-up of notable links . 
Please feel free to insert other good links in the comment field . 
Wired carries some good hurricane stories , one hailing the great emergency resource of sciponius.com . 
This uses a Google Map of the disaster area as a template , and allows users to post information about specific areas and streets . 
The entries give evolving information such as how submerged a certain area is , or whether it has mobile phone coverage . 
Wired describes the site as a `` wiki disaster map '' . 
Another interesting Wired story outlines attempts being made to develop modern ways of replacing the sandbag as the answer to blocking broken levees . 
It looks at three floodwall systems being examined by the US military , which use a variety of plastic and other methods : Geocell Systems , Hesco and Portadam . 
Continue reading ... The report says `` ethical lapses '' and weaknesses in the program 's management were `` symptomatic of systematic problems in the UN administration generally . '' 
The UN 's ability to do its job depends on its maintaining an image of competence , honesty and accountability . 
The report goes on : `` It is precisely those qualities that too often were absent in the administration of the oil-for-food program . '' 
No wonder Mr Annan said he wished the UN had never been given the program . 
But it was and the UN did not cover itself in glory during the $ 61bn -LRB- # 33bn -RRB- project , one of the UN 's biggest operations ever . 
Benon Sevan , the UN official in charge of the program , last month resigned from the organization just days before he was accused in a previous report of receiving $ 147,184 -LRB- # 83,000 -RRB- to help to facilitate an oil deal . 
Continue reading ... Emergency workers have repaired some of New Orleans ' levees and begun pumping water out of the hurricane-ravaged area . 
We 'll be continuing our round-up of the best blog reports and comments today . 
Elsewhere Tony Blair continues his round of trade talks in China , where a group of journalists covering his visit have been injured in a road accident . 
Accompanying the prime minister are Sir Bobby Robson , Darcey Bussell and assorted other sports and cultural figures launching a program of cultural exchange with China . 
Here on Newsblog , Luke Harding continues his series of blogs in the run-up to Germany 's general election . 
Today he looks at the campaign posters . 
Also today , Brian Whitaker explains why the arrest of four generals in Lebanon over the assassination of former prime minister Rafik Hariri may lead to the downfall of not one Arab president , but two . 
Our arts site rounds up the odds on the Mercury music prize contenders ahead of tonight 's announcement of the winner . 
And cricket writer Lawrence Booth is live online at 2.30 pm today to discuss England 's Ashes prospects . 
Post your questions for him here . 
And get your fingers out of the office stationery drawer . 
There 's a quiz on workplace honesty coming up later today . 
Cyclists pass in front of an election campaign poster of the new Linkspartei 's top candidates Oskar Lafontaine -LRB- l -RRB- and Gregor Gysi in Berlin . 
Photograph : Fabrizio Bensch\/Reuters They are everywhere - along the side of roads , stuck on street lamps , and plastered next to the river Spree . 
If the health of a democracy can be judged by the number of posters around at election time , then German democracy is in good shape . 
But with 12 days to go until Germans go to the polls in the September 18 election , which party has the best poster ? 
My favorite by a mile is the poster of the Linkspartei , Germany 's new left party , featuring the party 's two star candidates Oskar Lafontaine and Gregor Gysi . 
Both men are wearing suits and smiling . 
Oskar is on the left , Gregor on the right . 
But hang on a minute . 
Look closely and you notice that Gysi is considerably smaller than Oskar - and looks a bit like a Roman slave gazing adoringly at his master . 
Continue reading ... US presidents stay in the White House for eight years if they are lucky . 
Even then , their power wanes considerably in their second term as George Bush is finding out . 
The Iraq war has gnawed away at his popularity while Hurricane Katrina has savaged his reputation as much as it has ravaged New Orleans . 
But suddenly , Bush has been presented with an opportunity that most presidents can only dream of . 
With the death of the highly conservative chief justice William Rehnquist just days before Senate confirmation hearings for John Roberts , Bush can nominate a second judge to the supreme court . 
Royal Windsor Horse Show . 
But new laws put an an end to grins like that , even for the Queen . 
Photograph : Julian Finney\/GettySaying ' Cheese ' could soon mean you 'll be taking your summer holidays in Bournemouth rather than Barcelona - as a new rule demanding straight faces only on passport photos comes into force next week . 
The idea behind the Home Office restrictions - first announced last year - is to ensure the smooth running of new scanning technology , which apparently has problems recognizing gurning and grinning holiday makers . 
The rules also specify the mouth should be closed , your piccie should be less than a month old , and only taken against an `` off-white , cream or light gray , plain background . '' 
And what if you insist on sending in your most winsome , toothy grin ? 
Smiley faces will lead to applications being refused until officials receive suitable photos , says the Home Office . 
Which is no laughing matter . 
Bloggers have been describing the chaos in New Orleans and the southern states affected by Hurricane Katrina . 
They have also been reporting the situation in areas , such as Houston , Texas , to which evacuees are being taken . 
We 've listed some of the best blogs and links please feel free to post links to any other good blogs and sites in the comment field . 
Continue reading ... This is the first of Luke Harding 's daily blog posts from Berlin in the run-up to the election on September 18 Honours even ? 
Angela Merkel and Gerhard Schrder shake hands after the debate . 
Photograph : AP\/RTL It was the biggest TV event since Germany lost to Brazil in the 2002 World Cup final . 
Some 20 million Germans tuned in to watch the only debate of the German election campaign between the chancellor Gerhard Schr der and his conservative challenger Angela Merkel . 
But who actually won ? 
Well , if you believe the polls conducted immediately after the gripping 90-minute clash it was a clear victory for Gerd as Schr der 's friends call him . 
According to a poll for ZDF television , some 48 % of viewers believed Schr der was the winner , while only 28 % thought Merkel had triumphed . 
And among undecided voters his figures were even better , with 58 per saying that Gerd had won , compared to only 16 % for Angie . 
At first glance the result seems baffling not least given that most journalists -LRB- including this one -RRB- thought Frau Merkel got the better of her rival . 
She seemed quicker than Schr der , superior when it came to detail and even made a joke . 
Tony Blair today apologised to Britons caught up in Hurricane Katrina who said they felt `` abandoned '' by by the Foreign Office . 
Today we 'll be contacting Gary Younge in New Orleans for an audio dispatch from the empty , ruined city , which he described in this piece in today 's Guardian . 
We 'll also be updating our list of blogs covering the aftermath of the tragedy . 
Mr Blair 's comments came during a visit to China , where he later held talks with President Hu Jintao in his capacity as holder of the rotating EU presidency . 
Also in China , there are conflicting reports over whether the EU and China have in fact reached a deal to end the so-called `` bra wars '' . 
In Indonesia , at least 117 people died today when an aircraft crashed into a crowded residential area in the city of Medan shortly after takeoff . 
And here on Newsblog we 'll have the first of Berlin correspondent Luke Harding 's daily dispatches ahead of the German election in two weeks ' time . 
