US presidents stay in the White House for eight years if they are lucky . 
Even then , their power wanes considerably in their second term as George Bush is finding out . 
The Iraq war has gnawed away at his popularity while Hurricane Katrina has savaged his reputation as much as it has ravaged New Orleans . 
But suddenly , Bush has been presented with an opportunity that most presidents can only dream of . 
With the death of the highly conservative chief justice William Rehnquist just days before Senate confirmation hearings for John Roberts , Bush can nominate a second judge to the supreme court . 
No sitting justice has died while in office in more than 50 years , and no president has installed two newcomers to the court at the same time since 1971 , when Richard Nixon appointed Rehnquist to fill one of a pair of vacancies . 
For Bush , the situation represents a rare chance to try and shape the court in his own conservative image and leave his most lasting legacy on America . 
It is also an opportunity to claw back the political initiative . 
Bush has already nominated John Roberts to succeed Rehnquist as America 's top judge , a decisive act that contrasted sharply with the dithering after Katrina . 
With the Roberts vetting process well advanced and his confirmation generating little opposition , such a shift could guarantee that a chief justice would be in place when the court opens its term early next month to consider important cases on abortion , assisted suicide and antitrust . 
Although presidents like to nominate justices that they think reflect their political leanings , it can be very hit and miss . 
Appointed chief justice in 1953 , Earl Warren turned out to be much more liberal than expected . 
He was involved in several landmark decisions including Brown v. Board of Education , which overturned the segregation of public schools ; the `` one man one vote '' cases of 1962-1964 , which dramatically altered the relative power of rural regions in many states ; and Hernandez v. Texas , which gave Mexican-Americans the right to serve on juries . 
Warren Burger , appointed chief justice by Richard Nixon in 1969 , also disappointed conservatives . 
Burger did not move to oveturn the major decisions of the Warren court and in the most controversial ruling of his term , Roe v. Wade , Burger voted with the majority to recognize the right to abortion . 
More recently , Justice Anthony Kennedy , who was appointed by Ronald Reagan , has pushed the court to defend homosexuality and abolish the juvenile death penalty . 
In recent years , the court was evenly balanced between liberals and conservatives , often ruling 5-4 on important cases . 
But if Bush has his way , the court could take a decisive shift to the right . 
