2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Major General Vang Pao led thousands of Hmong soldiers as they fought alongside the United States against the North Vietnamese Army during the war in Southeast Asia , according to a news release from Congressman Jim Costa of Costa , on behalf of Pao 's family , asked the Army to grant an exception to Arlington 's rules to allow Pao to be buried in the nation 's most hallowed burial ground . 
Pao died recently of complications from pneumonia , according to Costa . 
The five most popular stories in the past 24 hours on CNN.com , according to NewsPulse . 
` American Idol ' apology a joke ? 
OK , `` American Idol , '' you got us , we think . 
Fans waited to see what the big apology would be Wednesday night after host Ryan Seacrest tweeted the producers would be issuing a mea culpa . 
Giffords ' husband to fly shuttle : Astronaut Mark Kelly said Friday his wife 's extraordinary medical progress since she was shot through the brain , coupled with support from family , friends and the public led to his decision to command the upcoming flight of the Endeavour space shuttle . 
Miley Cyrus gets tattoo No. 5 : Miley Cyrus has added another tattoo to her collection - a dream catcher inked on her torso . 
Ex-Enron CEO requests prison leave : The lawyer for Enron 's jailed ex-CEO Jeffrey Skilling said Thursday he has reached out to the federal Bureau of Prisons to request that his client be allowed to attend his son 's funeral . 
Why Americans do n't travel abroad : The numbers tell the story -- Of the 308 million-plus citizens in the United States , 30 % have passports . 
A U.S. lawmaker said he requested Friday a visit with the Army solider accused of leaking classified documents to the WikiLeaks website . 
`` I am concerned about reports of his treatment while in custody that describe alarming abuses of his constitutional rights and his physical health , '' Rep. Dennis Kucinich said in a letter to Defense Secretary Robert Gates . 
Kucinich , a member of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform , said in a statement that he wants an `` explanation of reports that the Army ignored evidence of mental health problems of Pfc. -LRB- Bradley -RRB- Manning , and that he is being held in conditions that could contribute -LRB- to -RRB- a violation of the his Eighth Amendment right of protection from ` cruel and unusual ' punishment . '' 
He asked for a visit , he said , because as a member of the House committee , `` It is my duty to conduct effective oversight . '' 
The allegations of abuse gained more attention on Tuesday after a friend visited Manning at the U.S. Marine Corps brig in Quantico , Virginia . 
In Kia 's Super Bowl ad , aliens are more impressed with the Kia Optima than their own spaceship . 
A roundup of today 's CNNMoney news : Cashing in on snowstorms : With record amounts of snow blanketing some of the nation 's warmest cities this winter , an increasing number of companies are protecting themselves by betting on snow . 
And it can really pay off . 
Mets ' owners : $ 300 million in Madoff profit ? 
The owners of the New York Mets , the Wilpon and Katz families , are accused of being aware of concerns about what proved to be the biggest Ponzi scheme ever . 
The court-appointed trustee in the Madoff Ponzi case accused the owners of reaping $ 300 million in profit from the scheme . 
Carmakers driven to advertise on Super Bowl : Just two years after the U.S. auto industry was nearly wiped out , automakers are back with a vengeance in this year 's Super Bowl . 
Nine companies are purchasing multimillion-dollar spots for the big game . 
Check out some past rejected Super Bowl ads . 
White House : Innovate , educate , win ! 
President Obama wants to add 100,000 math , science , technology and engineering teachers by the end of the decade , extend wireless internet coverage to 98 % of the population and have 80 % of the nation 's electricity come from clean energy sources by 2035 . 
$ 7,500 electric car discount scares dealers : The Obama administration has a plan that would put up to $ 7,500 directly in the hands of car buyers without having them jump through any tax hoops . 
There is a tax credit for plug-in vehicles , but as it stands now , car buyers have to wait until tax time to get any money back . 
Meanwhile , excess is back as Ferrari sales soar . 
An American USAID subcontractor jailed in Havana over a year ago has been charged with `` acts against the independence and integrity '' of Cuba and could face up to 20 years in prison , Cuban state media reported on Friday . 
The December 2009 arrest of Alan Gross put relations between the United States and Cuba back in the deep freeze despite initial signs of a thaw under President Barack Obama . 
At the time , Cuban President Raul Castro said Gross had been distributing illegal satellite communications equipment to dissidents . 
Other officials referred to him as a spy . 
Up to five inches of snow blanketed parts of Dallas overnight creating treacherous conditions for fans visiting Dallas for the Super Bowl . 
Ice and snow melting off the Cowboys Stadium in Texas has caused snow falls onto the plazas around the stadium , NFL spokesman Brian McCarthy said , causing several minor injuries . 
All stadium entrances have been closed except for the truck tunnel which is away from the building by a safe distance . 
All workers and vistors will now enter and exit through the tunnel as a precaution and until further notice . 
Super Bowl XLV has the potential to be historic for a number of reasons . 
It pits the Pittsburgh Steelers and Green Bay Packers against one another , the NFL 's two longest-running single-city franchises and the two teams that are tied for the most NFL titles over the last 50 years with six apiece . 
Sunday 's game in Dallas also brings together two of the most fervent fan bases in all of pro football . 
King writes that Pittsburgh 's and Green Bay 's fans are as loyal , loud and dedicated as any fans he 's seen since he began covering the NFL in 1984 . 
They also travel to games unlike many others , and King expects both groups to be in full force with such a legendary matchup in store Sunday . 
The astronaut husband of U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords said Friday his wife 's extraordinary medical progress since she was shot through the brain , coupled with support from family , friends and the public , were keys to his decision to command the upcoming flight of the space shuttle Endeavour . 
During a press conference with NASA officials - who said they determined going with Kelly was the right decision - Mark Kelly described what he thought the realities would be after the January 8 shooting in Tucson , Arizona , and what he now expects . 
`` At that time , my thought was I 'd very likely would be sitting in the ICU seat , two , four or six months later , by her bedside , '' said Kelly , sporting a blue wristband that reads `` Peace , Love , Gabby . '' 
Command of the shuttle flight came under question after Giffords was shot . 
Now , he said , he expects her to witness Endeavour soaring into space on the current April 19 timetable . 
`` I have every intention for her to be at the launch , '' said Kelly . 
`` She would be very comfortable with the decision I made . '' 
Two childhood friends who love football , one an award-winning sportswriter , the other a finance geek , have the answers that just might help you win your Super Bowl bet . 
Jon Wertheim , senior writer at Sports Illustrated , and Tobias Moskowitz , University of Chicago finance professor , are co-authors of Scorecasting : The Hidden Influences Behind How Sports Are Played And Games Are Won , which takes a Freakonomics-type approach to the science of winning games . 
The book answers questions like , does the hometown team really have an advantage ? 
And , how much do fans make a difference ? 
From Arlington , Texas , Wertheim and Moskowitz tell American Morning s T.J. Holmes how their research can be applied to predicting the Super Bowl winner . 
So which team will it be -- Packers or Steelers -- for Super Bowl XLV ? 
-LRB- Update 5:05 a.m. in Cairo , 10:05 p.m. ET -RRB- CNN is broadcasting from a hidden location in Cairo amid threats against journalists . 
CNN freelancer journalist Ian Lee reports that sporadic gunfire around Tahrir Square subsided around 2:30 a.m. in Cairo . 
The Army fired the shots in the air in an effort to disperse pro-Mubarak protesters trying to breach the lines separating them from anti-government activists lingering in the square in defiance of a government-imposed curfew , a source tells Lee . 
-LRB- Update 4:30 a.m. in Cairo , 9:30 p.m. ET -RRB- A spokesman for the Muslim Brotherhood , told CNN 's John King that his organization will not participate in Egypt 's general election now planned for September . 
He said that any talks regarding Egypt 's future should only take place after Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak steps down . 
`` We are not looking for any power at all , '' Essam el-Erian said . 
-LRB- Update 3:55 a.m. in Cairo , 8:55 p.m. ET -RRB- Egypt 's one small nuclear reactor , used primarily for medical research , has been shut down and is now secure , a U.S. State Department official said . 
Egyptian soldiers have been deployed to the Nuclear Research Center in Inshas , an area about 40 miles from the scene of the worst protests in Cairo , according to the official . 
-LRB- Update 4:30 a.m. in Cairo , 9:30 p.m. ET -RRB- Ammar Sherie is a renowned musician . 
Naguib Sawiris made billions in the telecom business . 
Veteran diplomat Amre Moussa is the Arab League 's secretary-general . 
These three and 16 other Egyptians have put their heads and hearts together to form the '' Committee of the Wise , '' a group of independent elite that wants to be at the table during crucial government transition talks . 
The committee late Friday called on protests to continue at Tahrir Square every Tuesday and Friday until President Hosni Mubarak `` resigns and makes true the demands of the people . '' 
Mubarak , who has led the African nation for three decades , said he has no intention of stepping down until September , when his term ends . 
But 11 days of bloody protests and high tension have offered no assurance -LRB- Update 3:30 a.m. in Cairo , 8:30 p.m. ET -RRB- Five human rights activists - including two from Amnesty International and one from Human Rights Watch - were released Friday by Egyptian military police , the two groups said in statements . 
They were among some 35 people -- including international reporters and Egyptian lawyers and activists , some of whom remain in custody , according to the two groups ' statements -- detained on Thursday at the Hisham Mubarak Law Center in Cairo . 
-LRB- Update 3:00 a.m. in Cairo , 8:00 p.m. ET -RRB- Protesters in Iraq took to the streets again Friday , showing solidarity with popular demonstrators in Egypt that they say inspired them to publicly voice concerns about their own government . 
-LRB- Update 2:45 a.m. in Cairo , 7:45 p.m. ET -RRB- The Egyptian government viewed U.S. President Barack Obama 's statement Friday as very `` positive , '' according to an official under Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak , saying that it `` clarified innuendos '' that had left a lot of ambiguity as to how the White House sees events in Egypt . 
The Egyptian official said the remarks about Mubarak 's objectives create a better atmosphere for a transition . 
-LRB- Update 2:18 a.m. in Cairo , 7:17 p.m. ET -RRB- iReporter and bookstore manager Dax Bennett Roque took these pictures at today 's `` Day of Depature '' rally in Cairo 's Tahrir Square , capturing the protest calling for President Hosni Mubarak 's resignation from various angles . 
-LRB- Update 2:00 a.m. in Cairo , 7:00 p.m. ET -RRB- President Barack Obama condemned the attacks on journalists in Egypt Friday amid mounting criticism that President Hosni Mubarark is orchestrating the violence to suppress international coverage of bloodshed by pro-government operatives against peaceful protesters . 
`` We continue to be crystal clear that we oppose violence as a response to this crisis , '' Obama said . 
`` We are sending a strong , unequivocal message : Attacks on reporters are unacceptable . 
Attacks on human rights activists are unacceptable . 
Attacks on peaceful protesters are unacceptable . '' 
-LRB- Update 1:00 a.m. in Cairo , 6:00 p.m. ET -RRB- Protesters in the United States upset with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak gathered in New York City 's Times Square Friday , demanding the embattled leader resign . 
Today on American Morning , Kiran Chetry talks with James Rubin , former U.S. assistant secretary of state and current executive editor of the The Bloomberg View . 
Rubin 's wife is ABC News ' Christiane Amanpour , whose car was attacked while reporting in Egypt . 
Rubin says Mubarak 's tactics to attack protesters and round up journalists were not successful . 
Protesters today show that this `` really is the end for Mubarak , '' Rubin tells Chetry . 
Countries across the Middle East are watching the chaotic unrest in the streets of Egypt and recent demonstrations in Tunisia with a close eye . 
In Jordan , King Abdullah II sacked his government , named a new prime minister and met privately with leaders of the nation 's main Islamist group in response to anti-government protests there . 
The Islamic Action Front , the political wing of Jordan 's Muslim Brotherhood , planned another round of demonstrations Friday . 
On today s American Morning , Salameh Nematt , Jordanian political analyst and international writer for the Daily Beast , joins AM s T.J. Holmes from Amman , Jordan . 
Nematt says anti-government protests and how the violence is being handled in Egypt are having a `` major influence on public opinion '' throughout the Middle East , especially in Jordan , which he calls a `` moderating force '' for the United States in the Middle East . 
Nematt describes why Jordanian protesters are taking to the streets and how the king is reacting . 
Ongoing coverage - Protests in Egypt 10:00 am ET - TARP oversight hearing - The Congressional Oversight Panel takes a look at the commercial real estate market and its implications on the banking sector and the Troubled Asset Relief Program . 
Editor 's note : Nancy Grace 's new show on HLN , `` Nancy Grace : America 's Missing , '' is dedicated to finding 50 people in 50 days . 
As part of the effort , which relies heavily on audience participation , CNN.com 's news blog This Just In will feature the stories of the missing . 
This is the 15th case , and it aired Friday at 9 p.m. on HLN . 
Kyron Horman was 7 when he disappeared on June 4 in Portland , Oregon . 
His stepmother says she last saw him that day at his elementary school , walking down a hallway toward his classroom . 
Kyron never made it to that classroom , though a photo places him at a science fair at the school earlier in the day . 
Law enforcement personnel have not named any suspects or people of interest . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
