February 04 , 2011 | By Michael Martinez , CNN An Egyptian army soldier tries to keep order during clashes between pro and anti government demonstrators Thursday . 
President Obama condemned the attacks on journalists in Egypt Friday amid mounting criticism that the assaults were being orchestrated by President Hosni Mubarark to suppress international coverage of bloodshed by pro-government operatives against peaceful protesters . 
`` We continue to be crystal clear that we oppose violence as a response to this crisis , '' Obama said . 
`` We are sending a strong , unequivocal message : Attacks on reporters are unacceptable . 
Attacks on human rights activists are unacceptable . 
Attacks on peaceful protesters are unacceptable . '' 
White House press secretary Robert Gibbs said Friday that the administration continues `` to receive very disturbing reports '' of `` systematic targeting '' of journalists in Egypt . 
The Committee to Protect Journalists has excoriated Mubarak for `` an unprecedented and systematic attack '' on international reporters . 
`` This is a dark day for Egypt and a dark day for journalism , '' CPJ executive director Joel Simon said . 
`` With this turn of events , Egypt is seeking to create an information vacuum that puts it in the company of the world 's worst oppressors , countries such as Burma , Iran and Cuba . '' 
`` We hold President Mubarak personally responsible for this unprecedented action , '' said Simon , `` and call on the Egyptian government to reverse course immediately . '' 
The Committee to Protect Journalists , an independent , nonprofit committee promoting press freedoms worldwide , said Friday it has recorded at least 101 direct attacks on journalists and news facilities this week . 
The anti-press activities include assaults , detentions and threats , the committee said . 
Friday 's attacks were n't as severe as Thursday 's peak offenses , but the hostilities against a free press remain at `` an alarming level that must be halted , '' the committee said . 
Plainclothes and uniformed agents reportedly went so far as to even enter journalists ' hotels and confiscate equipment , the committee said . 
A journalist shot a week ago while covering a demonstration died Friday , a state newspaper reported , according to the committee . 
It was the first reported journalistic death during the weeklong uprising , it said . 
