`` This a dark day for Egypt and a dark day for journalism , '' organization says `` Attacks on reporters are unacceptable , '' President Obama says Al-Jazeera says a `` gang of thugs '' stormed its office Journalists have been beaten , detained and harassed -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- U.S. President Barack Obama condemned the attacks on journalists in Egypt Friday amid mounting criticism that the assaults were being orchestrated by President Hosni Mubarak to suppress international coverage of bloodshed by pro-government operatives against peaceful protesters . 
`` We continue to be crystal clear that we oppose violence as a response to this crisis , '' Obama said . 
`` We are sending a strong , unequivocal message : Attacks on reporters are unacceptable . 
Attacks on human rights activists are unacceptable . 
Attacks on peaceful protesters are unacceptable . '' 
White House press secretary Robert Gibbs said Friday that the administration continues `` to receive very disturbing reports '' of `` systematic targeting '' of journalists in Egypt . 
The Committee to Protect Journalists has excoriated Mubarak for `` an unprecedented and systematic attack '' on international reporters . 
CNN ordered not to film Egypt protests Hosni Mubarak : In his words Anderson Cooper takes on intimidation `` This is a dark day for Egypt and a dark day for journalism , '' CPJ executive director Joel Simon said . 
`` With this turn of events , Egypt is seeking to create an information vacuum that puts it in the company of the world 's worst oppressors , countries such as Burma , Iran and Cuba . '' 
`` We hold President Mubarak personally responsible for this unprecedented action , '' said Simon , `` and call on the Egyptian government to reverse course immediately . '' 
The Committee to Protect Journalists , an independent , nonprofit committee promoting press freedoms worldwide , said Friday it has recorded at least 101 direct attacks on journalists and news facilities this week . 
The anti-press activities include assaults , detentions and threats , the committee said . 
Friday 's attacks were n't as severe as Thursday 's peak offenses , but the hostilities against a free press remain at `` an alarming level that must be halted , '' the committee said . 
Plainclothes and uniformed agents reportedly went so far as to even enter journalists ' hotels and confiscate equipment , the committee said . 
A journalist shot a week ago while covering a demonstration died Friday , a state newspaper reported , according to the committee . 
It was the first reported journalistic death during the weeklong uprising , it said . 
Ahmad Mohamed Mahmoud of the newspaper Al-Ta ` awun , published by the state-owned Al-Ahram Foundation , died from a sniper 's bullets fired while he was filming confrontations between demonstrators and security forces January 28 in central Cairo 's Qasr al-Aini area , adjacent to Tahrir Square , Al-Jazeera and the semi-official Al-Ahram reported Friday , according to the committee . 
The Mubarak regime has n't discriminated in which sorts of journalists are being attacked : Egyptians and other Arabs , Russians , Americans , Europeans and South Americans all have been targeted , the committee said . 
Speaking on state-run Nile TV Thursday , Egyptian Vice President Omar Suleiman mentioned the role of the media and , at least in part , blamed journalists for the country 's current unrest . 
Protests on ` until Mubarak steps down ' What 's the role of Egypt 's military ? 
Reporting in Cairo by Twitter Meanwhile , in Washington , U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton condemned the attacks Thursday , `` in the strongest possible terms . '' 
Pro-government journalists and officials have been engaging in a campaign the past two days accusing foreign journalists of being spies or , in particular , `` Israeli spies , '' the committee said . 
In one instance , a woman whose face was obscured `` confessed '' to having been trained by `` Americans and Israelis '' in Qatar , where Al-Jazeera is based , the committee said . 
NPR journalist Lourdes Garcia-Navarro and her Egyptian-American colleague Ashraf Khalil , provided a typical account Thursday of how routine street reporting quickly turned in a thuggish assault on them . 
While interviewing a taxi driver about food , money and security in a middle-class neighborhood across the river and a good distance from the often-violent Tahrir Square , at least a dozen men suddenly surrounded them , Garcia-Navarro said on the NPR website . 
They asked for IDs and whether they were Israeli spies or worked for Al-Jazeera , an Arabic-language media outlet whose extensive coverage has angered the Mubarak regime . 
The men surrounded Garcia-Navarro in her car and repeatedly punched Khalil in the face . 
After 10 minutes , the army showed up , calmed the mob and protected the journalists . 
`` What happened today -- I 've lived here on and off since 1997 -- I did not think they had it in them , this kind of violent paranoia and xenophobia , '' journalist Khalil said . 
`` I 've never seen Egypt like this . '' 
The attacks against reporters targeted some of the most prominent news organizations in the Western and Arab worlds alike . 
The Al-Jazeera network said Friday that a `` gang of thugs '' stormed its Cairo office and burned the facility and the equipment there . 
Al-Jazeera said that over the past week `` its bureau was forcibly closed , all its journalists had press credentials revoked , and nine journalists were detained at various stages . '' 
The network said it `` faced unprecedented levels of interference in its broadcast signal as well as persistent and repeated attempts to bring down its websites . '' 
Like other networks , Al-Jazeera said it wo n't let such obstacles stop it from gathering news . 
`` We are grateful for the support we have received from across the world for our coverage in Egypt and can assure everyone that we will continue our work undeterred , '' a network spokesman said . 
Meanwhile , the French Foreign Ministry said it has had no word on the whereabouts of three French journalists and a French researcher in Egypt . 
The journalists work for Le Figaro newspaper and Magneto Presse , and the researcher is employed by Amnesty International , it said . 
A prominent blogger , Wael Abbas , said a group of people who said they thought he was a foreigner detained him Friday afternoon . 
They turned him over to the military , which released him , he said . 
And the Egyptian military secured 18 journalists who were captured by thugs and took them to a `` safe place , '' Egyptian state media reported Friday . 
It was unclear which news organizations the journalists worked for or where they had been taken . 
CNN could not independently confirm the report . 
Journalists attempting to cover unrest in Egypt have reported being beaten , arrested and harassed by security forces and police Thursday , leading to sharply limited television coverage of the protests . 
Along with Al-Jazeera , other news outlets -- including the BBC , Al-Arabiya , ABC News , the Washington Post , Fox News , and CNN -- said members of their staffs had been attacked or otherwise targeted . 
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch also reported that staffers were detained . 
U.S. State Department officials told CNN earlier that they had information that Egypt 's Interior Ministry was behind the journalist detentions , citing reports from the U.S. Embassy in Egypt . 
`` The threats to journalists on the street were explicit , and increasing . 
We pulled back accordingly to protect our people , '' said CNN Executive Vice President Tony Maddox . 
The Islamist group Muslim Brotherhood reported that its website office was stormed Friday by security forces , who arrested `` the journalists , the technicians and the administrators '' in the office . 
A `` gang of thugs '' accompanied the forces , the Muslim Brotherhood said . 
Some of those individuals were later seen being taken near the Interior Ministry headquarters , the website said . 
CNN 's Christine Theodorou , Jill Dougherty , Elise Labott , Ben Smith , Mary Rogers and Caroline Faraj contributed to this report . 
