By the CNN Wire Staff NEW : Opposition leader ElBaradei shares his vision for what government might look like Some opposition leaders say they will meet with the government ; others dig in 5,000 people have been injured in the demonstrations , the health ministry says After two days of violent clashes , Mubarak 's supporters are notably absent Cairo , Egypt -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Egypt 's burgeoning reform movement drew tens of thousands of people , undeterred by deadly clashes and government crackdowns , to Cairo 's Tahrir Square on Friday for a mass rally with a single message for the president : `` Leave . '' 
The central Cairo plaza transformed from a bloody battleground to the scene of a largely peaceful political rally dubbed `` Day of Departure '' as Egyptians gave embattled President Hosni Mubarak until the end of the day to relinquish power . 
Protesters did not get their wish and thousands remained in the square well into the night , defying a curfew that has been widely ignored . 
Heavy gunfire was heard in and around Tahrir Square . 
Among the demonstrators were the secretary-general of the Arab League and the spokesman for the largest center of Sunni Muslim learning , two men representing pillars of authority . 
Attempts to defuse the crisis , meanwhile , were halting but ongoing . 
Government brass had signaled a wish to meet with opposition leaders but those talks have not yet gained traction , a senior U.S. official told CNN Friday . 
Vice President Omar Suleiman 's offer to meet opposition groups fell flat , said the official , who did not want to be identified because of the sensitivity of the rapidly evolving situation . 
No key opposition leaders showed up . 
CNN ordered not to film Egypt protests At a glance : Nations facing unrest That opposition , a disparate group of at least six factions and political groups nominally headed by Nobel laureate Mohamed ElBaradei , is still `` jockeying , '' the official said , hedging their bets on how events will play out . 
Some have refused to negotiate until Mubarak steps down . 
`` The so-called dialogue is the first step to exhaust this revolution . 
The president must go , '' said Mohammed Habib , deputy chairman of the Muslim Brotherhood , an opposition Islamist group officially banned by the government . 
Some opposition parties that had previously refused to meet with government officials , however , told CNN Friday they have agreed to meet with Suleiman on Saturday . 
Refat Said , head of the left-leaning Tagammuparty , said his group will meet with the vice president , as will the liberal Wafd party . 
Ayman Nour , head of the al-Ghad party , said members of his group will decide soon on whether they will accept the government 's invitation to meet . 
`` Based on promises that the government gave us that they will investigate into the Tahrir Square clashes , we agreed to meet tomorrow , '' said Fouad Badrawi , secretary-general of the Wafd party . 
And 19 men , including veteran diplomat Amre Moussa , have formed a so-called `` Committee of the Wise '' in a bid to calm the crisis . 
The group of independents , which wants to be at the table during crucial government talks , has called for Mubarak to remain as a symbolic leader and to delegate to Suleiman responsibility for the transition period . 
Day 11 of the uprising was mostly jubilant in Cairo 's downtown square , but tensions remained high . 
In another plaza just half a kilometer away from Tahrir Square , supporters and foes of Mubarak fought running street battles . 
Youths wielding sticks and rocks engaged in fights and the sound of gunfire rang out . 
The Muslim Brotherhood reported that a security force accompanied by a `` gang of thugs '' stormed the office of its news website Friday and arrested the journalists , technicians and administrators . 
The satellite news network Al-Jazeera reported a similar attack on its Cairo office . 
Those attacks came after two days of violence and a government crackdown on journalists and human rights activists bearing witness to the crisis . 
Some had predicted the demonstrations might lose their momentum . 
That was hardly the case as anti-government protesters jammed TahrirSquare chanting slogans like `` He leaves , we do n't leave '' and `` The blood of the martyrs will not be forgotten . '' 
A massive banner in the middle of the square said in English : `` The people demand the removal of the regime . '' 
The demonstrators built a barbed-wire barricade and stacked piles of rocks throughout the square , surrounded Friday by soldiers in riot gear and tanks . 
Volunteers checked identification cards of people entering the square and searched them for weapons . 
Others stood by with emergency medical kits . 
Large screens showed coverage of the demonstrations on state television and Al-Jazeera as people played music , sang patriotic songs and danced . 
A man with an Egyptian flag wrapped around his head sat on a curb , flashing a victory sign . 
It was a remarkable change from the scenes that unfolded in the square Wednesday and Thursday when pro- and anti-Mubarak supporters clashed repeatedly , leaving at least 11 people dead and more than 900 others injured . 
Journalists , citizens attacked in Egypt Who is instigating the Cairo violence ? 
The Health Ministry reported that at least 5,000 people have been injured since the demonstrations began in Egypt early last week . 
Many believe the violent clashes were orchestrated by the embattled regime and on Friday , the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights called for a `` transparent and impartial '' probe . 
But defenders of Mubarak were notably absent from the square Friday . 
Instead , they staged a `` Day of Loyalty '' rally at a nearby mosque . 
Mubarak has said he will not seek another term in the September election , but now faces increasing pressure from the United States and other world powers to step aside much sooner . 
U.S. President Barack Obama skirted the question of whether Mubarak should resign immediately Friday , saying instead that the `` key question '' the Egyptian president should be asking himself is `` how do I leave a legacy behind '' that helps Egypt get through the current transition . 
`` There needs to be a transition process that begins now . 
That transition must initiate a process that respects the universal rights of the Egyptian people and that leads to free and fair elections , '' Obama said . 
Later , a senior U.S. official said that Obama 's remarks reflected the fact that the United States recognizes that certain legitimate legislative hurdles must be taken care of before Mubarak steps down . 
While pressing for Mubarak to act quickly , the U.S. official said the White House recognizes the process will take some time . 
The Obama administration is hopeful negotiations will begin Saturday between members of Mubarak 's government and various opposition representatives , the senior U.S. official said . 
Egyptian Prime Minister Ahmed Shafiq told the Al-Arabiya network that it would take until September to work out constitutional issues so that a new government could come to power . 
At this juncture , said Shafiq , compromises were key as the country pursues dialogue with opposition groups . 
Opposition leader ElBaradei told CNN 's Eliot Spitzer late Friday that he has been in contact with various parties , united in their belief that Mubarak must go . 
`` We have been in agreement right now that we 'd probably have a presidential council of three members including somebody from the army . 
We have a caretaker government ... who would then run the country for a year , prepare the grounds for the necessary changes in the electoral process to ensure that we will have all what we need for a free and fair election , '' he said . 
ElBaradei did not rule out the possibility of his running for president . 
The thirst for immediate change was evident as rallies took place in several Egyptian cities . 
In Alexandria , thousands made their way from the city 's central mosque down the wide seaside Corniche . 
`` This is a great revolution and the whole regime , the entire system needs to be changed . 
The revolution must continue until all objectives are met , '' the mosque 's imam told the crowd . 
Writing on the walls leading to the mosque , where police and anti-government demonstrators clashed last Friday , said `` Game OVER '' and `` Pharaoh 's last day . '' 
Roughly 35,000 people took to the streets Friday in the city of Suez , a spokesman for opposition leader Ayman Nour told CNN . 
Among the protesters in Cairo was Moussa , the Arab League 's secretary-general , and Muhammad Rifaa al-Tahtawi , spokesman for Al-Azhar University , the prestigious center for Sunni Muslim education . 
Al-Tahtawi told CNN he resigned from his Al-Azhar position and joined the anti-government protesters in Tahrir Square . 
`` I am against the regime . 
And I am supporting the revolution , '' he said . 
Mubarak told ABC News Thursday that he would like to step down right away , but can not because he does not want to risk plunging his nation into chaos . 
`` I do n't care what people say about me , '' Mubarak told ABC . 
`` Right now I care about my country , I care about Egypt . 
`` I was very unhappy about yesterday . 
I do not want to see Egyptians fighting each other , '' he said in the interview conducted at the heavily guarded presidential palace , where the embattled leader has been staying with his family . 
He accused the Muslim Brotherhood for instigating the violence , while his deputy also laid blame on the media . 
`` I actually blame certain friendly nations who have television channels , they are not friendly at all , who have intensified the youth against the nation and the state , '' Suleiman said on Nile TV . 
`` They have filled in the minds of the youth with wrongdoings , with allegations , and this is unacceptable . '' 
The government cracked down Thursday , arresting and beating journalists and human rights workers documenting events . 
The harassment continued Friday with the storming of Al-Jazeera 's office in Cairo . 
The network reported its office was attacked and burned by `` gangs of thugs . '' 
In the last week its bureau was forcibly closed , all its journalists had press credentials revoked , and nine journalists were detained at various stages . 
Al-Jazeera has also faced unprecedented levels of interference in its broadcast signal as well as persistent and repeated attempts to bring down its websites , the network said . 
Late Friday , Human Rights Watch , a rights organization , said that Egyptian authorities had released researchers from its group , Amnesty International and two foreign journalists . 
It called on officials to also free its Egyptian colleagues , who it says are still detained . 
`` Why does n't the government want us around ? '' 
asked New York Times columnist Nicholas Kristof , `` What is it that it plans to do in the next few days that it really does n't want cameras to be able to report on ? '' 
The Committee to Protect Journalists , a New York-based advocacy organization , said Friday it has documented at least 101 attacks on journalists and news facilities this week . 
The advocacy group cited numerous media reports claiming that Ahmad Mohamed Mahmoud , a journalist working for the newspaper Al-Ta ` awun , had died of wounds suffered while filming the protests . 
White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said the administration continues `` to receive very disturbing reports '' of `` systematic targeting '' of journalists in Egypt . 
Appalled by the attacks , U.S. officials encouraged Mubarak 's government to plan a path out of power . 
Vice President Joe Biden urged his Egyptian counterpart to ensure that `` credible , inclusive negotiations begin immediately '' with opposition political groups to expedite the creation of a new democratic government , according to a statement from Biden 's office . 
The U.S. Senate , meanwhile approved a resolution calling for Mubarak to immediately begin a peaceful transition and transfer power to a caretaker government . 
CNN 's Amir Ahmed , Ivan Watson , Jill Dougherty , Nic Robertson , Saad Abedine and journalist Ian Lee contributed to this report . 
