Egyptian demonstrators demanding the resignation of President Mubarak carry the body of a dead protestor past army tanks . 
With unprecedented numbers of protesters on the streets of Egypt calling for President Hosni Mubarak to resign , what clues do earlier demonstrations in the region offer about what will happen in Cairo ? 
Tunisia , a relatively small and apparently stable country on the Mediterranean , triggered the current wave of anti-government protests across the Middle East . 
It had been ruled by President Zine El Abedine Ben Ali for 23 years and was seen as a well-established police state . 
But in December 2010 , a fruit seller named Mohamed Bouazizi , 26 , set himself on fire in protest after police took away his fruit cart . 
The profoundly symbolic act of protest awakened a suppressed fury in the population . 
President Ben Ali visited Bouazizi 's hospital bedside -- the college graduate lived for three weeks before dying January 4 -- but he was unable to assuage the nation 's rage at decades of corruption , low living standards and grinding repression . 
After weeks of protests in which more than 100 people died , according to the United Nations , Ben Ali fled the country on January 14 . 
Longtime Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi took the reins of power and created a national unity government , including both members of the old guard and opposition . 
But the people demanded fuller reform , and Ghannouchi has continued to shuffle the government to try to appease an angry populace . 
New presidential elections have been promised within 60 days of Ben Ali 's flight . 
That 's a dramatically different outcome from what happened in Iran a year and a half earlier , when huge protests erupted after presidential elections in June 2009 . 
Many Iranians expected the defeat of incumbent hardline President Mahmoud Ahamdinejad , but official results showed him as the winner . 
Incredulous at the outcome and determined to overturn it , Iranians took to the streets , declaring that a `` Sea of Green '' -- the color of Islam -- would force Ahmadinejad out of power . 
The apparent revolution captured the imagination of the world , especially after a young woman , Neda Agha-Soltan , was killed by a bullet to the chest during a demonstration . 
The last moments of her life were caught on a shaky video that was seen by millions after it was posted online . 
But Iranian security forces cracked down hard . 
The government-backed plainclothes militia known as the Basij waded into demonstrations with motorcycles and clubs , and untold numbers of protesters were rounded up and thrown into prison . 
