2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Some of the coldest air of the season will plummet southward and combine with another storm developing over the southern Plains . 
An intense surface low will develop over north Texas and pull abundant warm , moist air from the Gulf of Mexico into the frigid Arctic air diving southward into the Plains . 
The result : blizzard conditions , heavy snow , ice storms and tornadoes . 
This storm appears to be another one for the record books . 
Very heavy snow will fall from Oklahoma northeastward through Kansas , Missouri and Illinois . 
Snow accumulations here will be measured in feet , not in inches . 
With massive protests against Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak entering their seventh day and a major opposition leader addressing demonstrators in Cairo , this week is shaping up to be a pivotal one for the country 's future . 
The unrest is starting to affect Egyptians ' food supplies and the United States is calling for a peaceful transition in Egypt to democracy . 
Governments of countries near Egypt are no doubt concerned about to what extent the unrest will spread to them -LRB- after all , Egypt 's protests came days after Tunisia 's president fled protests there -RRB- or how it will affect their long-term security . 
What will Mubarak do , and on what side will the Egyptian army fall ? 
Here 's a look at this and some of the other stories we plan to follow this week : Will Mubarak cling to power in Egypt ? 
Thousands of demonstrators took to the streets of Egypt 's major cities last week to demand an end to Mubarak 's 30-year rule , prompting the government to deploy the army to deal with civil unrest for the first time in a generation . 
The protests came after similar disturbances in Tunisia forced then-President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to flee the country . 
Both Egypt and Tunisia have seen dramatic rises in the cost of living in recent years and accusations of corruption among the ruling elite . 
Demonstrations also have taken place in recent weeks Algeria , Yemen and Jordan . 
-- -LRB- Update 2:04 p.m. Cairo , 7:04 a.m. ET -RRB- Protesters gathered in Cairo 's Tahrir Square said Monday that they were organizing a `` million man march '' around Cairo for Tuesday . 
-- Demonstrators also told CNN that they are organizing a `` million man march '' in Alexandria , but can not confirm when they will start . 
-- Tony Blair , Middle East peace envoy and former British prime minister , told Sky News Monday that the developments in Egypt have `` vast implications for the state of Israel , the Palestinians and the state of the peace process . '' 
He also said there are n't just two elements - a government that has long been in power and a movement for democracy - in the situation . 
`` There are three elements , because there is also a very strong Islamist movement in Egypt through the Muslim Brotherhood ... I think that the people of Egypt will not elect a Muslim Brotherhood government . '' 
-- The Canadian government will begin evacuating its citizens from Egypt as early as Monday using chartered flights bound for Europe , according to the country 's foreign affairs minister . 
-- Two flights carrying Israelis from Egypt to Israel landed Monday morning , according to an Israeli foreign ministry spokesman . 
Another flight was scheduled to land Monday evening . 
-- State-run Nile TV reported that police forces were scheduled to start deploying and resume their duties throughout Egypt on Monday . 
Police clashed violently with protesters last week and have been virtually absent from the streets since Saturday . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
