Thousands of protestors continue to pour onto streets in Egypt demanding Hosni Mubarak to step down . 
clashes continue between Egyptian protestors and riot police . 
Egyptians press for freedom on the 6th day of demonstrations . 
Social media proved to be vital in spreading the word to protestors across Egypt . 
Khaled Said became a symbol after allegedly being tortured to death on the hands of police in Egypt . 
President Mubarak demanded the government to resign after continuos criticism from demonstrators . 
January 30th , 2011 12:47 pm ET Americas puppet dictator Mubarak looks like he will not survive a call for democracy from the people of Egypt . 
In response America immediately sends in the puppet ElBaradei as a supposed representative of the Egyptian people . 
Egypts freedom movement is being co-opted quicker than the Tea Party . 
And the usual suspects in America are pulling the strings of corruption . 
But here is a fact that America politicians may find hard to swallow . 
Whats happening in Egypt is in fact happening all over the world . 
Belgium has not had a government for nearly one year . 
The people are sick of all sides . 
Americans gives a candidate a landslide victory one year and then a landslide defeat the next . 
Americans vote candidates out with disgust , they do not vote candidates in with belief . 
Britain has a coalition government as nobody has enough faith in any party . 
Ireland , Spain , Greece , France are subject to massive protest rallies and call for their governments to resign . 
Its global and the message from the people of the world is they are sick of dishonest , corrupt politicians who betray their countries , allow the banks to rape the state and then crow about democracy while they treat all regions of the world as theirs to command . 
January 31st , 2011 5:12 am ET Funny how you quit reporting it on Sunday night and just started showing repeats . 
Real nice caring job . 
Thanks for your support . 
and all the other populations subject to corrupt , dishonest dictators whose voices are muffled or whose minds are indoctrinated . 
One of the greatest qualities of democracy is freedom of expression but it is also one of the greatest challenges . 
Your opinions have long declared your distaste for democracy and it is clear that your problem is coping with anyone who has a different outlook to your own , somewhat similar to the world 's dictatorial leaders . 
I agree that many in the West , including governments and media are taking the wrong position in the Egyptian crisis , simplifying a process that is full of uncertainties and dangers , by promoting individuals who have specific contacts with diplomats and reporters , but unaware of the crucial importance of stability in the region . 
Positive change is difficult to be acheived when it is pushed by the media , whether the Muslim Brotherhood sponsored al Jazeera or the various Western owned outlets -LRB- with their own political agendas -RRB- . 
People need to think for themselves and initiate change at their own calling and at their own pace , not for the sake of camaras and reporters for transmission around the world which in themselves influence foreign government black and white opinions . 
February 1st , 2011 12:17 am ET Miriam , you are the type to repeat what you have been told on the news and then think your clever and well informed . 
In other words you are the perfect tool for manipulation . 
Its easy to manipulate you , because you cant see beyond nationalism and racism . 
Sadly you are the very common majority . 
Try to open your eyes . 
Look at the global corporatisation of Governments . 
Look at the scandal of the UN and the IMF . 
Look at the incremental high jacking of societies . 
Are you so dumb that you think the destruction of society will stop with a financial melt down in Greece , Spain , Ireland etc. . 
Are you so ignorant that you think that the Arab world has torn itself apart without any help . 
Are you so blind that you do n't see the banks gain bigger profits from all this misery . 
Keep waving your flag and repeating the nonsense your leaders tell you to believe . 
Follow them like the pied piper . 
But one day the troubles of Greece , Egypt and Spain will arrive at your door and you will become hungry , broke and lost . 
Alternatively you could become a meaningful human being , look beyond the BS in your favorite news paper and stand against the elite ruling classes who have screwed up your world . 
Or is it easier to attack the weak like Palestinians and blindly take all you can , until one day its your turn to lose everything . 
February 1st , 2011 1:30 am ET The danish government now supports democracy in Egypt , EVEN if `` the muslim brotherhood '' would be voted in . 
Well , do we not support democracy if the `` wrong '' people win by popular demand ? 
For the people of Egypt , I wish for a non-violent revolution , ending in a shape of government to their liking . 
The problem with modern democracy in many states around the world , is that to become a leader , you need money . 
A lot of money . 
Obamas campaign costs added up to 750 million $ ... Where is the democracy in this ? 
How can the working man compete with it ? 
Modern democracy is a pyramid of money , which looks a lot like the medieval feudal system , and until we , the people say no , it will keep looking like this . 
Peace to Egypt an power to the people February 1st , 2011 6:29 am ET Guys , it is not about USA or the west is particular , it is about the freedom , liberty and accountability which seem that those things are not available in the Middle East . 
But go back to Egypt where I came from Egyptians suffers for the last 60 years of corruption , dishonesty , suppression , manipulative media , lack of economic planning and dictatorship in each of those underqualified leaders and their regimes . 
The Egyptian constitution becomes an ill piece of legislation which has no relation to the fundamentals of the word constitution !! After too many changes to suit Mubarak and before him , Saddat and before Saddat was Naser , Sorry , at Naser s time there was no Constitution !! He did not need one because he knew it all and that was the beginning of the dark days for Egyptians . 
To John , I would like to say that ElBaradei is not a puppet to USA and he is an honest Egyptian , well educated and graduated from the law school in Cairo university and has a PhD in international law and I wish that he takes over an interim government until a proper Constitution get drafted to suit the people not the ruler !! What Egyptians need is responsible government to be accountable to its work and not a life time ruler . 
About the Moslim brotherhood , those people are not the as the media portraying them , it is just way of holding on power by indicating that if the Angle Mubarak goes the west will face the mighty extremists !! So the devil you know better than the devil you do not , and that is a naive approach from the west and I have to say that this is nonsense . 
For the rest of the Middle Eastern countries I wish you wake up too . 
Fortunately , in the `` world '' I live in , there is exposure to many information sources and media with every opinion under the sun . 
Consequently , one can develop one 's own ideas dismissing any attempt at manipulation and propaganda in the process . 
Those are the advantages of a democratic society with the institutions necessary to protect its citizens from descent into anarchy and chaos . 
February 1st , 2011 11:18 am ET Sayed K , thanks for your post . 
You say ElBaradei is not a puppet to USA . 
You say he 's only going to form a unity government until free elections are possible . 
My dear friend that s exactly what they said about Hamid Karzai in Afghanistan . 
ElBaradei is a UN man . 
What good has the UN been for the middle east ? 
Please understand the IMF ordered Egypt to cut food subsidies . 
They new this would cause riots . 
And just after they cut the subsidies ElBaradei flew in from the west . 
Mubarak has been a puppet for America , and he held you down with bullets made in the USA . 
But he is old and needs to be replaced . 
So in comes ElBaradei . 
The Muslim brotherhood has been funded by Britains MI5 since 1926 . 
The British and Americans want revolution to sweep the middle east . 
They hope your countries can be divided into smaller blocks like North and South Sudan . 
The want a new united Arab regime in Saudi and Egypt to fight Iran . 
The Egyptians on the street were never calling for ElBaradei . 
Most Egyptians on the street have limited access to modern communications and know little of ElBaradei . 
Ask the people who they want , do accept what the TV tells you is the people choice . 
February 1st , 2011 11:21 am ET Ask the people who they want , do NOT accept what the TV tells you is the people choice . 
It is quite likely that most of the 80 million Egyptians are satisfied with the Mubarak regime and are disinterested in change and anarchy . 
Unfortunately , they are also vulnerable to conspiracy theories . 
What the media is not telling you ? 
Inherent problems of the Arab world : - Dreaming to impose Islam worldwide by force - All the ME regimes and religious leaders brain washed peoples mind against external imaginary enemies - Investing in armies but not in future building - Increasing prices of basic food . 
- Inability to compete in the modern world No political movement calls to deal with the infrastructure issues ; Lessen to ME people and political declarations it is obvious that : The Arab masses want a solution to the unemployment and food problems regardless the regime type . 
February 1st , 2011 5:40 pm ET It is interesting that according to many media and commentators above , all of a sudden , millions of people around the world now agree with Avigdor Lieberman . 
Will that send them running in the other direction ?! February 2nd , 2011 12:35 am ET Several aspects need to be considered by the US and any other government , as well as anybody expressing opinions or support to Egypt : 1 . 
If you were in President Mubarak 's shoes , you would be scared . 
He fears for his life and unless a safe exit is guaranteed for him , preferably by another country , he will have difficulty acknowledging that he needs to step down immediately , for the sake of his own people . 
The world should not offer `` half-ass '' support and deals , as this will only breed resentment and lead to violence and a militant theocracy taking over . 
President Obama 's speech this evening is an example of such deal . 
Think : if you were an Egyptian putting your life on the line out in the streets , what impact would his message have on you ? 
Egyptian people need help handling the protests and the post-protest times . 
They have not had the privilege of growing up in a free society and being privy to peaceful and collaborative tools of resolving conflict . 
What is going on with this world ??? what about pease ? 
February 2nd , 2011 5:47 pm ET I plead all the European leaders and USA to force Mubarak to resign before the massacre among the protesters . 
February 3rd , 2011 1:01 pm ET noo plz not by this way if Mubarak to resign now egypt will be destroyed the people who protesters now in ELTAHRER dont representing Egyptians I plead all the European leaders and USA to ASK EGYPTIONS OUTSIDE -LRB- ELTAHER -RRB- before take any decision How about this amazing policy statement from the Quran ? 
`` He will teach him the scripture , wisdom , the Torah , and certain prohibitions imposed upon you . 
I come to you with sufficient proof from your Lord . 
Therefore , you shall observe GOD , and obey me . 
O followers of the scripture , why do you argue about Abraham , when the Torah and the Gospel were not revealed until after him ? 
Do you not understand ? '' 
That 's how we in the US can help democratize the entire Middle East . 
Wonder how that would sound in Hebrew , Koine Greek , even Latin which were all political before the writing of the Quran . 
Is n't this the highest form of freedom of speech there is ? 
i am Egyptian . . 
and now i proud February 6th , 2011 5:47 am ET Those who start protesting in Tahrir square are the young generation . 
It is true that many of opposition Parties try to ride the wave . 
But , they will not succeed as they never represented the people . 
As for the Muslim Brotherhood they are not welcomed by the people at all , even from religious Muslims . 
There numbers are not as the west think . 
They are not welcomed by anyone and will never take over Egypt . 
As for Mubarak he is trying to gain back his power over the country . 
He might succeed as the changes that he made are fake and all the new faces are in fact supporters to his regime . 
We need really the changes we claim , but the result is not clear at all ! 
February 8th , 2011 1:56 pm ET Learn , think and watch your steps ! 
The free world is advised to learn the lesson of `` Tehran 1979 , '' when a pro-Western dictator , the Shah , was overthrown by an alliance of reformists and Islamists . 
Shortly after the fall of the Shah , the Islamists smashed the reformists , establishing an anti-Western regime that sponsored anti liberal and democratic values using terrorism and radicalism throughout the world . 
The demonstrations in Tunisia and Egypt undermined the foundations of much of Obama 's approach to the Middle East . 
Obama administration Middle East policy is lead by the motto `` anything but Bush . '' 
It castigates Bush for being unrealistic regarding the promotion of democracy in the Arab world . 
Bush 's support for democratization led not to democracy but to the rise of Hamas Islamic terrorists - a branch of Muslim Brotherhood in Gaza . 
Now Obama is repeating Bush 's mistake in Egypt the leading strategic country in the Arab world . 
Obama calls for the inclusion of `` non-secular '' groups in the new government . 
Islamists anti-Western values and democratic government is deeply ideological and is not related to any American policy . 
Obama willingness to abandon USA allies and embrace the Islamists will harm the standing of USA allies and strengthen anti-Western Islamists across the region Comments are moderated by CNN , in accordance with the CNN Comment Policy , and may not appear on this blog until they have been reviewed and deemed appropriate for posting . 
Also , due to the volume of comments we receive , not all comments will be posted . 
Welcome to the Inside the Middle East blog where CNN 's journalists post news , views and video from across the region . 
This is also a place where you can start the discussion so please keep your comments coming . 
We highlight not only current news stories but also anecdotes and issues that do n't always make the top of the headlines . 
Inside the Middle East airs the first week of every month on the following days and times : 
