Extensive live coverage across all CNN Worldwide platforms , including : CNN\/U . 
S. and CNN International on television ; CNN.com ; CNN 's free apps for iPad , iPhone and iPod touch ; and CNNArabic.com , CNN 's Arabic language website based in Dubai which draws upon CNN 's global resources of journalists and video production . 
There are six teams on the ground in Egypt : Ben Wedeman in Cairo -LRB- @benCNN -RRB- , Nic Robertson in Alexandria -LRB- @NicRoberstonCNN -RRB- , Frederik Pleitgen in Cairo -LRB- @fpleitgenCNN -RRB- , CNN en Espa ol s Jose Levy in Cairo , Ivan Watson in Cairo -LRB- @IvanCNN -RRB- and Arwa Damon in Cairo -LRB- @arwadamonCNN -RRB- . 
Hala Gorani will arrive on Monday bringing the total to seven . 
As the crackdown on media and communications continues , CNN is also covering the story through the lens of social media . 
Using CNN iReport and other platforms much as the network did during the Iranian uprising in June 09 CNN is showing this story in a different light . 
Mohammed Jamjoom -LRB- @JamjoomCNN -RRB- , one of CNN 's Middle East-based correspondents , is currently in Atlanta working this story across all platforms from CNN 's Egypt Desk . 
In addition to the reporting from Egypt , CNN is taking advantage of its large newsgathering hub in Abu Dhabi and the International Desk in Atlanta , which has numerous Arab speakers and specialists . 
CNN 's DC political team are covering this story , including senior White House correspondent Ed Henry -LRB- @edhenryCNN -RRB- , as it could change the political and diplomatic dynamics of the region and Israel 's security . 
` CNN , which has an international channel as well as two channels in the United States , had a more robust presence in Egypt than any other U.S.-based television company . 
On Friday , the company had three correspondents in Egypt , and one more on the way . ' 
Brian Stelter , New York Times , January 28 , 2011 -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Notify me of follow-up comments via email . 
Notify me of new posts via email . 
CNN Press Room is the official website for CNN 's public relations team . 
Providing the latest announcements and information about CNN 's various networks , programs and platforms , CNN Press Room provides direct access to press releases , fact sheets , video and images , as well as transcripts , anchor and reporter bios , a running stream of the latest tweets from @CNNPR , and a comprehensive list of individual contacts in the CNN PR department . 
Osama bin Laden killed in Pakistan Rudy Giuliani on how New York reacted to bin Laden 's death The CNN Grill Returns to South by Southwest Timeline to bin Laden 's demise To find the press rep for a specific CNN network , program or platform , click here . 
Connect with CNN Public Relations : 
