2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
-- Demonstrators also told CNN that they are organizing a `` million man march '' in Alexandria , but can not confirm when they will start . 
-- Tony Blair , Middle East peace envoy and former British prime minister , told Sky News Monday that the developments in Egypt have `` vast implications for the state of Israel , the Palestinians and the state of the peace process . '' 
He also said there are n't just two elements - a government that has long been in power and a movement for democracy - in the situation . 
`` There are three elements , because there is also a very strong Islamist movement in Egypt through the Muslim Brotherhood ... I think that the people of Egypt will not elect a Muslim Brotherhood government . '' 
-- The Canadian government will begin evacuating its citizens from Egypt as early as Monday using chartered flights bound for Europe , according to the country 's foreign affairs minister . 
-- Two flights carrying Israelis from Egypt to Israel landed Monday morning , according to an Israeli foreign ministry spokesman . 
Another flight was scheduled to land Monday evening . 
-- State-run Nile TV reported that police forces were scheduled to start deploying and resume their duties throughout Egypt on Monday . 
Police clashed violently with protesters last week and have been virtually absent from the streets since Saturday . 
-- -LRB- Update 5:28 a.m. Cairo , 10:28 p.m. ET -RRB- Egypt 's military is urging people to respect a government-ordered curfew so that authorities can more easily capture those accused of looting and destruction in recent days , an unnamed man dressed in a military uniform said early Monday on state-run Nile TV . 
In the comments , described as the third statement by Egypt 's armed forces since the unrest began , the soldier also asked citizens to help detain outlaws as well as the hundreds who have recently escaped from prisons . 
-- -LRB- Update 4:45 a.m. Cairo , 9:45 p.m. ET -RRB- In remarks to his newly appointed prime minister , Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak recognized the `` peaceful demonstrations '' in recent days as reputable , while adding that some such gatherings had been `` infiltrated '' by people whose goal was to `` spread fear '' in society through hooliganism , looting and other criminal activity , according to a transcript read on state-run Nile TV . 
The president also charged the new Cabinet , to be shaped by newly appointed Prime Minister Ahmed Shafiq , to restore Egyptians ' faith in the economy and relieve people 's suffering by helping contain prices for basic commodities and combat high unemployment . 
Mubarak ordered the new government not to touch government subsidies for key goods . 
-- -LRB- Update 4:25 a.m. Cairo , 9:25 p.m. ET -RRB- Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak urged leaders of his new government Sunday to engage in dialogue with all political parties to help achieve `` a democratic civil society , '' state-run Nile TV reported . 
He also called on them to restore people 's faith in the Egyptian economy and to control unemployment , according to a readout of remarks the embattled president made to his newly appointed prime minister . 
-- -LRB- Update 4:18 a.m. Cairo , 9:18 p.m. ET -RRB- CNN 's Nic Robertson reports from Alexandria , where gunshots - apparently just warning shots - could be heard as protesters walked the streets after curfew Sunday night . 
-- -LRB- Update 3:33 a.m. Cairo , 8:33 p.m. ET -RRB- Addressing the situation in Egypt , Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez said Sunday that `` we do n't want to interfere , but we demand respect for the leaders . '' 
He said that he 's talked with Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi and Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad about the crisis . 
-- -LRB- Update 3:29 a.m. Cairo , 8:29 p.m. ET -RRB- About 20 armed police confronted and ended an anti-Mubarak demonstration Sunday by dozens of people in the West Bank , according to the nonprofit group Human Rights Watch . 
The security forces pushed the demonstrators away from the Egyptian Embassy , the group alleged in a statement . 
-- -LRB- Update 2:52 a.m. Cairo , 7:52 p.m. ET -RRB- Ali Regal , a student activist leader in Alexandria , said that the military is working closely with `` the masses '' - including demonstrators - to coordinate security around the port city . 
`` The army is very helpful and working with us , '' Regal told CNN 's Nic Robertson . 
`` There is a strong cooperation between the masses and the army , that 's what I can tell so far . '' 
-- -LRB- Update 2:10 a.m. Cairo , 7:10 p.m. ET -RRB- Shots can be heard in this video of crowds gathered outside a museum in Cairo on Sunday night . 
Egyptian army troops fired a half-dozen shots into the air in front of the museum . 
Sporadic and sometimes intense gunfire was also heard in other parts of Cairo , as well as in downtown Alexandria . 
-- -LRB- Update 12:24 a.m. Monday in Cairo , 5:24 p.m. ET -RRB- For Americans trapped in Egypt or for concerned relatives and friends back home , the U.S. State Department has released the following information : People interested in departing Egypt via U.S. government-chartered transportation should contact the State Department and the U.S. Embassy in Cairo by sending an e-mail to EgyptEmergencyUSC@state.gov or by calling 1-202-501-4444 . 
You should provide the following information : -- Name , age , place of birth and U.S. passport number and any special medical needs . 
-- Immediate family members -LRB- spouses and children -RRB- who are not U.S. citizens must be documented for entry into the safe-haven country and\/or U.S. , if that is your final destination . 
-- Travelers are permitted only one piece of luggage per person . 
For families concerned that a U.S. citizen in Egypt might require assistance , they should send an e-mail to EgyptEmergencyUSC@state.gov or call 1-888-407-4747 toll-free in the United States and Canada , or outside the United States and Canada on a regular toll line at 1-202-501-4444 . 
The Egyptian army had been deployed to replace police forces that had clashed brutally with demonstrators . 
-- -LRB- Update 11:08 p.m. Cairo , 4:08 p.m. ET -RRB- With many grocers closing shop and food shipments spotty because of unrest , food in Egypt is in short supply , CNN 's Salma Abdelaziz reports . 
Some Egyptian families are running out of staples such as bread , beans and rice . 
-- -LRB- Update 10:38 p.m. Cairo , 3:38 p.m. ET -RRB- Heavy machine gun fire could be overheard Sunday night as thousands of protesters demanding the ouster of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak marched through downtown Alexandria , CNN 's Nic Robertson reported . 
Army troops were positioned in various parts of the port city , having moved some of their checkpoints over the weekend . 
-- -LRB- Update 10:35 p.m. Cairo , 3:35 p.m. ET -RRB- A spokesman for British Prime Minister David Cameron said this about Cameron 's conversation Sunday with U.S. President Barack Obama regarding Egypt : '' -LRB- Cameron and Obama -RRB- were united in their view that Egypt now needed a comprehensive process of political reform , with an orderly , Egyptian-led transition to a government that responded to the grievances of the Egyptian people and to their aspirations for a democratic future . '' 
-- -LRB- Update 10:14 p.m. Cairo , 3:14 p.m. ET -RRB- U.S. President Barack Obama talked about the situation in Egypt during a call Sunday with British Prime Minister David Cameron , according to a White House statement . 
The previous day , he talked by phone to Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan , Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Saudi King Abdullah , the White House said Sunday . 
In those calls , Obama expressed support for `` an orderly transition to a government that is responsive to the aspirations of the Egyptian people , '' according to the statement . 
-- -LRB- Update 9:46 p.m. Cairo , 2:46 p.m. ET -RRB- On Monday , a state-imposed curfew will start one hour earlier than Sunday 's curfew started , state-run Nile TV reported . 
The curfew will run from 3 p.m. Monday to 8 a.m. Tuesday -LRB- 8 a.m. ET Monday to 1 a.m. ET Tuesday -RRB- . 
Sunday 's curfew started at 4 p.m. -LRB- 9 a.m. ET -RRB- and will end at 8 a.m. Monday -LRB- 1 a.m. ET -RRB- . 
-- -LRB- Update 8:18 p.m. Cairo , 1:18 p.m. ET -RRB- CNN tape of Egyptian opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei showed him addressing protesters in Cairo : `` I came today to participate today in the lives of Egyptians . 
Today I look into the eyes of each one of you and everyone is different today , '' he said . 
`` Today you are an Egyptian demanding your rights and freedom and what we started can never be pushed back . 
As we said we have one main demand the end of the regime and to start a new phase . '' 
Watch ElBaradei address the crowd -- -LRB- Update 7 p.m. Cairo , Noon ET -RRB- ElBaradei has arrived in Cairo 's Tahrir Square to address protesters , witnesses said . 
-- -LRB- Update 5:15 p.m. Cairo , 10:15 a.m. ET -RRB- Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak has issued a presidential decision today appointing Gen. Gamal Embaba , an army division commander , governor of El Wadi el Jadid , state-run Nile TV reported . 
Watch live CNN 's stream to Nile TV . 
The network is also reporting several prison breaks throughout Egypt , but the number of escapees could not be verified . 
-- -LRB- Update 4:40 p.m. Cairo , 9:40 a.m. ET -RRB- Egyptian troops fired warning shots into the air in Cairo 's Tahrir Square as demonstrators defied a curfew order Sunday evening . 
-- -LRB- Update 4:30 p.m. Cairo , 9:30 a.m. ET -RRB- U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton appeared on CNN 's State of the Union . 
Clinton told CNN 's Candy Crowley that the U.S. is neither on Mubarak 's side or the protesters ' side but that the U.S. is on the side of the Egyptian people . 
Watch CNN 's Sunday morning interview with Clinton . 
Columnist Mona Eltahawy urges global community support for protesters . 
Clinton told NBC 's `` Meet the Press '' Sunday that the U.S. does not have any reports of American citizens killed or injured in the anti-government protests in Egypt . 
Clinton said the U.S. has no plans to cut off aid to Egypt Sunday on ABC 's `` The Week . '' 
-- -LRB- Update 4 p.m. Cairo , 9 a.m. ET -RRB- Fighter planes flew low over the crowds in Cairo 's Tahrir Square on Sunday , 10 minutes before the state-imposed curfew . 
Some in the crowd began holding prayers despite the planes . 
CNN 's Ivan Watson said the fighter jets `` show de force '' was `` dramatic '' and that he could see the plane 's cockpit from the ground . 
-- -LRB- Update 3:53 p.m. Cairo , 8:53 a.m. ET -RRB- Egyptian opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei on Sunday called for embattled President Hosni Mubarak to `` leave today and save the country . '' 
Watch ElBaradei on CNN Sunday . 
`` This is a country that is falling apart , '' ElBaradei told CNN 's `` Fareed Zakaria GPS . '' 
Egypt is entering a period of transition , and a government of national unity is needed to fill the void and hold `` fair and free '' elections , ElBaradei said -- British Foreign Secretary William Hague called on Mubarak to start a democratic `` transformation '' and a process of `` peaceful reform '' that would lead to a more open and democratic society . 
`` It is not for us to try to pick who should be the president of Egypt . 
It is a sovereign nation , '' Hague told Britain 's Sky News - but he said reform would be `` preferable to Egypt falling into the hands of extremism . '' 
-- -LRB- Update 3:30 p.m. Cairo , 8:30 a.m. ET -RRB- Egypt 's defense minister , Gen. Mohamad Tantawi , urged the public Sunday to obey the 4 p.m.-8 a.m. curfew -LRB- 9 a.m.-1 a.m. ET -RRB- Tantawi 's statement was carried by state television , and Tantawi was escorted to the network 's headquarters by red-helmeted troops in a convoy of sport-utility vehcies . 
Tantawi is among the Cabinet ministers that embattled President Hosni Mubarak announced he was replacing over the weekend . 
In other developments earlier in Cairo on Sunday : -- The U.S. Embassy in Cairo will assist U.S. citizens who want to leave Egypt , said embassy spokeswoman Elizabeth Colton . 
She said flights will depart from Cairo on Monday . 
Turkey has already sent two planes to Egypt to begin evacuating its citizens . 
-- The State Department is urging U.S. citizens to avoid travel to Egypt . 
-- In Sudan , about 100 protesters at an university in Khartoum changed , `` No to high prices , no to corruption '' and `` Tunisia , Egypt , Sudan together as one . '' 
Police forced students back to the university and closed the gates , but students came back out of the gates and threw bricks at officers . 
-- Al Jazeera `` strongly denounces '' the closure of its Cairo bureau by the Egyptian government , the news network said in a statement Sunday . 
Egypt 's information ministry announced the shutdown of the Al Jazeera channel in Egypt and the withdrawal of its media license to operate in the country , state-run Nile TV reported Sunday . 
-- A body was found in front of the country 's interior ministry Sunday morning , but there was no police presence nearby . 
Meanwhile , military tanks and hundreds of protesters were out on Cairo 's Tahrir Square . 
No violence was spotted in that area . 
-- Vandals ripped off the heads off two mummies and tossed relics onto the ground in Cairo 's Egyptian Museum , said Zahi Hawass , secretary-general of Egypt 's Supreme Council of Antiquities . 
The vandals were arrested and jailed , Hawass said . 
The museum has stepped up security and is now guarded by Egypt 's army , he said . 
-- Four people admitted to looting in the Cairo area , according to state-run Nile TV , which aired their confessions . 
-- People who were trying to protect their property said they are worried about criminal gangs armed with samurai swords , clubs or rifles . 
Every time a motorcycles drove by , people rushed out to make sure such criminals did n't stop . 
-- Ahmed Rehab of the Council of American Islamic Relations said police were absent on Cairo streets . 
`` People are walking around with baseball bats and knives , '' Rehab said early Sunday . 
`` We did n't get any sleep all night . '' 
-- In Alexandria , the scene at hospitals was chaotic . 
The facilities were short-staffed , and injured protesters said they were not being treated quickly enough . 
-- At least 31 people have been killed in protests in Alexandria , hospital authorities told CNN Saturday . 
Earlier , the state-run Nile TV earlier reported that at least 38 people died in the country 's unrest . 
It was unclear whether the Alexandria deaths were part of that toll . 
@Philip , Actually , Saudi Arabia is our 3rd largest oil importer after Canada and Mexico . 
i have a silly question what prophesy does mohamed elbaradie speak of in his speach last night or this morning on cnn he bluted out that mubarak must head the prophesy and do the egyption people have plan for smooth transition anyone can protest or through a coupe but a successful one has a leader who is it elbaridie thanks `` Delicate situation in the Arab World . 
The second coming of the fall of the Berlin Wall . 
A viral tidal wave to oust autocracy . 
Revolution of change must move swift & peacefully otherwise radical opportunistic Muslims will turn these countries into another Somalia -LRB- hotbed of terror -RRB- . 
There are good Muslims out there . 
They are my friends . 
Let peace prevail . '' 
They only had DOS with windows in its ' infancy . 
I remember I did not even have a cell phone ... pagers were the hotest thing . 
Egypt not only has one of the largest Muslim populations ; it more importantly has great economic influence in the region . 
The battle line will be the transport routes or lack of in the Suez Canal causing an oil speculation ripple effect . 
We also ca n't overlook the Blue Nile Treaty . 
Economic war vice conventional war is the new trend . 
I predict Jordan -LRB- Palestinians not Jordanians in Jordan-Jordanians get monthly govt stipends -RRB- Sudan ... Algeria ... Morocco to name a few . 
Other African countries are too oppressed . 
Only the countries with a strong collective population of educated tech savy youth can produce the trigger necessary for future protests . 
There is also a potential for this VIRAL Tidal Wave to cross over from predominantly Arab countries with the common pulse being the change of autrocratic governments . 
Security is preventing medical supplies from reaching the civic medical center in Tahris square ... ... the descent of army infantry . . 
Direct broadcast segments for field editing Know one knows the problem in Egypt except the Egyptians not the the other people . . 
Who com to destroy the country . 
Look what Jehan El Sadat what she said to Barbara Walters . 
she said the biggest mistake her husband done it . 
I am sorry all the world will see after Mobarak . 
Thank U February 3 , 2011 at 5:22 pm | Report abuse | Reply I hope this guy is satisfied by all the blood he poured christian svensson danmark news abaut egypten cairo I just got back yesterday here on Thursday was for demonstration in cairo , and not as a journalist or otherwise . 
I 'm not a believer and have nothing against Muslims , we are all human beings in my eyes I feel just poorly Mubarak has in 30 years , starved and tyraniseret a country . 
and only poor judgments can make people so angry I was probably the only one in the north or perhaps in the world who were with demonstrators States the reason why I left , I hope Egypt will have a better future A lot of pictures also pictures of myself with banner and Egyptian flags as demonstrators against the regime The riots in Egypt organized by Obama , Iran and the Muslim Brotherhood Mohamed Mustafa ElBaradei the Iranian traitor , the Muslim Brotherhood and Iran want to rule Egypt . 
They want Repression of women , prohibition of education , high unemployment , radical Islam as Iran , Somalia and Afghanistan under Taliban rule ... As James Earl Carter supported Iranian Islamic Revolution of 1979 , so does today Barack Hussein Obama II ... SINCE 1979 USA HELP IRAN TO TAKE CONTROL IN Middle East ! 
What is the condition in Iran 1979 before the islamic Revolution and today in : Today if woman Wearing Jeans or Without a head covering in Iran she will be Punished ... ! 
All the Opposition parties in Egypt Agreed to the government 's changes and for new elections this year Except the Muslim Brotherhood ! 
After some months the Islamic extremists will take the POWER and people will be in worst situation then before ... Do the people in Iran , Somalia , Afghanistan want the Extremists to rule ? 
A call to all those who are K.B.E. , enjoy your cup or Tea . 
A man of Peace will attain rank , his rank will be 10 bars of gold . 
In the Royal Navy , a part of their sleeve insignia is the Circle of Life , incorporated with rank . 
In the American Navy , a five pointed star is incorporated in their sleeve insignia along with their rank . 
At present the Common Wealth is at war , a captain has 4 bars of gold on each shoulder board , a total of 8 bar of gold . 
Add 1 bar of gold to each shoulder board and you attain the rank of Commadore , a war time rank , a Silver Star . 
Let the `` Wise Men of the East '' follow the brightest burning star in the western sky . 
If a true Democrocy is allowed to be established in the nation of Egypt , there is a good chance that Isreals southern flank will remain alligned with a friendly government . 
Many milenia ago , Moses led the Isrealites out of Egypt and while in the Sinai , a burning bush became a sign post . 
Days ago , I saw a burning bush in the Sinai . 
Jordan ceeded the West Bank to Isreal , is it now time for Isreal to ceed Gaza to Egypt ? 
Not all Crowns will fall , yet the 12 Tribes of Isreal will reunite . 
If President Barrack Obama is instramental in establishing a `` True Democracy '' in Egypt , where All are given a voice in government , and ALL are allowed to worship freely , he will truely earn a Prize for PEACE , A Nobel jesture ... ... The youth of the Brotherhood of Islam will take care of the `` Khalif of Persia '' . 
If Isreal is to remain a true Democracy , the nation will need to maintain a majority of the populations vote . 
In a true Democracy , ALL religions of the world are allowed to worship . 
Isreal will maintain control of The Holy City , but All will be allowed to worship freely . 
All the Religions of the World . 
A cornerstone of PEACE in the region will be established if a President is now set , a President of limited Reign . 
If the manuver is pulled off properly , Egypt will be an example for the Brothers of Islam , and All the Wise Men of the East will be able to arrive at their destination , The Holy City . 
This manuver will benefit the American taxpayer the most , if we can eliminate AIDE to Egypt , Palestine , Isreal , Irac , Afghanistan , and Pakistan ; and remove a standing army in the region for decades to come , we will be able to AIDE the american tax payer in the furture . 
Hopefully we will not have to raid the programs we have all paid into . 
Commerce is King , weather you call it a King or a President . 
Weather your business is `` manna from heaven ' or BLACK GOLD , business will be conducted . 
A powerful standing army in the region is much more for control than for National Security . 
Control of the Black Gold , and you must transit this to conduct your commerce . 
Business men will always conduct their business , especially if they are among friends and brothers . 
Give the Brotherhood of Islam an example they can ALL follow . 
The Egyptians in Tahrir Square want a true Democracy , it is what they are asking for . 
A proper transition will take time and work . 
Mubarak is out at the end of this term , but in a true Democracy , he and his family would be allowed to stay in the country . 
The wealth of the Mubarak Family could do wonders for the commerce of Egypt . 
A call to all those who are K.B.E. , enjoy your cup of Tea , and let the `` Circle of Life '' be unbroken ... ... ... ... A message to the children of Abraham . 
To the kindom of Isreal , You know David was a soldier before he was a profit and a king . 
To you I give Control of the Holy City . 
To the Brotherhood of Islam , you know Muhamed was a soldier before he was a profit and a king . 
To you I give Great Wealth , BLACK GOLD . 
To the Brotherhood of Christ , I give you the Power to Enforce your Will , this is a Great Responsability . 
Ensure your children and grand children are able to celebrate the Holy Day of Christmas as you have . 
A call to all those who are K.B.E. , enjoy your cup of Tea , and let the `` Circle of Life '' be unbroken . 
I respect all the men and wemen from cnn group went to egypt Anderson , Ben , Iven , Nic , Arwa and Hala I love you all you gave me all the information I need to know about my country I had hard time goting it from egyption chanels , I 'm very sorry about the miss treetement to stop you from telling the truth . 
Thank you and keep up the good work . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
