U.S. military brass talk with Egyptians , vow to continue ` partnership ' British Foreign Secretary Wlliam Hague on Sunday called for peaceful reform in Egypt . 
U.S. armed forces leaders continued high-level talks Sunday with their Egyptian counterparts , applauding their `` continued professionalism '' and reaffirming the two militaries ' partnership , a spokesman said . 
U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates has talked by phone this weekend with Egyptian Defense Minister Mohamed Hussein Tantawi , as well as Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak , according to Pentagon spokesman Geoff Morrel . 
Also , Egyptian Lt. Gen. Sami Enan spoke Sunday afternoon with his equivalent in the United States , Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Adm. Mike Mullen , according to Mullen 's spokesman . 
Mullen got an update from Enan on the situation in Egypt , and `` expressed his appreciation for the continued professionalism of the Egyptian military , '' said Capt. John Kirby , his spokesman . 
`` Both men reaffirmed their desire to see the partnership between our two militaries continue , and they pledged to stay in touch , '' Kirby added . 
These contacts came as Western diplomats continued to sound off on the situation in Egypt , where widespread lawlessness was reported following massive demonstrations calling for the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said Sunday that Washington , among others , had `` made very clear that the concrete steps for democratic and economic reform that President Mubarak mentioned in his speech have to be acted upon . '' 
Meanwhile , British Foreign Secretary William Hague warned Sunday about the danger that Egypt -- should Mubarak exit , after 30 years in power -- could fall into the hands of extremists or a more authoritarian government . 
`` That is why the way forward is peaceful reform , '' he said . 
`` That requires the government of Egypt now to allow the right to peaceful protest , '' Hague urged . 
`` It also requires the Egyptian people to express their aspirations in a peaceful way and it requires -LRB- a -RRB- more broadly based government , the inclusion of opposition figures in the government . '' 
He declined to say whether Mubarak should stay in power , or whether he was capable of reform , saying it was not for the United Kingdom to choose Egypt 's leader . 
British Prime Minister David Cameron spoke with Jordan 's King Abdullah and U.S. President Barack Obama on Sunday , according to a spokesman for the prime minister who was not identified , in line with government policy . 
