BP oil spill report is a start , but wait for other probes to get answers AS IT RELEASED its report on the Deepwater Horizon oil spill this week , BP insisted that it was n't trying to assess blame for the disaster . 
That 's not how it reads . 
The company that owns the lease to the Macondo well identified eight critical failures that led to the blowout and explosion that sunk the rig . 
Of those , Rep. Edward J. Markey -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
argued , only partially exaggerating , BP takes explicit responsibility for only half of one . 
Investigators reckon that the disaster began with an inadequate cement seal ; the cement `` slurry '' that oil services contractor Halliburton used did not prevent oil and gas from entering the well . 
An anomalous pressure test indicating that the well was n't sealed should have alerted rig workers , including BP 's . 
But they misinterpreted the results . 
Once oil and gas began surging to the surface , BP says , workers from rig owner Transocean should have taken different steps to contain them . 
Finally , Transocean 's blowout preventer failed to shut off the flow . 
Critically , BP insists that its much-criticized well design was n't a problem . 
That 's angered Transocean , which also points out that BP declined to run a `` cement bond log '' to test the integrity of the cement job . 
Which is to say , other ongoing investigations must assess BP 's account . 
The thrust of the narrative is n't necessarily wrong . 
The accident probably did result from a series of errors that ca n't be assigned to one actor . 
This makes sense , since the concurrent failure of redundant safety systems does n't lend itself to neat explanation and easy assignment of blame . 
Even so , the report has to be understood in light of the company 's possible legal liability , a question that it avoids addressing , and the popular perception that this was `` the BP oil spill . '' 
At least as far as the latter is concerned , it 's worth remembering that BP had the responsibility to successfully monitor the operations onboard the Deepwater Horizon , including the cement job . 
The report admits this . 
As The Post 's Joel Achenbach noted , what BP 's investigators do n't do is give a full explanation of motivation : Were BP and its contractors rushing the job to save money ? 
For that , for answers to the legal liability question and for confirmation of BP 's narrative , the public will have to wait for independent investigations to conclude , including the presidentially chartered inquiry and a Justice Department probe . 
Outstanding investigations also must more fully examine the role of government regulators . 
