`` The queen had only one way of settling all difficulties , great or small . 
` Off with his head ! ' 
she said without even looking around . '' 
-- `` Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland '' Under the pressure of the financial crisis , one presidential candidate is behaving like a flustered rookie playing in a league too high . 
It is not Barack Obama . 
Channeling his inner Queen of Hearts , John McCain furiously , and apparently without even looking around at facts , said Chris Cox , chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission , should be decapitated . 
This childish reflex provoked the Wall Street Journal to editorialize that `` McCain untethered '' -- disconnected from knowledge and principle -- had made a `` false and deeply unfair '' attack on Cox that was `` unpresidential '' and demonstrated that McCain `` does n't understand what 's happening on Wall Street any better than Barack Obama does . '' 
To read the Journal 's details about the depths of McCain 's shallowness on the subject of Cox 's chairmanship , see '' McCain 's Scapegoat '' -LRB- Sept. 19 -RRB- . 
Then consider McCain 's characteristic accusation that Cox `` has betrayed the public 's trust . '' 
Perhaps an old antagonism is involved in McCain 's fact-free slander . 
His most conspicuous economic adviser is Douglas Holtz-Eakin , who previously headed the Congressional Budget Office . 
There he was an impediment to conservatives , including then-Rep . 
Cox , who , as chairman of the Republican Policy Committee , persistently tried and generally failed to enlist CBO support for `` dynamic scoring '' that would estimate the economic growth effects of proposed tax cuts . 
In any case , McCain 's smear -- that Cox `` betrayed the public 's trust '' -- is a harbinger of a McCain presidency . 
For McCain , politics is always operatic , pitting people who agree with him against those who are `` corrupt '' or `` betray the public 's trust , '' two categories that seem to be exhaustive -- there are no other people . 
McCain 's Manichaean worldview drove him to his signature legislative achievement , the McCain-Feingold law 's restrictions on campaigning . 
Today , his campaign is creatively finding interstices in laws intended to restrict campaign giving and spending . 
-LRB- For details , see The Post of Sept. 17 ; and the New York Times of Sept. 19 . -RRB- 
By a Gresham 's Law of political discourse , McCain 's Queen of Hearts intervention in the opaque financial crisis overshadowed a solid conservative complaint from the Republican Study Committee , chaired by Rep. Jeb Hensarling of Texas . 
In a letter to Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson and Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke , the RSC decried the improvised torrent of bailouts as a `` dangerous and unmistakable precedent for the federal government both to be looked to and indeed relied upon to save private sector companies from the consequences of their poor economic decisions . '' 
This letter , listing just $ 650 billion of the perhaps more than $ 1 trillion in new federal exposures to risk , was sent while McCain 's campaign , characteristically substituting vehemence for coherence , was airing an ad warning that Obama favors `` massive government , billions in spending increases . '' 
The political left always aims to expand the permeation of economic life by politics . 
Today , the efficient means to that end is government control of capital . 
So , is not McCain 's party now conducting the most leftist administration in American history ? 
The New Deal never acted so precipitously on such a scale . 
Treasury Secretary Paulson , asked about conservative complaints that his rescue program amounts to socialism , said , essentially : This is not socialism , this is necessary . 
That non sequitur might be politically necessary , but remember that government control of capital is government control of capitalism . 
Does McCain have qualms about this , or only quarrels ? 
On '' 60 Minutes '' Sunday evening , McCain , saying `` this may sound a little unusual , '' said that he would like to replace Cox with Andrew Cuomo , the Democratic attorney general of New York who is the son of former governor Mario Cuomo . 
McCain explained that Cuomo has `` respect '' and `` prestige '' and could `` lend some bipartisanship . '' 
Conservatives have been warned . 
Conservatives who insist that electing McCain is crucial usually start , and increasingly end , by saying he would make excellent judicial selections . 
But the more one sees of his impulsive , intensely personal reactions to people and events , the less confidence one has that he would select judges by calm reflection and clear principles , having neither patience nor aptitude for either . 
It is arguable that , because of his inexperience , Obama is not ready for the presidency . 
It is arguable that McCain , because of his boiling moralism and bottomless reservoir of certitudes , is not suited to the presidency . 
Unreadiness can be corrected , although perhaps at great cost , by experience . 
Can a dismaying temperament be fixed ? 
