Of all the self-proclaimed experts I wanted to hear from about the financial crisis , the one I looked forward to the most was Nick Leeson , late of Britain 's Barings Bank . 
In 1995 , he bet hugely on Nikkei futures -LRB- whatever they are -RRB- and lost something like $ 1.4 billion . 
Leeson was 28 years old and often drunk , Barings was 233 years old and in fiduciary senility . 
Leeson went to prison , Barings went bust and Wall Street , without so much as a pause , went on its merry way . 
Sadly , Leeson did not have much to say about the current financial crisis . 
Writing last week in the Guardian , he instead expressed bitterness that the former owners of Barings went on with their lives while he spent 41\/2 years in prison . 
What he did not say , to the regret of us all , is how once again the kids were allowed to play with huge amounts of money without any adult supervision . 
`` I was astonished that nobody stopped me , '' he wrote in his book `` Rogue Trader . '' 
`` People in London should have known . '' 
The theme in the current financial crisis is not , as John McCain would have it , greed , since that , like lust , will be with us forever . 
Instead , it is transparency . 
Leeson , you may recall , was dealing from Singapore in exotic derivatives that his bosses in London little understood . 
All they knew was that Leeson was putting huge profits on the books , not that those books had anything to do with reality . 
Somewhat the same thing happened on Wall Street . 
The complicated , exotic and downright erotic financial instruments cooked up at the investment houses were , in fact , little understood not only by the buyers but also by the sellers . 
You can see that from what they said and from what they did : Lehman Brothers , Bear Stearns , AIG and others all held on to financial instruments that were worth less than they once thought . 
This was truly a case of the blind leading the blind . 
`` The problem is that nobody knows what any institution owns and what the terms of the securities they own are and what they 're worth , '' New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg said Sunday on `` Meet the Press . '' 
He 's saying what others on the Street having been saying for some time : Nobody knows what these things -- securitized mortgages , etc. -- are worth . 
And , just to darken the mystery -LRB- and maybe your mood -RRB- , no one knows the value of the underlying real estate , either . 
I started with Leeson for a reason . 
He is the personification of a generational gap in the finance industry . 
He was young and computer-savvy , and his bosses in London were neither . 
That was true on Wall Street , too . 
The very top guys really had little idea of what was going on below . 
Everything was going right . 
They were making lots of money , which they deserved -- in their wonderful circular reasoning -- because they were making it . 
This , I tell you , is the true magic of the vaunted market : It justifies both stupidity and greed . 
Now the government is proposing another pig in a poke . 
The huge federal bailout is necessary , but Democrats are right to insist on detail and oversight . 
For too long , the financial markets have operated without much of either . 
Now the Bush administration is asking Congress for a blank check , what New Jersey Gov. Jon Corzine calls the `` moral equivalent '' of the congressional resolution that wound up authorizing the Iraq war . 
Corzine , a former Goldman Sachs chairman -LRB- not to mention U.S. senator -RRB- , is a voice worth heeding nowadays . 
When I talked to him , he had just gotten hold of the two-page administration program . 
This is another exotic financial instrument . 
The wise words of William Goldman , the screenwriter , should echo in Congress 's ears . 
He not only coined the phrase `` follow the money '' for `` All the President 's Men , '' but he expressed the sum total of knowledge about the making of movies with : `` Nobody knows anything . '' 
The same has been true about opaque financial instruments . 
It 's up to Congress to fix that . 
The lesson of Leeson has yet to be learned . 
Financial markets have moved well beyond the trading of things that could be seen or measured or weighed . 
On Wall Street , older men employed the lingo of younger men to pretend they knew what was happening -- but they did n't . 
Now , Congress is being asked to do something similar . 
That wo n't do . 
Do n't be afraid to regulate . 
Act as if you 're the government , for crying out loud . 
Because if you do n't do this right , you soon wo n't be . 
