BP oil spill : White House rewrote drilling ban report Changes to the text suggested wrongly that scientists and engineers supported the ban Crude oil floating on the surface of the Gulf of Mexico after the Deepwater Horizon oil rig had sunk . 
Photograph : Christopher Berkey\/EPA The White House rewrote a department of the interior report to suggest wrongly that independent experts had endorsed a six-month ban on deepwater drilling after the Gulf of Mexico oil disaster , an official report has said . 
The report , from the department 's inspector general , is bound to further inflame Republicans in Congress who have said the ban was politically motivated , and who are demanding an investigation into the White House energy and climate adviser , Carol Browner . 
Between 2am and 3am on 27 May , aides to Browner produced two different edits of the executive summary to a report on recommendations for drilling safety . 
Both versions altered the text significantly to make it appear as if a seven-member panel of scientists and engineers supported the drilling ban . 
The inspector general 's report said : `` The White House edit of the original DoI draft executive summary led to the implication that the moratorium recommendation had been peer-reviewed by the experts . '' 
But the experts had not been consulted on the wisdom of a drilling ban , and were instead asked for technical advice on a separate list of safety recommendations . 
The report makes no judgment on why the White House would have made changes that significantly altered the meaning of the executive summary . 
After complaints from the experts and pressure from Republicans , the interior secretary , Ken Salazar , issued three separate apologies to the experts in a letter , a conference call and a face-to-face meeting last June . 
`` There was no intent to mislead the public . 
The decision to impose a temporary moratorium on deepwater drilling was made by the secretary following consultation with colleagues including the White House , '' Kendra Barkoff , an interior department spokeswoman , said in a statement . 
A White House official said three of the experts accepted that the editing changes were a misunderstanding . 
However , the inspector general 's report challenges a core principle of the Obama administration , to be guided by the science and to operate transparently , as a corrective to the allegations of politicisation of environmental policy under George W Bush . 
Browner has been accused by the presidential investigation into the BP oil spill and others of misrepresenting official reports related to the disaster . 
Last August on TV , Browner introduced a report by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency , claiming that threequarters of the leaked crude oil in the Gulf had been cleaned up . 
But the report itself did not make that claim , conceding that half the oil was still in the Gulf . 
The administration 's ban , which affected 33 wells , produced a huge controversy , with Louisiana complaining it was putting hundreds of local jobs at risk . 
Republicans said the ban was politically motivated , and have said they will investigate the decision-making behind the moratorium when they take control of the House of Representatives in January . 
Fred Upton , a Michigan Republican likely to take over the energy and commerce committee , has been pushing for some time to bring Browner up before Congress . 
The original wording of the executive summary , sent to the White House for review late on the night of May 26 , mentioned the drilling ban ordered by the interior secretary , Ken Salazar , on the first page . 
The reference to 22 safety recommendations , approved by the expert team , was on the second page . 
Browner 's staff made significant changes to the draft executive summary on the night of 26 May . 
But in both versions staff moved up the paragraph discussing the technical experts support for new safety recommendations so it appeared directly underneath the drilling ban . 
`` Both versions , however , revised and re-ordered the executive summary , placing the peer review language immediately following the moratorium recommendation causing the distinction between the secretary 's moratorium recommendation which had not been peer-reviewed and the recommendations contained in the 30-Day Report which had been peer-reviewed to become effectively lost , '' the report said . 
The interior department approved the White House changes . 
But on 3 June , the interior department deputy secretary David Hayes wrote to the experts to apologise . 
`` We did not mean to imply that you also agreed with the decision to impose a moratorium on all new deepwater drilling , '' the letter said . 
The investigation was ordered after the experts complained that their views had been misrepresented , and that they had never been asked to weigh in on the drilling ban . 
Elizabeth Birnbaum , who then headed the offshore drilling regulatory agency , was also not directly consulted about a deepwater ban , the report said . 
A version appeared on p26 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 23.17 GMT on Wednesday 10 November 2010 The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off dominicru : Jamie Dimon there were mistakes that `` obviously scared us '' . 
