ISTANBUL | Sat Nov 19 , 2011 3:08 pm EST ISTANBUL -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Turkish newspapers said on Saturday Ankara had contingency plans to create no-fly or buffer zones to protect civilians in neighboring Syria from security forces there if the bloodshed worsens . 
Turkey opposes unilateral steps or intervention aimed at `` regime change '' in Syria , the reports said , but it has not ruled out the possibility of more extensive military action if security forces began committing large-scale massacres . 
The reports , based on a briefing by Turkish officials to selected journalists , came on the day of an Arab League deadline for President Bashar al-Assad 's government to end its repression of anti-government unrest and comply with a peace plan . 
`` It 's almost certain that Bashar al-Assad 's regime is going down , all the assessments are made based on this assumption . 
Foreign Ministry sources say that the sooner the regime goes down , the better for Turkey , '' columnist Sedat Ergin wrote in Hurriyet newspaper . 
`` It is out of the question that Turkey carries out a military intervention to change the regime . 
However , it takes a flexible stance on opposition groups running activities in Turkey . '' 
Several thousand Syrians have fled to Turkey in the wake of the repression launched after pro-democracy protests erupted in March . 
Among them were soldiers who say they deserted rather than shoot their own people , and are now part of the armed resistance against Assad 's forces . 
Turkey , along with other powers , fear that if Syria slips into civil war it would ignite sectarian and ethnic conflict that could spread elsewhere in the region . 
Ruled by the Assad family for more than 40 years , Syria 's power circle is based around the Baath party and members of the minority Alawite sect to which the Assad family belong . 
The Radikal newspaper 's columnist Murat Yetkin quoted one of the Turkish officials saying : `` We believe that with each day that passes under the Assad regime , the threat to stability increases . 
We believe stability in Syria and in the region will only be possible again under a democratic government . '' 
The Arab League , and non-Arab Turkey , have threatened economic sanctions unless bloodshed stops . 
And Turkish officials told the journalists they expected Assad 's government to implode under popular pressure . 
Turkey wants to avoid a massive influx of people across the border , having been inundated by 500,000 people from Iraq during the 1991 Gulf War . 
Radikal 's Yetkin said the Turkish military could establish a buffer zone if the Syrian army advanced on a city , like Aleppo , close to the Turkish border . 
Columnist Asli Aydintasbas of Milliyet newspaper wrote : `` Foreign ministry sources added that Turkey could set up a no-fly buffer zone within Syria if Syrians fleeing the army create a mass wave of migration to Turkey . 
`` A more extensive military intervention could come on the table only if Syrian regime starts a large-scale massacre in a big city such as Aleppo or Damascus , '' Aydintasbas added . 
`` Ankara could take a role in a military intervention against Syria only with the international community and following a U.N. Security Council decision . '' 
Having once cultivated Assad 's friendship , Turkey turned sharply critical during the eight-month-old uprising , as Damascus repeatedly ignored advice to end the violence and make reforms demanded by the people . 
Attacks on their diplomatic missions in Damascus last weekend , prompted non-Arab Turkey and Arab governments to escalate pressure on Assad . 
Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan said on Saturday Syria was responsible for the breakdown in the relationship . 
`` Unfortunately , the Syrian regime was reluctant and insincere in carrying out reforms it had promised to . 
Furthermore , they wanted to quash the opposition through inhumane methods , by shedding blood , '' he told a business forum . 
`` If there 's a policy change , it 's not Turkey 's but Syria 's change of policy . 
Syria has not kept the promises it made , neither to the Arab League nor the world , '' he said . 
`` Its actions have not been sincere and trustworthy . '' 
