What makes a great war film ? 
As Sam Mendes ' Jarhead tackles the 1991 Gulf conflict , James Meek , who has reported from the battlefields of Iraq , gives his verdict Fire away : a scene from Jarhead Oscar night in April 1979 marked a shift of key for the Hollywood war film , a genre whose explosions keep going off in newspaper columns and political discourse long after the closing credits have rolled . 
Michael Cimino 's The Deer Hunter , about an Orthodox community in a steel town whose sons go to Vietnam , won best film and best director . 
Cimino was given one statuette by Francis Ford Coppola - whose own Vietnam movie , Apocalypse Now , was destined for a cooler critical reception when it limped into the cinemas a few months later - and the other by John Wayne . 
It was Wayne 's last public appearance before he died . 
His attempt , as actor-director , to apply the propagandistic certainties of his second world war films to a celluloid Vietnam , The Green Berets , had been a failure as art or entertainment or , indeed , propaganda . 
Another Vietnam film , Coming Home , won Jane Fonda a best actress Oscar that night . 
According to Peter Biskind , Fonda , whose visit to Communist North Vietnam during the war still makes her an object of hate for the American right , lashed out at Cimino backstage , saying The Deer Hunter was a `` racist , Pentagon version of the war '' . 
Two decades later , along with their M16s , gas masks and Kevlar helmets , the young US marines preparing for war in the Arabian desert in Sam Mendes ' new film , Jarhead , carry a new piece of equipment into battle : irony . 
Watching Apocalypse Now on base at Camp Pendleton , the marine characters in the Mendes movie sing along with The Ride of the Valkyries broadcast from the attack helicopters in the Coppola movie . 
In camp in Saudi Arabia , they sit down to enjoy a video of The Deer Hunter only to find that the wife who sent it has deliberately taped over the Cimino film with a home movie of her having sex with the neighbor . 
Mendes is doing a couple of things with the references to post-Vietnam classics . 
One is to point out that thoughtful liberal film-makers who set out to make movies showing the futility and waste of war run the risk of celebrating it instead for that significant host of men who , among themselves , only glory in their association with death - the risk of receiving it , and the chance of dealing it out . 
Like the Wall Street brokers who burst into cheers when Gordon Gekko , the supposed-to-be-odious broker in Oliver Stone 's Wall Street , declares `` Greed is good '' , like the Russian mafia neophytes who reportedly based their philosophy on The Godfather , films about US marines are bound to be watched by US marines . 
Now that the US , like Britain , has an all-volunteer military - in Vietnam , most of the troops were conscripts - your average marine is much more likely to be the kind of guy who is in uniform because he yearns to feel what it is like to be afraid of violent injury , and what it is like to frighten others . 
When I asked a 19-year-old marine in Iraq last year why he 'd joined up , he said : `` I 've always been into explosions and , you know , just , just , uh , action movies . '' 
The other side of the ironic references to Vietnam films in Jarhead is provocative . 
`` Compare mine to theirs , '' it says . 
It 's ballsy and risky of Mendes to put Jarhead up against The Deer Hunter and Apocalypse Now - the latter having so grown in reputation since it appeared . 
Can they be compared ? 
Is Jarhead a war film ? 
What is a war film , anyway - is Schindler 's List a war film ? 
Is Lawrence of Arabia -LRB- another film Mendes references visually -RRB- ? 
Is the musical Oh What a Lovely War a war film , or The Crying Game ? 
Is Wag the Dog a war film ? 
There 's a war in it , but not a real one . 
Millions are killed off-screen , and there are heaps of skulls , but there is n't exactly a war in The Killing Fields . 
Brian De Palma made a feature in 1987 in which an idealistic young officer and his tough , experienced sergeant lead a group of heavily armed misfits into battle against an evil , equally heavily armed foe which threatens everything they and their families hold dear . 
Bullets fly , there are casualties on both sides ; in the end right triumphs over both might and cynicism . 
But The Untouchables is n't a war film . 
All war films tell two stories , the story of a war , and the story of the men fighting it . 
-LRB- Although large numbers of women have served in the US marines since the 1980s , you would n't know this from Jarhead -RRB- . 
By this measure , Mendes ' movie certainly counts as a war film , yet , based as it is on Anthony Swofford 's memoir of a stint in the US marines which took him to the Arabian Gulf , it has more in common with the clutch of Vietnam films that appeared in the late 1980s than with those of 1979 - Oliver Stone 's Platoon , Stanley Kubrick 's Full Metal Jacket and John Irvin 's Hamburger Hill . 
Less `` pity the world that has war visited upon it '' ; more `` pity the poor soldier '' . 
It 's more to do with how a group of young American men party , quarrel , bitch , brawl , boast , pose , amuse themselves and bond in an intimate group facing danger than about the wider impact of war on families , civilians or the world at large . 
Jarhead is , nonetheless , an oddity . 
It begins conventionally enough . 
There are certain cinematic rites of passage which non-Americans have seen so often that it is almost as if they have become part of their own childhood . 
I sometimes feel as if I once asked a girl to the senior prom by a bank of metal lockers in the corridor of a mid-western high school ; as if I walked through a screen door to shoot baskets with my eager-to-bond father in the twilight in the forecourt outside our non-existent garage ; and as if , once , I stood in green fatigues on a hot parade ground , being shrieked at by a sergeant - black , naturally - in a broad-brimmed hat , to whom I would yell back : `` SIR , YES , SIR ! '' 
Swofford , played by Jake Gyllenhaal , endures this experience and the usual set of boot camp humiliations . 
What makes the film peculiar both as a war film and as a reflection on America 's present hideous entanglement in Iraq is its timing and the Twilight Zone-nature of the war Swofford and his comrades are eventually sent to take part in . 
Jarhead is set in the 1991 Gulf War , when US troops led a genuine international coalition - including , it is strange to remember now , troops from Syria , Egypt , Saudi Arabia and France - to expel Iraqi troops from Kuwait , leaving Iraq as soon as they 'd achieved this . 
Their commander in chief is George Bush , but it 's the other George Bush , the present White House incumbent 's father . 
The only Arabs the marines get close to in the film are shimmery Bedouin on the horizon and the charred , unrecognisable bodies of Iraqi troops subject to US air attack . 
None of the marines in Swofford 's section fire a shot in anger ; the only US casualties are those killed by friendly fire . 
The young American warriors in Jarhead do n't get the chance to be a threat to Arabs - the nearest Swofford gets is having an Iraqi officer in the sights of his sniper 's rifle and reading about the killing of an Arab by Albert Camus - and never seem threatened themselves . 
Swofford gets rained on by crude oil , sits down to commune with a set of scorched Iraqi corpses , is made to shovel shit with a Santa Claus hat on his head and loses a comrade after they 're discharged , but the thing that seems to affect him most deeply is being dumped , while in the desert , by his girlfriend . 
Since the character played by Gyllenhaal is a fit , attractive , educated 20-year-old American male , and since there is nothing in the film to tell us anything about their relationship except that Swofford really liked having sex with her , you may find it hard to equate his plight with , say , the experience of having your entire family wiped out when a bomb is dropped on your house by mistake . 
Historically , the lack of fighting the US marines were involved in on the ground in 1991 , while the allied air armada roared overhead , dealing death and destruction on Iraq , is accurate . 
Their main role was as a feint , making the Iraqis think they were going to land on Kuwait 's beaches . 
When they finally entered Kuwait - some time after air power and the tanks of the US , British and French armies had chased the Iraqis north - there was n't much for the marines to do except take the surrender of thousands of Iraqi troops . 
Yet it 's odd to have such a non-war war film playing in the cinemas when , before and after the performance , you 'll be reading in the papers and watching on TV about scores of Iraqis being killed in car bombs , about US marines being killed by roadside bombs , about Iraqis and Afghans being tortured or arrested or killed or having their property damaged by US troops , about anti-war feelings growing inside America . 
In a curious way , an earlier 1991 Gulf War feature , Three Kings , though it was too hip , funky and sentimental to be a great film , engaged better than Jarhead does with today 's disaster in Iraq - and Three Kings was made in 1999 , when the dismal phrase `` war on terror '' had n't sounded around the world . 
The pundits do on occasion work themselves up into a lather about how `` realistic '' a war film is . 
There was excitement , when Steven Spielberg brought out Saving Private Ryan , at how genuine the portrayal of the slaughter on the beaches in the early hours of D-Day was . 
Although very few people alive today , including serving soldiers , have experienced that sustained intensity of combat , it did have the appearance of authenticity . 
Yet that realism counts for nothing if the characters and story in the film are n't real too -LRB- Private Ryan ends absurdly with a Magnificent Seven-style shootout -RRB- . 
Perhaps it is asking too much of war films to be realistic when war itself is so unlike the reality western audiences know . 
It 's not that actors are incapable of capturing the intensity of men at war . 
What they can not do is capture the vacancy of men at war . 
Apart from the technical difficulty of conveying to cinema audiences the actual loudness of military explosives , and the fact actors are usually too old for raw recruits -LRB- Gyllenhaal is 25 , his sniping partner Peter Sarsgaard 34 , when the average age of boot camp newbies is 19 -RRB- , the dramatic demands of a commercial film make it impossible to capture the salient characteristic of ordinary soldiers - that they are exhausted most of the time . 
Jarhead is a war film , but it is constricted , like Platoon , by the narrow vision of the pity-the-soldier genre . 
Indeed , Jarhead often slips into envy-the-soldier territory for naive young men - the lack of gore , the marines ' experience of war as freakish , transient vision , the sheer boyish locker-room fun Swofford and his pals enjoy in the desert as they booze , boogie and flex their torsos , means Jarhead wo n't be troubling US recruiters in the way today 's news footage does . 
The key to a film about war is how it ends , and if the young man at the film 's center is lifted out of the battlefield uninjured and sane , if his family and home life before and after are n't prominent in the picture , the movie is diminished as a film which says something about war and becomes a simpler story of growing up , of jeopardy overcome . 
That 's what happens to Charlie Sheen 's character at the end of Platoon , and that 's what happens to Jake Gyllenhaal 's character at the end of Jarhead . 
It is easy to understand why Jane Fonda abominated The Deer Hunter . 
The Vietnamese characters are not sympathetic or deep , the American soldiers are , and the movie ends with the survivors sitting around the table , singing God Bless America . 
But that simplistic summary , and Fonda 's hostility , mischaracterise the subtlety and complexity of Cimino 's feature : the tender slowness with which he describes the home town the conscripts come from , which makes you understand the coldness of the American war machine , the depth of the betrayal involved in hurling trusting young patriots into an incomprehensible nightmare for which their upbringing has not prepared them , and the true , lingering nature of war wounds . 
And even The Deer Hunter , like all Hollywood war films , carries a morally flawed premise that the world can not rely on the US film industry to correct : namely that the only truly important thing , in wars waged by Americans , is what happens to the Americans . 
