Friday 11 March 2005 01.52 GMT Experts in public health from six countries , including the UK , today castigate the British and American governments for failing to investigate the deaths of civilians caught up in the conflict in Iraq . 
Twenty-four experts from the UK , the US , Australia , Canada , Spain and Italy say the attitude of the governments is `` wholly irresponsible '' . 
They say the UK government 's reliance on `` extremely limited data '' from the Iraqi ministry of health is `` unacceptable '' because it is likely to seriously underestimate the casualties . 
Their hard-hitting statement , published online by the British Medical Journal , comes nearly five months after the Lancet published a household survey of civilian deaths in Iraq which estimated that about 100,000 civilians had died - most of them women and children . 
The study caused controversy and was dismissed by the British government as unreliable , partly because the authors admitted that , under the difficult circumstances , it could not be precise . 
The experts lambast the government for criticising the data without conducting inquiries of its own . 
`` The obvious answer to removing uncertainties that remain is to commission a larger study with full official support and assistance , but scientific independence , '' they say . 
`` Counting casualties can help to save lives both now and in the future by helping us to understand the burden of death , and residual burden of injury , disease and trauma across the entire population , '' the experts say . 
`` We have waited too long for this information . '' 
The Iraqi ministry of health data is not complete . 
Among the reasons for this are that only violence-related deaths reported through the health system are counted and deaths in the first 12 months of the conflict are not included . 
Among the 10 experts from the UK who have signed the statement are Klim McPherson , visiting professor of public health epidemiology at Oxford University , David Hunter , chair of the UK Public Health Association , and Sian Griffiths , immediate past-president of the faculty of public health at the Royal College of Physicians . 
There are seven eminent physicians from the US , three from Australia , two from Spain and one each from Canada and Italy . 
`` Monitoring casualties is a humanitarian imperative , '' they say . 
`` Understanding the causes of death is a core public health responsibility , nationally and internationally . 
Yet neither the public , nor we as public health professionals , are able to obtain validated , reliable information about the extent of mortality and morbidity since the invasion of Iraq . '' 
In a commentary in the BMJ , Professor McPherson says that public access to reliable figures is important . 
`` The policy being assessed - the allied invasion of Iraq - was justified largely on grounds of democratic supremacy . 
Voters in the countries that initiated the war and others - not least in Iraq itself - are denied a reliable evaluation of a key indicator of the success of that policy . 
This is unacceptable . '' 
Understanding the burden of death , disease , injury and trauma aids the proper planning of war and health and will help governments assess the humanitarian implications of conflict , he says . 
`` The plain fact is that an estimate of 100,000 excess deaths attributable to the invasion of Iraq is alarming . 
That is already half the death toll of Hiroshima . 
Apart from the practical arguments , the principled ones stand and will always stand . 
Have we not learned any lessons from the history of sweeping alarming numbers of deaths under the carpet ? 
This is not something about which there can be any political discretion 60 years after Auschwitz . '' 
The Foreign Office said yesterday it believed the figures from the Iraqi ministry of health were the most reliable because they were based on head counts not extrapolation . 
