HOUSTON | Thu Oct 28 , 2010 6:02 pm EDT HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Halliburton Co. used flawed cement in BP Plc 's doomed Gulf of Mexico well , which could have contributed to the blowout that sparked the worst offshore oil spill in U.S. history , a White House panel said on Thursday . 
Halliburton 's shares tumbled as much as 16 percent after the National Oil Spill Commission released a letter detailing the panel 's findings , before recovering to close down nearly 8 percent at $ 31.68 per share on the New York Stock Exchange . 
BP 's U.S.-listed shares closed up 1.3 percent at $ 40.60 per share . 
While not absolving BP of responsibility , the report heaped criticism on Halliburton 's cement job , raising investor concerns it could be forced to bear some of the clean-up costs . 
BP has taken a $ 32.2 billion earnings charge to cover the cleanup . 
The cost to insure Halliburton 's debt jumped on the news . 
Halliburton had run a series of tests that showed the material was unstable in the weeks before the April 20 explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig , which killed 11 workers and spurred a temporary ban on deepwater U.S. drilling . 
In an emailed statement , Halliburton said it is reviewing the report and will publish a response later on Thursday . 
A BP spokesman declined to comment . 
Both Halliburton and BP were aware of flaws in the cement slurry , similar to the one used to seal the mile-deep Macondo well , as early as March 8 , over a month before the spill , `` but neither acted upon that data , '' according to National Oil Spill Commission chief counsel Fred Bartlit . 
`` The fact that BP and Halliburton knew this cement job could fail only solidifies their liability and responsibility for this disaster , '' said Rep. Edward Markey , a Democratic lawmaker who has criticized BP and its well partners . 
The industry has developed tests to identify faulty cement jobs in offshore wells , but `` BP and\/or Transocean personnel misinterpreted or chose not to conduct such tests at the Macondo well , '' Bartlit wrote . 
Tests conducted by industry cement experts show `` the foam cement used at Macondo was unstable , '' Bartlit wrote in a letter to co-chairs Bob Graham and Bill Reilly . 
`` Halliburton -LRB- and perhaps BP -RRB- should have considered redesigning the foam slurry before pumping it at the Macondo well . '' 
The report supports claims by BP that it shares the responsibility for the disaster with its Macondo partners , including Swiss-based Transocean Ltd , which owned the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
In an interim report BP issued in September , it said Halliburton used an `` unstable '' cement mixture that allowed hydrocarbons to flow up the drill pipe and onto the floor of the rig , where they ignited . 
The resulting spill marred the coasts of four U.S. Gulf states , prompted a ban on new deepwater drilling and left BP 's image in tatters in the United States , home to 40 percent of the London-based oil giant 's business . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
I understand the universe of challenges that my hope faces . 
it sure sucks when the government you bought gets voted out and there is no one to cover up your corrupt tracks ... This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
