BEIRUT | Tue Oct 18 , 2011 10:10 am EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Turkey 's foreign minister held his first acknowledged meeting with Syrian opposition leaders , urging them to use peaceful means despite what activists say was the biggest offensive yet in the city of Homs by forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad . 
Ahmed Davutoglu 's discussion with the opposition Syrian National Council Monday night , reported by an unnamed Turkish foreign ministry official , followed a threat by Syria to deal firmly with any country which formally recognizes the council . 
Turkey was an ally to Assad but ties soured when the Syrian president responded with force to the protests against his rule . 
`` The meeting is the first step toward Turkey recognizing the National Council , they are not very worried about the regime 's reaction because the relationship is already ruptured , '' said Lebanese analyst Hilal Khashan . 
The formation of the council has been welcomed by Western countries including the United States and France . 
However , unlike the transitional council set up by Libyan rebels who overthrew Muammar Gaddafi , Western governments have not offered the SNC any formal recognition , fearing a civil war that could destabilize the region . 
Davutoglu 's talks with the opposition also followed fresh signs that the seven-month uprising against Assad 's rule has become more militant . 
One opposition group reported the assassination Tuesday of an intelligence officer in the northern province of Idlib . 
Davutoglu told the council `` the Syrian opposition ... should employ peaceful and legitimate means to express their just demands and in a peaceful manner work to maintain the unity of the opposition and for a democratic transformation . '' 
Turkey has allowed opponents of Assad to meet in Turkish cities since anti-Assad protests started in March and has also given sanctuary to the most senior Syrian military to defect . 
Davutoglu 's talks followed one of the highest daily death tolls in Homs , the central Syrian city that has seen some of the most extensive protests against Assad . 
Residents said Syrian forces backed by tanks killed at least 25 people in a thrust into the opposition hotbed , 140 km -LRB- 90 miles -RRB- north of Damascus , aimed at stemming growing armed resistance to Assad 's crackdown on the seven-month-old uprising . 
Tanks firing machineguns swept into Sunni districts of Bab Sbaa , Bab Dreib and Bab Amro where large protests demanding the removal of Assad have taken place , residents and activists said . 
Army deserters and armed residents hit back with rocket-propelled grenades -LRB- RPGs -RRB- , hitting several tanks , they said . 
Homs is close to the border with Lebanon , which has begun to serve as a supply line to insurgents in the city and surrounding countryside , including army defectors who have increased in numbers since the crackdown intensified two months ago . 
Tuesday , troops sealed off districts in the city and searched the countryside for army defectors , residents said . 
`` Bab Sbaa , Bab Amro , al-Khalidya and al-Baiyada are totally sealed and machinegun fire keeps being directed at these neighborhoods . 
The only area where there are no troops or ` shabbiha ' is downtown , where only a few people are on the streets and there are virtually no cars , '' a resident of the city , who gave his name as Wael , told Reuters . 
`` Martyrs will be buried today , so we are expecting more deaths . 
A good number of the casualties yesterday occurred at funerals , '' another resident said . 
The United Nations says Assad 's crackdown has killed 3,000 people across Syria since March including at least 187 children . 
Syrian authorities blame the unrest on `` armed terrorist groups '' which they say have killed 1,100 army and police and are operating in Homs , killing civilians and prominent figures . 
The official news agency said troops had arrested `` the head of one of the leading terrorist groups '' in Homs and confiscated weapons , including RPGs and gunpowder . 
Foreign reporters are largely banned from Syria , making independent confirmation of reported events difficult . 
Mindful of the threat of civil war in Syria , which straddles major fault lines of Middle East conflict , the Arab League offered Sunday to host talks in Cairo between the opposition , who have formed a National Council , and the Damascus leadership . 
But Syria 's representative to the League said Syria had major reservations about the offer , while the Syrian National Council said it could not engage in talks while Assad 's military continued to storm restive cities and towns . 
