Amman Support for US brings a booming economy Bombings wreck image of safe haven from Iraq The bars are filled with tattooed ex-soldiers , young former officers and eastern European prostitutes . 
The men talk of the Iraq where they work for private security firms , and the women try to offer them an expensive escape . 
Amman has become the service center for western efforts to pacify and rebuild Iraq and Jordan 's once faltering economy is booming to the point of overheating . 
While many hotel guests are Jordanians , a large proportion are journalists , diplomats , soldiers , security guards and others who work in Iraq but use Amman as a base . 
While most of the victims of Wednesday 's suicide bombings were Jordanians , mainly at a wedding celebration , large numbers of Europeans and Americans were close to the explosion at the Grand Hyatt hotel . 
An al-Qaida statement posted on the internet described the three hotels that were attacked as `` filthy entertainment centres for the traitors and apostates of the umma -LRB- the Muslim world -RRB- and a safe haven for the infidel intelligence services '' . 
The decision of King Abdullah II to support the war in Iraq and the continued American presence there has led to many economic benefits but it has placed the country squarely in the enemy camp in the eyes of Islamic fundamentalists and particularly Abu Musab al Zarqawi , the Jordanian-born al-Qaida leader . 
The presence in Jordan of American special forces troops , employees of private security companies and western contractors for recuperation has made it an attractive target for militants fighting in Iraq . 
Jordan has a long porous border with Iraq , which is mostly uninhabited desert , and there is a large amount of traffic between the countries in which militants could hide . 
War in Iraq has brought an influx of western visitors and investment to Jordan . 
Prostitution has become more common , although it remains discreet . 
Amman even has a lap-dancing bar , although the dancers remain fully clothed and there is no physical contact with clients . 
One of the few establishments where eastern European prostitutes could be seen in public was the basement nightclub of the Grand Hyatt hotel . 
But the city is not just about rest and recuperation , it was also a safe haven for aid agencies and private companies to plan their work in Iraq . 
The United Nations , Red Cross and other organizations pulled out of Iraq after they became the targets of suicide bombs . 
Jordanian companies have been given contracts to provide services to the Iraqi administration such as refurbishing helicopters and training soldiers . 
To add to the boom , Jordan has become a bolthole for around half a million Iraqis and their assets , some of which have connections to the deposed Ba'athist regime and the insurgency . 
Before this week 's terrorist attack , the economy was growing by more than 7 % a year , property prices had more than doubled and the value of the Jordanian stock exchange had grown sixfold . 
It is a great success for a country which is mostly desert with few resources and hostile neighbors . 
On the eve of the war in Iraq , Jordanians were concerned they would suffer from its effects . 
The country was about to lose a $ 500m subsidy in free and cheap oil from Saddam Hussein and there was public anger at the government 's support for the United States . 
There were similar concerns in 1991 , when King Hussein remained neutral during the Gulf war . 
His son decided to do the opposite , which has led to an economic boom and terrorist attacks . 
Mohammad Abu Hammour , the head of the privatisation commission and a former finance minister , said the war in Iraq had positive and negative effects on Jordan . 
`` There are many investors who want to have joint ventures with Jordanian companies but at the same time there is little foreign interest in the privatisation of state companies as western investors see the risk as too great , '' he said . 
But the economic benefits have not filtered through to the majority of the population . 
The average wage is # 175 a month and most Jordanians would not be able to afford a meal at the Four Seasons or Sheraton hotels . 
Mr Hammour said the price of a modest apartment in Amman had risen from # 21,000 to # 49,000 in three years , making it very difficult for someone on an average salary to buy a home . 
A major danger facing Jordan is that its prosperity could remain unevenly distributed and the disparity in wealth could fuel social unrest that might find a focus in radical Islam . 
An ancient and modern city The city is built on seven hills on the eastern boundary of the Ajlun mountains . 
One of the oldest cities in the world , excavations have uncovered homes believed to have been built during the Chalcolithic period -LRB- circa 4500 - 3000 BC -RRB- . 
Later Amman became the capital of the Ammonites , a semitic people frequently mentioned in the Bible , and was known as Ammon . 
Egypt 's King Ptolemy II Philadelphus conquered the city in the third century BC and renamed it Philadelphia after himself ; the name was retained through Byzantine and Roman times . 
At the rise of Islam , the city 's name returned to its semitic origin of Ammon or Amman , after being taken by the Arab general Yazid ibn Abu Sufyan in AD 635 . 
By about 1300 the city had entirely disappeared for unknown causes . 
In 1878 the Ottoman Turks resettled the site with Circassian refugees from Russia ; it remained a small village until after the first world war . 
Transjordan became part of the Palestine mandate , but Britain severed it from western Palestine -LRB- 1921 -RRB- and established a protected emirate of Transjordan , under the rule of Abdullah bin al-Hussein . 
Amman became capital of this new country ; the city 's growth was accelerated at Jordan 's independence -LRB- 1946 -RRB- . 
The city is a thriving metropolis with a population of more than 1 million people . 
Its growth has been driven largely by political events in the region , especially the Arab-Israeli conflict which has drawn waves of Palestinian refugees to the city . 
