People wear medical masks while walking past a hospital in Taipei May 22 , 2009 . 
GENEVA | Fri May 22 , 2009 3:28 pm EDT GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Countries should be ready for more serious H1N1 flu infections and more deaths from the newly discovered virus , World Health Organization chief Margaret Chan said on Friday . 
The highly contagious strain must be closely monitored in parts of Asia , Africa and South America where the winter season is beginning in case it mixes with seasonal flu and mutates in `` unpredictable ways , '' Chan told the closing session of her United Nations agency 's annual congress . 
`` In cases where the H1N1 virus is widespread and circulating within the general community , countries must expect to see more cases of severe and fatal infections , '' she said . 
`` We do not at present expect this to be a sudden and dramatic jump in severe illness and deaths . '' 
In the WHO 's latest tally , the strain has infected more than 11,000 people in 42 countries and killed 86 . 
Chan told the end of the week-long World Health Assembly that poorer countries need to quickly improve their monitoring for the new flu , which has caused mainly mild symptoms in most patients but could become more serious as it spreads . 
`` This is a subtle , sneaky virus , '' she said . 
`` We have clues , many clues , but very few firm conclusions . '' 
Another senior WHO official , Keiji Fukuda , later told a news conference the United Nations agency was rethinking its criteria for declaring a full H1N1 pandemic is underway to factor in its severity as well as its geographical spread . 
`` What we are looking for and what we will be looking for is something , events , which signify a really significant increase in risk of harm to people , '' said Fukuda , acting WHO assistant director-general . 
The WHO 's global flu alert is currently at level 5 out of 6 , meaning that a pandemic is `` imminent . '' 
Officials from the WHO 's 193 member states have been pushing this week for an altered definition of a Phase 6 pandemic to reduce the risk of unnecessary public panic . 
`` The bottom line here is we are trying to walk a very fine line between not raising panic but also not becoming complacent , '' Fukuda said , adding that criteria would be reviewed now that the assembly had ended . 
The WHO 's current rulebook requires a full pandemic to be declared once the air-borne virus is spreading in a sustained way in two regions of the world . 
The H1N1 strain has been most prevalent in North America and has also caused growing pockets of infection in Japan , Spain and Britain . 
Chan said there was little real difference between the WHO 's current pandemic alert level of 5 and the highest of 6 in terms of preparedness measures taken , and she would consult experts before opting to raise it again . 
`` The decision to declare an influenza pandemic is a responsibility and a duty that I take very , very seriously , '' she said . 
`` I will consider all the scientific information available . 
I will be advised by the emergency committee . '' 
The WHO expects that by the end of May , laboratories will be able to send candidate viruses to drug companies to be tested as vaccine viruses , according to Fukuda . 
`` We are hopeful that by the end of June , by the beginning of July , this will be the time when commercial companies will be in the position of beginning to , or being able to make H1N1 vaccine , '' he said . 
While the new flu virus dominated their meeting , officials also passed resolutions on the need to improve treatment of multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis and prepare for a surge in diseases including mosquito-borne malaria due to global warming . 
