`` We have not been able to stop the flow , '' said Doug Suttles , the London-based oil giant 's chief operating officer . 
`` We have made the decision to move on to the next option , '' he added . 
That next option is called the lower marine riser package cap , one that captures oil from the well rather than plug it . 
Suttles said it could take four days or longer to show results . 
U.S. Coast Guard Admiral Mary Landry , flanking Suttles at a daily briefing , said the news of the top kill failure was disappointing and that the best option for ending the spill was drilling a relief well which BP estimates will take two months . 
The top kill maneuver started on Wednesday and involved pumping heavy fluids and other material into the well shaft to stifle the flow , then seal it with cement . 
But it was fraught with risk because it had never been attempted at the depth of the well , a mile beneath the sea . 
The failure was a further blow to BP 's reputation and bottom line . 
The company has spent $ 940 million so far to try to plug the leak and clean up the sea and soiled marshlands vital to wildlife and fishing . 
The news will also put further pressure on U.S. President Barack Obama , who is struggling to persuade Americans that his administration can handle the crisis . 
The plodding clean-up effort has sickened workers and left Gulf coast residents frustrated and angry . 
The Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on April 20 , killing 11 workers and unleashing an underwater torrent of oil that the government estimated at 12,000 to 19,000 barrels -LRB- 504,000 to 798,000 gallons\/1 .9 million to 3 million liters -RRB- a day . 
Obama faced criticism that he responded too slowly and assured people in Louisiana during a visit on Friday that they `` will not be left behind '' and that the `` buck stops '' with him . 
There is not much Obama can do other than apply pressure to BP to get it right and put his best scientists in the room . 
The government has no deep-sea oil technology of its own . 
This week , government estimates showed that the Gulf spill surpassed the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaskan waters . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
I am a boat owner in Chicago and was just emailed that Obama is hosting a party this weekend on a boat on Lake Michigan . 
Why not the Gulf of Mexico ? 
I am a boat owner in Chicago and received an email that President Obama is hosting a party on a boat on Lake Michigan this Memorial Day Weekend . 
Why not on the Gulf of Mexico ? 
A siege on the gulf , Im glad it 's only oil . 
With B.H.O. on the spot this will be taken care of by breakfast Sunday . 
What does He mean by the buck stops with Him ? 
Who is this masked man ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
