Desmond Lachman -- Welcome to America , the World 's Scariest Emerging Market Back in the spring of 1998 , when Boris Yeltsin was still at Russia 's helm , I led a group of global investors to Moscow to find out firsthand where the Russian economy was headed . 
My long career with the International Monetary Fund and on Wall Street had taken me to `` emerging markets '' throughout Asia , Eastern Europe and Latin America , and I thought I 'd seen it all . 
Yet I still recall the shock I felt at a meeting in Russia 's dingy Ministry of Finance , where I finally realized how a handful of young oligarchs were bringing Russia 's economy to ruin in the pursuit of their own selfish interests , despite the supposed brilliance of Anatoly Chubais , Russia 's economic czar at the time . 
At the time , I could not imagine that anything remotely similar could happen in the United States . 
Indeed , I shared the American conceit that most emerging-market nations had poorly developed institutions and would do well to emulate Washington and Wall Street . 
These days , though , I 'm hardly so confident . 
Many economists and analysts are worrying that the United States might go the way of Japan , which suffered a `` lost decade '' after its own real estate market fell apart in the early 1990s . 
But I 'm more concerned that the United States is coming to resemble Argentina , Russia and other so-called emerging markets , both in what led us to the crisis , and in how we 're trying to fix it . 
Over the past year , I 've been getting Russia flashbacks as I witness the AIG debacle as well as the collapse of Bear Sterns and a host of other financial institutions . 
Much like the oligarchs did in Russia , a small group of traders and executives at onetime venerable institutions have brought the U.S. and global financial systems to their knees with their reckless risk-taking -- with other people 's money -- for their personal gain . 
Negotiating with Argentina 's top officials during their multiple financial crises in the 1990s was always an ordeal , and sparring with Domingo Cavallo , the country 's Harvard-trained finance minister at the time , was particularly trying . 
One always had the sense that , despite their supreme arrogance , the country 's leaders never had a coherent economic strategy and that major decisions were always made on the run . 
I never thought that was how policy was made in the United States -- until , that is , I saw how totally at sea Treasury Secretaries Henry Paulson and Timothy F. Geithner and Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke have appeared so many times during our country 's ongoing economic and financial storm . 
The parallels between U.S. policymaking and what we see in emerging markets are clearest in how we 've mishandled the banking crisis . 
We delude ourselves that our banks face liquidity problems , rather than deeper solvency problems , and we try to fix it all on the cheap just like any run-of-the-mill emerging market economy would try to do . 
And after years of lecturing Asian and Latin American leaders about the importance of consistency and transparency in sorting out financial crises , we fail on both counts : In March 2008 , one investment bank , Bear Stearns , is bailed out because it is thought to be too interconnected with the rest of the banking system to fail . 
However , six months later , another investment bank , Lehman Brothers -- for all intents and purposes indistinguishable from Bear Stearns in its financial market inter-connectedness -- is allowed to fail , with catastrophic effects on global financial markets . 
In visits to Asian capitals during the region 's financial crisis in the late 1990s , I often heard Asian reformers such as Singapore 's Lee Kuan Yew or Japan 's Eisuke Sakakibara complain about how the incestuous relationship between governments and large Asian corporate conglomerates stymied real economic change . 
How fortunate , I thought then , that the United States was not similarly plagued by crony capitalism ! 
However , watching Goldman Sachs 's seeming lock on high-level U.S. Treasury jobs as well as the way that Republicans and Democrats alike tiptoed around reforming Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae -- among the largest campaign contributors to Congress -- made me wonder if the differences between the United States and the Asian economies were only a matter of degree . 
On Wall Street there is an old joke that the longest river in the emerging-market economies is `` de Nile . '' 
Yet how often do U.S. leaders respond to growing signs of economic dysfunctionality by spouting nationalistic rhetoric that echoes the speeches of Latin American demagogues like Peru 's Alan Garcia in the 1980s and Argentina 's Carlos Menem in the 1990s ? 
-LRB- Even Garcia , currently in his second go-around as Peru 's president , seems to have grown up somewhat . -RRB- 
But instead of facing our problems we extol the resilience of the U.S. economy , praise the most productive workers in the world , and go on and on about America 's inherent ability to extricate itself from any crisis . 
And we ignore our proclivity as a nation to spend , year in year out , more than we produce , to put off dealing with long-term problems , and to engage in grandiose long-term programs that as a nation we can ill afford . 
A singular characteristic of an emerging market heading for deep trouble is a seemingly suicidal tendency to become overly indebted to foreign creditors . 
That tendency underlay the spectacular collapse of the Thai , Indonesian and Korean currencies in 1997 . 
It also led Russia to default on its debt in 1998 and plunged Argentina into its economic depression in 2001 . 
Yet we too seem to have little difficulty becoming increasingly indebted to the tune of a few hundred billion dollars a year . 
To make matters worse , we do so to countries like China , Russia and an assortment of Middle Eastern oil producers -- none of which is particularly well disposed to us . 
Like Argentina in its worst moments , we never seem to question whether it is reasonable to expect foreigners to keep financing our extravagance , and we forget the bad things that happen to the Argentinas or Hungarys of the world when foreigners stop financing their excesses . 
So instead of laying out a realistic plan for increasing our national savings , we choose not to face up to the Social Security and Medicare crises that lie ahead , embarking instead on massive spending programs that -- whatever their long-run merits might be -- we simply can not afford . 
After experiencing a few emerging-market crises , I get the sense of watching the same movie over and over . 
All too often , a tragic part of that movie is the failure of the countries ' policymakers to hear the loud cries of canaries in the coal mine . 
Before running up further outsized budget deficits , should we not heed the markets that now see a 10 percent probability that the U.S. government will default on its sovereign debt in the next five years ? 
And should we not be paying close attention to the Chinese central bank governor 's musings that he does not feel comfortable with the $ 1 trillion of U.S. government debt that the Chinese central bank already owns , let alone adding to those holdings ? 
In the twilight of my career , when I am hopefully wiser than before , I have come to regret how the IMF and the U.S. Treasury all too often lectured leaders in emerging markets on how to `` get their house in order '' -- without the slightest thought that the United States might fare no better when facing a major economic crisis . 
Now , I fear time is running out for our own policymakers to mend their ways and offer real leadership to extricate the United States from its worst economic calamity since the 1930s . 
If we insist on improvising and not facing our real problems , we might soon lose our status as a country to be emulated and join the ranks of those nations we have patronized for so long . 
Desmond Lachman , a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute , was previously chief emerging market strategist at Salomon Smith Barney and deputy director of the International Monetary Fund 's Policy and Review Department . 
