The damage done to Babylon has impaired the prospect of understanding a glorious ancient civilisation , writes Mike Pitts Monday 17 January 2005 16.47 GMT US marines walk through the remake of the palace of King Nebuchadnezzar in the ancient town of Babylon . 
Photograph : Jerry Lampen\/Reuters `` By the waters of Babylon '' , goes the song . 
There we sat down , and wept . 
As I read John Curtis 's tersely-worded report , the sound of this lament rang in my mind . 
Archaeologists deal with things usually so broken as to be unrecognisable to the untrained eye , yet for us these documents reverberate with people 's lives . 
So this list of trenches and swaths of flattened ground across ancient Babylon conjured ancient empires and civilisations . 
I thought of a century and a half of international research and fieldwork . 
I imagined an emerging nation seeking its glorious , complex heritage in the gashes and violations of an occupying force . 
What were they thinking ? 
In a war acknowledged to be more about politics and culture than territory , surely the significance of Babylon was not missed ? 
Babylon the capital city of Hammurabi , of Nebuchadnezzar , of the hanging gardens described by Herodotus ; Babylon the military powerhouse that ravaged its neighbors in the sixth and fifth centuries BC , yet also developed astronomy , science and art to extraordinary levels . 
Surely no one in the west was so ignorant at least not to ask : should we not be concerned ? 
If you choose this site for a military camp , you must know that both that choice and especially how you treat the ancient remains will be read as a political statement by others . 
An archaeologist , however , will see more in the report than trouble over the symbolism of carelessness . 
There are obvious references that indicate damage to archaeological remains took place in and around the camp . 
You do not need to be an expert to understand these , any more than you would need to have been to have realized something dodgy was happening at the time . 
Someone tried to remove a moulded brick from the famous Ishtar Gate . 
It seems they failed , but had a good time damaging the reliefs in the attempt . 
A sixth century BC processional way was not designed for a modern military vehicle , and the result of driving one on it was predictable . 
A 170m long trench - these are not just portaloo pits - threw up `` much pottery and many fragments of brick with cuneiform inscriptions of Nebuchadnezzar '' . 
Cuneiform inscriptions : are they not a useful discovery ? 
They might be , but their value will have been greatly diminished , if not destroyed , by the way they were uncovered . 
In archaeological research , physical association is crucial . 
The history of a civilisation and the daily lives of its citizens emerge from intimate study of the totality of their remains , not from glitzy artefacts with no context . 
Inscribed bricks make good headlines , but , for the archaeologist , the trenches that apparently threw up nothing are just as significant . 
It is important to realize that much of Babylon 's story remains a mystery , and with the ever-growing subtleties of modern science , there is huge promise for future researchers . 
Turning the pages of Curtis 's report I see case after case where the document that would tell this story has been ripped apart . 
An area 50m by 200m close to the ancient Ninmah temple was flattened for a helipad , gravelled and treated with petroleum to control the dust . 
All of these - levelling , introduction of foreign materials and contamination - are potentially destructive of archaeological remains , as are the many cuttings and trenches detailed , the heavy vehicle wheel ruts , the earthmoving and the fuel seepages . 
And this list - the report 's killer phrase - `` should not be seen as exhaustive , but ... indicative '' . 
There must be a full investigation of what happened and the damage caused , but what really matters lies ahead . 
Babylon must join Unesco 's list of world heritage sites -LRB- in another country , it would long have been there -RRB- . 
We must show Iraq that the world respects its history . 
International effort must research , reveal and rebuild Babylon 's past . 
This heritage disaster must be turned to triumph . 
Mike Pitts is editor of British Archaeology Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Follow all the top stories of the day on Twitter with the Guardian 's world news team john_hooper : #Benedict decided to resign after visit to Mexico & Cuba last March , says tonight 's edition of #pope 's daily L'Osservatore Romano #news 
