A presidential commission investigating the intelligence debacle that preceded the Iraq invasion reported yesterday that the damage done to US credibility would `` take years to undo '' . 
American intelligence was described by the report as being in chaos , often paralysed by the rivalry of 15 different spy agencies and affected by unchallenged assumptions about Baghdad 's supposed weapons of mass destruction . 
The incompetence described in the report occasionally descends into farce , particularly over an Iraqi defector codenamed Curveball , whose fabricated tales about mobile biological laboratories and their influence on US decision-makers were reminiscent of Graham Greene 's accidental spy in Our Man in Havana . 
Despite warnings that he was `` crazy '' , `` a waste of time '' , and that he had not even been in Iraq at the time of an event he supposedly saw , his claims became the subject of almost 100 Defense Intelligence Agency reports and a focus of the National Intelligence Estimate in October 2002 . 
Most critically , Curveball 's description of mobile laboratories provided one of the highlights of Colin Powell 's address to the UN security council on February 5 2003 , in which the then US secretary of state laid out the justification for the invasion . 
Curveball 's story has already been told in part , but yesterday 's account is the most comprehensive . 
He was an Iraqi chemical engineer who was first debriefed in 2000 by a foreign liaison service - not named in yesterday 's report but elsewhere reported as being German intelligence . 
Before the war , the Germans refused to let US interrogators question Curveball directly , saying that he `` would refuse to speak to Americans '' ; they just passed on his claims , according to the Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction . 
Warning signs emerged in May 2000 when a military intelligence officer was allowed to visit Curveball . 
He reported : `` I do have a concern with the validity of the information , based on Curveball having a terrible hangover the morning of -LRB- the meeting -RRB- . '' 
The warning fell on deaf ears , but by autumn 2002 the CIA was growing increasingly nervous , knowing it had not met an important source . 
So a meeting was arranged between the local CIA division chief and German intelligence officers . 
When the division chief asked whether US agents could question the defector , `` the foreign intelligence service responded with words to the effect of ` You do n't want to see him because he 's crazy ' - furthermore , the -LRB- German -RRB- representative said that he worried that Curveball was ' a fabricator ' . '' 
The division chief passed on this alarming news to his superiors , but George Tenet , then CIA chief , and his deputy , John McLaughlin , both denied having been told of it . 
On the eve of Mr Powell 's UN speech , Mr Tenet and senior intelligence officers were cloistered with the secretary of state in New York , going over the administration 's claims . 
At midnight Mr Tenet called the division chief at home , but the two men have different recollections of the conversation . 
`` Although he did not remember his exact words , the division chief says that he told Mr Tenet something to the effect of ` You know that the -LRB- foreign service -RRB- reporting has problems ' . 
According to the division chief , Mr Tenet replied with words to the effect of ` Yeah , yeah ' and that he was ` exhausted ' , '' the report says . 
It continues : `` The division chief said that when he listened to the speech ... he was surprised the information from Curveball had been included . '' 
Questioned by the commission , however , Mr Tenet denied that the subject of Curveball had ever been raised . 
Curveball is reportedly related to a senior member of the Iraqi national congress -LRB- INC -RRB- , then an exile group . 
However , the commission found that the INC had not brought him forward . 
The report is another nail in the coffin of Mr Tenet 's reputation and clears the White House and Pentagon of trying to shape intelligence to justify war . 
It concludes : `` The commission found no evidence of political pressure to influence the intelligence community 's prewar assessments of Iraq 's weapons programs . '' 
It warns only of the dangers of intelligence leaders becoming too close to the president and risking the loss of objectivity . 
In other words , the commission found that Mr Tenet had been too eager to please . 
