The Guardian profile : Paul Wolfowitz The intellectual force behind the Bush administration 's neo-conservatives has been trying to charm his critics as he is crowned head of the World Bank . 
But whether he can - or will - put US interests to one side remains to be seen Friday 1 April 2005 00.03 BST For opponents of America 's war on Iraq and fans of Michael Moore , one of the most indelible moments of the film Fahrenheit 9\/11 is when Paul Wolfowitz , deputy defense secretary and the intellectual high priest of the Bush administration 's hawks , puts a generous dollop of spit on his comb before smoothing his hair for a television appearance . 
Iffy grooming habits are the least of Wolfowitz 's worries as he takes on the presidency of the World Bank . 
His coronation yesterday was never seriously in doubt - the US is the bank 's largest shareholder . 
But it remains to be seen whether Wolfowitz can overcome the derision and anger that have been heaped on him as the architect of the Iraq war . 
And , after a lifetime spent trying to expand America 's power , is he capable of functioning in a multilateral environment where the focus will not be Washington 's strategic interest , but global poverty ? 
In the fortnight since his nomination , Wolfowitz has worked strenuously to try to temper his reputation as a raging neo-conservative , deploying his not inconsiderable charm to persuade critics in Europe and the Middle East that he does indeed have experience in finance and development , and that he will be able to divorce Washington 's interests from the bank 's . 
Many will prove impossible to convince , seeing in Wolfowitz 's appointment evidence of the White House 's intent to use the World Bank to advance US global interests . 
`` It 's a slap in the face , it 's a poke in the eye . 
It 's bad for the international community in general , and particularly for people already pushed to the brink in poor and marginalised communities , '' says Emira Woods , a fellow at the left-leaning Institute for Policy Studies . 
`` What this means is that the person who was the architect of the corporate-driven plan for Iraq that failed now gets a chance to do that in the rest of the world . '' 
Others believe that Wolfowitz , seen as the intellectual force among the administration 's neo-conservatives , was always an uneasy fit at the Pentagon . 
`` When he was named deputy of secretary of defense I thought of a number of positions where he would be even more in tune with what was going on , '' says Thomas Keaney , a defense expert who worked with Wolfowitz during one of his brief spells out of government at the School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University . 
`` I thought he was even more in tune with international development and globalisation . 
This is a good fit . '' 
It is also a welcome escape for Wolfowitz , who has spent much of the past two years trying to defend his policies to Congress . 
The academic high priest of the Vulcans , as the president 's coterie of security advisers called themselves , Wolfowitz is associated inextricably with the greatest disasters of the Iraq war : the rosy predictions on the eve of the conflict that US soldiers would be welcomed with open arms as liberators , and his insistence that reconstruction could be financed from Iraqi oil revenues . 
`` I think he and the Bush White House have slightly different agendas . 
The Bush White House wanted to promote and reward a guy without going through - though they would never say this - a bruising confirmation battle for some other US government job , '' says James Mann , the author of a history of the Bush war cabinet called Rise of the Vulcans . 
`` He sees it as a chance to launch into an entirely new area , and to get away from being stuck on defense and military issues . '' 
Now 61 , Wolfowitz was born into a Polish Jewish immigrant family , and grew up mainly in the university town of Ithaca , New York , where his father was a professor of statistical theory at Cornell University . 
At 14 he spent a year in Israel while his father was a visiting professor in Haifa , and his sister emigrated to the country . 
But he is one of the few neo-conservatives in the Bush administration to endorse the creation of a Palestinian state , and was heckled at a pro-Israeli rally in 2002 for acknowledging Palestinian suffering . 
To please his father , the younger Wolfowitz enrolled at Cornell , too , where he studied maths and was offered a full scholarship , but went on to pursue his own interests in political science , doing graduate studies at the University of Chicago . 
There he encountered such leading conservative figures as Leo Strauss and Albert Wohlstetter , under whom he wrote his doctorate on the dangers of a nuclearised Middle East . 
Significantly for a neo-conservative , that included the threat posed by a nuclear-armed Israel . 
Since coming to Washington to work as an intern in the arms control and disarmament agency in 1973 , Wolfowitz has worked almost exclusively in government , apart from a period of exile during the Clinton years , when he headed the School of Advanced International Studies . 
Even colleagues who disagree violently with his view of the world concede that Wolfowitz was far more congenial than the usual Washington apparatchik . 
`` He does n't do what I have often seen in Washington which is treat you like a piece of furniture , '' says Dan Gour , a fellow at the Lexington Institute , who met Wolfowitz 30 years ago when he gave him a job at the arms control agency . 
`` Even if he was critical of something you had done for him , it was not done in a way that would diminish you as an individual . '' 
But despite sharp intelligence , willingness to put in 18-hour work days , and a genial , low-key manner , Wolfowitz has never before held a leadership position . 
Instead , he became `` the most influential underling in Washington '' , as Mann writes in his book . 
Over the years he worked under six presidents , including the Democrat , Jimmy Carter . 
But Wolfowitz 's preoccupations have not radically changed since his days as a graduate student : a belief in the importance of military power and that America is a force for good in the world , a distrust of the Soviet Union and of America 's intelligence agencies , and a disdain for the Kissinger doctrines of detente and containment . 
Since 2001 Wolfowitz has added another pillar to his ideology : a belief that the September 11 terror attacks changed the world forever . 
Clues to the way in which Wolfowitz would respond to that change as deputy Pentagon chief were evident from his first days in Washington . 
As a junior official at the Pentagon in 1977 he presided over a project which looked at the possibility of a Soviet seizure of Gulf oilfields . 
He also explored the consequences of an Iraqi attack on Saudi Arabia or Kuwait . 
To Mann , that was typical . 
`` He stands out for me from many other neo-conservatives for the frequency with which he takes core beliefs and then asks the next question , '' he says . 
During the 80s , Wolfowitz 's interests shifted from the Middle East to Asia , when he moved to the state department as assistant secretary for east Asia , then ambassador to Indonesia . 
Supporters say those years convinced him of the importance of using American might to promote democratic change . 
He was , by all accounts , a successful ambassador . 
But some who acknowledge his popularity also discount the argument that Wolfowitz used his influence as an envoy to press for change . 
`` It is really too much to claim that he played any kind of role in leading Indonesia to democracy , '' says Jeffrey Winters , an expert on Indonesia at Chicago 's Northwestern University , who was in the country at the time . 
`` The real record when you dig into it is that he was very slow to respond to Indonesia 's movement for democracy . 
Indonesia 's citizens across the spectrum had been struggling against authoritarian rule . 
They had been tortured . 
They had been jailed . 
They had been ruined in various ways , and the Wolfowitz embassy did n't speak up for them - not once . '' 
He adds : `` He had his chance , and he toed the Reagan hawkish line . '' 
The World Bank will be watching for far more than that from Wolfowitz . 
Born 1943 in Brooklyn , New York . 
Son of Jacob Wolfowitz , a leading Polish mathematician who emigrated in 1920 , and Lillian Dundes Family Married in 1968 to Clare Selgin . 
Three children ; divorced 2002 Educated Cornell University -LRB- bachelor 's degree in maths , 1965 -RRB- , University of Chicago -LRB- PhD , political science , 1972 -RRB- Career Lecturer , political science , Yale 1970-73 ; deputy assistant secretary of defense ,1977 - 80 ; state department policy planning staff head1981-82 ; assistant secretary for east Asian and Pacific affairs , 1983-86 ; ambassador to Indonesia 1986-89 ; undersecretary of defence,1989-93 ; deputy defense secretary , 2001-05 ; World Bank president , 2005 A former colleague says `` Hawk does n't do him justice . 
What about velociraptor ? '' 
