Wednesday , February 18 , 2009 ; 10:18 AM The deep contraction in the economy and in the housing market has created devastating consequences for homeowners and communities throughout the country . 
Millions of responsible families who make their monthly payments and fulfill their obligations have seen their property values fall , and are now unable to refinance at lower mortgage rates . 
Millions of workers have lost their jobs or had their hours cut back , are now struggling to stay current on their mortgage payments with nearly 6 million households facing possible foreclosure . 
Neighborhoods are struggling , as each foreclosed home reduces nearby property values by as much as 9 percent . 
The Homeowner Affordability and Stability Plan is part of the President 's broad , comprehensive strategy to get the economy back on track . 
The plan will help up to 7 to 9 million families restructure or refinance their mortgages to avoid foreclosure . 
In doing so , the plan not only helps responsible homeowners on the verge of defaulting , but prevents neighborhoods and communities from being pulled over the edge too , as defaults and foreclosures contribute to falling home values , failing local businesses , and lost jobs . 
The key components of the Homeowner Affordability and Stability Plan are : 1 . 
Affordability : Provide Access to Low-Cost Refinancing for Responsible Homeowners Suffering From Falling Home Prices Enabling Up to 4 to 5 Million Responsible Homeowners to Refinance : Mortgage rates are currently at historically low levels , providing homeowners with the opportunity to reduce their monthly payments by refinancing . 
But under current rules , most families who owe more than 80 percent of the value of their homes have a difficult time refinancing . 
Yet millions of responsible homeowners who put money down and made their mortgage payments on time have -- through no fault of their own -- seen the value of their homes drop low enough to make them unable to access these lower rates . 
As a result , the Obama Administration is announcing a new program that will help as many as 4 to 5 million responsible homeowners who took out conforming loans owned or guaranteed by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac to refinance through those two institutions . 
Reducing Monthly Payments : For many families , a low-cost refinancing could reduce mortgage payments by thousands of dollars per year : Consider a family that took out a 30-year fixed rate mortgage of $ 207,000 with an interest rate of 6.50 % on a house worth $ 260,000 at the time . 
Today , that family has about $ 200,000 remaining on their mortgage , but the value of that home has fallen 15 percent to $ 221,000 -- making them ineligible for today 's low interest rates that now generally require the borrower to have 20 percent home equity . 
Under this refinancing plan , that family could refinance to a rate near 5.16 % -- reducing their annual payments by over $ 2,300 . 
Stability : Create A $ 75 Billion Homeowner Stability Initiative to Reach Up to 3 to 4 Million At-Risk Homeowners Helping Hard-Pressed Homeowners Stay in their Homes : This initiative is intended to reach millions of responsible homeowners who are struggling to afford their mortgage payments because of the current recession , yet can not sell their homes because prices have fallen so significantly . 
Millions of hard-working families have seen their mortgage payments rise to 40 or even 50 percent of their monthly income -- particularly those who received subprime and exotic loans with exploding terms and hidden fees . 
The Homeowner Stability Initiative helps those who commit to make reasonable monthly mortgage payments to stay in their homes -- providing families with security and neighborhoods with stability . 
No Aid for Speculators : This initiative will go solely to helping homeowners who commit to make payments to stay in their home it will not aid speculators or house flippers . 
