President Obama will address the nation from the White House Tuesday night . 
Subject : the BP oil spill . 
The problem is the president is a few weeks late and millions of gallons short . 
The president revealed his impotence and just how out of touch he is with this and another issue of profound importance to the public in an interview with Politico . 
In that interview , the president compared the BP oil spill to 9\/11 . 
September 11 was about the murder of 3,000 Americans in a deliberate act by a group of Islamic fanatics . 
The BP affair was an accident which killed 11 and injured 17 others . 
One could argue that both 9\/11 and the BP platform explosion and subsequent leak were preventable , but to compare a murderous act with an accident is absurd . 
The president hopes to make it appear he is doing something when all he is doing is talking , or talking about doing something , or doing something that wo n't stop the leak and repair the Gulf waters . 
He has threatened BP , as if the company wants to continue damaging its already soiled reputation . 
He wants the company to set aside a fund , to be administered by a third party , to guarantee payments to those with legitimate damage claims . 
That might be a good idea , but as long as he is wanting others to pay for damages , how about sending a bill to Iraq and Afghanistan for the damages those wars have caused to American lives and our treasury ? 
Just how political the BP issue has become is evident in a comment made by Rep. Jesse Jackson -LRB- D-Ill -RRB- . 
Jackson called on the president to `` level with the American people , '' turn the oil spill into a job-creation tool and `` stop the blame game . '' 
I agree on stopping the blame game , but the president seems incapable of doing that . 
At least he ca n't blame this one on the Bush administration , or might he ? 
The president has relied on his speaking ability to get him this far . 
On Tuesday night , he 'll need more than rhetoric and his TelePrompter . 
The public is onto him as reflected in his sinking approval numbers . 
Cal Thomas is America 's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor . 
Fox Forum is on Twitter . 
