The drilling rig Discoverer Enterprise recovers leaking oil in the Gulf of Mexico on June 13 . 
-LRB- AP Photo -RRB- As President Obama landed in Mississippi for his fourth trip to the Gulf Coast to survey oil spill damage , BP outlined a plan it said would speed up the containment effort so that more than 50,000 barrels a day can be pumped to the surface by the end of June . 
The outline came after the Coast Guard on Friday demanded the company figure out ways to accelerate the process . 
The cap on the blown-out well is said to be capturing about 15,000 barrels a day -- but plenty more is still leaking into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Under the revised schedule , BP claims it can capture between 40,000 and 53,000 barrels a day by the end of this month . 
BP was n't expected to reach that capacity until mid-July under the earlier plan . 
The new estimate , detailed in a letter to the Coast Guard dated Sunday , also claims the energy giant will be able to capture as much as 80,000 barrels a day by mid-July . 
The Obama administration said BP was responding to its order from Friday , in which Coast Guard Rear Adm. James Watson told the company that `` every effort must be expended to speed up '' the rate of containment . 
`` After being directed by the administration to move more quickly , BP is now stepping up its efforts to contain the leaking oil , '' an administration official said Monday , adding that the new plan has enough backup in place to account for bad weather and `` unforeseen circumstances . '' 
`` This administration has continuously demanded strategies and responses from BP that fit the realities of this catastrophic event , for which BP is responsible . 
We will continue to hold BP accountable and bring every possible resource and innovation to bear , '' the official said . 
BP , in its letter , said it would mobilize a vessel from South America to store oil , in addition to two more lightering tankers -- used to transfer cargo between ships -- from Europe and other equipment . 
BP Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles said in the letter that the company believes `` this plan is responsive to your order , '' but cautioned that the firm was outside its comfort zone . 
`` The risks of operating multiple facilities in close proximity must be carefully managed , '' he wrote . 
`` Several hundred people are working in a confined space with live hydrocarbons on up to 4 vessels . 
This is significantly beyond both BP and industry practice . 
`` We will continue to aggressively drive schedule to minimize pollution , but we must not allow this drive to compromise our number one priority , that being the health and safety of our people , '' he wrote . 
BP is facing increasing political and public pressure not only to speed up the rate of containment but to pledge more money to help those suffering economic losses from the spill . 
Obama is pressing the company to set up an escrow account to pay for lost income to local businesses , a plan he will describe during an address to the nation from the Oval Office on Tuesday . 
Leading up to his address , the president will tour Mississippi , Alabama and Florida to survey the damage . 
He is set to arrive in Biloxi , Miss. , shortly before noon on Monday . 
To this point , the president had only visited the Louisiana coast . 
Florida Republican Sen. George LeMieux said that when the president visits his state on Tuesday , he plans to press him on why the administration is not allowing in more oil skimmers to clean up the damage . 
Four hundred skimming boats are at work in the Gulf cleaning up the oil , but local officials have been pleading with the federal government to bring in more -- one problem may be that foreign ships are barred from working in U.S. coastal waters by a 1920s law known as the Jones Act . 
Officials say they are prepared to waive the act if necessary , but White House energy adviser Carol Browner told Fox News on Friday that so far no request from the Coast Guard has been made to do so . 
LeMieux told Fox News on Monday that U.S. skimmers are available as well and questioned why more boats are not being deployed . 
`` There 's thousands of skimmers in the United States and thousands of skimmers around the world , '' he said . 
`` Why are n't they headed to the Gulf of Mexico ? 
It does n't ' make any sense to me . '' 
