On Al-Qaeda Web Sites , Joy Over U.S. Crisis , Support for McCain Al-Qaeda is watching the U.S. stock market 's downward slide with something akin to jubilation , with its leaders hailing the financial crisis as a vindication of its strategy of crippling America 's economy through endless , costly foreign wars against Islamist insurgents . 
And at least some of its supporters think Sen. John McCain is the presidential candidate best suited to continue that trend . 
`` Al-Qaeda will have to support McCain in the coming election , '' said a commentary posted Monday on the extremist Web site al-Hesbah , which is closely linked to the terrorist group . 
It said the Arizona Republican would continue the `` failing march of his predecessor , '' President Bush . 
The Web commentary was one of several posted by Taliban or al-Qaeda-allied groups in recent days that trumpeted the global financial crisis and predicted further decline for the United States and other Western powers . 
In language that was by turns mocking and ominous , the newest posting credited al-Qaeda with having lured Washington into a trap that had `` exhausted its resources and bankrupted its economy . '' 
It further suggested that a terrorist strike might swing the election to McCain and guarantee an expansion of U.S. military commitments in the Islamic world . 
`` It will push the Americans deliberately to vote for McCain so that he takes revenge for them against al-Qaeda , '' said the posting , attributed to Muhammad Haafid , a longtime contributor to the password-protected site . 
`` Al-Qaeda then will succeed in exhausting America . '' 
It was unclear how closely the commentary reflected the views of al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden , who has not issued a public statement since the spring . 
Some terrorism experts said the support for McCain could be mere bluster by a group that may have more to fear from a McCain presidency . 
In any event , the comments summarized what has emerged as a consensus view on extremist sites , said Adam Raisman , a senior analyst for the Site Intelligence Group , which monitors Islamist Web pages . 
Site provided translations of the comments to The Washington Post . 
`` The idea in the jihadist forums is that McCain would be a faithful ` son of Bush ' -- someone they see as a jingoist and a war hawk , '' Raisman said . 
`` They think that , to succeed in a war of attrition , they need a leader in Washington like McCain . '' 
Islamist militants have generally had less to say about Sen. Barack Obama of Illinois . 
Leaders of the Iranian-backed group Hezbollah expressed a favorable view of Obama during the primary campaign but later rejected the Democrat after he delivered speeches expressing support for Israel . 
In an e-mail response , senior McCain foreign policy adviser Randy Scheunemann noted that al-Qaeda leaders have repeatedly said that America `` did not have the stomach to fight them over the long haul , '' which the Arizona senator has pledged to do . 
`` Whatever musings and bravado on radical websites the Washington Post chooses to quote , the fact remains that only John McCain has the experience , judgment and fortitude to lead a country at war , '' he said . 
The Obama campaign declined to comment on the Web postings . 
Both the Bush administration and the two major presidential campaigns have rejected any suggestion that the economic downturn will undermine the country 's fight against al-Qaeda . 
Obama and McCain have stepped gingerly around the issue of how they would adjust their priorities in a recession and have spoken of the importance of maintaining a strong defense . 
Both have advocated expanding the size of the U.S. military overall , but neither has explained in detail how to pay for it . 
From shortly after the Sept. 11 , 2001 , al-Qaeda attacks to last year , U.S. defense spending rose from 3 to 4 percent of gross domestic product , but it remains far below the 45-year average of 5.5 percent . 
The Pentagon 's budget for fiscal 2009 is $ 527 billion , a figure that does not include Iraq and Afghanistan war costs , which have totaled more than $ 800 billion since 2001 . 
`` History shows us that nations that are strong militarily over time have to have a strong economy , '' McCain said this month . 
He has said the United States must send more troops to Afghanistan while avoiding a withdrawal timetable from Iraq . 
