Fearing a Drought of Aid Flood victims in Haiti carried sacks of rice from international aid organization CARE . 
Bush has argued against cutting such aid amid the global financial crisis . 
-LRB- By Ariana Cubillos -- Associated Press -RRB- President Bush , who has made international aid a cornerstone of his foreign policy , warned yesterday against cutting U.S. assistance to impoverished nations in the midst of the financial turmoil sweeping Wall Street and Main Street , arguing that doing so would undermine America 's economy , national security and moral authority . 
`` During times of economic crisis , some may be tempted to turn inward -- focusing on our problems here at home , while ignoring our interests around the world , '' Bush said at a White House summit on international development in Washington . 
`` This would be a serious mistake . 
America is committed , and America must stay committed , to international development for reasons that remain true regardless of the ebb and flow of the markets . '' 
The remarks came as fears grew that the financial crisis could further harm developing nations already whipsawed by surging food and energy prices over the past two years . 
The United Nations estimates that , even before the market crisis , rising food prices had pushed an additional 75 million people into chronic hunger , bringing the total to 925 million after years of decline . 
Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf said in an interview yesterday that her country , and others in Africa , were feeling the pinch of the global economic crisis . 
Foreign investors battered in their home countries , she said , were scaling back plans to build a massive palm oil plantation and factory . 
A major London-based mining company , she added , is behind schedule on a $ 1.5 billion plan to extract iron ore and build roads . 
`` That 's going to have a major impact on the poor , '' she said . 
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice made a pitch for preserving foreign aid at yesterday 's conference . 
`` Some will ask the inevitable question in these troubled times : ` How can we afford it ? ' '' 
`` I would ask instead , ` How can we not afford it ? ' '' 
Even before the recent crisis , Western largesse was waning . 
The Bush administration , which has garnered accolades for dramatic increases in U.S. international aid programs , cut its foreign aid in 2007 by 3.5 percent , to $ 21.7 billion , according to the Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development . 
`` Developing countries have been making real progress , so this is a real setback , '' said David Beckmann , president of Bread for the World , a Christian advocacy group . 
`` The one piece of good news from the last eight years is that the world has made real progress against poverty , and the U.S. has been quite good in this area . '' 
The two major U.S. presidential candidates , Sens. John McCain -LRB- R-Ariz . -RRB- 
and Barack Obama -LRB- D-Ill . -RRB- 
, have suggested that the financial crisis would not curtail their ambitions for foreign aid . 
Obama has vowed to more than double the annual outlay for international aid , to $ 50 billion , while McCain has focused on reforming the bureaucracy that doles out U.S. assistance . 
Obama spokeswoman Wendy Morigi said that if elected president , Obama would likely `` extend the time period '' for meeting his $ 50 billion aid target . 
`` The current financial crisis , along with the $ 700 billion recovery package , will clearly put short-term pressure on our budget , '' she said . 
McCain has not put a dollar amount on foreign assistance , but he is committed to using both public and private money to pay for increased aid , according to Richard Fontaine , McCain 's senior foreign policy adviser . 
`` We are going through tough economic times , and we have to take that into consideration , '' he said . 
`` But we are also a generous country . '' 
