Syria : US sanctions target President Bashar al-Assad President Assad has said the security forces made some mistakes in their handling of protests The United States has imposed sanctions on Syrian President Bashar al-Assad for human rights abuses . 
It represents the first time Mr Assad has been targeted specifically by the international community for his government 's crackdown on protesters . 
President Barack Obama last month imposed sanctions on his brother Maher , his cousin and an intelligence chief . 
Syria condemned the sanctions , which it said were part of a US effort to impose its policies in the region . 
`` The sanctions have not and will not affect Syria 's independent will , '' an official source was quoted as saying on state television . 
Meanwhile , Mr Assad has said his security services made some mistakes in their handling of demonstrations , the al-Watan newspaper reported . 
He attributed the shortcomings to a lack of experience with such situations , which he said would normally be the police 's responsibility . 
Mr Assad also `` gave assurances that Syria had overcome the crisis '' and that `` events were coming to an end '' , the newspaper added . 
The admission came as the BBC received new reports of attacks on civilians in Tal Kalakh , near the border with Lebanon , which has been besieged for several days . 
Activists say at least 27 people have died . 
Kim Ghattas BBC News , Washington It is not every day that the US imposes sanctions on the president of a country . 
North Korea and Iran are listed as state sponsors of terrorism by the state department and face tough sanctions . 
Kim Jong-il and Mahmoud Ahmadinejad are Washington 's bete noires . 
Yet they personally face no sanctions . 
Bashar al-Assad is now in the company of the Libyan leader , Muammar Gaddafi , and the President of Belarus , Alexander Lukashenko . 
Although it is symbolic move because Assad and the other officials have no assets here , it is a strong signal that Washington now sees Mr Assad as personally responsible for the crackdown . 
They had so far avoided making a direct link between him and the violence , holding to their view of him as a reformer . 
They have not asked him to step down yet , but a US official said Mr Assad had a choice - lead a transition to democracy or leave . 
It also means the US and Europe will no longer be satisfied by the half measures that Mr Assad 's resorted to so far to maintain his image as a reformer . 
Mohammed Dib Zaitoun , the head of the Political Security Directorate Mr Obama wanted to `` increase pressure on the government of Syria to end its use of violence and begin transitioning to a democratic system that ensures the universal rights of the Syrian people '' , an official said . 
A US state department official said it was time for Mr Assad `` to lead a political transition or to leave '' . 
The US and EU have already imposed sanctions on other senior figures close to Mr Assad , but have so far stopped short of targeting him . 
The new measures freeze any assets they have in US jurisdiction and make it illegal for Americans to do business with them . 
The US has not yet called on the Syrian leader to go , although one senior state department official said on Wednesday that he had a choice now . 
`` We are saying that we oppose his behavior and that he needs to stop his policies of repression and mass arrests and begin a political transition that ensures fair representation and democratic rights for Syrians , '' the official told reporters . 
The US also said it had designated other individuals and entities complicit in the repression , including Hafez Makhlouf , a cousin of the president and senior official in the General Security Directorate -LRB- GSD -RRB- ; Qasem Soleimani , commander of the Iranian Islamic Revolution Guard Corps ' elite Quds Force , the conduit for Iranian material support to the GSD ; and Mohsen Chizari , head of operations and training for the Quds Force . 
Human rights activists say more than 850 people have been killed and thousands arrested in the operation launched to quell dissent in March . 
The Syrian government blames most of the violence on `` armed criminal gangs '' , saying they have killed more than 120 soldiers and police . 
The sanctions were announced the day before a major speech on the uprisings in the Middle East and North Africa by Mr Obama . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
