ISTANBUL | Thu Jul 14 , 2011 2:23 pm BST ISTANBUL -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Western powers and Arab states meeting in Istanbul on Friday will seek a political solution to end the civil war in Libya , amid conflicting signals over whether Muammar Gaddafi intends to fight on or surrender power . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and the EU 's foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton are among more than a dozen ministers attending the Libyan contact group meeting , its fourth since an emergency summit in London in March . 
`` The main aim is to find a political solution to accelerate efforts to end the bloodshed , '' said Selcuk Unal , spokesman for the Turkish Foreign Ministry hosting the talks in Istanbul . 
Heads of NATO , the Arab League , African Union and Gulf Cooperation Council will also attend along with representatives of the Libyan opposition . 
The U.N. Secretary-General 's special envoy on Libya , Abdul Elah Al-Khatib , will report results of contacts with the beleaguered Gaddafi government in Tripoli and the rebel National Transitional Council based in the eastern city of Benghazi . 
There will also be updates on the flow of financial and humanitarian assistance to the rebel-held areas . 
Russian and China , two permanent members of the U.N. Security Council that have taken softer line on Gaddafi , were invited for a first time to attend a contact group meeting . 
But China has said it would skip the meeting while it was uncertain who Russia would send . 
Mahmoud Jebril , a senior member of the rebel council , said in Brussels on Wednesday that there had been no negotiations so far with Gaddafi 's regime to end the civil war that began with a popular uprising against his 41-year rule in February . 
Gaddafi is resisting rebel advances on Tripoli from the eastern desert and western mountains , and the drawn-out conflict and lack of substantive talks have frustrated NATO allies who are helping the rebels by enforcing a no-fly zone and bombing Gaddafi forces deemed a threat to civilians . 
The international community wants to ensure that the oil - and gas-rich North African country of 6 million people emerges as a stable democracy rather than falling prey to ethnic or tribal conflict , or becoming a haven for Islamist militants . 
Among items to be discussed in Istanbul will be a recommendation by a British-led team planning post-conflict Libya for Gaddafi 's security forces to be left intact after a rebel victory in order to avoid errors made after the Iraq war . 
French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said earlier this week that emissaries from Gaddafi 's government were in contact with NATO members , and were saying that Gaddafi was ready to quit . 
A crucial question , should Gaddafi agree to step down , will be whether he is allowed to stay in Libya or has to take refuge in a third country despite a U.N.-backed International Criminal Court investigation into crimes against his people . 
Clinton said on Wednesday in Washington that Gaddafi 's intentions were unclear . 
`` We are still getting contradictory signals from Colonel Gaddafi 's camp , '' she said during a visit by Russia 's Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov . 
`` He has yet to meet the red lines that are set by the international community to cease violence against his people , withdraw his forces and step down from power . '' 
Clinton said the while the United States and Russia could not predict exactly when Gaddafi would go , `` we do understand and agree that his days are numbered '' . 
Lavrov said Moscow 's position on the enforcement of U.N. resolutions on Libya differed somewhat from that of NATO powers , but this would not stop Russian efforts to get peace talks going . 
`` We are united in that we have to start the political process as soon as possible and we have different channels , official and not very official channels , to work through to create conditions for this process , '' he said . 
The White House later issued a statement that President Barack Obama welcomed Russia 's efforts to mediate a political solution and back talks towards a democratic transition so long as Gaddafi stepped aside . 
Turkey and the African Union have proposed separate road maps aimed at establishing a cease-fire and moving through stages from Gaddafi quitting power to a democratic transition , and the contact group will seek to agree on a single plan . 
Turkey 's Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu has voiced hopes last week that significant progress towards a political solution could be made before the Muslim fasting month of Ramadan , which this year falls at the beginning of August . 
