By David Shukman Environment correspondent , BBC News , Texas David Shukman looks at the efforts inside BP 's crisis center to stem the spill Behind the bland facade of a BP office block in the outskirts of Houston , I step into an oil industry nightmare : the headquarters for a battle being fought on a distant seabed . 
Along the corridors , signs point the way to the company 's `` crisis center '' . 
Originally designed to provide back-up space to cope with hurricanes , it is now hosting a desperate effort to tackle the first leak to erupt beneath a mile of ocean . 
The crisis center is staffed around the clock by a team of 500 people For a giant of a company , these are tense , threatening times . 
In fact , one of the first sights to catch my eye inside the center was a notice offering counselling and massages for stress . 
Some 500 people - mostly engineers - work in here in round-the-clock shifts , and they are doing their best to avoid being distracted by the storm of criticism , lawsuits , bills and allegations raging outside . 
Of the multiple crises afflicting the company , their attention is focused on the struggle to tame and then kill the `` wild well '' gushing beyond human reach in the Gulf of Mexico . 
In one of the few visits allowed to the media , we are led into a series of rooms where different teams focus on different parts of the fight . 
The largest is one running the containment operation - each of the vessels collecting oil from the leak is managed by a team here . 
One group is from a rival oil firm , Chevron , because one of their ships is being leased to BP and it is easier not to train new people to direct it . 
Monitors provide the only visual link engineers have with the spill 's source For a highly competitive industry , this would normally be an unthinkable sight . 
A neighbouring room acts as a marine traffic control center . 
Having as many as 20 ships and rigs crowded into a small patch of sea above the leak carries risks . 
And across a hall lies BP 's equivalent of mission control - a darkened room in which one wall carries projected images from the 12 remotely operated vehicles -LRB- ROVs -RRB- on the ocean floor . 
Before we enter , we are asked to be as quiet as possible . 
The place is wired for instant communications with the ships handling the robots . 
The staff , faces cast in the blue-ish light of the screens , are in charge of the only means by which the leak can be contained ; only robots can operate at the extreme depths involved . 
Will all this succeed ? 
Amid the exhaustion and strain , there is an air of confidence that more oil will gradually be captured and that ultimately the relief wells will block the leak . 
A center intended for the sudden , short-lived threat of a hurricane is likely to be busy for some time to come . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
