Friday 29 April 2005 12.53 BST Sergeant Hasan Akbar -LRB- l -RRB- of the US army 's 101st Airborne Division is led from the courtroom at Fort Bragg , North Carolina during the sentencing phase of his court martial for a 2003 attack on his fellow soldiers in Kuwait . 
Photograph : Gerry Broome\/AP A US military jury has imposed the death penalty on a Muslim soldier who launched a fatal grenade and rifle attack on his comrades in the run up to the invasion of Iraq . 
Sgt Hasan Akbar , 34 , quietly apologised yesterday for attacking his fellow soldiers in the early morning of March 23 2003 , when he lobbed grenades into troop tents and fired on soldiers in the ensuing chaos . 
The army 's 101st Airborne division was stationed at Camp Pennsylvania in Kuwait , awaiting orders to begin the invasion . 
Captain Chris Seifert , 27 , from the army and Major Gregory Stone , 40 , from the air force were killed , and 14 others wounded in what prosecutors described as an attack driven by religious extremism . 
Akbar is the first soldier since the Vietnam war to be convicted of killing a comrade during wartime . 
The 15-member military jury in Fort Bragg , North Carolina took just two and a half hours to convict Akbar of premeditated murder and attempted premeditated murder last week . 
It deliberated for about seven hours in the sentencing phase . 
The sentence will be reviewed by a commanding officer and automatically appealed . 
If Akbar is executed , it would be by lethal injection . 
`` I want to apologise for the attack that occurred . 
I felt that my life was in jeopardy , and I had no other options . 
I also want to ask you for forgiveness , '' Akbar told the jury before it passed sentence . 
Akbar spoke for less than a minute , delivering an unsworn statement that could not be cross-examined . 
He spoke in such a low voice that even prosecutors sitting nearby had trouble hearing . 
While the defense contends Akbar was too mentally ill to plan the attack , they have never disputed that he threw grenades or fired on soldiers . 
Prosecutors say Akbar launched the attack at his camp because he was concerned about US troops killing fellow Muslims in the Iraq war . 
`` He is a hate-filled , ideologically driven murderer , '' chief prosecutor Lieutenant Colonel Michael Mulligan said , adding that Akbar had written in his diary in 1997 that his would not be complete `` unless America is destroyed '' . 
If the death sentence is upheld , Akbar will join five others on the military 's death row at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas . 
The last US military execution was in 1961 . 
`` Hasan Akbar has robbed me of so many things , '' Tammie Eslinger , Stone 's fiancee , said after the sentencing . 
`` He stole my love , my family , my dreams and my future . 
But he could never steal my spirit . '' 
Seifert 's widow said she was satisfied with the military justice system and called Akbar `` a nonentity to me '' . 
Defense lawyer Major David Coombs told jurors that a sentence of life without parole would allow Akbar to be treated for mental illness and possibly rehabilitated . 
`` Death is an absolute punishment , a punishment of last resort , '' he said . 
A defense psychiatrist testified that although Akbar was legally sane and understood the consequences of his attack , he suffered from forms of paranoia and schizophrenia . 
Akbar 's father , John Akbar , has said his son complained in vain to his superiors about religious and racial harassment before the attack . 
The defense never introduced any witnesses to testify about any such harassment . 
John Akbar was not in the courtroom for the verdict . 
He emerged from a meeting with his son in tears and declined to comment . 
