Gov. Bobby Jindal talks about efforts to stop leaking oil from reaching the coast as Sen. David Vitter -LRB- R-La . -RRB- 
, center , listens . 
-LRB- Alex Brandon\/associated Press -RRB- Natural gas from the damaged Deepwater Horizon wellhead in the Gulf of Mexico is burned by the drill ship Discoverer Enterprise in a process known as flaring . 
Gas and oil from the wellhead are being brought to the surface via a tube placed inside the damaged pipe . 
s. Coast Guard Via Associated Press -RRB- OVER THE GULF OF MEXICO -- Strapped into a National Guard Black Hawk , peering down at green water mottled with oil sheen , the most serious man in Louisiana is starting to sound ridiculous . 
Over the helicopter 's intercom , Gov. Bobby Jindal -LRB- R -RRB- is explaining to the mayor of New Orleans two of the state 's efforts to keep back the oil slick . 
One is named for a Mexicanentree . 
The other is named for a Cajun sausage . 
The `` burrito levee '' and the `` boudin bag '' are part of a vast effort , overseen by Jindal , to hold back a slick that is already spitting tar balls onto the state 's coast . 
He also has a plan to create more Louisiana , building new barrier islands in the oil 's path . 
`` It makes so much sense . 
It 's so obvious . 
We gotta do it , '' Jindal said into his headphones . 
His call for a major government response stands in apparent contrast to his previous calls for small government . 
Indeed , in a crisis marked by desperate improvisation -- where the search for solutions has turned to golf balls and top hats -- nobody is matching Jindal 's frenetic vigor . 
Local observers say the oil spill is testing the promise that almost three years ago made this son of Indian immigrants governor : that he could keep his catastrophe-scarred state safe , through good data and hard work . 
`` He 's there because of Katrina , he 's there because of the failed response to a disaster , and I think he recognizes that , '' said Kirby Goidel , a political science professor at Louisiana State University . 
`` He absolutely has sort of over-learned that mistake . '' 
On Monday , Jindal said his state would not slow its response , despite the news that the oil company BP was siphoning about 1,000 barrels of oil a day out of a pipe that began leaking around April 22 -- a fraction of the total spill . 
`` We are nowhere close to the finish line , '' Jindal said in a statement . 
He noted that oil has already been found along 29 miles of the state 's coast : `` Oil continues to pour into the gulf and hit our shores . '' 
Jindal , 38 , was elected governor in 2008 , his political rise starting when he was appointed at age 24 to head the state 's Department of Health and Hospitals . 
He still struggles with political aesthetics : In the first days after the crisis , Jindal showed up wearing a blue blazer at a news conference in a broiling marsh . 
Only recently has he donned the standard governor-in-crisis uniform of rolled-up shirt sleeves . 
And Jindal was widely thought to have blown his first real test as a national politician . 
Last year , he was chosen to give the Republican response to President Obama 's first address to a joint session of Congress . 
But his speech -- urging smaller government and criticizing money for monitoring another source of natural disasters , volcanoes -- was criticized as flat and over-familiar . 
But now , Jindal 's skills seem as right for this moment as they were wrong for that one . 
`` Bobby Jindal is a first-class , straight-A warrior , '' said Chris Moran , who owns a marina , a restaurant and a charter-fishing business in the oil-field hub of Port Fourchon , La. . 
He said he liked that Jindal had visited his area -LRB- although Moran wished the governor had stayed for a steak -RRB- and admired his efforts to have National Guardsmen use huge sandbags to plug holes that bring gulf water to inland marshes . 
`` He 's probably the most-suited governor for a natural disaster . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
