MEXICO CITY | Sat May 2 , 2009 7:53 pm EDT MEXICO CITY -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Mexico 's flu outbreak appeared to be stabilizing on Saturday but officials warned the unpredictable virus still threatened a global pandemic . 
Mexican officials said hospitals were seeing fewer new cases of people with symptoms from the new swine flu virus and cut the estimated death toll from the outbreak . 
`` It would still be imprudent to say that we 're past the worst of it but I do think ... we are in a stage of stabilization , '' Mexican Health Minister Jose Angel Cordova told reporters . 
Costa Rica , Italy , and Ireland confirmed cases of the virus , which has now been found in 18 countries . 
In Geneva , the World Health Organization said H1N1 influenza had not spread in a sustained way outside North America , as would be required before the pandemic alert level is raised to its highest level . 
But it said that would probably happen soon . 
`` I would still propose that a pandemic is imminent because we are seeing the disease spread , '' Michael Ryan , WHO director of Global Alert and Response , told a briefing . 
Few are ready to take chances with the new virus , widely dubbed swine flu . 
In Hong Kong , police quarantined a hotel after a Mexican guest fell ill with the virus , which may have killed more than 100 people in Mexico , the worst-hit country . 
Mexico called the action `` unjustified '' and advised its citizens to avoid travel to China . 
Mexican authorities cut their suspected death toll to up to 101 from as many as 176 as more test samples came back negative . 
Fewer patients with severe flu symptoms were checking into hospitals , suggesting a falling infection rate , and no new deaths were reported in Mexico City in the past two days . 
The World Health Organization said 15 countries had reported 615 infections , not including the later reports of confirmed cases in Ireland , Italy and Costa Rica . 
The United States , the second hardest-hit country , said it had confirmed 160 cases in 21 states . 
U.S. officials said they were encouraged by reports from Mexico that the outbreak may be leveling off , although they said it was too early to relax . 
`` We are remaining vigilant , '' said Dr. Anne Schuchat of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . 
`` We have seen times where things appear to be getting better and then get worse again . 
... I think in Mexico we may be holding our breath for some time . '' 
Almost all infections outside Mexico have been mild . 
The only death in another country has been a Mexican toddler who was taken to the United States before he fell sick . 
President Barack Obama said the United States was responding aggressively to the new flu strain and was closing some schools temporarily and distributing antiviral drug supplies as needed . 
The White House said Obama spoke to Mexican President Felipe Calderon on Saturday about U.S.-Mexican cooperation on limiting the spread of the virus . 
Scientists are still trying to assess how the new virus behaves and how it compares to regular seasonal flu strains , which kill between 250,000 and 500,000 globally every year . 
The outbreak remains tiny compared with other epidemics such as malaria , hepatitis and meningitis . 
But the WHO hiked its pandemic alert level to 5 from 3 this week -- the last step before a pandemic -- due to its rapid spread and the possibility it could hit hard in poor and disease-prone communities , including among people with HIV . 
Ryan said the WHO would send more than 2 million treatment courses of antiviral drugs to poor countries to help them prepare for the virus , which is already causing havoc with a travel industry that flies hundreds of thousands of people to and from Mexico each week . 
China suspended flights to Mexico after Hong Kong authorities on Friday confirmed a Mexican man who flew via the Chinese mainland was infected with the flu strain . 
Hong Kong was hit hard by the 2003 SARS outbreak . 
Police in surgical masks quarantined 200 guests and 100 staff inside a Hong Kong hotel where the Mexican , 25 , had been staying , saying they would be confined for a week . 
`` They said everybody needed to go back to their rooms . 
I do n't want to go to my room because I want to be out , '' an Australian man at the hotel told a TV reporter by telephone . 
Public hospitals in Mexico have noted a steady drop in patients turning up with fevers , suggesting the infection rate may be declining as people don face masks and use hand gel . 
Cordova said of 159 suspected flu deaths , tests showed 58 died of other causes . 
He said 16 deaths were confirmed as caused by the H1N1 flu and 85 were being tested . 
In Mexico City , big parks , museums and zoos were shut and in the sprawling metropolis of 20 million people many were heeding a government call to stay home for a prolonged five day-holiday to try to stem new infections . 
Jose Francisco Suarez , 15 , said he wanted to get back to school . 
`` We 're sick of this situation . 
A few days off school would n't be so bad but now there 's nothing to do , '' he said during a break playing basketball with two friends . 
