-LRB- For full coverage of the flu outbreak , click -LRB- nFLU -RRB- -RRB- HONG KONG , May 2 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Travellers quarantined in a Hong Kong hotel for a week after a Mexican guest tested positive for the H1N1 flu expressed dismay on Saturday at the tough steps , while an infectious disease expert said the authorities had over-reacted . 
Police wearing surgical masks sealed off the Metropark hotel on Friday night after test results on the 25-year-old Mexican man were confirmed , ordering approximately 200 guests and 100 staff to stay in the hotel for the next seven days . 
The measures taken by the authorities in Hong Kong underscore the concern here about the new flu and the confirmed case , Asia 's first . 
Hong Kong was badly hit by the SARS virus in 2003 and has had many episodes of H5N1 bird flu for more than a decade . 
Officials said no one would be allowed to leave the hotel in the Wanchai district , an area popular with tourists . 
`` They said everybody needed to go back to their rooms . 
I do n't want to go to my room because I want to be out , '' an Australian man in the hotel told local television by telephone . 
`` They told me I will stay here . 
I wo n't be allowed out and this is it . '' 
Brice Chevallereau , a French tourist , checked into the hotel on Friday afternoon but did not stay the night . 
When he returned to the hotel on Saturday , he was told by authorities he would have to be quarantined . 
`` Why do I have to go inside ? '' 
`` I just stayed two minutes in the lobby . 
It 's not fair . '' 
Journalists and camera crews massed on the street outside the hotel , which is being guarded by police and cordoned off with blue and white tape . 
Shops near the hotel were shuttered . 
`` How can there be business ? 
The police vans are all around here , '' said Li Mingtai , a waiter at a nearby restaurant . 
Twelve guests who had refused to stay were taken to a lodging house close to the border with mainland China . 
The site was used to quarantine Hong Kong people who were exposed to the SARS virus back in 2003 , a government spokesman said . 
PASSENGERS URGED TO COME FORWARD The Mexican man arrived in Hong Kong from Mexico on Thursday following a stopover in Shanghai . 
He developed a fever after arriving and took a taxi to a hospital on Thursday evening . 
He is in a stable condition , officials said . 
Authorities appealed for 142 passengers and crew on the same flight as the Mexican to report to health officials . 
Lo Wing-lok , an infectious disease expert , said the government was over-reacting . 
`` He would have been infectious starting from the time he was on the plane . 
Think about all the people around him on the plane , while he was going through customs , waiting for baggage , in the taxi , in the hotel and when he got to hospital , '' Lo said . 
`` So how can it be effective if the government is just trying to isolate people in the hotel , it is a mission impossible . '' 
Health officials said the `` essential needs '' of those inside the hotel would be looked after . 
They would also get regular medical check-ups and psychologists were on standby . 
An elderly couple passed a bag of clothes to police at the entrance for their daughter , who works in the hotel . 
The new virus , which is largely swine and part avian and human , has killed up to 101 people in Mexico , but confirmed cases in other countries have been mild . 
Nevertheless , news of the infected traveller caused jitters in Hong Kong and some people were taking no chances . 
In subways , ferry terminals and on the streets , more people went about their business on Saturday wearing surgical masks , although some had masks fashioned out of cloth . 
At the checkout counters in a supermarket , residents rifled through masks and sterilisers . 
A sign nearby said : `` Prevent flu infection . '' 
