Credit : Reuters\/Las Vegas Sun\/Steve Marcus LAS VEGAS | Sat May 2 , 2009 2:35 am BST LAS VEGAS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - About 25,000 British fans are expected to descend on Las Vegas for Ricky Hatton 's IBO light-welterweight title defense against Filipino Manny Pacquiao on Saturday , despite the global economic downturn . 
`` For Ricky Hatton to be able to bring 25,000 Brits to Las Vegas because he has a fight , even when most of them do n't have tickets , is incredible , '' promoter Bob Arum told Reuters on Friday . 
Around 4,500 fans crammed into the MGM Grand 's Garden Arena for Friday 's weigh-in while many more were turned away . 
`` It was probably the biggest weigh-in we 've ever had , '' said Richard Sturm , president of sports and entertainment for MGM Mirage . 
According to former middleweight and light-heavyweight champion Bernard Hopkins , the huge turnout gave further proof that boxing was still in excellent shape . 
`` Today showed that boxing is n't going anywhere , '' Hopkins told Reuters . 
`` The pay-per-view numbers are going to show , I believe , that boxing is alive as long as people are getting something they can be excited about . '' 
Hopkins , who is now a partner with Golden Boy Promotions who look after Hatton , said the struggling economy had placed an extra burden on organisers to produce competitive bouts . 
`` We 've got to take risks because now people are choosing wisely with their dollars , '' he said . 
`` They 're not going to buy tickets just because your name is Bernard Hopkins if you 're fighting Donald Duck . '' 
Boxing experts are eagerly anticipating Saturday 's 12-round bout because of its competitiveness and unpredictability . 
Although Pacquiao is widely regarded as the best pound-for-pound fighter in the world , he has never fought at light-welterweight where Hatton is unbeaten after 44 bouts . 
However Sturm said the popularity of the two fighters in their respective countries had been another significant factor in the fight 's huge interest . 
`` Both of these fighters have tremendous fan bases , '' he said . 
`` They 're icons and they both have the same number of fans . 
`` The British fans may be louder but Pacquiao has a fan base here -LRB- in the U.S. -RRB- that is n't all from the Philippines . 
He has a history of great fights in the States . '' 
Ultimately , Hopkins argued , the sport will withstand the economic downturn in the same way it has overcome previous obstacles . 
`` Boxing has survived the Depression , it survived the Mob , '' he said . 
`` It 'll survive everything , including the swine flu . '' 
-LRB- Editing by Mark Lamport-Stokes and Greg Stutchbury -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
