No exercise , more than lying around , tied to fat in kids Full Article Hong Kong hotel quarantine move stirs controversy HONG KONG | Sat May 2 , 2009 9:15 pm IST HONG KONG -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Travelers quarantined in a Hong Kong hotel for a week after a Mexican guest tested positive for H1N1 flu expressed frustration on Saturday at the tough steps and a medical expert said authorities had over-reacted . 
Police wearing surgical masks sealed off the Metropark hotel on Friday night after test results on the 25-year-old Mexican man were confirmed . 
They ordered the approximately 200 guests and 100 staff to stay in the hotel for the next seven days . 
The measures taken by the authorities in Hong Kong underscore the concern here about the new flu and the confirmed case , Asia 's first . 
Hong Kong was badly hit by the SARS virus in 2003 and has had many episodes of H5N1 bird flu for more than a decade . 
`` As this is the first confirmed case in the Greater China region and there is still little information about the severeness of the influenza , we need to be very cautious in dealing with the situation . 
We decided to take comprehensive and stringent measures to prevent any massive outbreak in Hong Kong , '' a government spokeswoman said . 
Officials said no one would be allowed to leave the hotel in the Wanchai district , an area popular with tourists . 
`` It just feels surreal because you are trapped , '' said Juliet Keys , who arrived from Singapore on Thursday to attend and planned to leave on Sunday . 
`` I 'm fine but it is a bit frustrating because I have a three-and-a-half year old daughter -LRB- and husband -RRB- in Singapore . '' 
Keys , speaking to Reuters by telephone , said she was given a health check and a 10-day course of the antiviral drug Tamiflu . 
Health officials held a briefing for those inside , Keys said . 
`` People are pretty good . 
A few are emotional , frustrated at not being able to get out because of things like work commitments , '' Keys said , adding guests had been given rice and some side dishes to eat . 
A frustrated Australian man in the hotel told local television by telephone he wanted to leave . 
Brice Chevallereau , a French tourist , checked into the hotel on Friday afternoon but did not stay the night . 
When he returned to the hotel on Saturday , he was told by authorities he would have to be quarantined . 
`` Why do I have to go inside ? '' 
`` I just stayed two minutes in the lobby . 
It 's not fair . '' 
PASSENGERS URGED TO COME FORWARD The Mexican man arrived in Hong Kong from Mexico on Thursday following a stopover in Shanghai . 
He developed a fever after arriving and took a taxi to a hospital on Thursday evening . 
He is in a stable condition , officials said . 
Authorities appealed for 142 passengers and crew on the same flight as the Mexican to report to health officials . 
Lo Wing-lok , an infectious disease expert , said the government was over-reacting . 
`` He would have been infectious starting from the time he was on the plane . 
Think about all the people around him on the plane , while he was going through customs , waiting for baggage , in the taxi , in the hotel and when he got to hospital , '' Lo said . 
`` So how can it be effective if the government is just trying to isolate people in the hotel , it is a mission impossible . '' 
Health officials said the `` essential needs '' of those inside the hotel would be looked after . 
They would also get regular medical check-ups and psychologists were on standby . 
News of the infected traveler caused jitters in Hong Kong and some people were taking no chances . 
In subways , buses , ferry terminals and on the streets , more people went about their business on Saturday wearing surgical masks , although some had masks fashioned out of cloth . 
At the checkout counters in a supermarket , residents rifled through masks and sterilizers . 
A sign nearby said : `` Prevent flu infection . '' 
