The Syrian city of Homs has experienced days of heavy shelling Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao says Beijing will `` absolutely not protect any party '' in the conflict in Syria . 
Speaking after talks with EU chiefs in Beijing , he said China would `` continue to play a constructive role '' . 
China and Russia vetoed a UN resolution on Syria 10 days ago , sparking claims from the UN rights chief that action against protesters has intensified . 
Meanwhile activists say the city of Homs , under heavy attack for more than a week , is suffering fresh bombardment . 
The Local Co-ordination Committees group said that the shelling was `` brutal '' and was the worst for several days . 
On Monday , the United Nations ' human rights chief , Navi Pillay , said the veto by China and Russia had encouraged President Bashar al-Assad 's government to carry out indiscriminate shelling of civilians in Homs . 
In a special session of the UN General Assembly , Ms Pillay accused the Syrian government of launching an all-out assault to crush opposition dissent . 
She said that at least 300 people had been killed in the assault on Homs , and that the number of dead and injured continued to rise every day . 
Mr Wen 's comments came as he addressed a joint news conference in Beijing 's Great Hall of the People with European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso and European Council President Herman Van Rompuy . 
He insisted that China remained committed to peace in Syria . 
`` What is most urgent and pressing now is to prevent war and chaos so that the Syrian people will be freed from greater sufferings , '' he said . 
`` This accords with the fundamental interests of the Syrian people and also will contribute to the peace and stability of the entire Middle East region . 
`` To achieve this objective , China supports all efforts consistent with the UN charter purposes and principles , and we are ready to strengthen communication with all parties in Syria and the international community and continue to play a constructive role . 
`` China will absolutely not protect any party , including the government of Syria . '' 
Mr Van Rompuy said all UN Security Council members should act on Syria . 
As the European Parliament in Strasbourg prepares to debate the violence in Syria , a senior Liberal MEP , Guy Verhofstadt , has told the BBC Europe should consider giving weapons to the Free Syrian Army . 
But other MEPs , including the British conservative MEP Charles Tannock , say the situation in Syria is too complex and advises caution . 
Meanwhile German Chancellor Angela Merkel has praised the Arab League 's stance on the Syria crisis . 
Arab League Secretary-General Nabil al-Araby calls for killings in Syria to stop `` right now '' Speaking as she welcomed the organization 's Secretary General , Nabil al-Araby , to Berlin , she said the league 's `` firm '' position `` clearly points out the human rights violations committed by the Assad government '' . 
`` The European Union supports this position and we will underline it through further sanctions , '' she said . 
Mr Araby said that the killings in Syria should stop `` right now '' , and said that the `` winds of change '' that had swept through the Arab countries in the past year had been about people demanding what Europeans had had for a long time : liberty , democracy , social justice , dignity and good governance . 
Human rights groups say more than 7,000 have died throughout Syria since last March . 
The government says at least 2,000 members of the security forces have been killed combating `` armed gangs and terrorists '' . 
However , Syria restricts access to foreign media and it is not possible to verify casualty figures . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
