LONDON | Thu Mar 31 , 2011 10:13 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A printing error helped a 12th century English village church realize it owned a rare 400-year-old King James Bible , the book that changed the world . 
The edition that had been sitting on a ledge in the pretty Anglican church in Wiltshire , central England for the past 150 years , barely touched and much less read , is one of only a handful that still exists . 
Although a sign above the book indicated it dated back to 1611 , it was only after the parochial church council -LRB- PCC -RRB- of St Laurence in Hilmarton decided to get it authenticated during the 400th anniversary of the King James Bible that they made their discovery . 
`` I noticed it like everyone who uses the church noticed it as an old Bible that was sort of there , but no one was sure about its origins until very recently , '' PCC member Chris Mastin-Lee told Reuters . 
St Laurence stopped using the Bible after the introduction of more modern versions , and fewer than 200 original printings of the 1611 King James version are believed to exist . 
Although the church , which has about 60 parishioners , is not expecting coach loads of tourists to suddenly turn up , Mastin-Lee said he would not be surprised to see an increase in numbers wanting to take a look . 
The St Laurence Bible , whose heavy handset Gothic script was printed on linen fabric , lacks any gold leaf or ornate illustrations , and was authenticated as a second edition because of a tell-tale misprint . 
A place in the Gospel of Matthew that should say Jesus entered the Garden of Gethsemane and spoke to his disciples instead says that Judas , who betrayed Jesus , entered the garden . 
The edition , which has suffered a bit of wear and tear over the years also has the first five chapters of Genesis missing . 
Other damage was caused when a former vicar , the Reverend Francis Fisher , had ornate hand-carved binding put on the book after discovering it in a church chest in 1857 . 
`` This is speculation but when he found it in the parish chest it 's likely that the edges of the pages would have been quite tatty , '' Mastin-Lee said . 
`` When he had the Bible bound we understand that it was the custom of Victorian binders to trim the pages to make them neat . '' 
But the Bible is priceless as an example of one of the first translations of the Gospels into English . 
`` Within 300 years , this translation transformed how English people spoke to each other , how we wrote our books and how we see our God , '' the King James Bible Trust says on its website . 
`` The translation of the Bible has had enormous consequences not just for England but America and this is still significant today . '' 
Some phrases in the King James Bible are still used today , such as `` a cross to bear , '' `` a broken heart '' and a `` law unto themselves . '' 
The church is looking to raise funds to put the Bible in a glass case , from which people would still be able to turn the pages and read it . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
