Pigs to the slaughter in Egypt Amid swine flu hysteria Mubarak has ordered pigs to be killed but is this just another assault on Egypt 's Christian minority ? 
Farmers in Egypt clashed yesterday with officials who had come to destroy their pigs . 
They blocked the roads and some hurled stones at trucks and bulldozers sent by the health ministry . 
The trouble broke out after the government ordered the slaughter of all pigs in Egypt amid a wave of hysteria about `` swine '' flu . 
The Mubarak regime 's record in matters of public health and safety is a dismal one : more than 1,000 dead in a ferry disaster , more than 370 dead in a train fire , 50 dead in a theater fire , plus treacherous roads , and buildings that fall down regularly on top of their occupants . 
Egypt also continues to have cases of bird flu 26 people have died there since 2006 , making it the worst-affected country outside Asia , where the disease originated . 
This time , though , the regime has acted with uncharacteristic haste even before there is a single suspected case of the H1N1 virus in the country , either among humans or even pigs . 
But its decision to kill 300,000-400 ,000 pigs is not just costly . 
It is also pointless . 
As the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation 's chief veterinary officer put it yesterday , the cull is `` a real mistake '' . 
`` There is no reason to do that . 
It 's not a swine influenza , it 's a human influenza , '' he said . 
Time magazine has more , explaining why we should n't blame pigs . 
Not wishing to let science stand in the way of a rousing speech , members of the Egyptian parliament -LRB- whose upper house was carelessly wrecked by fire not so long ago -RRB- have been railing against the enemy within , and calling for pigs to be exterminated or removed from centres of population . 
IslamOnline , the Egyptian-based website supervised for doctrinal correctness by Yusuf al-Qaradawi , also joined in . 
According to an article in its health and science section , `` Egypt has pig breeding farms located in heavily populated areas inside the capital Cairo . 
This means that in case of a swine flu epidemic , the flu will be rapidly transmitted to people living near the pig farms , then to others . '' 
The website also has a discussion forum where readers air their prejudices against pigs . 
There may or may not be an unspoken sub-text to all this but , as everyone in Egypt knows , pig-keeping is associated with the Christian minority who probably account for about 10 % of the country 's population -LRB- the actual figure is a state secret -RRB- . 
For that reason , the response to swine flu ought to have been handled with care and sensitivity . 
Even if it was not intentional , the over-dramatic and obviously ill-planning decision to cull all pigs is likely to be interpreted by Christians as yet another assault on their community . 
It is not even clear if pig-keepers are to be properly compensated . 
Some have reportedly been paid $ 180 per pig after complaining . 
If repeated across the country , that would cost the government tens of millions of dollars which could be far better spent on other things . 
There are also hints , though , that the government may try to wriggle out of paying compensation on the grounds that the dead pigs can be sold for human consumption . 
If that turns out to be the official line it could seriously damage community relations . 
Many of Egypt 's pigs are kept in shacks in cities , in close proximity with humans -LRB- see picture here -RRB- . 
Moving them away from centres of population may be a sensible public health policy regardless of the current flu outbreak but that will also destroy the livelihoods of many urban poor who survive by collecting waste to feed the pigs . 
If it is to be done , though , it will need care and planning to find alternative sources of income for those affected . 
Otherwise , as so often in Egypt , it is likely to make matters worse rather than better . 
