Friday 1 May 2009 21.14 BST People cross a normally busy street in Mexico City . 
The authorities have ordered a five-day shutdown to halt further spread of the H1N1 flu virus . 
Photograph : Joe Raedle\/Getty Images It was the silence more than anything . 
No rumble of traffic . 
No voices in the street . 
Nothing to betray the existence of 20m people . 
The cacophony of noise and life that breaks with the dawn missed its cue in Mexico Citytoday . 
The sun rose higher but it made no difference . 
The avenues stayed empty . 
It was a day of firsts : the first of May . 
The first of a five day nationwide shutdown . 
The first time an epidemic had stilled one of the world 's great cities . 
A first time to do lots of things : sit in the middle of Paseo de la Reforma and not get run over ; stroll through the woods of Bosque de Chapultepec and not see another soul ; have the No 18 bus there was the occasional bus all to yourself . 
For Adriana Mendez , 25 , a tamale seller on Bajio street , it was the first time she was so bereft of customers that she curled up and slept at her stall in the middle of the day . 
`` God , it 's quiet , '' she said , waking up and rubbing her eyes . 
Further up the street there was another glimpse of life : three policeman at a junction waiting for traffic to direct . 
`` I 'm supposed to be training these two cadets but how can I do that if there are no cars ? '' 
said Reyes Alguilar , 62 , a veteran of the force . 
He was cleaning his own car with a red cloth . 
`` Might as well do something useful , right ? '' 
Smog had cleared , revealing an azure sky , but the city felt heavy , expectant . 
The authorities said the H1N1 flu epidemic seemed to be easing and that the five-day lockdown would help snuff out the threat . 
But what if it did n't ? 
What if restaurants , offices , factories , schools , museums would have to remain shut ? 
What if economic pain turned to agony ? 
An opinion poll said that 90 % of Mexicans believe the federal government has responded well or very well to the epidemic but that could swiftly change if the crisis continues . 
Even before the epidemic Mexico had been hit by plunging exports and oil revenues , shrinking the economy by 7 % in the first quarter . 
Tourism , on which many jobs depend , has disappeared . 
`` Its logical that it would be that way and there is not much we can do about it at the moment , '' said the tourism minister , Rodolfo Elisondo . 
It may not help much that there is a t-shirt for sale which bears the image of a pig and the slogan : `` I went to Mexico City and all I got was swine flu . '' 
For the few out on the streets , there was an immediate question : what if the person approaching me is infected ? 
In a pew at the cathedral one worshipper looked in horror at the runny nose of the man beside him and fled . 
Billboard advertising offered mocking reminders of normality . 
The action film Wolverine was supposed to open last week but the premiere was canceled . 
All the cinemas are shut . 
Mexico City resembled a film set for an apocalyptic tale . 
I Am Legend , perhaps , or 28 Days Later , but there were no zombies , just ordinary people making the best of a grim situation . 
On Thursday , as lockdown approached , the only queues were outside DVD shops . 
The most popular rentals were cartoons , said a Blockbuster employee . 
Today was supposed to be workers ' day . 
Normally tens of thousands of flag-wavers would congregate in the Zocalo , a magnifient plaza . 
Fabiano Lopez , a 73-year-old Marxist in a yellow shirt , stood in the empty square holding a red flag . 
It was the only one . 
Capitalism had orchestrated the epidemic , he said . 
`` I 'm not worried . 
My comrades will come later . 
You 'll see . '' 
A version appeared on p7 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 00.38 BST on Saturday 2 May 2009 . 
