Scot confirmed as first UK victim of swine flu who was infected in Britain Clerical worker at Falkirk Royal hospital tests positive as number of confirmed UK cases reaches 13 Friday 1 May 2009 15.49 BST Graeme Pacitti , the first person in Britain to catch swine flu in the UK . 
Photograph : AP A Scottish hospital worker has been confirmed as the first person to catch swine flu from within the UK , after contracting it in a pub from newlyweds who had traveled to Mexico , according to health officials . 
Graeme Pacitti , a clerical worker at the Falkirk Royal hospital , is thought to have caught the virus during a night out with Iain Askham , who contracted it on his honeymoon in Mexico . 
Tonight the Department of Health announced that there were two new cases in the south west and south east . 
The case in the south west is thought to have been a human-to-human transfer within the UK . 
Sir Liam Donaldson , chief medical advisor , said : `` The first non-imported cases of swine flu have been confirmed in England and Scotland . 
The infection appears to have been acquired by person to person spread within the United Kingdom . 
Until now cases were confined to people who had themselves recently come back from Mexico . 
The person in the south west is being treated with Tamiflu . '' 
Tonight 's announcement brought the total number of confirmed cases in the UK to 13 . 
Earlier today , a year seven pupil in Gloucestershire , and a woman from Merseyside were also confirmed as suffering from the virus . 
Pacitti , 24 , has been confined to his home in Falkirk under voluntarily quarantine with his mother , Lesley , her partner and his younger brother , Alan , 18 , and has been taking the antiviral drug Tamiflu since becoming ill earlier this week . 
He was given the results from the Health Protection Agency by telephone this afternoon . 
Minutes after getting the results , Pacitti said he was really disappointed . 
`` I 'm gutted really . 
I just found out , '' he said . 
`` I saw Iain last Thursday , he was n't showing any symptoms then . 
My friends thought he looked a bit tired but we thought it was just jetlag . 
`` I 've been feeling a lot better today than I have all week . 
I 've still got an upset stomach and a sore throat . 
Earlier in the week I was having headaches and feeling feverish . '' 
The Scottish health secretary , Nicola Sturgeon , said that authorities believed the virus was still being contained . 
She said : `` This is of course significant because it represents the first case in the UK of person-to-person transmission of this virus . 
The person we 're confirming as positive today had n't been in Mexico or any other affected area . 
He had been in contact with someone who had . 
`` I want to stress , however , that it does n't mean that there is more reason to worry . 
We 're working hard to try to disrupt this infection and stop it spreading . '' 
Sturgeon said that Pacitti 's condition was not causing any medical concern . 
`` I 'm told that his symptoms , as with the other cases , in the context of flu are mild symptoms . 
He is not unwell in a way which would cause clinical concern , as was the case with the other two cases . '' 
This confirmation came as Iain and Dawn Askham , from the small town of Polmont , outside Falkirk , said they believed they caught the virus on the flight home from Mexico from five other men who were clearly ill . 
The five men , who sat in the neighbouring rows of seats to the couple , were coughing and feverish throughout the nine-hour flight from the Mexican resort of Cancun . 
`` I actually said to Dawn : ' I think we 're going to be getting off this plane with the plague ' , '' Askham told the Daily Record , adding the couple were now `` 99 % sure '' they contracted the virus on the flight . 
One other passenger on the flight , a 12-year-old girl from Torbay , in Devon , has since been diagnosed with swine flu . 
Askham said at one point on the flight , two other passengers sitting near the five British Asian men moved seats because of the disturbance from their coughing . 
`` We were on the flight back for nine hours and it would have been impossible not to have breathed in their germs , which will have been getting circulated around the plane , '' he said . 
`` They were really ill , especially the guy sat directly behind us . 
He had a really bad fever . 
We did n't ask to get moved because we 'd have felt a bit rude asking for an upgrade even if it was our honeymoon . '' 
The HPA tried to dampen fears that these five men were at large in the community with swine flu . 
A spokeswoman told the Guardian today that nearly all the passengers within 1 metre of the couple particularly sitting in seats immediately behind and in front of the Askhams had been identified . 
Most had responded to phone calls and emails , and been ruled out as swine flu carriers . 
Some , however , had not yet replied . 
`` Contact tracing has already been done , '' an HPA spokeswoman said . 
`` I ca n't tell you about individual cases because of patient confidentiality . 
`` What I can tell you is that everybody who was in close contact , the 1-metre area for more than an hour obviously anyone near them on a long-haul flight either has been or is being traced . 
That has been going on since the cases were identified as a positive . '' 
Meanwhile , the German health ministry confirmed a nurse as the country 's first case of human-to-human swine flu transmission . 
The World Health Organisation has increased its tally of confirmed cases of the H1N1 virus around the world from 257 to 331 . 
