It took Louisiana 's oyster industry years to recover from Hurricane Katrina Louisiana 's oyster beds have not recovered from the US 's worst environmental catastrophe , the Deepwater Horizon oil-rig disaster , and some fishermen fear they never will . 
We were fishing at the end of the world - or at least a place that felt like it . 
Grand Isle is one of the final precarious fragments of land where the myriad bayous of the Mississippi delta give way to the open water of the Gulf of Mexico . 
Around us , hungry frigate birds watched as we headed for the oyster beds . 
For the first time in my life , I had oysters for breakfast Pelicans swooped by in formation , low and effortless , and a pair of dolphins raced just ahead of the bow , daring each other to get closer and occasionally rolling sideways to check we were suitably impressed . 
We were less than 100 miles -LRB- 160 km -RRB- from the wreck of the Deepwater Horizon but everything looked pristine under a blazing sun . 
As big as the palm of my hand , succulent and briny . 
It was still early and so , for the first time in my life , I had oysters for breakfast . 
But the atmosphere aboard the boat was sombre . 
The oysters were good but hardly plentiful . 
At this , the season of peak demand , far too many were simply dead . 
Oyster supplies are down following measures taken to disperse the oil Not , as you might think , coated in sticky oil or even poisoned by chemical dispersants but killed off , as luck would have it , by fresh water . 
Millions of gallons from the Mississippi River were hurriedly diverted into the bays and marshes of the delta to keep the oil from rolling in , earlier in the year - but this upset the delicate balance of fresh and salty conditions the oysters need to survive . 
Nick Collins is a fourth generation oyster-man , with a rich gumbo of an accent to match . 
His business had only just recovered from the ravages of Hurricane Katrina , five years ago , and Nick was looking forward to a bumper year . 
But if the first setback was an act of God , the second was an act of industry - an industry that is much bigger and more commercially important to Louisiana than Nick 's delicious oysters , an industry that sits off this fragile , mysterious landscape of channels and marshes , and produces the stuff that Americans really can not get enough off . 
At nearby Port Fouchon beach , the shallow-water rigs , tens of them , sit as little as a mile offshore . 
Clean-up teams are still scooping up tar from the beach Oil arrived here in the weeks after the spill and BP 's clean-up continues . 
Armies of contract workers , mostly from Central America , make their steady , painstaking way along the sand . 
Wave after wave of them , in bright yellow boots , stooping slightly over shovels and brushes , scooping up tiny tar balls , covered in sand . 
They pause , scour the patch in front of them and then - to the sound of `` Vamonos ! '' 
-LRB- `` Let 's go ! '' -RRB- 
- move on a few paces . 
Not all the oil is from the Macondo well . 
Studies show that some of it comes from elsewhere , perhaps from the rigs we can see , perhaps even from the natural seepage that goes on all the time in the oil-rich Gulf of Mexico - and which has , over the eons , created an army of microbes that like nothing more than to feast , like Pac-Men , on energy-rich hydrocarbons . 
He was confident , as everyone was , that it was just a matter of time before the oysters reappeared and everyone was happy again Organisms that just might clean up whatever muck lurks out of sight , all by themselves . 
So the clean-up is not just about the Deepwater Horizon but about every company that has ever sought to make a fortune extracting the black stuff and bringing it ashore . 
BP , it seems , is making amends for all of us . 
But back to the oysters and another family business struggling with the fallout . 
On the edge of New Orleans ' legendary French quarter , the P & J Oyster Company has been in business for more than 130 years . 
Like Nick Collins , Al Sunseri wonders if he has what it takes to recover . 
The ice which gushes noisily into his giant coolers every eight minutes has very little to cool and the high , whitewashed-stone shucking tables are deserted . 
The Exxon Valdez ran aground off Alaska spilling 11m gallons of oil He has laid off all but two temporary workers who keep a trickle of customers happy with oysters from nearby Texas . 
Al also had to deal with Katrina , downsizing and waiting for the oyster beds to replenish themselves . 
He was confident , as everyone was , that it was just a matter of time before the oysters reappeared and everyone was happy again . 
But now he wonders about his son , who has experienced depression and has not been working for a couple of months . 
He says he remembers his own anxiety as a young man , taking over a business with such a long tradition to uphold . 
He thinks about Alaska and the herrings that disappeared from Prince William Sound three years after the Exxon Valdez spill , never to return . 
More than seven months after the blowout on the Deepwater Horizon , the full ramifications of this disaster are still hard to gauge . 
The uncertainty gnaws at everyone who depends on the sea . 
Is it possible , they wonder , that the worst days may still lie ahead ? 
How to listen to : From Our Own Correspondent BBC Radio 4 : Saturdays , 1130 . 
