Oil execs in Senate hearing as gulf oil spill cleanup efforts continue -- photos Oil companies stress one another 's failures in a Senate hearing as cleanup and containment efforts continue in the Gulf of Mexico , after the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig April 20 . 
View how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
PASS CHRISTIAN , MISS. -- In this Gulf Coast fishing town , they spent Saturday awaiting , and dreading , the oil . 
The slick from the Deepwater Horizon oil spill was still too far offshore to see or even smell . 
At least , it did n't smell worse than the harbor 's usual mix of boat fuel and bait . 
But there were rumors : It would come Sunday , first the sheen and then the thick stuff behind it . 
People here had heard that just to the west , fishermen were already pulling up shrimp that smelled like diesel fuel . 
On the Royster , a rust-edged fishing boat , Richard Bosarge said that he feared the oil could coat the valuable oyster grounds , which the fishermen here know so intimately they have given them names like `` Square Handkerchief '' and `` Pass Mary Anne . '' 
And the oil could poison the huge stocks of shrimp offshore . 
`` They 're out of reach until he 's probably my age , '' Bosarge , 42 , said , pointing to his son Roy , who is 15 . 
`` Just take a picture and put it in a museum . '' 
It has been 11 days since a BP oil and gas exploration well blew out , setting fire to the drilling rig , which sank , killing 11 people . 
Ever since , crude oil has been leaking into the Gulf of Mexico , raising the prospects of a historic environmental disaster . 
Winds from the southeast have nudged the slick northward , where it floated Saturday near the coasts of Louisiana , Alabama and Mississippi as residents waited anxiously for it to arrive . 
`` Mother Nature gets a vote in this thing , and that 's probably the most unpredictable thing we 've got , '' said Adm. Thad Allen , commandant of the U.S. Coast Guard . 
`` There 's enough oil out there to impact the shoreline . 
The real question is when and where . '' 
President Obama plans to visit the area Sunday morning to see any environmental damage for himself and check on the federal response . 
With the economy already weak , the widening oil slick could add to the region 's woes by damaging the fishing , tourism and shipping industries . 
The White House is eager to avoid the mistakes made by President George W. Bush , who was seen as too detached from floundering rescue efforts after the much more dire Hurricane Katrina . 
And that is the problem for Obama right now : Things are not going well in the battle to contain the oil spill . 
Allen , who Obama has named `` national incident commander '' for the spill , said Saturday that no progress had been made in cutting off the flow of oil from the damaged well , which is 5,000 feet below the ocean surface . 
Allen said weather and choppy seas were hindering efforts to contain the spill by laying out booms or skimming oil off the water , control techniques that have changed little over the past four decades . 
Allen said BP has not yet started drilling a relief well to cut off and plug the leaking one , and he reiterated that the new well would take weeks to complete . 
That poses political as well as environmental and economic challenges . 
Obama faces the politically tricky task of appearing in control of the response while avoiding the blame for the situation . 
While he repeatedly refers to BP as `` the responsible party '' under legislation approved in 1990 , administration officials have also been striving to demonstrate their attention to the crisis . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
