It 's getting harder and harder to believe there 'll eventually be a resolution to Libya 's civil war that will allow anyone to claim Moammar Gadhafi lost to rebel forces or was humbled by members of the NATO-led coalition waging air strikes against him . 
Indeed , it 's becoming increasingly clear as the weeks rush by that battle-weary European partners in the intervention force are keener to find ways of ending the conflict and pull forces back home than they are to obtain their initial objectives of seeing Gadhafi deposed and forced abroad . 
The upshot is the sound of diplomatic throats being cleared ever louder to prepare public opinion for the now-probable scenario of the operation ending without Gadhafi having budged much . 
As Tony Karon 's July 20 post noted , U.S. officials came away from recent meetings in Tunisia with Gaddafi representatives repeating demands that the colonel must go as a part of any resolution to the conflict . 
Yet even then it was becoming evident that what go ultimately entails may not meet the definition rebels have long advanced : of Gadhafi being forcefully driven from power , arrested , and handed over to the U.N. tribunal wanting to try him for crimes against humanity . 
On July 20 , French Foreign Minister Alain Jupp told French TV channel LCI that one of the hypotheses that 's envisioned is , indeed , that -LRB- Gadhafi -RRB- stays in Libya on the condition he very clearly leaves Libyan political life . 
That considerably watered down position on the criteria to end the conflict was then repeated on July 25 by British Foreign Secretary William Hague . 
While remaining adamant that Gadhafi must leave power , Hague left the Libyan leader 's fate beyond that open to question . 
`` Obviously him leaving Libya itself would be the best way of showing the Libyan people that they no longer have to live in fear of Gadhafi , Hague said Monday , prior to his meeting with Jupp in London . 
`` But as I have said all along , this is ultimately a question for Libyans to determine . '' 
July 26 , 2011 at 12:54 pm | Reply I totally agree with you . 
All that money and lives wasted should serve as warning for the future that plans that were drawn in the 80s and 90s need to be rechecked before being implemented decades later . 
July 28 , 2011 at 7:44 pm | Reply The Nato and its allies have to learn a lesson . 
They should n't have blown the trumpet in advance , before they know the tune , or else it 'd be embarrasing if it did n't come out as anticipated . 
July 26 , 2011 at 5:41 pm | Reply They should have never mentioned regime change if they could n't get it . 
The french do n't have the balls to say that phrase , much less do it . 
I was really excited to see how the french would do \* their \* Iraq . 
Thought we might learn something . . 
I 'm not impressed . 
Mo is still there . 
July 26 , 2011 at 10:00 pm | Reply This will be over in weeks not months ... . 
another massive miscalculation by the training wheels affirmative action president . 
July 26 , 2011 at 10:39 pm | Reply Poor Germany is making up for its lost contribution in the early stages ... I feel bad for them ... they are just jumping in the fry pan they were not in earlier . 
If the Germans had a decent leader today , they would n't be sending any money to those so-called `` rebels '' in Libya . 
In fact , being German only by descent , I 'm still a better German than that country 's current leaders who only crawl to the U.S. , Great Britain and France and act on their behest !!! July 27 , 2011 at 11:31 am | Reply yeah , yeah ... give them funds now ... incite conflict , supply ammunition , give funds by the millions ... for what ? 
so that they can go ahead and kill their fellow countrymen ?? this is how outside countries should get involved ... in a `` revolution '' ... you call this a revolution or a take over by foreign countries ? 
Arent all these countries going to get their millions back in the form of `` contracts '' from these so called rebels they are `` supporting '' ? 
if you love to do humanitarian work ... love to do what is good for the people ... there are hundreds of people dying out there in a famine in the same continent ... send your money there . 
Why do you think twice before supporting them ? 
Because they are not rich and cant give you hefty contracts ? 
Isnt this war totally and absolutely just `` for the money '' ... each and every step of it ? 
This is great news indeed , if true . 
After all , the only legitimate leader Libya has is now Mohammar Qadaffy and nobody else . 
We have absolutely no right to decide Libya 's future nor do any of our worthless NATO allies !!! July 27 , 2011 at 11:24 am | Reply Pity1 If the West backs down eventually then Gaddafi will claim victory over them and the rest of the world . 
July 27 , 2011 at 6:39 pm | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
