Analysis : Gaddafi still has enough loyal forces for a fight LONDON | Thu Feb 24 , 2011 11:50 am EST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Muammar Gaddafi may have lost control of much of his country and military , but a hard core of troops will probably stay loyal as he tries to retain control of western Libya , the coastal strip and the capital Tripoli . 
Much of the oil-rich east around Benghazi appears lost . 
Troops melted away in the face of popular protests inspired by the overthrow of rulers in neighboring Egypt and Tunisia , leaving it in the hands of people 's militias and tribal groups . 
But so far Gaddafi 's opponents appear disparate and disorganized , with no centralized command and little prospect of mounting their own offensives . 
That could leave the initiative in Gaddafi 's hands . 
Analysts say he has always kept the wider military weak and disorganized , leaving real power in the hands of ultra-dedicated units often linked to his own tribal group . 
`` It 's always been kept deliberately nebulous , '' said Alia Brahimi , head of the North Africa program at the London School of Economics . 
`` But I think it 's clear there are at least several thousand troops -- perhaps more -- who will remain loyal to Gaddafi and it 's reasonable to assume that any serious military equipment is likely to be in their hands . '' 
Gaddafi has fomented confusion and rifts in any structure capable of posing a threat , said Jon Marks , a Libya expert and director of the Cross Border Information consultancy . 
`` It 's been divide and rule with the tribes , with political groups , with the regions , and above all with security , '' he said . 
Gaddafi may also be relying on foreign fighters brought in from elsewhere in Africa . 
In Benghazi , local people told Reuters they had captured several and were holding them in prison . 
The Paris-based International Federation for Human Rights , citing reports from Libya exile groups , estimated there were up to 6,000 mercenaries , 3,000 in Tripoli and the rest across the country . 
Others suggest those numbers may be vastly exaggerated . 
There is little solid information on Gaddafi 's weaponry and equipment , dented by years of sanctions . 
`` It is mainly vintage 1950s , 60s and 70s kit , '' IHS Jane 's Middle East analyst David Hartwell said . 
`` Some tanks and armored personnel carriers and artillery . 
Basic stuff , but certainly lethal . '' 
The opposition may also have some tanks and heavy weapons from units that defected , he said , but less in the way of spares and ammunition , less idea how to use it and currently no command and control structure . 
That may change if defecting military commanders and tribal chiefs form new alliances . 
Some experts say army chief General Abu Bakr Younus Jaber , a comrade of Gaddafi in the 1969 coup that brought him to power , is believed to have sided with the rebels . 
Mansour El-Kikhia , an expert on Libyan politics , estimated Gaddafi can call on 10,000-12 ,000 Libyan troops , split broadly between a 32nd Brigade led by his son Khamees , and a presidential guard that has been led by another son , Muatassim . 
There are also armed members of his revolutionary committees , hardline political structures that enforce internal security and which are likely to stay loyal , if only from a sense of self-preservation . 
`` Since the 1970s he has drummed into them that their fate is tied to his , '' Kikhia said . 
`` For the past 40 years he has delegated the carrying out of many of the atrocities of the regime to these forces , deliberately to implicate them . 
He has made sure they understood that they live or die with him . '' 
Information from Libya remains sketchy at best , but the battle lines are slowly emerging of what increasingly looks like a Libyan civil war . 
Gaddafi appears largely in control of Tripoli , after crushing protests there , while his opponents , though disorganised , have ousted him from the second city of Benghazi . 
The situation along the coastal strip between the two cities is more confused . 
Gaddafi 's home town Sirte lies in the middle , apparently under government control . 
Fighting was reported in the port city of Misrata , 200 km east of Tripoli . 
In other coastal towns , military forces have apparently been deployed to quell protesters . 
Gaddafi seems to be trying to cement his control of western Libya , but analysts warned he was still far from safe in Tripoli where popular protests remain a potential threat . 
Analysts said the air force is the only way he can hit back at opposition targets around Benghazi -- potentially including valuable oil installations . 
That could be complicated by the arrival of a British frigate to evacuate foreign nationals . 
On paper , his air force includes dozens of aircraft , mainly Russian-built jets with some 25 French-made Mirages at the start of the week . 
But many are believed to be out of service and Libyan pilots have proved reluctant to strike opposition areas . 
Two Mirage pilots defected to Malta earlier in the week and a Libyan newspaper said the crew of a third aircraft bailed out rather than bomb Benghazi . 
Gaddafi is said to have hired foreign mercenary pilots in the past , but finding new crews may be hard . 
Any war will likely be low-tech and bloody , analysts say . 
The good news is that Libya is believed to have given up and destroyed all stockpiles of chemical weapons as part of its rapprochement with the West . 
Gaddafi must know that if he did use any such weapons against civilian targets , he would invite an overwhelming response from abroad . 
Unlike the World War Two tank battles in the north African desert , fighting in the current conflict is expected to take place in the towns . 
`` This will be urban , '' said one ex-military security expert now advising the oil sector . 
`` Just like Iraq . '' 
A lengthy Iraq-style conflict or descent into Somalia-style anarchy could provide fertile ground for Islamist radicals at a time of great change in Libya 's coastal neighbors . 
`` The consequences could be very bleak , '' said LSE 's Brahimi . 
`` But right now there does n't seem to be any appetite in the outside world to do anything to stop it . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
However , when all is said and done at the end of the day he is no different from hitler , stalen or any other manipulative , self-serving , megalomaniac imps serving satan 's purpose here on earth . 
Ultimately it is between them and HIM . . 
I dont want to be nearby . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
