Analysis : Revolt in Libya likely to scar its oil sector NEW YORK | Thu Feb 24 , 2011 10:24 am EST NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Regardless of what comes next in Libya 's lethal political standoff , the OPEC country 's oil sector is nearly certain to suffer , bringing long-lasting supply disruptions or even permanent damage . 
None of several potential outcomes is benign for Libya 's oil industry -- the lifeblood of its economy -- or for oil prices . 
The scenarios run the gamut from all-out civil war and attacks on energy infrastructure to low-level neglect and reservoir damage , as foreign expertise flees the country . 
Over decades , from Iran , to Iraq and Venezuela , periods of political chaos in OPEC countries have usually carved lasting scars on the oil sector , and few expect Libya to be any different . 
`` A period of chaos will probably interrupt Libya 's refining and oil operations , '' said Amy Jaffe , an energy studies fellow and Middle East expert at Rice University in Houston . 
`` The military is abandoning Gaddafi , so it 's unclear who is left to protect oil installations . 
Lots of foreigners are being evacuated , so who will remain in place capable of operating Libya 's oil industry ? 
Will workers even show up ? '' 
As Africa 's No. 3 producer and the site of the continent 's largest proved reserves , estimated at 44 billion barrels , Libyan oil usually accounts for 2 percent of world output . 
The country , whose oil accounts for a fourth of Italy 's demand , is the first major oil exporter to be thrust into acute turmoil since protests began sweeping through the Middle East in January , unseating presidents in Tunisia and Egypt so far . 
An estimated 300,000 to 400,000 barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- of Libya 's 1.6 million bpd of production has been halted , as companies evacuate staff and suspend operations , according to the latest Reuters calculations . 
Much of the country 's oil industry is run by foreign firms including Eni and Repsol , while Libya 's National Oil Corporation -LRB- NOC -RRB- has traditionally been tightly controlled by Gaddafi . 
Libyan strongman Muammar Gaddafi defiantly pledged on Tuesday to stay in power at any cost , threatening to have protesters hunted down and killed `` house by house . '' 
With rival factions already laying claim to an oil-rich swath of eastern Libya , separated by hundreds of miles of desert from capital Tripoli in the west , the country could even face civil war , analysts warned . 
In OPEC countries where oil infrastructure is the ultimate key to power and purse strings , war and other major political crises have typically resulted in supply disruptions that take years or decades to bounce back from . 
Iran 's 1979 revolution cut the country 's output by more than half , and production never recovered fully . 
Iraq 's 1990 invasion of Kuwait ultimately slashed output in both countries for years , and ravaged Kuwaiti oil wells . 
Venezuela 's massive oil industry strike of 2002 crippled production , which has never returned to pre-strike levels . 
To be sure , OPEC 's top producer Saudi Arabia has stepped in to boost production in previous disruptions in other member producers , and the Saudi oil minister said on Tuesday the cartel , led by the kingdom , stands ready to pump more oil , but only when needed . 
U.S. officials say Saudi Arabia could replace Libyan supplies within a month , although it would leave less available spare capacity . 
Libya 's unrest has helped push Brent crude oil prices up nearly 6 percent since Friday , touching a 2-1\/2 - year high of nearly $ 109 a barrel , although the surge also reflects the chance that chaos will affect other oil-exporting countries . 
Brent rose $ 2.64 to $ 108.42 a barrel on Wednesday . 
`` The output of -LRB- Libya 's -RRB- oil will probably not be completely halted , but it is difficult to see this level of chaos failing to result in significant operational disruptions , '' Eurasia Group analysts said in a note on Tuesday . 
`` It is likely that the country will experience a prolonged period of violent instability , with a potential for full blown civil war . '' 
As the revolt aimed at ending Gaddafi 's 41-year rule intensifies , oil infrastructure could enter the power play . 
Unlike in major African exporters Nigeria and Angola where oil is mostly offshore , installations are mostly on land in Libya , making them potentially more vulnerable . 
`` This effectively gives the country two political factions , two energy-producing basins , two oil output infrastructures . 
Economically at least , the seeds of protracted conflict -- regardless of what happens with Gaddafi or any political changes after he departs - have already been sown , '' said political risk consultancy Stratfor . 
With oil companies scrambling to pull personnel from the country , Libya 's oil industry `` will have to operate under difficult circumstances . 
A sustained lack of security will keep foreign oil companies at bay for a while , '' said energy consultancy PFC in a note . 
As yet , there are no reports of attacks on energy infrastructure , but eastern tribal leaders have threatened to shut off exports , revenue from which usually flows to capital Tripoli , Gaddafi 's increasingly tenuous stronghold in the west . 
Nearby , an underwater gas line to Italy has already been interrupted . 
The fact that Libya is cutting exports of refined products may indicate workers are already abandoning the country 's refineries and their highly explosive plants out of fear . 
A Time Magazine intelligence columnist wrote on Tuesday that Gaddafi himself may be ordering sabotage attacks on oil pipelines leading to the Mediterranean Sea , citing a source in the region . 
At Libyan oil wells , which are mostly in remote desert areas , any abrupt halt could permanently damage infrastructure and compromise it for years . 
`` Anybody who feels they could still control the infrastructure in the future will probably not try to blow it up , '' said Jaffe . 
`` But companies , including the Libyan national oil company , may face a tough decision . 
Will they try for orderly shutdowns that ensure production can resume easily later , or keep fields going but risk events that could damage them ? '' 
-LRB- Editing by Ramthan Hussain and Alden Bentley -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
