Michael Jackson concert : Final preparations in Cardiff Michael Jackson died aged 50 in June 2009 , while rehearsing for his This Is It tour Final preparations are under way for Saturday 's stadium concert in Cardiff in memory of Michael Jackson . 
Christina Aguilera , Cee Lo Green and Smokey Robinson will perform at the Millennium Stadium , as well as Leona Lewis and JLS . 
Marlon , Jackie , Tito and La Toya Jackson will also pay tribute to their brother . 
Beyonce will appear via video . 
Organisers admit preparations have been challenging but say the event will be spectacular . 
Michael Jackson died aged 50 in June 2009 , during a rehearsal period for his This Is It tour . 
The Michael Forever concert has been criticised for coinciding with the trial in Los Angeles of the singer 's physician Dr Conrad Murray , who denies involuntary manslaughter . 
Randy , Jermaine and Janet Jackson have confirmed they will not be attending the event because of the `` bad timing '' . 
But brothers Marlon , Tito and Jackie and his sister La Toya will be in Cardiff . 
Their mother Katherine Jackson also said she was `` greatly honored '' to attend the tribute to her son , which has been organised by Global Events Live . 
BBC Radio 1 presenter Fearne Cotton will co-host the event with Hollywood actor and singer Jamie Foxx . 
Beyonce will appear via a video link . 
Chart-topping act Black Eyed Peas were among the biggest acts in the line-up , but the group pulled out with just days to go , citing `` unavoidable circumstances '' . 
The show includes stars from the US and UK Chris Hunt , head of Global Live Events , admitted that preparations had been challenging , but blamed `` misinformation '' for some of the negative headlines . 
Mr Hunt told Reuters he was `` happy '' with ticket sales , although he did not have precise numbers , and that they had picked up `` hugely '' in recent days . 
Cardiff council confirmed that an email was sent by the Millennium Stadium to its `` key stakeholders , '' including Cardiff council staff , offering `` a number of free tickets '' to the concert . 
The offer was available on a first-come-first-served basis . 
A council spokesman said he did not know how many free tickets were available but it was not believed to be a large amount and free tickets had not been offered to all council staff . 
The stadium has been set a capacity of 60,000 for Saturday 's show , with the first act on stage at 18:00 BST . 
`` It 's going to be a huge and spectacular event , '' said Mr Hunt . 
He added : `` This is a Jackson family evening . 
I think it 's easy to underestimate this . 
I think it will be a hugely emotional evening . 
Mrs Jackson and the children will be very visible . '' 
Saturday 's tribute concert , which will be broadcast around the world , with profits raising money for three charities including the Los Angeles-based Aids Project and the Prince 's Trust . 
Giving the event her `` complete blessing '' , Katherine Jackson said : `` Michael gave his entire life to the world through his love , his music and his devotion to healing the planet . '' 
She added it would be a `` worthy celebration of Michael 's life '' and that `` this is how Michael would have wanted it '' . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
