Michael Jackson 's brothers speak about `` celebrating the legacy '' of their brother ahead of Saturday night 's memorial concert in Cardiff Organisers said 40,000 tickets have now been sold ahead of Saturday night 's stadium concert in Cardiff in memory of Michael Jackson . 
Although 10,000 tickets remained for the show at the Millennium Stadium they were confident of an eventual sell-out . 
Christina Aguilera , Cee Lo Green and Smokey Robinson are among performers , while Beyonce will sing via video link . 
Marlon , Jackie , Tito and La Toya Jackson will also pay tribute to their brother . 
Chris Hunt , head of organisers Global Events Live , said : `` I 'm excited about tomorrow 's event , especially with ticket sales going so well . '' 
He added that , although there were still tickets left `` we hope to sell out on the day '' and reach the event 's 50,000 capacity . 
`` Buzz is really building and some key acts have already been spotted in the city . 
Doors will open at 4pm tomorrow for what will be a fantastic evening , '' he said . 
Michael Jackson died aged 50 in June 2009 , during a rehearsal period for his This Is It tour . 
The Michael Forever concert has been criticised for coinciding with the trial in Los Angeles of the singer 's physician Dr Conrad Murray , who denies involuntary manslaughter . 
Randy , Jermaine and Janet Jackson have confirmed they will not be attending the event because of the `` bad timing '' . 
But brothers Marlon , Tito and Jackie and his sister La Toya will be in Cardiff . 
Their mother Katherine Jackson also said she was `` greatly honored '' to attend the tribute to her son . 
BBC Radio 1 presenter Fearne Cotton will co-host the event with Hollywood actor and singer Jamie Foxx . 
Beyonce will appear via a video link . 
Chart-topping act Black Eyed Peas were among the biggest acts in the line-up , but the group pulled out with just days to go , citing `` unavoidable circumstances '' . 
Michael Jackson died aged 50 in June 2009 , during a rehearsal period for his This Is It tour Meanwhile , Cardiff council confirmed that an email was sent by the Millennium Stadium to its `` key stakeholders , '' including Cardiff council staff , offering `` a number of free tickets '' to the concert . 
The offer was available on a first-come-first-served basis . 
A council spokesman said he did not know how many free tickets were available but it was not believed to be a large amount and free tickets had not been offered to all council staff . 
Doors open at 16:00 BST for Saturday 's show , with the first act on stage at 18:00 BST . 
`` It 's going to be a huge and spectacular event , '' said Mr Hunt . 
He added : `` This is a Jackson family evening . 
I think it 's easy to underestimate this . 
I think it will be a hugely emotional evening . 
Mrs Jackson and the children will be very visible . '' 
The tribute concert , will be broadcast around the world , with profits raising money for three charities including the Los Angeles-based Aids Project and the Prince 's Trust . 
Giving the event her `` complete blessing '' , Katherine Jackson said : `` Michael gave his entire life to the world through his love , his music and his devotion to healing the planet . '' 
She added it would be a `` worthy celebration of Michael 's life '' and that `` this is how Michael would have wanted it '' . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
