US commission blames ` systemic ' causes for spill and analysts say inquiry unlikely to contradict findings The wrecked Deepwater Horizon rig , ablaze 50 miles off Louisiana last week , is spilling an estimated 5,000 barrels of oil a day in what may be the US worst environmental disaster . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP BP is more likely to escape the potentially ruinous charge of gross negligence , according to City analysts , after a powerful US commission blamed `` systemic '' causes for the Gulf of Mexico disaster . 
Barack Obama 's national commission released part of its final report into the disaster last night on Wednesday night . 
The report , to be published next week , could influence several other parallel investigations into the spill that are yet to finish . 
The commission was scathing in its criticism of BP , as well as its contractors Halliburton and Transocean , which it blamed for a collective `` failure of management '' . 
But it added that it had found no evidence that the blowout which led to last April 's disaster was the result of `` aberrational decisions made by rogue industry or government officials '' . 
Commission co-chair William K Reilly said : `` So a key question posed from the outset by this tragedy is , do we have a single company , BP , that blundered with fatal consequences , or a more pervasive problem of a complacent industry ? 
Given the documented failings of both Transocean and Halliburton , both of which serve the offshore industry in virtually every ocean , I reluctantly conclude we have a system-wide problem . '' 
Analysts said that blaming the oil industry , and not singling out BP , would help the company in its fight against being found guilty of gross negligence . 
But industry and legal sources told the Guardian that BP would still have to strike a deal out of court to settle myriad lawsuits . 
Separately , the US justice department has launched a civil action against BP and is investigating potential criminal violations . 
BP shares rose by more than 2 % during morning trading in London but finished the day slightly down . 
Analysts expect BP to resume paying dividends which were suspended last summer under intense White House pressure when it reports full-year results on 1 February , as the company tries to move on from the disaster . 
Before the spill the company paid out $ 10bn -LRB- # 6.5 bn -RRB- annually to shareholders but it is likely to resume dividends at only half that level . 
Investors could receive dividends for the last quarter of 2010 as soon as March . 
Analyst Peter Hitchens , of stockbroker Panmure Gordon , said : `` The national commission 's report is another chink of light for BP . 
BP was named and held responsible in the report but it also said ` we ca n't solely blame BP ' . 
`` It 's hinting that there wo n't be a finding of gross negligence . 
What seems to be coming through is there was an unfortunate string of accidents which led to the disaster . 
BP had a near-death experience . 
But time is a great healer for BP , it seems . '' 
The national commission report was also highly critical of the now-disbanded offshore regulator , the Minerals Management Service -LRB- MMS -RRB- , which it previously accused of giving a higher priority to increasing production in the gulf than to safety . 
The full report , to be released on Tuesday , is likely to recommend a radical overhaul of the regulatory regime to improve offshore drilling . 
Charlie Kronick , a spokesman for Greenpeace , said : `` The report sets up a big flag that the regulatory regime is going to be much tighter . 
The new regulator has already indicated that it wo n't be a permit-fest once new guidelines for offshore drilling are drawn up . '' 
But he said that pointing the finger at BP 's contractors should not exonerate the company from blame . 
`` Halliburton and Transocean were operating on BP 's behalf . 
It 's hard to see how that lets BP off the hook . '' 
If BP avoids a charge of gross negligence it will be able to charge its junior partners in the fateful Macondo well Anadarko and Mitsui for a third of the costs . 
US federal fines would triple under a gross negligence finding , with JP Morgan estimating that the total bill for BP under this scenario could be as high as $ 69bn . 
BP has made good progress in its program of selling assets worth $ 25-30bn , having netted about $ 20bn so far . 
A version appeared on p26 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 09.38 GMT on Friday 7 January 2011 . 
