cents Complacency ` could lead to another catastrophe ' Fire crews battle the blazing remnants of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig , Gulf of Mexico , in April last year . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP The oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico was an avoidable disaster caused in part by a series of cost-cutting decisions made by BP and its partners , the White House oil commission has concluded . 
In a preview of its final report , due next week , the national oil spill commission said systemic management failure at BP , Transocean , and Halliburton caused the blow-out in the Gulf of Mexico , and warned that such a disaster would likely recur because of industry complacency . 
Many of the poor decisions taken on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig before the fatal blow-out on 20 April were taken to save time and money . 
`` Whether purposeful or not , many of the decisions that BP , Halliburton , and Transocean made that increased the risk of the Macondo blowout clearly saved those companies significant time -LRB- and money -RRB- , '' the report said . 
In a separate chart , it identified nine decisions that increased risk ; seven of these saved the companies time . 
BP was involved in all nine decisions . 
BP , which owned the well , did not enforce the proper controls to manage those increased risks , the report said . 
`` BP did not have adequate controls in place to ensure that key decisions in the months leading up to the blow-out were safe or sound from an engineering perspective . '' 
It continued on the same theme , concluding : `` Most of the mistakes and oversights at Macondo can be traced back to a single overarching failure a failure of management . '' 
In earlier pronouncements , the commission 's chairmen have suggested a culture of complacency ruled on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig and in the oil industry . 
`` This disaster likely would not have happened had the companies involved been guided by an unrelenting commitment to safety first , '' commission co-chairman Bob Graham , said in a statement . 
`` And it likely would not have happened if the responsible governmental regulators had the capacity and will to demand world-class safety standards . '' 
On 11 January , the seven-member commission will publish its full report into the causes of the blow-out , which killed 11 men and spewed 4.9 million barrels of oil into the Gulf . 
Its findings could prove critical to the civil lawsuit filed last month by the US Justice Department against BP , Transocean and other companies involved in the spill for damages to the environment , as well as the hundreds of lawsuits filed by Gulf residents who have lost their livelihoods because of the spill . 
The report warned that BP and the other companies could be liable for billions more in compensation to people who have lost money because of the oil spill , and for damage to natural resources . 
The explosion was caused by a sudden kick of gas through the 5,000 ft riser pipe connecting the well to the Deepwater Horizon oil rig that another investigation found went undetected for several crucial moments . 
The report identified a series of mistakes that , it said , eventually made the blow-out `` inevitable . '' 
It paid particular attention to the faulty cementing job , performed by Halliburton , at the bottom of the well . 
But it blamed BP for failing to exercise proper oversight over the cementing job , and for misreading a pressure test that indicated the well had not been properly sealed . 
`` Based on evidence currently available , there is nothing to suggest that BP 's engineering team conducted a formal , disciplined analysis of the combined impact of these risk factors on the prospects for a successful cement job , '' the report said . 
It also criticised BP 's choice of a long string well design . 
BP crew were also wrong to replace heavy drilling mud in the riser pipe with lighter seawater before the well was properly sealed , the report said . 
Transocean also came in for criticism for failing to communicate to its crew the risks of deepwater drilling even after a near-miss only months earlier . 
BP said in a statement that it was working with government regulators to ensure that the experience in the Gulf led to improved practices . 
Transocean tried to shift the blame to BP and government . 
`` The procedures being conducted in the final hours were crafted and directed by BP engineers and approved in advance by federal regulators , '' a company statement said . 
Halliburton , which has previously criticised commission lab tests finding a faulty cement seal , said the commission had made use of selective information . 
