MPs publish report on lessons from BP 's Gulf of Mexico oil spill disaster Politicians have ` serious doubts ' over oil companies ' plans to cope with spills in the Atlantic waters off Shetland Fire crews battle the blazing remnants of the BP-operated oil rig , Deepwater Horizon , in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Ho\/AFP\/Getty Images British taxpayers could end up footing the clean-up bill from any major oil spill in UK waters because current rules allow companies to dodge their environmental responsibilities , according to MPs investigating BP 's Gulf of Mexico disaster . 
And the government ought to require companies to prove that they can pay out billions of pounds in clean-up costs before they are granted exploration and production licences , recommends the committee 's final report , which is published today . 
It also points to `` serious doubts '' over whether companies ' plans to respond to spills by capping leaking wells and skimming oil from the sea surface would work in the rough Atlantic waters off the west coast of Shetland . 
The report points to the `` limitations '' of the computer modelling used by oil companies to predict the long-term effects of spills at sea . 
The Guardian has obtained documents relating to the oil spill response plan of US company Chevron which , in October , was given consent to drill off Shetland . 
It showed that its modelling software could not simulate spills lasting more than 14 days without crashing . 
The Gulf of Mexico spill lasted almost three months . 
The energy and climate change committee held several hearings last year , with witnesses from the oil industry including BP 's former chief executive Tony Hayward environmentalists and politicians all giving evidence . 
Its report -LRB- UK Deepwater Drilling : Implications of the Gulf of Mexico Oil Spill -RRB- into what lessons could be learned from the BP disaster largely exonerates the UK 's industry and regulatory regime , which it said was much tougher than the one that oversaw the Gulf of Mexico . 
But it attacks the voluntary oil spill clean-up fund set up by the industry , which can pay out a maximum of $ 250m -LRB- # 161m -RRB- per year , as `` insufficient '' . 
It only covers `` direct damage '' the definition of which the report says is not clear . 
`` While membership of the Offshore Pollution Liability Association -LRB- Opol -RRB- remains voluntary ... -LRB- that -RRB- voluntary nature weakens its legality and the control and deployment of its funds . 
We believe this lack of legal control will allow polluters to claim that damages to biodiversity and ecosystems are indirect , and therefore do not qualify for compensation . '' 
The report adds : `` We conclude there needs to be clarity on the identity and hierarchy of liable parties to ensure that the government , and hence the taxpayer , do not have to pay for the consequences of offshore incidents . '' 
The report also says that EU legislation obliging companies to meet their responsibilities over a spill is vague and inconsistent and `` unlikely to bring to account those responsible for environmental damage caused by an offshore incident such as happened in the Gulf of Mexico '' . 
It adds that the government should work with the EU to draw up new legislation based on the `` polluter pays '' principle . 
It says that a moratorium on drilling in the UK , as some environmentalists have recommended , would be bad for the British economy . 
In December Barack Obama , the US president , angered the oil industry when he banned new drilling off the east coast and the eastern part of the Gulf of Mexico . 
However , the committee , which is chaired by Tim Yeo , the Conservative MP and former environment minister , said that the British regulator should consider requiring all blow-out preventers to have a double , rather than a single , set of blind shear rams , which are supposed to cut through the drill pipe to close off the well in the event of a blow-out . 
BP 's Deepwater Horizon only had one set of blind shear rams , which failed to activate , rendering the blow-out preventer the last line of defense against a major spill useless . 
Charles Hendry , the energy minister , said that the government would carry out another review of the British offshore safety regime once US investigations had been concluded . 
Trade body Oil and Gas UK said it was against a requirement for double shear rams and disagreed on the report 's claims on industry clean up funding . 
The report also urges the government and oil companies to stop the intimidation of rig workers into not reporting safety concerns . 
The Health and Safety Executive -LRB- HSE -RRB- accused Transocean , the American rig owner at the center of BP 's Gulf of Mexico oil spill , of compromising safety in the North Sea by `` bullying , harassment and intimidation '' of its staff . 
