A BP petrol station closed due to a Greenpeace protest , in Camden , London , 27 July 2010 . 
Photograph : Facundo Arrizabalaga\/EPA The report , to be released in full on Tuesday , is utterly damning . 
The safety failures of BP and its contractors Haliburton and Transocean were `` systemic '' , due to a `` failure of management '' and , without reform , a repeat accident `` may well occur '' . 
Worse , these are the best operators in the global industry and BP was led by Tony Hayward who , on his appointment as CEO in 2007 , said : `` I promise to focus like a laser on safe and reliable operations . '' 
That followed another fatal accident at a BP refinery in Texas City in 2005 , as well as a hushed-up blowout in Azerbaijan in 2008 . 
So the best operators , focusing laser-like on safety , caused the worst offshore oil spill in US history . 
You can see the problem . 
But how did we get here ? 
The world runs on oil , a point made most succinctly by George W Bush of all people , when he described the US 's '' addiction to oil . '' 
That addiction takes us to the ends of the Earth and the bottom of the ocean in search of the next fix . 
Drilling in deep oceans for oil and gas is one symptom , from Brazil 's massive pre-salt reserves to the west of Shetland . 
The filthy squeezing of the black gold from the tar sands of Canada is another , as is the global surge is fracking of oil shales , another dirty business . 
Surely the higher risks and impacts involved in strangling the dregs of oil and gas out of the Earth would make other , renewable , options preferable ? 
No , because the costs of the euphemistically dubbed `` unconventional '' sources of fossil fuel are not borne by those who produce or consume them . 
The only long-term answer is to wean ourselves off oil before the post-peak trouble really starts . 
It is not easy . 
It 's amazing stuff : energy-dense and easily transported . 
But alternatives exist , from electric vehicles to biofuels to fuels generated from sunlight . 
These need investment , but would we really rather spend billions on clean-up operations and lawyers ? 
