A customer fills his Aston Martin DB9 car at a petrol station , in south London , March 2 , 2011 . 
NEW YORK | Tue Aug 23 , 2011 4:08 pm EDT NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Oil rose on Tuesday along with equities on hopes that the Federal Reserve might indicate fresh stimulus measures later this week , with oil also drawing support from fighting in Libya and disrupted Nigerian exports . 
Major stocks indexes rose more than 2 percent as investors jumped into the market before a highly anticipated address by Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke later this week in Jackson Hole , Wyoming , where policymakers and academics meet once a year . 
Some investors expect Bernanke to signal more Fed quantitative easing measures ahead to stimulate a sluggish U.S. economy . 
`` This is a rally driven on hopes of Bernanke saying something about more stimulus , '' said Bill O'Grady of Confluence Investment Management in St. Louis . 
`` In Libya , rebels are in an urban warfare situation and Gaddafi has n't fallen , increasing the risk of oil disruptions and a lengthy period before production can resume . '' 
Brent October crude rose 95 cents to settle at $ 109.31 a barrel , having swung from $ 107.20 to $ 109.79 . 
U.S. October crude rose $ 1.02 to settle at $ 85.44 a barrel , having reached $ 86.39 . 
There were no initial reports of damage to major oil infrastructure after an earthquake struck the U.S. East Coast and shook buildings from Virginia to Boston . 
Colonial Pipeline shut its main refined products pipelines north of Greensboro , North Carolina , as a precaution due to the earthquake . 
In top African oil producer Nigeria , Royal Dutch Shell -LRB- RDSa . 
L -RRB- declared a force majeure on Tuesday for exports of Bonny Light crude through October , following a hacksaw attack on a pipeline . 
Trade sources said the entire Bonny Light program of around 200,000 barrels per day in exports has been withdrawn . 
Crude rose early on Tuesday , following manufacturing data from China and Germany that was less gloomy than some economists had expected . 
The data helped to boost the euro against the U.S. dollar , which slid about 0.3 percent against a basket of foreign currencies . 
A weaker dollar can boost oil prices by making crude cheaper for foreign currency holders . 
Weaker U.S. home sales data in July did nothing to curb a stock market rally , as some investors read the data as justification for more Fed stimulus . 
Rebels gained control over large portions of Libyan capital Tripoli , but some forces remaining loyal to the Muammar Gaddafi regime fought back in street battles . 
Rebels said they had gained control of a key Libyan oil export terminal , Ras Lanuf , and found it intact with no damage . 
But many analysts do not expect Libyan crude exports to restart quickly after being shut for months during a civil war . 
Brent 's premium to U.S. crude fell below $ 23 a barrel intraday , before expanding again to around $ 24 . 
The spread has narrowed after reaching a record high $ 26.69 on Friday . 
U.S. crude inventories are expected to have risen last week , according to a Reuters expanded survey of analysts on Tuesday . 
Crude stocks were expected to be up 800,000 barrels , with distillates up 700,000 and gasoline stockpiles down 900,000 barrels . 
U.S. retail gasoline demand fell again last week despite another drop in pump prices , MasterCard said a weekly report . 
Oil inventory data from industry group the American Petroleum Institute is due at 4:30 p.m. EDT on Tuesday . 
The government report from the Energy Information Administragion will follow on Wednesday . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
If only Michelle Bachmann were our President , we would n't have to worry about those darn speculators causing prices to rise . 
Does n't President Obama know how easy it is to lower gas prices ??? I just hope this time Bernanke will not give in ... This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
