Tue Aug 23 , 2011 4:05 pm EDT \* Limited Libyan oil production could start soon \* Condition of oil export terminals still unclear \* Clearing pipes clogged by waxy crude could delay output By David Sheppard and Sarah Young NEW YORK\/LONDON , Aug 23 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Limited Libyan oil production ought to resume quite quickly as most fields appear to have survived the civil war unscathed , international oil services companies say , but many are still waiting for more stability in the country before sending employees back in . 
In interviews with some of the biggest oil services players in pre-civil war Libya , most echoed the view that major oil fields had largely avoided serious damage during the six months of fighting , though some voiced concerns about damage to export terminals and pipelines . 
OPS International Chairman Gavin De Salis told Reuters Insider television that Libyan crude oil , prized for its high yield of valuable light products such as gasoline and for its low sulfur content , was quite waxy , which could clog up pipelines if they had been left unused for some time . 
`` There might be a little bit of effort unplugging pipelines , which is two to three months ' worth of effort before they can resume full production , '' De Salis said . 
`` But that will not affect all of the pipelines or all of the fields , so they can certainly start limited production quite quickly . '' 
Nilsson said contacts at Libya 's rebel oil firm Arabian Gulf Oil Company -LRB- AGOCO -RRB- informed him there had been little damage to the oilfields in the east of the country during the six-month power struggle . 
`` We have n't been able to work at the oilfields during the civil war as it has not been safe , but I think within a couple of weeks we could be back to almost normal , '' Nilsson said by telephone from his office in Stockholm . 
`` The oil income is essential to Libya and the new government so they will want to bring it back online as soon as possible . '' 
Nilsson said they had several Swedish , Indian and Sudanese employees who had stayed in the country during the civil war , but total staff numbers in the country were down from around 250-300 . 
He said he expected international employees to start returning to Libya in about a month 's time . 
DAMAGE Oil firm 's who supported the rebel government during the civil war are expected to win the lion 's share of contracts to help relaunch the Libyan oil industry , which before the war produced some 1.6 million barrels per day of crude . 
Those based in countries that were quick to back military action by NATO , including France , Britain and the United States , are thought to be particularly well positioned . 
PA -RRB- , the Paris-based oil services and engineering firm , said it did n't have any employees in Libya at the present time , but it expected to play a role in helping oil and gas companies quickly resume production . 
Oil major 's like Italy 's ENI -LRB- ENI . 
MI -RRB- , the largest producer in Libya before the outbreak of fighting , is positioning for an early return to Libya . 
Analysts said getting production back up to speed quickly could help its `` good will '' with any new government , after it was seen as slow to distance itself from Muammar Gaddafi at the start of the conflict . 
Samuel Ciszuk , Middle East and North Africa analyst at IHS Energy said oil fields in the south west of the country had largely escaped the fighting , and said production throughout Libya could rise to 250,000-350 ,000 barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- within three months . 
`` Planning for the post-war recovery seems to be in full swing with both international oil companies -LRB- IOCs -RRB- , as well as oil service companies , starting to prepare for swift deployment of key personnel to assist with production start-ups and repairs , '' Ciszuk said . 
`` In the south-west , where no fighting occurred and where the effects of looting and vandalism are thought to be low , production ... could start rising towards the pre-war 200,000 bpd level perhaps as soon as the pipeline to the coast is repaired and cleaned of potential residues . '' 
The oil port of Ras Lanuf saw some of the heaviest fighting in the war , but a rebel spokesman said there was no apparent damage to facilities after pro-Gaddafi forces retreated from the area on Tuesday . 
-LRB- ID : nLDE77M0VJ -RRB- NEW OPPORTUNITIES Oil services group Petrofac -LRB- PFC. L -RRB- , that was n't active in pre-civil war Libya , said it now saw more opportunities in the country . 
`` Whilst short term developments are difficult to predict , Libya has substantial oil and gas reserves and restoring production will be key to getting the Libyan economy going again , '' Petrofac 's chief financial officer Keith Roberts said . 
`` Over the medium to long term there are considerable opportunities in the country , and therefore we see the prospects for the services industry as very positive . 
The question is how long and difficult the transition will be , '' But some experienced players in Libya injected a note of caution as to how long it would be before there was enough stability in the country to resume work there , both in terms of violence and the resolution of existing contracts . 
`` I am sure that whatever government emerges will put a real priority on getting the oil industry into good shape but historically things have taken a long time in Libya , '' Allister Langlands , chief executive of oil services firm Wood Group said on Tuesday . 
`` It 's too early to say more than that . '' 
