WASHINGTON | Tue Aug 23 , 2011 1:09 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan rebels appeared to be in control of most of Tripoli , the Pentagon said on Tuesday , adding that it was sticking to its assessment that leader Muammar Gaddafi had not left the country . 
Calling the situation fluid , Pentagon spokesman Colonel Dave Lapan said that Gaddafi 's forces remained dangerous even though their command capabilities had been diminished by major rebel advances into the heart of the capital and NATO air strikes . 
The United States , which is providing Predator drones and other air capabilities to the NATO mission , sharply stepped up the tempo of its air strikes on Libya over the past week and a half , according to Pentagon data . 
`` It 's still very fluid , there 's still fighting going on , '' Lapan said . 
`` While we believe that opposition forces control a large part of the country , Libya and Tripoli in particular are still very dangerous places . '' 
Asked specifically about Tripoli , Lapan said the situation was too fluid to put a precise percentage on how much of the city was under rebel control . 
Rebel leaders say 80 percent of the Libyan capital is now controlled by forces opposed to Gaddafi . 
`` Majority -LRB- control of Tripoli -RRB- is safe but I would n't get beyond that , '' he said . 
The United States was monitoring Libya 's chemical weapons sites , Lapan said , amid concern in Congress that those and other Libyan weapons could fall into the wrong hands . 
Lapan said he was aware of a total of two Scud missile launches by Gaddafi forces . 
A U.S. official told Reuters that neither caused any injuries or deaths . 
`` Regime forces are going to use whatever means they have to continue to inflict damage on their opponents and on the civilian population , '' he said . 
The Pentagon said on Monday that it believed Gaddafi had not left the country , a position Lapan reaffirmed on Tuesday , saying : `` Nothing 's changed . '' 
Still , he did not offer any more precise assessment about Gaddafi 's potential whereabouts . 
Gaddafi 's son and presumed heir Saif al-Islam told a crowd that his father was well and still in Tripoli , confounding reports of his capture . 
Asked whether the Pentagon was surprised by the emergence of Gaddafi 's son , whom the rebels had initially said was in their hands , Lapan said : `` We 've seen conflicting reports . 
Again it goes back to a very fluid situation ... We continue to see conflicting reports about the whereabouts certain individuals . '' 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
So who do you trust in that tide of opposing humanity . 
Be smart America stay out of their coming civil war quagmire . 
But our politicians in Washington are so dam stupid , they will probably not stay out . 
And will squander $ billions of our tax dollars on worthless projects in Libya . 
first of all Libya has a very good quality oil ... it is sweet as candy ... you do not need so much processing ... american companies should be in this business ... somebody is carried away so much with tax dollar story ... we can not isolate ourselves from our long term interests ... GalacticCat if you want to save tax dollars give back your social security payments ... uneducated rednecks ... This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
