LONDON | Tue Aug 23 , 2011 10:51 am EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The fortified Tripoli compound attacked by Libyan rebels Tuesday is the seat of Muammar Gaddafi 's political power and the principal base of loyalist fighters trying to rescue his 42-year-old rule . 
Analysts say Gaddafi loyalist fighters confronted with an influx of rebels since the weekend have sought to use his Bab al-Azizyah bastion as a springboard from which to carve out a loyalist zone and chip away at rebel control of adjoining neighborhoods . 
The encampment is believed to sit atop a network of tunnels and bunkers that lead to adjoining districts , including possibly a subterranean route to the coast . 
But the tunnel networks are not the loyalist militiamen 's only card : Gaddafi 's fighters have an intimate knowledge of the city and many are believed to have a greater degree of military training than their opposition guerrilla opponents . 
`` This is Gaddafi 's Pentagon , '' said Noman Benotman , a senior analyst at the British think tank Quilliam and a former Libyan Islamist opposition guerrilla commander . 
He said tunnels forking out from the complex to nearby districts gave his fighters precious access to supplies . 
`` Based in Bab al-Azizyah , Gaddafi 's force want to create chaos inside Tripoli and carve it up into rival militia zones , just like Beirut in the Lebanese civil war , '' said Benotman , who is also an associate of former Libyan spy chief Moussa Koussa `` By sending a message that ` there will be no peace without us ' his aim is to force his inclusion in talks on a political negotiation . '' 
Long the seat of Gaddafi 's power as well as his main Tripoli home , the barracks may well be the final battleground of Libya 's war . 
Even if Gaddafi is not there , its loss would inflict a potentially crippling symbolic defeat . 
If Gaddafi is at the six sq-km -LRB- 2.3 sq mi -RRB- base , located south of Tripoli at the northern end of the Airport Highway , there is a fair chance he is in a tunnel under it rather than in a fortified room above ground . 
The compound has often been targeted by NATO air strikes , but it is still defended by tanks and snipers , a fact that suggests Gaddafi or at least some key aides are nearby . 
Al Arabiya news channel said rebel forces had attacked the gates of the compound Tuesday as NATO warplanes flew low overhead . 
Sky Television said smoke could be seen billowing from the compound following a NATO attack . 
COMPOUND WALLS CAN BE BREACHED `` FROM THE AIR '' The site is normally dotted with tents , residential buildings , security encampments , and the cratered remains of a house bombed by U.S. warplanes in 1986 and kept in ruins as a memorial . 
A communications center , attacked months ago by NATO , sits on an adjoining plot . 
Umar al-Hariri , a military official of the rebel Libyan National Transitional Council , told Al-Sharq al-Awsat newspaper in June that the barracks were linked to underground tunnels up to 30 km -LRB- 20 miles -RRB- long , some of which led to the sea . 
Hariri said that for rebel fighters attacking the compound it was just as important for NATO to breach the meter-thick , olive-green walls as to access the tunnels underneath . 
`` I met NATO at one time and told them that the most important thing they should strike are the walls of Bab al-Aziziyah because their thickness is one meter and they can not be penetrated by a tank or gun . 
There must be a penetration from the air , '' he was quoted as saying . 
He put the height of the walls at four meters . 
Built in the era of King Idris , overthrown by Gaddafi in the 1969 putsch that brought him to power , the site was reinforced in the 1980s using an array of foreign contractors . 
Analysts say Western intelligence services will have long ago sought to question any foreign companies that helped build tunnels under the site , to learn how to attack the compound . 
From a rebel and Western perspective , that information is growing more valuable by the hour . 
Jon Marks , chairman of Britain 's Cross Border Information risk consultancy and information service , said he suspected Western governments will have asked foreign companies that helped Gaddafi build his Great Man Made River project for any information about the tunnels under Tripoli , on the assumption some may have helped build them . 
The Man Made River project sends water from wells in the Sahara desert to coastal communities along a 4,000 km -LRB- 300 miles -RRB- - long network of pipelines . 
`` The governments will be asking the companies for a debrief , '' he said , adding the Tripoli tunnels `` may have been done as a side order from the Man Made River work . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
