CARACAS | Tue Aug 23 , 2011 5:10 pm EDT CARACAS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez said on Tuesday he will only recognize a Libyan government led by his friend and ally Muammar Gaddafi and accused the United States of inciting the country 's civil war . 
Chavez , who has been the most vocal world leader to support Gaddafi , accused Western powers of riding roughshod over international law by backing Libya 's rebels in their revolt . 
`` This is kicking , spitting ... on the most basic elements of international law , '' he said . 
`` Where are the international rights ? 
This is like the caveman era . '' 
Venezuela 's socialist leader spoke after rebels overran Gaddafi 's compound in Tripoli in what appeared to be the end of his 42-year rule . 
During six months of civil war more than 30 countries , including the United States and major European Union countries , have moved to recognize the rebel National Transitional Council as the governing authority in Libya . 
`` Now -LRB- U.S. President Barack -RRB- Obama said he will collaborate economically with the new government , which of course we do not recognize , '' Chavez said . 
`` We only recognize one government , the one led by Muammar Gaddafi , '' he said to applause as he presided over a cabinet meeting broadcast live on state TV . 
The 57-year-old former soldier has repeatedly accused Western powers of fuelling the conflict to steal Libya 's oil and on Tuesday said they were waging a `` dogs ' war . '' 
`` It 's harsh but true ... They arranged this war , '' Chavez said , referring to the United States . 
`` They provided the arms , the mercenaries . 
They better not attempt to apply the Libyan formula to Venezuela or we 'll have to show them our power . '' 
Both Chavez and Gaddafi are military men who cast themselves as anti-imperialist revolutionaries and forged a friendship during half a dozen encounters in the past decade . 
They have enjoyed a long-standing alliance based on left-wing economic ideas , antagonistic relations with the United States , and their countries ' membership in OPEC . 
Chavez studied Gaddafi 's `` Green Book '' outlining his political philosophy while in the army , and both men have given each other numerous gifts and awards . 
Back in March , the Venezuelan leader proposed a vague peace plan for Libya that received little support from either side . 
Some media reports have suggested Gaddafi , whose whereabouts remain unknown , could seek asylum in Venezuela but Chavez made no reference to that . 
-LRB- Editing by Daniel Wallis and Bill Trott -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
