Wednesday , August 4 , 2010 ; 3:54 PM A procedure to pump heavy mud into the blown-out BP oil well in the Gulf of Mexico has succeeded in plugging it , officials said Wednesday , and government scientists reported that most of the crude that gushed from it for three months has dissipated or been removed from the water . 
President Obama cautioned that much recovery work remains , and other officials warned that the threat from the damaged Macondo well will not be eliminated until it is `` killed '' later this month with a relief well . 
Moreover , federal officials said , the long-term effects of the oil spill , the worst in the nation 's history , remain to be determined . 
But in view of a series of early setbacks in efforts to control the blown-out well , BP 's announcement early Wednesday that it had reached a `` static condition '' came as a huge relief . 
The term meant that pressure inside the well was brought under control through a mud-pumping process that began Tuesday afternoon . 
BP called the achievement `` a significant milestone '' and said it stopped pumping mud into the Macondo well after about eight hours because the effort had been successful . 
`` The well is now being monitored , per the agreed procedure , to ensure it remains static , '' the company said in a statement . 
`` Further pumping of mud may or may not be required depending on results observed during monitoring . '' 
In a speech in Washington , Obama called the development welcome news . 
He also pointed to the report released Wednesday by government scientists who found that an estimated 74 percent of the oil has been recovered , burned , dispersed , evaporated , consumed by microbes or otherwise removed from the gulf . 
`` The long battle to stop the leak and contain the oil is finally close to coming to an end , and we are very pleased with that , '' Obama said at a meeting of the AFL-CIO Executive Council . 
Obama added : `` Our recovery efforts , though , will continue . 
We have to reverse the damage that 's been done . 
We will continue to work to hold polluters accountable for the destruction they 've caused . 
We 've got to make sure that folks who were harmed are reimbursed , and we 're going to stand by the people of the region for however long it takes until they 're back on their feet . '' 
As they huddled in BP 's operations center , federal officials tried to manage expectations , saying that even if the operation known as `` static kill '' went as hoped , the well at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico would not be finally plugged until it was intercepted and cemented by a relief well that crews have been drilling for three months . 
The federal official in charge of the oil spill response , retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad W. Allen , told a New Orleans television station Wednesday that pumping mud into the blown-out well took care of the immediate threat but that the `` bottom kill '' technique involving the 18,000-foot relief well would still go ahead . 
`` We 've pretty much made this well not a threat , but we need to finish this from the bottom , '' Allen told WWL-TV . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
