BP 's fight against energy nonprofit highlights murky world of advocacy-for-hire Days after the Deepwater Horizon oil rig sank in the Gulf of Mexico , a conservative nonprofit group called the Institute for Energy Research asked BP to contribute $ 100,000 for a media campaign it was launching in defense of the oil industry . 
Although BP took a pass , the group 's advocacy arm went ahead with a campaign -- only instead of defending BP , it vilified the company as a `` safety outlier '' in an otherwise safe industry . 
The campaign 's Web site features dozens of images of the burning rig , oil-smeared birds and other environmental devastation from the spill . 
`` BP is a victim of its own carelessness , '' the group 's president , Thomas Pyle , wrote as part of the campaign 's kickoff in early July . 
`` The rest of us should not be . '' 
To backers of BP who were familiar with the discussions and spoke on the condition of anonymity , it seemed an awful lot like a shakedown . 
The initial proposal contained no criticism of the British oil giant or its handling of the spill . 
A BP spokesman declined to comment . 
But Pyle , previously an oil-industry lobbyist and an aide to former congressman and Texas Republican Tom DeLay , said the anti-BP message was part of a separate campaign and was not intended as retaliation . 
`` A lot of people were trying to lump the industry together as one cohesive unit , '' Pyle said in an interview . 
`` Our point was to not judge the whole industry by one incident and one actor . '' 
The case illustrates the murky world of advocacy-for-hire in Washington , where ideological groups wage stealth messaging campaigns with little disclosure of their funding or possible motives . 
Such arrangements rarely come to light since most advocacy groups are organized as nonprofits that do not have to disclose details about their donors . 
In another case last year , the head of the American Conservative Union , a prominent Washington advocacy group , came under fire for siding with UPS in a labor battle after rival FedEx declined a request to fund the group . 
The BP dispute also underscores the tensions that have flared between factions of the oil and gas industry , as Congress has debated whether to enact new drilling restrictions . 
The anti-BP effort , for example , is supported by the Shallow Water Energy Security Coalition , which has sought to emphasize the risks of the deepwater wells that are a major part of BP 's business . 
The campaign operates under the name `` Save U.S. Energy Jobs , '' which is described as a project of the American Energy Alliance , the advocacy arm of IER . 
The group is flying in about 50 oil-industry employees to Washington for a Wednesday rally to be headlined by Sen. John Cornyn -LRB- R-Tex . -RRB- 
, chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee . 
A copy of the initial campaign pitch , which was obtained by The Washington Post , laid out plans for a $ 570,000 `` energy rapid response team '' to counter criticism from `` anti-energy groups '' attempting to `` politicize the Gulf Spill . '' 
The two-page outline proposed a `` campaign-style war room '' to `` monitor and challenge any anti-energy rhetoric in the blogosphere , in newspapers and on television . '' 
There 's no mention of BP and its safety record . 
