13 February 12 09:54 GMT The situation in Syria has never looked bleaker nor closer to civil war . 
Almost a year after the uprising against President Bashar al-Assad 's government began , Syrian security forces have stepped up military operations to crush the opposition movement in key cities and towns . 
In Homs , the center of the revolution , the security forces are now using heavy weapons including artillery , rockets and mortars to bombard residential areas . 
The result : in less than a fortnight , more than 400 people have been killed , including women and many children , according to opposition activists . 
The BBC 'S Paul Wood , who witnessed the onslaught at first hand , has returned with stories of extraordinary brutality . 
He was shown a video taken from the phone of a member of the feared government paramilitary force , the Shabiha . 
In the video , prisoners are systematically beheaded as they lie on the ground with their hands tied behind their backs . 
In response , rebel fighters say if they catch members of the Shabiha , they kill them . 
Meanwhile , the hand-wringing continues within the international community . 
The latest Arab League proposal for a joint UN-Arab peacekeeping mission for Syria is more a mark of desperation about what to do than an idea that could be implemented in the current circumstances . 
Already foreign military intervention has been ruled out partly because of concerns about the impact on the wider region , while diplomatic action in the UN Security Council is being blocked by Russia and China . 
And although officials say the situation in Syria is a `` human tragedy on a large scale '' , the idea of setting up humanitarian corridors and no-fly zones has been described by one Western diplomat as `` not realistic '' because they would need to be protected . 
There is also reluctance among Western countries to start arming and training the Syrian rebels because it might tip Syria into a full-blown civil war . 
But where Western countries now fear to tread , others seem to be stepping in . 
The BBC has been told by a well-placed source who did not wish to be named that traditional smuggling routes through Iraq have been used since last autumn to ferry money to rebel fighters inside Syria . 
It is alleged the money is coming from Saudi Arabia , after members of the Shammar tribe in eastern Syria who have joined the uprising against President Assad appealed for help from their fellow tribesmen in Saudi Arabia . 
The smuggling routes pass through the Iraqi provinces of al-Anbar and Nineveh , where the long desert border with Syria is easy to cross . 
In a recent interview with the AFP news agency , Iraq 's deputy interior minister Adnan al-Assadi confirmed these routes were also being used for smuggling weapons and Iraqi militants who want to fight alongside the Syrian rebels . 
`` The weapons are transported from Baghdad to Nineveh , '' he said . 
`` And the prices of weapons in Mosul -LRB- the province 's capital -RRB- are higher now because they are being sent to the opposition in Syria . '' 
The movement of militants from Iraq into Syria could increase following the release of a video on Saturday by al-Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri , in which he called on Muslims across the region to support the Syrian uprising . 
The Syrian rebels , who are believed to include several distinct groupings , including ordinary people protecting their communities , army defectors and militant Islamists , are also reported to have been buying weapons from Lebanon . 
This is more difficult than the Iraqi route , but sources say an Islamist group based in northern Lebanon may itself be funnelling some supplies and fighters into Syria . 
But in reality , the current supply routes through Iraq and Lebanon are extremely unlikely to make much difference on the ground where the rebels face a well-equipped army of more than 200,000 soldiers . 
What is not clear at the moment is whether key members of the Arab League will now consider providing weapons and training for the Syrian opposition , having pledged at their meeting in Cairo on Sunday to provide `` all forms of political and material support '' to the opposition . 
