This summary of investigations and legislative action prompted by the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico omitted one bill . 
A measure approved by the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee would remove oil companies ' $ 75 million liability limit and retroactively remove the liability cap for BP and the Deepwater Horizon explosion . 
The summary also misidentified the CLEAR Act that is related to the spill : The legislation in question is the Consolidated Land , Energy and Aquatic Resources Act , not the Carbon Limits and Energy for America 's Renewal Act , which is an unrelated measure . 
The text below has been modified to reflect these changes . 
Digging deep after the oil spill Update July 13 at 2:50 p.m. . 
The April 20 explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig and the massive oil spill that has stemmed from the accident have prompted 10 formal investigations , and more could be coming . 
Who 's in charge : Seven-member team co-chaired by former Florida governor and former U.S. senator Bob Graham , and former Environmental Protection Agency administrator William K. Reilly . 
Focus : Commission is tasked with providing recommendations on how to prevent -- and mitigate the impact of -- any future spills that result from offshore drilling . 
Status : Initial hearings being held July 12 and July 13 . 
Who 's in charge : Coast Guard and Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement -LRB- formerly known as the Minerals Management Service -RRB- . 
Focus : To identify the factors leading to the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
Status of investigation : Two sessions of hearings in May . 
A third session is scheduled for later this month . 
First session investigated the circumstances surrounding the fire , explosion , pollution and sinking of the rig . 
Second session focused on gathering information on the rig 's materiel condition , crew qualifications , emergency preparedness and casualty timeline . 
The third session of hearings will focus on the `` how '' and the `` why . '' 
Highlights : Documents and testimony showed that work on the well was behind schedule and over budget , that the well plan was changed several times shortly before the accident , and that BP decided not to perform a test on the mud at the bottom of the well before starting to place the final cement lining , which experts think was a likely source of the gas that eventually blew out the well . 
House Energy and Commerce Committee . 
