For environmentalists , the BP oil spill may be disproving the maxim that great tragedies produce great change . 
Traditionally , American environmentalism wins its biggest victories after some important piece of American environment is poisoned , exterminated or set on fire . 
An oil spill and a burning river in 1969 led to new anti-pollution laws in the 1970s . 
The Exxon Valdez disaster helped create an Earth Day revival in 1990 and sparked a landmark clean-air law . 
But this year , the worst oil spill in U.S. history -- and , before that , the worst coal-mining disaster in 40 years -- have n't put the same kind of drive into the debate over climate change and fossil-fuel energy . 
The Senate is still gridlocked . 
Opinion polls have n't budged much . 
Gasoline demand is going up , not down . 
Environmentalists say they 're trying to turn public outrage over oil-smeared pelicans into action against more abstract things , such as oil dependence and climate change . 
But historians say they 're facing a political moment deadened by a bad economy , suspicious politics and lingering doubts after a scandal over climate scientists ' e-mails . 
The difference between now and the awakenings that followed past disasters is as stark as `` on versus off , '' said Anthony Leiserowitz , a researcher at Yale University who tracks public opinion on climate change . 
`` People 's outrage is focused on BP , '' Leiserowitz said . 
The spill `` has n't been automatically connected to some sense that there 's something more fundamental wrong with our relationship with the natural world , '' he said . 
The story of 2010 is not that nothing happened after the BP spill , or after the coal-mine explosion that killed 29 in West Virginia on April 5 . 
It 's that much of the reaction has focused on preventing accidents -- on tighter scrutiny of rigs and mines -- rather than broader changes in the use of oil and coal . 
On Capitol Hill , Sen. Jeff Merkley -LRB- D-Ore . -RRB- 
recently proposed a plan to cut oil use by shifting to electric vehicles , building better mass-transit systems and switching to biofuels . 
But the Senate 's most important environmental debate , the one over climate legislation , remains stalled . 
Last year , the House of Representatives passed legislation that would create a `` cap and trade '' system for reducing greenhouse-gas emissions . 
That bill probably wo n't fly in the Senate -- too much concern over rising energy costs -- and a compromise is still being worked out . 
`` It 's the short-term concerns overriding the longer-term benefits '' of curbing greenhouse-gas emissions , said Ralph Izzo , chief executive of the Public Service Enterprise Group , a large New Jersey-based utility that supports putting a price on carbon emissions . 
Meanwhile , for the environmental groups trying to break this logjam , it 's hard to imagine a more useful disaster . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
