In a complicated subsea dance involving robots and hardware , BP made progress Sunday in its effort to install a new , secure cap on the gushing oil well at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico , but the company says that it is early in the week-long project and that the oil is spewing as skimmers try to capture the newly vigorous flow of crude . 
BP engineers are hopeful that by week 's end they will have placed a perfect seal over the well , which began bleeding oil into the gulf April 20 after an explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig , in which 11 workers died . 
`` We did an extensive amount of preparation work in terms of planning and installation , and we 're pleased at this point on how it 's going , '' said Kent Wells , a BP senior vice president , referring to the removal early Sunday morning of the top flange on the leaking well and the installation of a device that will eventually connect the new cap to the well . 
Wells said the maneuvers , which are being conducted in large part by robotic submarines a mile under the water 's surface , are going smoothly partly because of a window of good weather and calm seas . 
Separately , the Sunday Times of London reported that BP is in talks to sell about $ 10 billion in assets , including a share of its Alaska oil production , to Apache , a large U.S. independent oil company . 
A sale that size would cover about half the amount of money BP has promised to put in an escrow fund to cover claims related to the spill . 
BP owns 26 percent of the Prudhoe Bay field , the biggest in the United States , and five other fields on Alaska 's North Slope . 
But the field is past its prime . 
More than half the oil has been produced from the Prudhoe Bay field ; production , a fraction of its peak , is dropping about 10 percent a year , BP has said . 
On Saturday , robots removed the cap that had been placed on top of the leak in early June to collect the oil and send it to surface ships for collection or burning . 
That move allows the well to spew oil in an uncontrolled manner until the new cap is installed . 
BP said a containment ship , the Helix Producer , steamed into place over the well and was expected to begin collecting oil Sunday night or early Monday . 
Federal officials say the well is releasing as much as 2.5 million gallons of oil a day . 
The old cap collected about 1 million gallons , according to the government . 
BP officials say that once the new cap and a new containment vessel are in place , the system will be capable of capturing 2.5 million to 3.4 million gallons daily . 
Still , it would be a temporary fix ; BP hopes to plug the leak permanently by mid-August . 
Meanwhile , the Justice Department has started interviewing witnesses as part of the criminal and civil probe of the spill . '' 
