Full text : Iraq legal advice -LRB- part two -RRB- The full text of the advice about the legality of war with Iraq given by the attorney general , Lord Goldsmith , to the prime minister , Tony Blair , on March 7 2003 . 
Read the first part of the advice Thursday 28 April 2005 18.46 BST 20 . 
It has also been suggested that the final words of OP4 were chosen carefully to avoid the implication that it was for the Security Council to assess whether Iraqi conduct constituted a further material breach . 
The French proposed to amend OP4 so that Iraqi conduct would only amount to a further material breach `` when assessed '' as such by the Council , but this amendment was not accepted . 
I am not wholly convinced by this argument : if , for the reasons discussed in paragraph 17 above , OP4 requires an assessment of Iraq 's conduct by the Council , the alternative language makes little difference . 
However , I do accept that the negotiating history indicates that the words at the end of OP4 `` and shall be reported to the Council for assessment in accordance with paragraphs 11 and 12 '' were added at a late stage , but in substitution for other language which would clearly have had the effect of making any finding of further material breach subject to a further Council decision . 
Whether a report comes to the Council under OP4 or OP11 , the critical issue is what action the Council is required to take at that point . 
In other words , what does OP12 require . 
It is clear that the language of OP12 was a compromise by the US from their starting position that the Council should authorise in advance the use of all necessary means to enforce the ceasefire resolution in the event of continued violations by Iraq . 
It is equally clear , however , that the language does not expressly provide that a further Council decision is necessary to authorise the use of force . 
The paragraph indicates that in the event of a report of a further material breach -LRB- whether under OP4 or OP11 -RRB- there will be a meeting of the Council to consider the situation and the need for compliance in order to secure international peace and security . 
The Council thus has the opportunity to take a further decision expressly authorising the use of force or , conceivably , to decide that other enforcement means should be used . 
But the Council might fail to act . 
The resolution does not state what is to happen in those circumstances . 
The clear US view is that , whatever the reason for the Council 's failure to act , the determination of material breach in OPs 1 and 4 would remain valid , thus authorising the use of force without a further decision . 
My view is that different considerations apply in different circumstances . 
The OP12 discussion might make clear that the Council 's view is that military action is appropriate but that no further decision is required because of the terms of resolution 1441 . 
In such a case , there would be good grounds for relying on the existing resolution as the legal basis for any subsequent military action . 
The more difficult scenario is if the views of Council members are divided and a further resolution is not adopted either because it fails to attract 9 votes or because it is vetoed . 
The principal argument in favor of the view that no further decision is required to authorise force in these circumstances is that the language of OP12 -LRB- ie `` consider '' -RRB- was chosen deliberately to indicate the need for a further discussion , but not a decision . 
As I have indicated , it is contended that this interpretation is supported by the negotiating history . 
The French and Russians both made proposals to amend OP12 to include an express requirement for a further decision , but these proposals were not accepted . 
The US Administration insist that they made clear throughout that they would not accept a text which subjected the use of force to a further Council decision . 
The French -LRB- and others -RRB- therefore knew what they were voting for . 
The US are confident that in accepting OPs 4 and 12 , they were conceding a Council discussion and no more . 
The US , of course , approached the negotiation of resolution 1441 from a different starting point because , as I explained in paragraph 9 above , they have always taken the view that `` material breach '' is a matter of objective fact and does not require a Security Council determination . 
-LRB- By contrast , the UK position taken on the advice of successive Law Officers , has been that it is for the Security Council to determine the existence of a material breach of the ceasefire . -RRB- 
Therefore , while the US objective was to ensure that the resolution did not constrain the right of action which they believed they already had , our objective was to secure a sufficient authorisation from the Council in the absence of which we would have had no right to act . 
I have considered whether this difference in the underlying legal view means that the effect of the resolution might be different for the US than for the UK , but I have concluded that it does not affect the position . 
If OP12 of the resolution , properly interpreted , were to mean that a further Council decision was required before force was authorised , this would constrain the US just as much as the UK . 
It was therefore an essential negotiating point for the US that the resolution should not concede the need for a second resolution . 
They are convinced that they succeeded . 
I was impressed by the strength and sincerity of the views of the US Administration which I heard in Washington on this point . 
However , the difficulty is that we are reliant on their assertions for the view that the French -LRB- and others -RRB- knew and accepted that they were voting for a further discussion and no more . 
We have very little hard evidence of this beyond a couple of telegrams recording admissions by French negotiators that they knew the US would not accept a resolution which required a further Council decision . 
The possibility remains that the French and others accepted OP12 because in their view it gave them a sufficient basis on which to argue that a second resolution was required -LRB- even if that was not made expressly clear -RRB- . 
A further difficulty is that , if the matter ever came before a court , it is very uncertain to what extent the court would accept evidence of the negotiating history to support a particular interpretation of the resolution , given that most of the negotiations were conducted in private and there are no agreed or official records . 
The counter view of OP12 is that this paragraph must imply a decision by the Council . 
Three particular arguments support that approach : -LRB- i -RRB- when taken with the word `` assessment '' in OP4 , the language of OP12 indicates that the Council will be assessing the seriousness of any Iraqi breach ; this is especially powerful if in truth some assessment is necessary ; -LRB- ii -RRB- there is a special significance in the words `` in order to secure international peace and security '' . 
They reflect not only the special responsibility of the Security Council under Article 39 of the UN Charter -LRB- `` The Security Council shall determine the existence of any threat to the peace , breach of the peace , or acts of aggression and shall make recommendations , or decide what measures shall be taken ... to maintain or restore international peace and security '' -RRB- , but also pick up the language of both resolution 678 -LRB- which authorised the use of force `` to restore international peace and security in the area '' -RRB- and resolution 687 -LRB- which referred to the objective of `` restoring international peace and security in the area as set out in its recent resolutions '' -RRB- . 
The clear inference , it will be argued , is that this shows the Council was to exercise a deliberative role on that issue , ie to determine what it is necessary to secure international peace and security ; -LRB- iii -RRB- any other construction reduces the role of the Council discussion under OP12 to a procedural formality . 
Others have jibbed at this categorisation , but I remain of the opinion that this would be the effect in legal terms of the view that no further resolution is required . 
The Council would be required to meet , and all members of the Council would be under an obligation to participate in the discussion in good faith , but even if an overwhelming majority of the Council were opposed to the use of force , military action could proceed regardless . 
Where the meaning of a resolution is unclear from the text , the statements made by members of the Council at the time of its adoption may be taken into account in order to ascertain the Council 's intentions . 
The statements made during the debate on 8 November 2002 are not , however , conclusive . 
The US and UK stated that further breaches would be reported to the Council `` for discussion '' . 
Jeremy Greenstock then added that we would then expect the Council to `` meet its responsibilities '' , although -LRB- implicitly -RRB- we would be prepared to act without Council backing to ensure that the task of disarmament is completed . 
Only the US explicitly stated that it believed that the resolution did not constrain the use of force by States `` to enforce relevant United Nations resolutions and protect world peace and security '' regardless of whether there was a further Council decision . 
Conversely , two other Council members , Mexico and Ireland , made clear that in their view a further decision of the Council was required before the use of force would be authorised . 
Syria also stated that `` the resolution should not be interpreted , through certain paragraphs , as authorising any State to use force '' . 
Most other Council members were less clear in their comments . 
The joint statement of France , Russia and China is somewhat opaque , but seems to imply that a further decision is required . 
Many delegations welcomed the fact that there was `` no automaticity '' in the resolution with regard to the use of force . 
But it is not clear what they meant by this . 
It could indicate that they did not consider that the resolution authorised the use of force in any circumstances by means of the revival argument . 
On the other hand there is some evidence from the negotiating history that their main concern was that the resolution should not authorise force immediately following its adoption -LRB- last four words underlined -RRB- on the basis of `` material breach '' in OP1 plus `` serious consequences '' in OP13 . 
The UK and US indicated that `` no automaticity '' meant that there would be a Council discussion before force was used . 
To sum up , the language of resolution 1441 leaves the position unclear and the statements made on adoption of the resolution suggest that there were differences of view within the Council as to the legal effect of the resolution . 
Arguments can be made on both sides . 
A key question is whether there is in truth a need for an assessment of whether Iraq 's conduct constitutes a failure to take the final opportunity or has constituted a failure fully to cooperate within the meaning of OP4 such that the basis of the ceasefire is destroyed . 
If an assessment is needed of that sort , it would be for the Council to make it . 
A narrow textual reading of the resolution suggests that sort of assessment is not needed , because the Council has pre-determined the issue . 
Public statements , on the other hand , say otherwise . 
In these circumstances , I remain of the opinion that the safest legal course would be to secure the adoption of a further resolution to authorise the use of force . 
I have already advised that I do not believe that such a resolution need be explicit in its terms . 
The key point is that it should establish that the Council has conduced that Iraq has failed to take the final opportunity offered by resolution 1441 , as in the draft which has already been tabled . 
Nevertheless , having regard to the information on the negotiating history which I have been given and to the arguments of the US Administration which I heard in Washington , I accept that a reasonable case can be made that resolution 1441 is capable in principle of reviving the authorisation in 678 without a further resolution . 
However , the argument that resolution 1441 alone has revived the authorisation to use force in resolution 678 will only be sustainable if there are strong factual grounds for concluding that Iraq has failed to take the final opportunity . 
In other words , we would need to be able to demonstrate hard evidence of non-compliance and non-cooperation . 
Given the structure of the resolution as a whole , the views of UNMOVIC and the IAEA will be highly significant in this respect . 
In the light of the latest reporting by UNMOVIC , you will need to consider extremely carefully whether the evidence of non-cooperation and non-compliance by Iraq is sufficiently compelling to justify the conclusion that Iraq has failed to take its final opportunity . 
In reaching my conclusions , I have taken account of the fact that on a number of previous occasions , including in relation to Operation Desert Fox in December 1998 and Kosovo in 1999 , UK forces have participated in military action on the basis of advice from my predecessors that the legality of the action under international law was no more than reasonably arguable . 
But a `` reasonable case '' does not mean that if the matter ever came before a court I would be confident that the court would agree with this view . 
I judge that , having regard to the arguments on both sides , and considering the resolution as a whole in the light of the statements made on adoption and subsequently , a court might well conclude that OPs 4 and 12 do require a further Council decision in order to revive the authorisation in resolution 678 . 
But equally I consider that the counter view can be reasonably maintained . 
However , it must be recognized that on previous occasions when military action was taken on the basis of a reasonably arguable case , the degree of public and Parliamentary scrutiny of the legal issue was nothing like as great as it is today . 
The analysis set out above applies whether a second resolution fails to be adopted because of a lack of votes or because it is vetoed . 
As I have said before , I do not believe that there is any basis in law for arguing that there is an implied condition of reasonableness which can be read into the power of veto conferred on the permanent members of the Security Council by the UN Charter . 
So there are no grounds for arguing that an `` unreasonable veto '' would entitle us to proceed on the basis of a presumed Security Council authorisation . 
In any event , if the majority of world opinion remains opposed to military action , it is likely to be difficult on the facts to categorise a French veto as `` unreasonable '' . 
The legal analysis may , however , be affected by the course of events over the next week or so , e.g. the discussions on the draft second resolution . 
If we fail to achieve the adoption of a second resolution , we would need to consider urgently at that stage the strength of our legal case in the light of circumstances at that time . 
Possible consequences of acting without a second resolution 32 . 
In assessing the risks of acting on the basis of a reasonably arguable case , you will wish to take account of the ways in which the matter might be brought before a court . 
There are a number of possibilities . 
First , the General Assembly could request an advisory opinion on the legality of the military action from the International Court of Justice -LRB- ICJ -RRB- . 
A request for such an opinion could be made at the request of a simple majority of the States within the GA , so the UK and US could not block such action . 
Second , given that the United Kingdom has accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the ICJ , it is possible that another State which has also accepted the Court 's jurisdiction might seek to bring a case against us . 
This , however , seems a less likely option since Iraq itself could not bring a case and it is not easy to see on what basis any other State could establish that it had a dispute with the UK . 
But we can not absolutely rule out that some State strongly opposed to military action might try to bring such a case . 
If it did , an application for interim measures to stop the campaign could be brought quite quickly -LRB- as it was in the case of Kosovo -RRB- . 
The International Criminal Court at present has no jurisdiction over the crime of aggression and could therefore not entertain a case concerning the lawfulness of any military action . 
The ICC will however have jurisdiction to examine whether any military campaign has been conducted in accordance with international humanitarian law . 
Given the controversy surrounding the legal basis for action , it is likely that the Court will scrutinise any allegations of war crimes by UK forces very closely . 
The Government has already been put on notice by CND that they intend to report to the ICC Prosecutor any incidents which their lawyers assess to have contravened the Geneva Conventions . 
The ICC would only be able to exercise jurisdiction over UK personnel if it considered that the UK prosecuting authorities were unable or unwilling to investigate and , if appropriate , prosecute the suspects themselves . 
It is also possible that CND may try to bring further action to stop military action in the domestic courts , but I am confident that the courts would decline jurisdiction as they did in the case brought by CND last November . 
Two further , though probably more remote possibilities , are an attempted prosecution for murder on the grounds that the military action is unlawful and an attempted prosecution for the crime of aggression . 
Aggression is a crime under customary international law which automatically forms part of domestic law . 
It might therefore be argued that international aggression is a crime recognized by the common law which can be prosecuted in the UK courts . 
In short , there are a number of ways in which the opponents of military action might seek to bring a legal case , internationally or domestically , against the UK , members of the Government or UK military personnel . 
Some of these seem fairly remote possibilities , but given the strength of opposition to military action against Iraq , it would not be surprising if some attempts were made to get a case of some sort off the ground . 
We can not be certain that they would not succeed . 
The GA route may be the most likely , but you are in a better position than me to judge whether there are likely to be enough States in the GA who would be willing to vote for such a course of action in present circumstances . 
Finally , I must stress that the lawfulness of military action depends not only on the existence of a legal basis , but also on the question of proportionality . 
Any force used pursuant to the authorisation in resolution 678 -LRB- whether or not there is a second resolution -RRB- : must have as its objective the enforcement the terms of the cease-fire contained in resolution 687 -LRB- 1990 -RRB- and subsequent relevant resolutions ; be limited to what is necessary to achieve that objective ; and must be a proportionate response to that objective , ie securing compliance with Iraq 's disarmament obligations . 
That is not to say that action may not be taken to remove Saddam Hussein from power if it can be demonstrated that such action is a necessary and proportionate measure to secure the disarmament of Iraq . 
But regime change can not be the objective of military action . 
This should be borne in mind in considering the list of military targets and in making public statements about any campaign . 
