Tony Blair at a Labor poster launch this morning . 
Photograph : Bruno Vincent\/Getty The full 13 pages of the attorney general 's formerly confidential advice on the legality of the Iraq war were today published as the prime minister , Tony Blair , battled accusations that he misled parliament and the cabinet over its contents . 
The long-lobbied-for disclosure follows the publication on Guardian Unlimited yesterday evening of a two-page summary of the advice . 
The government has previously resisted all attempts to secure its release . 
Lord Goldsmith 's confidential minute of March 7 said he could make a `` reasonable case '' for Britain to go to war with Iraq without a second UN resolution but a court `` might well conclude '' this course of action was illegal under international law . 
Further paragraphs released today also reveal Lord Goldsmith advised Mr Blair that in those circumstances he could not guarantee legal action would not be brought against members of the armed forces or government . 
Mr Blair , speaking at the launch of Labor 's business manifesto , said his preference had been for a second resolution but when it was clear France would use its security council veto to block any ultimatum that was no longer an option . 
`` The purpose of the advice was to make it clear we could proceed by law , '' the prime minister said . 
`` The attorney general 's advice was necessary to say the war could proceed lawfully . '' 
Lord Goldsmith 's full advice ruled out self-defence and humanitarian motives for war . 
It instead examined and gave support to the argument that resolution 1441 of November 2002 had revived the authority of UN security council Resolution 678 in 1990 to go to war with Saddam Hussein if he had not stuck to the 1991 ceasefire . 
`` Once he advised that , the question for everybody was political , '' Mr Blair said today . 
`` Did we think we should proceed , notwithstanding the fact we could not get a second UN resolution ? 
`` And I took the view then , I take it now , that it was better for this country 's security , and the security of the world , to remove Saddam and put him in prison rather than have him in power . '' 
The legal advice , however , said that the lawfulness of military action depended on the question of what was proportionate to disarm Iraq . 
`` Regime change can not be the objective of military action , '' Lord Goldsmith wrote . 
Mr Blair was backed up on stage by the chancellor , Gordon Brown , and the trade secretary , Patricia Hewitt , as he faced questioning over whether the cabinet was aware of the full extent of the attorney general 's advice . 
Mr Brown said the cabinet had `` full discussions on numerous occasions '' and saw a lengthy document on the legal issues involved before it backed the invasion . 
Mr Blair said he `` took '' the cabinet through the legal issues and Ms Hewitt said Lord Goldsmith had been present at the cabinet discussions . 
Lord Goldsmith 's full advice had concluded that the government would need `` hard evidence '' that Iraq was not cooperating with UN weapon inspectors if it was to argue it could go to war on the basis of past UN resolutions . 
The 13-page minute was sent to Mr Blair on the same day that the chief UN weapons inspector , Hans Blix , declared that Iraq had made `` substantial '' progress in destroying its long-range missiles , and he found no evidence of biological or chemical weapons . 
It appears at odds with the parliamentary answer issued by Lord Goldsmith 10 days later that concluded it was `` plain '' that Iraq was in breach of its UN disarmament obligations . 
Mr Blair said evidence released by the foreign secretary , Jack Straw , on March 15 2003 had shown that Saddam was in clear breach of his UN disarmament obligations . 
`` This so-called smoking gun has turned out to be a damp squib , '' he said . 
Mr Brown , meanwhile , paid tribute to the prime minister 's handling of the pre-war diplomacy . 
`` I not only trust Tony Blair but I respect Tony Blair for the way he went about that decision , '' he said . 
Earlier , the Conservative leader , Michael Howard , demanded that Mr Blair explain why Lord Goldsmith changed his legal advice and why the prime minister has repeatedly maintained that it did not change . 
`` Last night we received devastating new information which exposed that when Mr Blair said ' I have never lied ' , he was not telling the truth , '' he said . 
`` We 've been told by Mr Blair that on March 17 - just 10 days later - the advice given by the attorney general to cabinet was clear and it had n't changed . 
We now know beyond any doubt that it had changed . '' 
The Liberal Democrat leader , Charles Kennedy , stoutly resisted calls for him to accuse Mr Blair of being a liar but echoed Mr Howard 's call for answers , saying that the prime minister must `` come clean with the British public '' over the legality of the Iraq war . 
