Thursday 28 April 2005 13.03 BST The head of the United Nations weapons inspectors in the run-up to the Iraq war , Hans Blix , last night undercut one of the main grounds offered by the attorney general , Lord Goldsmith , in his legal advice to Tony Blair . 
Lord Goldsmith said there would have to be evidence that Iraq was not complying with the inspectors . 
But Mr Blix , who has since retired to Sweden , said his inspectors found no compelling evidence that Iraq had a hidden arsenal or was blocking the work of the inspectors . 
He said there had been only small infractions by Iraq . 
`` We did express ourselves in dry terms but there was no mistake about the content , '' he said . 
`` One can not say there was compelling evidence . 
Iraq was guilty only of small infractions . 
The government should have re-evaluated its assessment in the light of what the inspectors found . 
`` We reported consistently that we found no weapons of mass destruction and I carried out inspections at sites given to us by US and British intelligence and not found anything . '' 
In a key passage in the legal advice written by Lord Goldsmith on March 7 2003 , the attorney general said that UN resolution 1441 could only be sustainable as a justification for war `` if there are strong factual grounds for concluding that Iraq has failed to take the final opportunity . 
In other words , we would need to be able to demonstrate hard evidence of non-compliance and non-cooperation . '' 
He said the views of Unmovic , the UN inspectorate body , and the International Atomic Energy Agency , the UN nuclear watchdog , will be `` highly significant '' and `` you will need to consider very carefully whether the evidence of non-cooperation and non-compliance by Iraq is sufficiently compelling '' . 
Mr Blix and his team returned to Iraq in December 2002 after a four-year absence and remained until the week before war began in March 2003 . 
More than 200 inspectors crisscrossed Iraq , checking out possible sites for the production or stockpiling of weapons of mass destruction : chemical , biological or nuclear . 
Mr Blix 's first monthly report to the UN security council in January was mainly negative about the Iraqi government , complaining about lack of cooperation . 
A month later he adopted a more neutral stance , pointing out some infringements but finding no significant stockpiles . 
On March 7 , the day Lord Goldsmith drew up his report , Mr Blix gave his final report and this was the most favourable yet from Iraq 's point of view . 
Asked if this final report amounted to the compelling evidence that Lord Goldsmith considered crucial , Mr Blix said : `` One can not say so . 
There were infractions , you can say . 
In March , they -LRB- the Iraqis -RRB- cooperated like hell . 
In December and January , no. . 
That is why I gave a critical account on January 27 . 
In February , it was more balanced . '' 
On March 7 , Mr Blix pleaded for more time to complete his mission and reported that lethal weapons such as Samoud 2 missiles were being destroyed . 
Mr Blix said last night : `` The things found were all small things . 
We found dozens of munitions for chemical weapons . 
They were empty and in a site declared . 
In relation to Samoud that went beyond 150 kilometres , they -LRB- the US and Britain -RRB- said it was beyond the permitted limit but I did not feel particularly indignant about that . '' 
On the same day , the head of the IAEA , Mohamed ElBaradei , reported that there was no evidence that Saddam Hussein had any nuclear weapons or was in the process of acquiring them . 
Mr Blix said : `` By then , Mohamed ElBaradei revealed that Niger was not authentic . '' 
British intelligence falsely claimed Iraq had been trying to acquire uranium from Niger . 
Mr Blix said Mr ElBaradei had also challenged US claims that aluminium tubes found were for WMD purposes . 
Mr Blix himself also expressed scepticism to the US secretary of state , Colin Powell , about alleged evidence of WMD . 
The Iraq Survey Group , set up by the US to search for WMD , found none . 
In Britain , inquiries into the route to war have been held by MPs , Lord Hutton and Lord Butler . 
The intelligence service was criticised for not re-evaluating its assessments in the light of Mr Blix 's reports . 
