\* Japan 's LNG imports hit record for month of June \* Pace of yr\/yr LNG import growth eases to 10.6 pct from May 's 26.0 pct \* Crude imports up 1.9 pct yr\/yr , vs May 's 6.9 pct rise \* Utilities import more fossil fuels as nuclear reactors stay offline -LRB- Rewrites lead , adds detail -RRB- TOKYO , July 21 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Japan 's imports of liquefied natural gas -LRB- LNG -RRB- rose to a record high for the month of June as utilities used more fossil fuels to make up for the loss of nuclear reactors shut by the March earthquake and tsunami or kept offline due to safety concerns . 
Imports by the world 's biggest LNG importer rose 10.6 percent year-on-year in June , marking a third consecutive month of increases . 
Similarly , Japan 's imports of crude oil rose 1.9 percent from a year earlier , the second monthly gain in a row . 
LNG and crude oil imports are expected to continue rising , mainly to meet higher demand from utilities preparing for peak power use in the summer . 
Despite expanded energy conservation requests by the Japanese government this week , the chances looks slim for an imminent restart of any nuclear reactors which are ready to come back online after regular maintenance , given newly imposed safety measures . 
Earlier this month , Japan announced plans to order `` stress tests '' for the nation 's nuclear reactors , hoping to bolster public confidence shaken by the crisis at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex in the northeast after the March 11 earthquake and tsunami caused meltdowns and radiation leaks . 
Thursday 's data showed Japan 's imports of LNG totalled 6.228 million tonnes last month . 
The pace of year-on-year growth slowed to 10.6 percent from 26.0 percent in May . 
Japan , the world 's third-biggest oil consumer , also imported 1.9 percent more crude in June than a year earlier , at 15.39 million kiloliters -LRB- 3.23 million barrels per day -RRB- , the Ministry of Finance 's preliminary customs-cleared data showed . 
In May , Japan 's crude oil imports rose 6.9 percent to 15.497 million kl -LRB- 3.14 million bpd -RRB- . 
The Japan Crude Cocktail -LRB- JCC -RRB- price , or the average price for customs-cleared crude oil imports which is used as the benchmark for LNG prices for Japanese buyers , fell to $ 114.68 a barrel in June . 
The price peaked in May at $ 118.58 , the highest since September 2008 . 
Imports of thermal coal for power generation rose 7.0 percent in June from a year earlier to 8.167 million tonnes . 
But imports of liquefied oil gas fell 29.3 percent to 905,000 tonnes . 
-LRB- Reporting by Risa Maeda ; Editing by Edmund Klamann -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
