Workers remove containment boom from water contaminated by oil from the Deepwater Horizon spill , Thursday , June 10 , 2010 , in Bay Barbeau near Chauvin , La. -LRB- AP Photo\/Eric Gay -RRB- -LRB- Eric Gay - AP -RRB- Thoughts , comments , suggestions or criticisms about The Post 's Live Q&A s ? 
Send us an e-mail . 
President , Shell Oil ; Founder and CEO , Citizens for Affordable Energy , Inc. . 
Friday , June 11 , 2010 ; 11:00 AM Arlington , Va. : I heard you basically say on a news show that the reason we are drilling in deep and ultradeep water is because we do n't allow drilling on the beaches and some federal lands . 
Do you believe this ? 
That we could ban forever all deep and ultra deepwater drilling and supply all our needs -LRB- 20 + million barrels\/day -RRB- with unrestricted drilling on beaches and Federal lands ? 
Sun Prairie , Wisc. : Good morning , Mr. Hofmeister . 
Could you comment on the involvement of oil companies other than BP in the attempts to stop the runaway well spewing more money into the Gulf of Mexico , and in the effort to clean up oil already in the Gulf and monitor its effects ? 
Are Exxon and other oil companies involved at all , or are they bystanders ? 
Do they possess expertise BP does not , or resources that might help if put to use ? 
John Hofmeister : BP early on invited the major oil companies and experts from universities , consulting firms and think tanks to get inovled . 
They assembled in the crisis center in Houston and have been working on the technical aspects of this since then . 
Although they have yet to succeed in stopping the flow the engineering and ideas are the best we have in the world . 
Newport News , Va. : Mr. Hofmeister : President Obama , according to many , ca n't seem to do anything right re : the spill . 
In your mind , what could the administration have done differently and better that would have had a marked effect on the recovery effort so far ? 
John Hofmeister : In my opinion the White House and the President should have gotten up close to the tragedy from day one and been a part of the team at the outset . 
Instead they held back and jumped in when things were n't going well , as if they had better ideas . 
Then it all got politicized very quickly when the rhetoric and bullying started in earnest in response to increasingly loud complaints . 
Quiet and intense conversation between the key parties is preferable to shouting out loud and `` kicking ass . '' 
The White House went public to embarass BP and went over the top by shutting down perfectly safe drilling rigs across the deepwater . 
It chose to not even talk with the BP CEO . 
You have to talk to people to solve problems . 
Washington , D.C. : I do n't understand why we should drill more in the U.S. Eventually , the world is going to start to run out and it is better to not have depleted all our reserves in the meantime . 
Peaks Island , Maine : Do you agree with members of the Flow Rate Technical Group that BP stonewalled the group 's request for the likes of high resolution video data ? 
Washington , D.C. : No offense but do n't you think the reason people are not listening to your ideas about a flotilla of supertankers sucking up oil is because , like Tony Hayward , they presume you have some financial motivation to say what you are saying ? 
BTW , do you ? 
Fort Myers , Flka . 
: Can you explain why deep water drilling is allowed without proven safety measures in place ? 
I understand the difficulty in capping the leak at that depth , but did n't one of our brilliant scientific minds point this out before these rigs were built ? 
John Hofmeister : For forty years and for over 35000 wells in the Gulf of Mexico the proven safety measure has been the blow out protector . 
It is also the device used around the world . 
Something went wrong with the blow out protector and we need to get to the bottom of it and hold people accountable . 
It should have worked . 
Tucson , Ariz. : Assuming that much of the oil tainting delicate marshlands or mangroves can not be cleaned up , do we know how long it will take these ecosystems to recover on their own ? 
or , are they perhaps changed forever ? 
John Hofmeister : It will take years , several growing seasons , for the biosphere to adapt and adjust , provided it is not further damaged in the meantime . 
The warm climate and warm water actually will help restoration , unlike cold water and cold weather in Alaska . 
Aberdeen , S.D. : Would it be possible to equip fishing , larger cargo type ships and or naval ships with portable oil water separtion devices to start remediating the slicks in-situ ? 
New York , N.Y. : What should the federal government 's role be in the current gulf oil spill ? 
They seem to be inflaming and delaying rather than doing anything useful . 
John Hofmeister : The federal government does a good job of analyzing and regulating . 
It does a consistently poor job of operating and executing . 
Laurel , Md. : How much easier would the spill have been to cap if the rig had n't been in such deep water ? 
Is there any compelling reason that deep-water drilling is preferable to shallow ? 
John Hofmeister : Deep water drilling is inherently more risky and costly than shallow water drilling . 
In the western Gulf of Mexico more than 35000 wells have been safely drilled , including over 2200 deep water wells . 
Peaks Island , Maine : What grade would you give Adm. Allen on his descriptions of the process for stopping the flow ? 
For his explanations of the leak rate determinations and the importance thereof ? 
Fairfax , Va. : What changes do you envision for the Minerals Management Service in the coming months and years ? 
Salazar has recommended an agency shake-up , but it appears that MMS needs more -- not less -- staff power and funding . 
John Hofmeister : It 's still too soon to say . 
I disagree with the characterization that the industry and MMS were `` too cozy . '' 
That was not my experience . 
Perhaps some people tried to get friendly with the government . 
I never saw it that way . 
They have a job to do ; so does the industry . 
Their job is to regulate and govern ; the industry is to produce . 
Between the two parties it promotes reliability and accountability . 
Yuma , Ariz. : What are the chances that the well casing below the sea floor has been compromised , and that gas and oil are coming up the outside of the well casing , eroding the surrounding soft rock . 
Could this lead to a catastrophic geological failure , unstoppable even by the relief wells ? 
John Hofmeister : This is what some people fear has occurred . 
It is also why the `` top kill '' process was halted . 
If the casing is compromised the well is that much more difficult to shut down , including the risk that the relief wells may not be enough . 
If the relief wells do not result in stopping the flow , the next and drastic step is to implode the well on top of itself , which carries other risks as well . 
Harrisburg , Pa. : Scientific research can shown that algae produces far more energy resources than does cane sugar , corn , or drilled oil . 
What is being done about researching the creation of algae to energy plants ? 
Why does the Federal government not allow grants for new energy resources for algae ? 
I read one company is looking into this . 
Why are n't the other companies looking into this , and what is taking so long to duplicate what underfinanced scientists are able to do in small laboratories ? 
Algae could be the safest and most productive energy source available . 
Bethesda , Md. : Would you say the best minds are occupied with finding a way to cap the oil , but no one is minding the business of the execution such as making sure the booms are well placed , and frequently replaced when they have satured ? 
One can obviously see the booms method of cleaning is not working . 
John Hofmeister : You characterize it as I do . 
The scientists and engineers are primarily focused on the well . 
Arlington , Va. : You say something went wrong with the BOP , which may be true -- but is n't it also likely that the well casing was compromised within 1000 ' of the seabed and that even if the BOP sealed the head shut , the hydrocarbons would be spewing out down well and migrating to the surface ? 
New Orleans , La. : Why is shallower drilling safer ? 
I have followed the BP inquest and story closely . 
It appears that a bad job of cementing , poorly tested , combined with a very poor design for casing and cutting corners on time resulted in this disaster . 
I can see the exact same problems happening in 400 ' of water . 
And with a probable fractured casing , the only solution is a successful relief well , on land , in 12 ' or water or 5,000 ' of water . 
So why is shallow drilling safer ? 
Bethesda , Md. : You mean is the government 's decision to use burning , dispersing , booming and skimming ? 
It is not BP 's decision ? 
Leesburg , Fla. : Can the U.S. demand an escrow fund from BP to ensure all damaged get paid before BP goes broke ... get some\/a lot of that cash now ? 
If not why not ? 
Springfield , Va. : How often has a blowout preventer been called into use ? 
And how many times has it worked ? 
The BOP in the Ixtoc spill from decades ago did not work , hence the massive spill then . 
John Hofmeister : That accident was worse than this one . 
It led to much improvement in the design and effectiveness of blow out preventors . 
The one at this well seems to have been re-designed and then damaged . 
We need to find out the whole story before we declare the prodct insufficient for our purposes . 
Anonymous : I have heard that The Jones act is preventing us accepting help in skimming the oil up . 
Could you please tell us about that Arlington , Va. : You have complained that the administration is showing `` anti hydrocarbon tendencies '' . 
Why is this a bad thing ? 
John Hofmeister : So sorry everyone . 
I have to go now to another commitment . 
Thank you for your questions and comments . 
I hope we can continue this in the future . 
Editor 's Note : washingtonpost.com moderators retain editorial control over Discussions and choose the most relevant questions for guests and hosts ; guests and hosts can decline to answer questions . 
washingtonpost.com is not responsible for any content posted by third parties . 
To Refresh Page : Press the F5 key on your keyboard or click here . 
: Christless Christianity Guest : Dr. Michael S. Horton Viewpoint is a paid discussion . 
The Washington Post editorial staff was not involved in the moderation . 
