Louisiana Rep. Charlie Melancon moved to tears by gulf spill GRAND ISLE , LA. . 
-- Great globs of oil are churning in the surf . 
Muck-covered pelicans sit offshore , white only in their eyes . 
Here -- in a beach town living its nightmare -- Rep. Charlie Melancon -LRB- D -RRB- gets up at a community meeting . 
He does whatever is the opposite of grandstanding : He explains what he ca n't do to help . 
`` I , like you , am just feeling so helpless that there 's a hole out there , '' Melancon says to the crowd , filling the compact First Baptist Church . 
`` Until we get that hole stopped , we 're all in peril . '' 
For all the politicians bogged down in the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , this is the essential dilemma : How does one look effective while actually flailing ? 
No politician can stop the spill ; that will be done , if ever , by corporate submersibles at the bottom of the gulf . 
The problem is inside the jurisdiction of the U.S. government but physically outside its reach . 
All that frustration pushed President Obama this week to start working blue : He said he was trying to decide `` whose ass to kick . '' 
The real personification of the leak 's political story -- of its ability to make power feel useless -- is Melancon , a junior congressman whose coastal district has taken the brunt of the spill . 
Melancon is known as a man who makes things move in south Louisiana . 
But in this crisis , his most prominent act was last month , when he broke down and cried in front of colleagues and TV cameras at a subcommittee hearing on Capitol Hill . 
`` I have problems because it 's not a tangible . 
It 's a hole in the ocean , '' he said , calm and composed in a recent interview . 
That hole , plus his heated Senate bid to unseat a GOP incumbent , have restricted his abilities to play congressman : to fix problems , or gripe at those who do n't . 
`` The hard part is ... , '' Melancon said , pausing to sum up his problem , '' ... what can I do ? '' 
Melancon -LRB- pronounced `` Meh-LAW-sawn '' -RRB- is 62 -- a square-faced man with a medium-grade Cajun accent and a career hugging the political center . 
He grew up in small-town Napoleonville and served his political apprenticeship as an aide to former governor Edwin Edwards -LRB- D -RRB- . 
Melancon met his wife , Peachy , working on Edwards 's campaign . 
The couple visited their old boss in Oakdale federal prison just two months ago . 
Melancon served in the state legislature and was president of the American Sugar Cane League . 
He entered Congress in 2005 , in time to have his career defined by the Bayou State 's catastrophes . 
Four recent hurricanes have hit Melancon 's swampy , French-inflected district in the toe of Louisiana 's boot . 
`` Katrina , Rita , Gustav and Ike '' -- people say here , rattling them off like bad relatives . 
Katrina was the last time Melancon cracked : In an emotional outburst after weeks of little sleep , he made members of the Democratic Caucus watch a video of scenes of New Orleans 's devastation . 
