Crooked mortgage brokers , greedy investment bankers , oblivious rating agencies and gullible investors have all been faulted in the financial crisis , and there is bipartisan agreement that regulators were asleep at the switch . 
It 's all well and good to call for substantial new oversight . 
But if regulators were oblivious to the danger , the question is why . 
In the case of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , the answer seems easy : Their massive lobbying machines thwarted every legislative attempt at reform . 
But what about the Fed , the Treasury and the Securities and Exchange Commission , agencies that are not above politics but are known for their professionalism and expertise ? 
Surely they had the capability and motivation to avoid a calamity of the type that is occurring . 
Why did they fail ? 
The problem is that Wall Street and regulators relied on complex mathematical models that told financial institutions how much risk they were taking at any given time . 
Since the 1990s , risk management on Wall Street has been dominated by a model called `` value at risk '' -LRB- VaR -RRB- . 
VaR attributes risk factors to every security and aggregates these factors across an entire portfolio , identifying those risks that cancel out . 
What 's left is `` net '' risk that is then considered in light of historical patterns . 
The model predicts with 99 percent probability that institutions can not lose more than a certain amount of money . 
Institutions compare this `` worst case '' with their actual capital and , if the amount of capital is greater , sleep soundly at night . 
Regulators , knowing that the institutions used these models , also slept soundly . 
As long as capital was greater than the value at risk , institutions were considered sound -- and there was no need for hands-on regulation . 
Lurking behind the models , however , was a colossal conceptual error : the belief that risk is randomly distributed and that each event has no bearing on the next event in a sequence . 
This is typically explained with a coin-toss analogy . 
If you flip a coin and get `` heads '' and then do it again , the first heads has no bearing on whether the second toss will be heads or tails . 
It 's a common fallacy that if you get three heads in a row , there 's a better-than-even chance that the next toss will be tails . 
That 's simply not true . 
Each toss has a 50-50 chance of being heads or tails . 
Such systems are represented in the bell curve , which makes clear that events of the type we have witnessed lately are so statistically improbable as to be practically impossible . 
This is why markets are taken by surprise when they occur . 
But what if markets are not like coin tosses ? 
What if risk is not shaped like a bell curve ? 
What if new events are profoundly affected by what went before ? 
Both natural and man-made systems are full of the kind of complexity in which minute changes at the start result in divergent and unpredictable outcomes . 
These systems are sometimes referred to as `` chaotic , '' but that 's a misnomer ; chaos theory permits an understanding of dynamic processes . 
Chaotic systems can be steered toward more regular behavior by affecting a small number of variables . 
But beyond chaos lies complexity that truly is unpredictable and can not be modeled with even the most powerful computers . 
Capital markets are an example of such complex dynamic systems . 
Think of a mountainside full of snow . 
A snowflake falls , an avalanche begins and a village is buried . 
What caused the catastrophe ? 
The value-at-risk crowd focuses on each snowflake and resulting cause and effect . 
The complexity theorist studies the mountain . 
The arrangement of snow is a good example of a highly complex set of interdependent relationships ; so complex it is impossible to model . 
If one snowflake did not set off the avalanche , the next one could , or the one after that . 
But it 's not about the snowflakes ; it 's about the instability of the system . 
This is why ski patrols throw dynamite down the slopes each day before skiers arrive . 
They are `` regulating '' the system so that it does not become unstable . 
The more enlightened among the value-at-risk practitioners understand that extreme events occur more frequently than their models predict . 
So they embellish their models with `` fat tails '' -LRB- upward bends on the wings of the bell curve -RRB- and model these tails on historical extremes such as the post-Sept . 
But complex systems are not confined to historical experience . 
Events of any size are possible , and limited only by the scale of the system itself . 
Since we have scaled the system to unprecedented size , we should expect catastrophes of unprecedented size as well . 
We 're in the middle of one such catastrophe , and complexity theory says it will get much worse . 
Financial systems overall have emergent properties that are not conspicuous in their individual components and that traditional risk management does not account for . 
When it comes to the markets , the aggregate risk is far greater than the sum of the individual risks ; this is something that Long-Term Capital Management did not understand in the 1990s and that Wall Street seems not to comprehend now . 
As long as Wall Street and regulators keep using the wrong paradigm , there 's no hope they will appreciate just how bad things can become . 
And the new paradigm of risk must be understood if we are to avoid lurching from one bank failure to the next . 
The writer was general counsel of Long-Term Capital Management from 1994 to 1999 . 
He works for Omnis Inc. , a McLean consultant on national security and capital markets . 
