The article incorrectly said that Sen. Kent Conrad -LRB- D-N.D. -RRB- chairs the Senate banking committee . 
Conrad is the chairman of the Budget Committee . 
Obama Picks N.Y. Fed President Geithner as Treasury Secretary New York Federal Reserve Bank President Timothy F. Geithner . 
-LRB- Daniel Acker - Bloomberg News -RRB- President-elect Barack Obama has selected New York Federal Reserve Bank President Timothy F. Geithner as Treasury secretary , handing the post to a primary architect of the Bush administration 's response to the financial crisis , according to Democratic and industry officials yesterday . 
At 47 , he is the same age as Obama and would represent a generational change in the highest levels of Washington economic policymaking , heading a remarkably young team of White House economic advisers tasked with sorting out one of the worst financial messes since the Great Depression . 
A Democrat and a relative unknown outside the world of high finance , Geithner has worked closely with Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. to devise responses to the most critical events of the market turmoil , including the bailouts of the investment bank Bear Stearns and the insurance giant American International Group . 
Like Paulson , Geithner believes that the Treasury should be given vast powers to develop experimental strategies for responding to the crisis and the flexibility to abandon them if they do n't work . 
Geithner 's mentor is Lawrence H. Summers , 53 , a Treasury secretary during the Clinton administration who also was in the running for the job . 
Summers instead will go to the White House and serve as a senior economic adviser to Obama , according to a senior Democratic official familiar with the matter . 
Meanwhile , Obama is seriously considering a former opponent in the primary campaign , New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson , to head the Commerce Department , according to the official . 
Joining Summers in the White House would be Jason Furman , 38 , as a top economic adviser ; Peter R. Orszag , 39 , as White House budget director ; and Austan Goolsbee , 39 , on the president 's Council of Economic Advisers , sources familiar with the matter said . 
The rollout of the economic team is expected to take place in Chicago on Monday , according to a transition source who spoke on condition of anonymity because the announcements have not been made yet . 
As for the timing , this source said , `` Everything has been accelerated on the economic front because of the news of the last few months '' but not in reaction to any specific market trends this week . 
The problems facing the new administration are dire as the government 's effort to rescue the banking system falters . 
Yesterday , Goldman Sachs said it expected the economy to shrink even faster during the fourth quarter of this year , at a 5 percent annualized rate . 
The investment bank predicted that unemployment would soar to 9 percent by the end of next year . 
The stock markets cheered the would-be appointment of Geithner , who is well-known to Wall Street . 
The Dow Jones industrial average had been down as much as 1.4 percent in the morning . 
Around 3 p.m. , when news of Obama 's pick broke , the index shot up , ending the day 494.13 , or 6.5 percent , higher . 
`` Geithner is uniquely situated and has the business experience and the political experience and the policy experience to handle this crisis , '' said Scott Talbott , senior vice president of the Financial Services Roundtable , which lobbies for the nation 's largest financial firms . 
`` Everyone I talked to at the New York banks have had positive comments or no negative comments . '' 
He also has experience in addressing complex crises . 
In the late 1990s , he worked under Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin and Summers to guide the Clinton administration 's response to currency collapses in Russia , Mexico and Asia . 
In the last years of the administration , Summers became Treasury secretary and Geithner was promoted to undersecretary . 
Geithner `` will get a very favorable response in the Senate , '' said Sen. Kent Conrad -LRB- D-N.D. -RRB- , chairman of the Senate Banking Committee . 
`` You saw the relief rally in the market today ... These are the kind of people you want with their hand on the till in a storm . 
And we 're in a Category 4 . '' 
Others wondered whether Geithner , who has a youthful manner , could inspire confidence in the markets . 
