Traders work at the Citigroup kiosk on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange . 
The company 's stock price has dropped 60 percent this week . 
-LRB- By Keith Bedford -- Bloomberg News -RRB- Citigroup executives have launched a campaign to convince investors and analysts that the company is in a strong position to weather the economic crisis . 
-LRB- By Preston Keres -- The Washington Post -RRB- A defiant Citigroup proclaimed itself in good health yesterday even as its stock price completed a one-week , 60 percent swan dive , highlighting renewed investor concern about the long-term prospects of the nation 's largest banks . 
Lenders are facing massive losses across a wide range of businesses as the economy unravels at a quickening pace , and investors have concluded that some of the largest banks , including Citigroup , will need to raise more money . 
Some investors also appear to be betting that the Bush administration is out of time , tools and willpower to save another bank . 
Simon Johnson , former chief economist at the International Monetary Fund , compared the market movement to an attempt by speculators to collapse a foreign currency by betting that the government wo n't invest enough money to reverse the decline . 
`` The market is testing Mr. Paulson , '' said Johnson , now a professor of entrepreneurship at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . 
`` They basically have $ 60 billion left to last them two months , and now they have to deal with some increasingly serious problems . '' 
Citigroup 's executives launched a fierce campaign yesterday to convince investors and analysts , government officials , and even their own employees that the company is in a strong position to weather the economic crisis . 
Chief executive Vikram Pandit accused investors of `` fear-mongering , '' according to a person who heard him speak on a conference call with employees yesterday . 
Federal regulators are watching the situation and are in contact with the company 's executives but are not taking an active role , believing that Citigroup is in much stronger financial condition than banks that have recently collapsed , people familiar with the matter said . 
The government remains committed to preventing the collapse of any large financial institution , those sources said , speaking on condition of anonymity because they are not authorized to speak publicly . 
Citigroup 's board met yesterday to discuss options , including the sale of business units , according to people familiar with the situation . 
Pandit has said that he strongly opposes the sale of core units such as the Smith Barney brokerage . 
Citigroup is also pushing the Securities and Exchange Commission to suspend short-selling , the practice of betting on a decline in a company 's stock price , which can create its own momentum as investors drive down prices , according to industry and government sources . 
The company has the support of leading industry trade groups , but two industry sources who had been in contact with the SEC about the matter said regulators are disinclined to comply . 
The SEC banned short-selling on hundreds of financial stocks for several weeks earlier this fall . 
But the agency concluded the initial effort was counterproductive , because it led some large investors to sell all their holdings and leave the market , undermining the stated purpose of shoring up stock prices . 
Investors dropped Citigroup 's stock to $ 3.77 a share in trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange , the lowest price since 1992 . 
Bank of America fell to $ 11.47 , its lowest share price since 1995 . 
J.P. Morgan Chase fell to $ 22.72 , its lowest price since 2002 . 
Citigroup 's stock price has little direct , short-term impact on the company . 
The concern , however , is that Citigroup 's customers and business partners will accept the stock market 's judgment about the company 's health and will begin to withdraw and withhold money from the bank . 
A similar process has driven other banks to the point of collapse , including Washington Mutual , Wachovia and National City . 
The declining stock price also limits the company 's ability to raise money by issuing shares , or to buy other companies using shares . 
Citigroup had discussed buying Chevy Chase Bank of Bethesda but no longer appears able to close the deal , according to people familiar with the situation . 
