With the spotlight shining on the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , and on the executives sizzling in the hot seat on Capitol Hill , environmental advocates are looking north . 
`` The May 28 report deadline still leaves ample time should the Department of the Interior choose to allow this ill-advised drilling to move forward in extreme Arctic conditions , where spill response faces additional challenges of sea ice , seas of up to 20 feet , darkness and a virtual lack of infrastructure from which to stage a response , '' the environmental groups -- Alaska Wilderness League , Center for Biological Diversity , Defenders of Wildlife , Earthjustice , Sierra Club and The Wilderness Society -- said in a statement . 
The Chukchi Sea is home to polar bears , which are already under pressure due to melting summer sea ice in the Arctic . 
The big white bears are listed as a U.S. threatened species due to the expected continued effects of climate change in the area . 
Shell plans to move into the area around July 1 , and get to the places where it wants to drill exploratory wells by July 4 if ice permits . 
They plan to leave for the year by October 31 . 
An analysis of Shell 's exploration drilling plan by the Pew Environment Group says that provisions for cleanup in the event of a Chukchi Sea oil spill are inadequate and too distant from the prospective drill site . 
Marilyn Heiman , the former director of the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Commission and now with the Pew group 's U.S. Arctic program , quoted the Shell exploration drilling plan as saying that a large oil spill , such as a crude oil release from a blowout , is extremely rare and not considered a reasonably foreseeable impact . 
Heiman said the U.S. Minerals Management Service ' s environmental assessment also dismissed the probability of this kind of blowout and spill as `` insignificant . '' 
A blowout at BP 's well off the Louisiana coast is the source of the oil spill there . 
Since the BP spill in the Gulf , the Minerals Management Service has asked Shell for additional safety information by May 18 , but that may not be enough to allay the environmental groups ' fears . 
They want the Obama administration to cancel this summer 's plans for Arctic oil exploration . 
Photo credits : REUTERS\/Alexander Demianchuk -LRB- Twin six-month-old polar bear cubs play in the city zoo in St. Petersburg , Russia , March 25 , 2010 -RRB- REUTERS\/Jason Reed -LRB- President and Chairman of BP America Inc. . 
Lamar McKay in front of protesters before a Senate hearing on the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , Washington , May 11 , 2010 -RRB- What impact would an oil spill have on the albedo of the Arctic if a BP-scale oil blow-out were to occur there ? 
i.e. , How much more heat would the Arctic absorb as a result of an BP-sized or Exxon Valdez oil spill ? 
Based on the oil spill rate and record of the past 40 years , how many oil spills and blow-outs are projected for , say , the year 2030 or 2050 if we fully implemented the Palin `` Drill , baby , drill '' wish list ? 
yeah -- - not to mention that bp had absolutely NO PLAN for cleaning up since ` it was virtually impossible ' -- -- WELL , HOW ABOUT NOW ?????????? the gulf spill will impact the area for at least 50 years -- and it 's just getting started -- and they ca n't figure out how to stop it -- and this is in an area that 's EASY to get to -- what will happen in the arctic ??? will we just let it go ` all winter ' since the ice will be covering it ???????? and that 's without mentioning the METHANE that 's ALREADY BUBBLING UP because of the warming going on -- how long before there 's a blow out because of that ??? COME ON PEOPLE !!! put the R&D into fixing the problems that we can cause -- not just into ` safe drilling ' -- that 's an oxymoron if i ever heard one -- Hello there is a great company called planet resource to fix the problem there is a frrat animation of correcting this We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
I 've covered the Winter Olympics in Calgary and Salt Lake City , a couple wars , the State Department , White House , Pentagon , several long trials and a presidential sex scandal . 
Since 2006 , I 've been reporting on the environment and climate change . 
