Tue May 11 , 2010 7:31 pm EDT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A drilling rig explosion on April 20 left 11 workers missing and presumed dead , and the rig 's subsequent collapse unleashed a major oil spill that threatens the ecosystems and economy of the U.S. Gulf of Mexico . 
Also threatened is the heart of U.S. energy production , as a giant , unprecedented underwater leak spreads oil across the northern Gulf of Mexico , threatening areas from Florida to points west of the of the Mississippi River . 
President Barack Obama 's plans to widen offshore drilling have been suspended , and energy giant BP Plc faces another blow to its reputation and a multibillion-dollar bill for cleaning up the mess and paying damages . 
Below is a chronology of the spill and its impact : \* April 20 , 2010 - Explosion and fire on Transocean Ltd 's drilling rig Deepwater Horizon licensed to BP ; 11 workers missing , 17 injured . 
The rig was drilling in BP 's Macondo project 42 miles southeast of Venice , Louisiana , beneath about 5,000 feet of water and 13,000 feet under the seabed . 
A blowout preventer , intended to prevent release of crude oil , failed to activate . 
\* April 22 - The Deepwater Horizon rig , valued at more than $ 560 million , sinks and a five-mile long oil slick is seen . 
\* April 23 - The U.S. Coast Guard suspends search for missing workers . 
\* April 25 - The Coast Guard says remote underwater cameras detect the well is leaking 1,000 barrels of crude oil per day . 
The agency calls the leak a `` very serious spill '' that threatens ecosystems along the Gulf Coast . 
It approves a plan to have remote underwater vehicles activate a blowout preventer and stop leak , but the effort fails . 
\* April 26 - BP 's shares fall 2 percent on fears the cost of cleanup and legal claims will deal the London-based energy giant a heavy financial blow . 
\* April 27 - U.S. departments of Interior and Homeland Security announce joint investigation . 
Coast Guard says leaking crude may be set ablaze to slow the spread of oil in the Gulf . 
\* April 28 - The Coast Guard says the flow of oil is 5,000 barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- -LRB- 210,000 gallons\/795 ,000 liters -RRB- -- five times greater than first estimated . 
A controlled burn is held on the giant oil slick . 
\* April 29 - Obama pledges `` every single available resource , '' including the U.S. military , to contain the spill , which Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano says is of `` national significance . '' 
Obama also says BP is responsible for the cleanup . 
Louisiana declares state of emergency due to the threat to the state 's natural resources . 
\* April 30 - An Obama aide says no drilling will be allowed in new areas , as the president had recently proposed , until the cause of the Deepwater Horizon accident is known . 
\* BP Chairman Tony Hayward says the company takes full responsibility and will pay all legitimate claims and the cost of the cleanup . 
The Interior Department orders safety inspections of all 30 deepwater drilling rigs and 47 deepwater production platforms . 
\* May 1 - Coast Guard says leak will affect the Gulf shore . 
\* May 2 - Obama visits the Gulf Coast to see cleanup efforts first hand . 
U.S. officials close areas affected by the spill to fishing for an initial period of 10 days . 
BP starts to drill a relief well alongside the failed well , a process that could take two to three months to complete . 
\* May 5 - A barge begins towing a 98-ton containment chamber to the site of the leak . 
BP says one of the three leaks has been shut off by capping a valve , but that would not cut the amount of oil gushing out . 
\* May 6 - Oil washes ashore on the Chandeleur Islands off the Louisiana coast , uninhabited barrier islands that are part of the Breton National Wildlife Refuge and important nesting and breeding areas for many bird species . 
\* May 7 - BP engineers use undersea robots to move the containment chamber over the larger of the two remaining leaks on the seabed . 
A fishing ban for federal waters off the Gulf is modified , expanded and extended to May 17 . 
\* May 8 - BP 's containment dome hits a snag when a buildup of crystallized gas forces engineers to postpone efforts to place the chamber over the oil leak and siphon oil to the surface . 
`` Tar balls '' suspected to come from the leak wash up along a half-mile stretch of Dauphin Island , Alabama . 
\* May 9 - BP says it might try to plug the undersea leak by pumping materials such as shredded up tires and golf balls into the well at high pressure , a method called a `` junk shot . '' 
\* May 10 - Forecasts suggest the oil spill could move significantly west of the Mississippi River delta as brisk onshore winds prevail . 
BP announces plans to place a small containment dome , known as a `` top hat , '' over the blown out well to funnel oil to the surface . 
\* May 11 - Executives with BP , Transocean and Halliburton appear at congressional hearings in Washington , where Senators criticize their safety records . 
The executives blame each other 's companies for the explosion . 
The oil slick washes ashore on a third land mass : Louisiana 's Port Eads area , on the southern edge of the Mississippi Delta . 
-LRB- Reporting by Erwin Seba , Ros Krasny and Jeffrey Jones ; Editing by Marguerita Choy -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
On April 21st the Obama Administration sent down Deputy Secy of the Interior Hayes after a briefing that included Obama and heads of FEMA , EPA , Homeland Security and Coast Guard . 
BP insisted as late asApril 27 they could handle the cleanup . 
The DoD assessed the situation only to find they did not have equipment to go that deep so the were unable to help . 
BP and others should not have been allowed to go that deep without a disaster plan for a catastrophic leak . 
Now we pay the price . 
I hear a lot of talk who is the responsible party in this spill . 
I do n't hear if any of our famous chemists run yet test what will happen when hurricane will start forming and with it starts lifting sea water mixed with crude -LRB- tar , gasoline , oil -RRB- . 
Once in the air aided by lightning and it will become torch . 
It will incinerate everything in it 's path . 
That will be Apocalypse as Bible describes it and with all the Government FREE WILL it will be done not by God but , by stupidity of our leaders . 
Our reckless governing is giving ALL the powers to bribe -LRB- political contribution -RRB- corporate givers and destroys all we know , the ecology and the us . 
When this firestorm comes Shelby and Stele will be in Washington talking how to `` help '' their `` American People '' that they mouth around . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
