BP oil spill : UK taxpayers face Gulf clean-up loss BP will book $ 10bn tax credit against costs of cleaning up Gulf oil spill , meaning US and UK governments will lose out Volunteers in Louisiana clean a pelican covered in oil from the BP Deepwater Horizon rig . 
Taxpayers in the US and UK will now have to bear some of the clean-up costs from the spill Photograph : Reuters BP is poised for fresh controversy after it emerged today that the UK Treasury will lose hundreds of millions of pounds as a result of the oil clean-up in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The cost of the clean-up has pushed BP into the red , meaning the oil company will be able to book a near - $ 10bn -LRB- # 6.5 bn -RRB- tax credit , slashing its tax bill in the US and Britain . 
The loss comes on top of a plunge in tax revenues after BP halted its dividend payouts to shareholders . 
The news will dismay politicians in Westminster , since the coalition government needs all the tax revenues it can get as it introduces austerity measures to deal with the deficit . 
The majority of the tax credit is likely to relate to the US , but the exchequer is also likely to lose out badly . 
BP paid $ 8.4 bn of corporate taxes last year , with roughly # 930m going to the UK government . 
Tax experts reckon it paid a similar amount in US taxes . 
While the spill will reduce the level of BP 's corporate taxes , the news comes on top of the hundreds of millions lost to the exchequer in the form of lost dividend taxation . 
Under fierce political pressure from Washington , BP scrapped its lucrative payouts to shareholders this year and there is currently no plan to reinstate payments . 
BP announced today that it is making a $ 32.2 bn provision for the cost of the spill caused by the explosion and subsequent sinking of the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig in April . 
That pushed BP 's second-quarter results into a record loss of $ 17bn , compared with a profit last year of $ 3.1 bn . 
The company explained , however , that the net impact on BP 's bottom line will only be $ 22bn because the company will be able to record a $ 9.9 bn tax credit . 
BP 's UK tax bill will also be reduced , the firm added . 
Both the US and UK governments receive hundreds of millions of dollars from the company in tax payments each year . 
News that BP will be able to write off against tax the cost of plugging the well , cleaning up the spill and compensating the thousands of people who have been affected is likely to anger politicians of all political hues . 
Only the fines that might be imposed by the US authorities would definitely not be tax-deductible , according to tax experts . 
Three years ago , aircraft manufacturer Boeing flew into a storm of protest when it sought to write off against tax a $ 615m fine levied by the department of justice that settled an investigation into the improper hiring of a Pentagon official and the theft of data from Lockheed Martin Corporation . 
The fine was levied in order for Boeing to avoid criminal charges . 
Three Republican senators wrote to the US attorney general at the time to say that allowing Boeing to deduct payments to the government `` would be unacceptable '' . 
