BP 's Tony Hayward : resignation statement Outgoing chief executive Tony Hayward says BP will be a changed company as a result of the oil spill ` and it is right that it should embark on its next phase under new leadership ' Tuesday 27 July 2010 08.38 BST BP chief executive Tony Hayward is leaving the oil group after almost 30 years with a # 1m payoff and a pension expected to be about half a million pounds a year . 
He will hand over as chief executive in October but will remain on the BP board until 30 November . 
BP plans to nominate him as a non-executive director at its Russian joint venture , TNK-BP . 
`` The Gulf of Mexico explosion was a terrible tragedy for which as the man in charge of BP when it happened I will always feel a deep responsibility , regardless of where blame is ultimately found to lie . 
`` From day one I decided that I would personally lead BP 's efforts to stem the leak and contain the damage , a logistical operation unprecedented in scale and cost . 
We have now capped the oil flow and we are doing everything within our power to clean up the spill and to make restitution to everyone with legitimate claims . 
`` I would like to thank all of the BP people involved in the response and the many thousands of others along the Gulf Coast who have joined us in our efforts . 
`` I believe the decision I have reached with the board to step down is consistent with the responsibility BP has shown throughout these terrible events . 
BP will be a changed company as a result of Macondo and it is right that it should embark on its next phase under new leadership . 
`` I will be working closely with Bob Dudley over the coming months to ensure a smooth transition . 
It has been a privilege to serve BP for nearly 30 years and to lead it for the last three . 
I am sad to leave so many fine colleagues and friends who have helped this great company to achieve so much over the years . 
I am sorry that achievement has been overshadowed by the tragedy in the Gulf of Mexico . '' 
