Deepwater Horizon oil spill : BP gaffes in full From Tony Hayward ` wanting his life back ' to Carl-Henric Svanberg saying that BP ` cares about the small people ' , here are the oil company 's PR gaffes in full Less than two weeks after the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon killed 11 people , BP chief executive Tony Hayward tells the BBC that while it is `` absolutely responsible '' for cleaning up the spill , the company is not to blame for the accident which sank the rig . 
`` This was not our accident This was not our drilling rig This was Transocean 's rig . 
Their equipment , '' he said . 
On 25 May however , BP revealed details of its internal inquiry into the spill and admitted `` a number of companies are involved , including BP , and it is simply too early and not up to us to say who is at fault '' . 
Hayward makes his first , and probably most ill-judged considering subsequent events , gaffe when he tells the Guardian that `` the Gulf of Mexico is a very big ocean . 
The amount of volume of oil and dispersant we are putting into it is tiny in relation to the total water volume '' . 
He goes on to admit that his job may be on the line . 
Asked if he felt his job was already under threat , he replied : `` I do n't at the moment . 
That of course may change . 
I will be judged by the nature of the response . '' 
In an interview with Sky News , Hayward says that the environmental impact of the spill will be `` very , very modest '' . 
`` It is impossible to say and we will mount , as part of the aftermath , a very detailed environmental assessment but everything we can see at the moment suggests that the overall environmental impact will be very , very modest . '' 
Probably Hayward 's biggest gaffe comes before a mass of reporters on the Louisiana shore when he says : `` The first thing to say is I 'm sorry . 
We 're sorry for the massive disruption it 's caused their lives . 
There 's no one who wants this over more than I do . 
I would like my life back . '' 
The families of the 11 people who died when the Deepwater Horizon exploded point out that they would like some lives back too . 
BP decides to go on the offensive and spends $ 50m -LRB- # 32m -RRB- on a national TV advertising campaign in which Hayward pledges : `` For those affected and your families , I 'm deeply sorry . 
We will make this right . '' 
At the same time the Financial Times publishes an interview with Hayward in which he admits BP was unprepared for an oil spill at such depths : `` We did not have the tools you would want in your toolkit . '' 
In an interview on US television Barack Obama says that if Tony Hayward had been working for him , the BP figurehead would have been relieved of his duties by now . 
The president says he is talking to a range of experts in an attempt to discover `` whose ass to kick '' . 
Svanberg , a native Swedish speaker who was formerly the head of the telecoms company Ericsson . 
`` I hear comments sometimes that large oil companies are greedy companies or do n't care but that 's not the case with BP . 
We care about the small people . '' 
Douglas Brinkley , a Gulf coast historian at Rice University , described it as another example of BP 's insensitivity : `` It 's snotty and deeply condescending and it shows the kind of corporate arrogance that BP has been exuding ever since the Deepwater Horizon accident . '' 
Hayward endures a seven-hour grilling by Congress but is attacked afterwards for his refusal to answer many of the questions levied by the House of Representatives ' energy and commerce committee . 
Hayward spends a relaxing Saturday on board his yacht `` Bob '' taking part in the JP Morgan Asset Management round the island race on the Isle of Wight . 
Pictures of the BP boss enjoying himself on the obviously oil-free waters of the Solent are described by White House chief of staff Rahm Emanuel in an interview with ABC News as `` just been part of a long line of PR gaffes and mistakes '' . 
`` I think we can all conclude that Tony Hayward is not going to have a second career in PR consulting . '' 
A BP spokesman said Hayward was `` spending a few hours with his family at the weekend '' as he had not had a break since the spill began . 
