Gulf oil spill : BP hopes to cap flow ` within 24 hours ' BP plans to use underwater robots to cut a damaged pipe and lower a cap BP hopes to contain the spill from its leaking well in the Gulf of Mexico within 24 hours , its chief operating officer , Doug Suttles , has said . 
An operation using undersea robots to cut off the fractured pipe and seal it with a cap was launched on Tuesday . 
It comes as US Attorney General Eric Holder announced that officials had begun criminal and civil investigations into America 's worst oil spill . 
Mr Holder would not say which companies or individuals were being targeted . 
Reuters news agency quotes BP as saying it would `` co-operate with any inquiry that the Department of Justice undertakes '' . 
BP 's shares fell sharply on Tuesday after the failure of its previous efforts to `` top kill '' the leak by pumping mud into the well . 
At one stage the share price hit its lowest level for 15 months , as stock markets digested the news that the US was `` prepared for the worst scenario '' that the leak might not be stopped before August . 
In the latest attempt to fit a containment cap , remote-controlled robots on the seabed are cutting the damaged well riser in order to cap it and pipe the leaking oil to the surface . 
Oil booms - partly successful Dispersant used - scientists warn it may kill marine life Huge dome placed over leak - became blocked by ice crystals Mile-long tube - fails to suck up large amount of oil `` Top-kill '' method to pump in heavy mud - abandoned Mr Suttles said : `` If everything goes well , within the next 24 hours we could have this contained . '' 
But , striking a note of caution , he stressed that success was not guaranteed and urged people to `` remember this is being done in 5,000 feet of water , and very small issues take a long time to fix '' . 
BP says the procedure will take all week and it does not expect that cutting the riser will allow significantly more oil to escape . 
But government scientists suggest the procedure could release up to 20 % more oil initially and the White House says it does not believe BP has been forthcoming about the risks , the BBC 's Richard Lister reports from Washington . 
On Tuesday , President Barack Obama described the leak as `` the greatest environmental disaster of its kind in our history '' and pledged to bring those responsible to justice . 
Announcing the criminal probe , Attorney General Eric Holder said : `` We will closely examine the actions of those involved in the spill . 
If we find evidence of illegal behavior , we will be extremely forceful in our response . '' 
Mr Holder , who was on his first visit to the affected region , said the companies involved had already been ordered to preserve their records . 
Meanwhile , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- warned that winds forecast later this week could move the spill towards the Mississippi and Alabama coasts , which have been less badly affected than Louisiana 's shores . 
At least 20 million gallons of oil have spilled into the Gulf so far Tuesday also marked the start of the hurricane season , with NOAA predicting up to 14 hurricanes , of which between three to seven will be `` major '' tempests , packing winds in excess of 110 mph . 
At least 20 million gallons -LRB- 76 million litres -RRB- have now spilled into the Gulf , affecting more than 70 miles -LRB- 110km -RRB- of Louisiana 's coastline . 
Eleven rig workers died when the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded and sank six weeks ago . 
Responding to calls for the US military to take the lead instead of BP , Adm Mike Mullen , chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , told US media on Monday that the military was not as well equipped as the oil industry to deal with the spill . 
The Obama administration has come under increasing pressure to find a way to mitigate the environmental and economic impact on the Gulf area . 
On what would normally be a busy holiday weekend , fishing boats sat idle in marinas along the Louisiana coast , as many fishing areas remain closed as a health precaution . 
BP has spent more than $ 940m -LRB- # 645m -RRB- so far in trying to contain the disaster . 
UK and Ireland Oil closes in on Florida coast - 30 mins ago National Post BP tries again to curb oil spill - 37 mins ago Scientific American BP tries again to curb oil spill as stock falls anew - 41 mins ago Reuters UK WRAPUP 3-BP tries again to curb oil spill , stock falls anew - 3 hrs ago New Statesman \* US begins criminal and civil investigation into oil spill - 5 hrs ago The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
