Attorney General Eric Holder on the criminal investigation He would not say which companies or individuals were being targeted . 
Earlier , BP launched a new attempt to try to contain the spill from its well using undersea robots to cut off the fractured pipe and seal it with a cap . 
BP said the spill - the largest in US history - might be capped within 24 hours , but success was not guaranteed . 
BP 's shares fell sharply on Tuesday following the failure of its previous efforts to `` top kill '' the leak by pumping mud into the well . 
At one stage the share price hit its lowest level for 15 months , as stock markets digested the news that the US was `` prepared for the worst scenario '' that the leak might not be stopped before August . 
Announcing the criminal investigations , Mr Holder said : `` We will closely examine the actions of those involved in the spill . 
Oil booms - partly successful Dispersant used - scientists warn it may kill marine life Huge dome placed over leak - became blocked by ice crystals Mile-long tube - fails to suck up large amount of oil `` Top-kill '' method to pump in heavy mud - abandoned `` If we find evidence of illegal behavior , we will be extremely forceful in our response . '' 
Mr Holder , who was on his first visit to the affected region , said the companies involved had already been ordered to preserve their records . 
`` We will ensure that every cent , every cent of taxpayer money , will be repaid and that damage to the environment and wildlife will be reimbursed , '' he said . 
Reuters news agency quoted BP as saying in a statement that it would `` co-operate with any inquiry that the Department of Justice undertakes '' . 
Speaking in Washington on Tuesday , President Barack Obama described the leak as `` the greatest environmental disaster of its kind in our history '' and pledged to bring those responsible to justice . 
He said it was time to take a comprehensive look at how the oil industry operated and how US government agencies oversaw their operations . 
Other companies involved with the Deepwater Horizon rig , which exploded on 20 April with the loss of 11 lives , include rig operator Transocean and oil services companies Halliburton and Cameron International . 
In the latest attempt to fit a containment cap , remote-controlled robots on the seabed are cutting the damaged well riser in order to cap it and pipe the leaking oil to the surface . 
BP plans to use underwater robots to cut a damaged pipe and lower a cap Chief operating officer Doug Suttles said : `` If everything goes well , within the next 24 hours we could have this contained . '' 
But , striking a note of caution , he stressed that success was not guaranteed and urged people to `` remember this is being done in 5,000 ft of water , and very small issues take a long time to fix '' . 
BP says the procedure will take all week and it does not expect that cutting the riser will allow significantly more oil to escape . 
But government scientists suggest the procedure could release up to 20 % more oil initially and the White House says it does not believe BP has been forthcoming about the risks , the BBC 's Richard Lister reports from Washington . 
Previous attempts by BP to stem the flow of oil have all failed . 
Meanwhile , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- warned that winds forecast later this week could move the spill towards the Mississippi and Alabama coasts , which have been less badly affected than Louisiana 's shores . 
An oil sheen has been seen about nine miles -LRB- 14.5 km -RRB- off the coast of Florida , with officials warning it could reach Pensacola Beach by Wednesday , the Associated Press news agency reports . 
Tuesday also marked the start of the hurricane season , with NOAA predicting up to 14 hurricanes , of which between three to seven will be `` major '' tempests , packing winds in excess of 110 mph . 
At least 20 million gallons -LRB- 76 million litres -RRB- have now spilled into the Gulf , affecting more than 70 miles -LRB- 110km -RRB- of Louisiana 's coastline . 
BP has spent more than $ 940m -LRB- # 645m -RRB- so far in trying to contain the disaster . 
San Francisco Chronicle BP uses giant shears to cut gushing oil pipe - 5 hrs ago Houston Chronicle BP robots to try again on pipe-cutting job - 10 hrs ago Financial Post BP tries again to curb oil spill - 13 hrs ago The Independent More trouble on the horizon for BP as oil moves towards Florida - 13 hrs ago The Scotsman BP clean-up back on track as robots with giant shears slice through pipe - 14 hrs ago The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
