Leaders from the Arab League stopped short of voting Syria out of its charter over charges Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is using extreme violence to crackdown on protesters . 
Arab leaders have called for an end to the bloodshed between the anti-government demonstrators and troops loyal to al-Assad , but have not agreed on a means for achieving it . 
At a news conference after the meeting , a spokesperson for the league said throwing Syria out of the organization would close the lines of communication , and prove detrimental for both sides . 
-LRB- SOUNDBITE -RRB- -LRB- Arabic -RRB- ARAB LEAGUE SECRETARY GENERAL , NABIL EL-ARABY , SAYING : `` Every issue was studied . 
But please allow me to say that I have met with a large number of the Syrian opposition groups , of all kinds , and most of them said , with all clarity , that freezing -LRB- Syria 's -RRB- membership is not in their interests . 
Because freezing their membership means cutting off the relations between the Arab League and Syria . 
And this is not what is needed . 
What is needed is to place all of the weight of the Arab League Council of Ministers in order to reach a solution that guarantees an end to bloodshed , and which guarantees the realisation of the reforms that the Syrian people are demanding . '' 
Leaders did agree on forming a committee to open dialogue between the government and opposition leaders ... that meeting is set to take place in about two weeks . 
The failure to take stronger action against Syria is likely to intensify criticism that the League has been ineffectual in dealing the Syrian crisis . 
According to the United Nations , the Syrian government has killed at least 3,000 people in pro-democracy crackdowns , including several hundred children . 
Julie Noce , Reuters Syria remains in Arab League -LRB- 1:52 -RRB- Oct. 17 - Arab League leaders decide against suspending Syria from it 's charter . 
-LRB- Transcript -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
