Flu hygiene hard in slums as Mexico scrubs off flu CIUDAD NEZAHUALCOYOTL , Mexico | Thu May 7 , 2009 4:26 pm EDT CIUDAD NEZAHUALCOYOTL , Mexico -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The water dribbling from the tap is not enough for Miriam Guerrero to clean her fingernails , let alone wash down her hair salon in a Mexico City slum as the country fights a deadly flu virus . 
With 44 people dead from the new H1N1 flu virus -- many of them in the sprawling capital of 20 million -- the government has urged Mexicans to scrub up as often as they can . 
But while the wealthy hose down storefronts with disinfectant and squirt hand sanitizer gel abundantly , impoverished families in Ciudad Nezahualcoyotl -- a vast , grimy slum on the northeast edge of the capital -- barely have running water . 
Low rainfall has left Mexico City 's already strained reservoirs badly depleted , and taps are driest in the poorest areas . 
Even though city officials have patched up leaky pipes several times , poor neighborhoods still suffer chronic shortages . 
`` When the water 's running short it 's not easy to keep washing your hands like they say , and there 's not enough to disinfect all the furniture , '' said Guerrero , who often fills her metal bucket from a water truck to clean her small salon . 
Ciudad Nezahualcoyotl , known as `` Neza , '' and other poor neighborhoods like nearby Iztapalapa , largely rely on the trucks that come around sporadically . 
Countries around the world are taking measures to halt the spread of the virus , which has infected more than 2,000 people in 24 countries . 
After grinding almost to a halt for several days , Mexico and its capital were getting back to normal on Thursday , reopening schools , bars , churches and restaurants as health officials said the worst of Mexico 's outbreak was over . 
But the government warned it was too early to stop taking hygiene measures . 
Many people still wore face masks and Mexico City restaurants sanitized diners ' hands as they arrived . 
Home to around 1 million people , Neza is infamous for being next to a huge open-pit garbage dump . 
`` We are worried about colds , the flu , especially being so close to the dump , '' said Alicia Soto , a vendor of sunflower seed snacks who took her daughter to the doctor two weeks ago , alarmed by her flu-like symptoms . 
Local health officials say they can not solve the water problem , but they are carting boxes filled with bottles of hand sanitizer to as many health clinics as they can . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
