Pigs might fly , but swine flu ! 
I called the swine flu hotline , but all I got was crackling . 
The reference to `` crackling '' , or pork rinds , starts a host of Internet jokes and puns about the new H1N1 strain of flu that has the world on edge but fortunately , so far , has not reached the pandemic proportions feared originally . 
Piggybacking this information exchange is a wealth of disinformation . 
Although this new strain of swine flu has complex origins not restricted to pigs , the association has stuck . 
To the delight of many , the subject has spammed enough jokes cartoons and bad puns to last out a quarantine . 
I ve been sent home because I came out in rashers , is one doing the rounds . 
You can cure it with oinkment , comes the reply . 
Amid the bad puns are a host of quirky and off beat stories that are keeping the web abuzz . 
Spare a thought for the only pig in Afghanistan , a curiosity so rare in this strictly Muslim country that it actually lives at Kabul Zoo , where it is exhibited along with a pair of lions , some monkeys , a bear , and assorted other wildlife . 
Although the poor little piggy is unlikely to ever come into contact with another of its species and even less likely to come into contact with an Afghan it has been quarantined indoors . 
Actually , it might be the best thing to happen to it . 
On every visit I have paid to Kabul s zoo , the creature has been subjected to abusive taunts by curious onlookers as well as the the not infrequent thrown stone . 
Pig farmers in Kansas City were making a great effort to save their bacon by banning outsiders from coming into contact with their swine herds . 
They even told staff with the sniffles to keep away on full pay . 
`` If humans give it to pigs , we do n't have things like Tamiflu for pigs . 
We do n't have antivirals . 
We have no treatment other than to give them aspirin , '' said Jennifer Greiner , chief veterinarian with the National Pork Producers group . 
In Malaysia , thousands of Hindus sought blessings from goup of wild boars they believe have mystical powers , the Daily Star reported . 
Pigs have long been known to be one of nature s most intelligent creatures , but this group appeared to have mastered the art of a free lunch by making a temple their home , where they are fed by visitors who arrive from as far afield as Thailand and Singapore . 
The pigs do n't have any disease . 
The country is diseased , '' said Marzouk Badr Adli after residents of the poor Manshiet Nasr shantytown of Cairo clashed with authorities who tried to cull his herd . 
The United Nations said killing the pigs would be a mistake , but even after the World Health Organization formally distanced itself from using the name swine flu , the language was still causing problems . 
Under Jewish dietary laws , pigs are also considered unclean and pork is a forbidden food , but Israeli authorities made a ham-fisted attempt to change the name . 
`` We will call it Mexico flu . 
We wo n't call it swine flu , '' Deputy Health Minister Yakov Litzman said . 
prompting an immediate protest from the Mexican ambassador . 
Confusingly , they then settled on South American flu , despite Mexico still being in North America the last time anyone checked . 
The European Union , mindful of its enormous domestic pork industry -LRB- and anxious , perhaps , to avoid creating a swine lake -RRB- , said it would call the new virus `` novel flu '' . 
In true EU style , however , it then produced an internal document which called it novel flu in English , Mexican flu in French and swine flu in German . 
it truly shows the selfish of American not taking serious steps to prevent H1N1 spreading , as U.S has good and sound health care system , so H1N1 is not a big concern to most Americans , but considering you brought the virus to worldwide , including those countries without good health care system , you should be guilty ! 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
