LONDON | Mon Jul 12 , 2010 7:03 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Gulf of Mexico oil spill highlights the need for governments to include the value of natural resources such as fisheries when calculating the size of their economies , the United Nations environment chief said . 
A U.N. Environment Programme report on Tuesday urged businesses to take more account of their impact on the natural resources which people depend on . 
It said the private sector would act faster if governments more explicitly valued such resources , including biodiversity , a term for the wide array of animal and plant species . 
`` The oil spill goes to the heart of a contradictory set of signals , '' said Achim Steiner , UNEP executive director . 
He said the money spent on cleaning up the spill from BP Plc 's ruptured well in the Gulf of Mexico would be included in Gross Domestic Product , the conventional measure of economic activity , but many costs to nature including the health of fisheries and the survival of marine creatures would not . 
`` An oil spill could turn out to be a positive thing for the GDP indicator , while it has actually caused a far greater -LRB- negative -RRB- impact in terms of the natural wealth and natural capital of the United States , '' said Steiner . 
`` We 're trying to tackle the issue of invisibility of the value of biodiversity in the marketplace . '' 
Tuesday 's report argued that extractive industries such as oil and mining , as well as wider industry , risked losing customers , brand value , efficiencies and opportunities if they failed to take account of biodiversity , as attention to its value rose . 
One example of explicit valuation was the payment by some cities for conservation of forests and wetlands , in order to use these to cleanse their water supplies and effluent and so avoid more expensive , artificial treatment . 
Tuesday 's report calculated the value of such emerging markets for water services at $ 5 billion in 2008 . 
The report is the latest such initiative in 2010 , which the United Nations has declared ` International Year of Biodiversity ' . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
