NEW ORLEANS | Mon Jul 12 , 2010 7:47 pm EDT NEW ORLEANS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Sal Sunseri 's P&J Oyster Company has worked Louisiana waters since 1876 , making it the oldest operating oyster processor in the United States . 
But the future is grim , he told a presidential panel on Monday , due to the devastating BP Plc spill that has been gushing oil into the Gulf of Mexico since late April . 
`` Due to this unnatural catastrophe in our water , P&J may forever be extinct , '' he said . 
Sunseri , who has already laid off 11 workers , was among a group of speakers from the fishing , seafood and tourism industries sharing stories of loss with the seven-member commission investigating the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
Keith Overton , chairman of the Florida Restaurant and Lodging Association , said tourism operators across his state were already suffering even though tar balls had been found only on the Florida Panhandle in the north . 
At his company , TradeWinds Island Resorts near St Petersburg , calls from potential customers are down 25 percent , he said . 
`` These losses have occurred in our area without a single drop of oil reaching our shore , '' said Overton . 
He implored the panel not to overlook legitimate claims from businesses hit by a public misperception that all Gulf Coast areas should be avoided . 
`` I think our losses are going to be scrutinized . 
Give us the benefit of the doubt , '' Overton said . 
President Barack Obama set up the commission with an executive order in late May , a month after a rig drilling a well for BP , the Deepwater Horizon owned by Transocean Ltd , sank after an explosion . 
Eleven workers were killed and the damaged well has been spewing oil into the Gulf of Mexico from a mile under the surface . 
BP is using a containment system to capture some of the oil and hopes to finally plug the leak by mid-August . 
Michael Hecht of Greater New Orleans Inc , an economic development agency , warned the panel not to underestimate the damage of a moratorium on deepwater drilling sought by the Obama administration . 
`` The economic impact from the oil spill itself , however broad and long-lasting , will likely be dwarfed by the impact of the moratorium , '' Hecht said . 
A drilling freeze threatens 24,000 jobs in Louisiana alone , representing nearly $ 2 billion in wages , he said . 
Cherri Foytlin , who spoke during a public comment period , said the $ 1,600 she and her husband , an out-of-work offshore oil worker , brought in last month to support their six children barely covered their $ 1000 mortgage . 
`` Whatever you do , please take into account that you are talking about people , '' Foytlin said . 
`` You are not talking about numbers , you are not talking about politics . 
You are talking about my family . 
My whole Louisiana family . '' 
One speaker said the disaster affects not just the fishing industry , but lucrative sport fishing as well . 
That pastime supports a wide variety of small business , from bait and tackle shops to marinas , charter vessels , hotels , and gas stations , said Jeff Angers , president of the Center for Coastal Conservation , a group that advocates sport fishing . 
`` If the entire Gulf were closed to recreational fishing from May to August , the region would lose ... $ 1.1 billion and about 19,000 jobs , '' Angers told the panel . 
The spill has wreaked havoc on delicate coastal ecosystems , killing birds , sea turtles and dolphins and threatening the spawning season of fish . 
Containment and cleanup have taken too long , said Sunseri of P&J Oyster , expressing a common complaint in the area . 
`` Our livelihoods have been drastically jeopardized , '' he said . 
`` I do n't see a future in the oyster business as it once was . '' 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
When an average citizen commits a heinous crime , the courts impose punitive fines to make it hurt . 
BP is barely being charged for the `` clean up '' -LRB- clearing out of visible oil -RRB- , and maybe some job loss checks cut to keep the peasants complacent . 
What about the crimes against nature and humanity in play here ? 
What about the poisoning of a quarter of our country with VOCs from the flaring of oil and natural gas , as well as fumes from the oil itself and solvents used ? 
Surely BP should n't be allowed to get away with this , no matter how wealthy and connected a company it is , and no matter how dependent we are upon the oil industry . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
