How many companies could take a $ 20 billion body blow and still be left standing ? 
The amount of money BP said it would plunk into an escrow fund for oil-spill claims is enough to cover the entire NASA budget for a year . 
It 's enough to buy all the shares of the Kellogg Co. . 
And it 's larger than the annual economic output of 90 countries . 
But BP is an unusual company . 
It made profits of $ 5.6 billion in the first quarter of this year and $ 14 billion in 2009 . 
It produces about 2.5 million barrels a day of crude oil from Russia to Angola , from Britain 's North Sea to Alaska 's North Slope . 
Until Wednesday , BP also had been planning to pay out $ 10.5 billion in dividends this year , which would still have left it with $ 5 billion to $ 10 billion in spare cash . 
It could raise the money for the escrow fund this year without borrowing another dime . 
That arsenal of cash and crude has n't been enough to placate the Obama administration , however , as the company wades through the largest environmental disaster in U.S. history . 
And BP has struggled to convince markets that it can meet its obligations to both investors and victims of the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
In eight weeks , BP stock has fallen to about half its earlier value . 
On Tuesday , Fitch Ratings slashed the firm 's credit rating to BBB , two rungs above junk . 
And early on Wednesday morning , investors in credit default swaps -- an insurance-like financial instrument -- were pricing an almost 40 percent chance the oil giant would default on its debts within five years . 
So although the deal struck at the White House on Wednesday was designed in part to reassure Gulf Coast residents that BP would put aside enough money for their claims , it was also designed to give shareholders a sense that the financial damage was manageable and could , over time , be contained along with the oil spill . 
That 's why one thing BP asked in exchange for the big escrow fund was a signal from President Obama that he was not trying to run the firm out of business . 
`` BP is a strong and viable company , '' the president said after his meeting with BP 's chairman and top executives , `` and it is in all of our interests that it remain so . '' 
That is hard to accept for many Americans who want to punish BP . 
But anything else might be counterproductive . 
So far , the company , drawing on its worldwide operations , has paid for everything from National Guard troops to air quality testing by the Environmental Protection Agency , from $ 5,000 checks for shrimpers to the $ 100 million or so for each relief well . 
`` This agreement underscores that as long as we need oil , Big Petroleum is better than Bankrupt Petroleum , '' Lincoln Mayer , a lawyer specializing in energy and antitrust at McDermott Will & Emery , said in an e-mail . 
`` Few companies could afford a $ 20 billion mistake . 
BP is one of them , and that 's a good thing . '' 
Investment analysts appeared reassured after the White House meeting . 
`` It takes the political heat off the company and it steadies the ship in rough waters , '' said Fadel Gheit , an oil analyst at Oppenheimer . 
`` BP is stabilizing its financial position so it can handle cleanup costs and damages . '' 
BP stock rose 1.4 percent on Wednesday , closing at $ 31.85 a share . 
And the cost of BP credit default swaps dipped slightly , indicating a bit less anxiety about corporate default . 
So how does a company come up with $ 20 billion ? 
BP 's chairman , Carl-Henric Svanberg , said the firm will suspend its dividend for three quarters , starting with the payment that had been scheduled for Monday . 
That will give it $ 7.8 billion in cash . 
