The much-anticipated showdown Wednesday at the White House between President Obama and top BP executives turned into no-nonsense business meeting in which the oil giant agreed to pay $ 20 billion into an escrow account to cover claims associated with the oil spill disaster in the Gulf of Mexico . 
There were also apologies from BP 's chairman of the board , Carl-Henric Svanberg -- to the president in the Roosevelt Room , and then to the American people when Svanberg and his grim-faced fellow executives went before the cameras in the White House driveway . 
Both sides got what they wanted out of the encounter . 
The administration , under fire for how it has responded to the environmental calamity , can boast of creating a huge pot of money for easing the pain of Gulf Coast residents . 
BP , though poorer on paper in the short run , got some much-needed clarity on its long-term liability , plus an explicit statement from Obama that the administration does n't want to see BP driven into bankruptcy . 
`` BP is a strong and viable company , and it is in all our interests that it remain so , '' Obama said in remarks to reporters in the State Dining Room . 
`` This is about accountability . 
At the end of the day , that 's what every American wants and expects . '' 
The morning meeting , which ran several hours longer than expected , was Obama 's first face-to-face encounter with BP executives since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded in a fireball April 20 . 
Although their partnership of necessity has been strained by the continuing spill , which , according to recent estimates , has dumped upward of 85 million gallons of oil into the gulf , the administration and BP officials hammered out the key details of their agreement over several days prior to the White House session . 
Under the deal , BP will pay $ 5 billion annually over the next four years into an escrow account for damage claims from the gulf , setting aside an equivalent amount of U.S. assets as collateral until the fund reaches $ 20 billion . 
The figure is not a cap on the potential damages , and the company received no liability waiver as part of the agreement . 
The thorniest issue in recent days , however , appears to have been resolved with a compromise . 
Since last week , administration officials have said that BP should pay the lost wages of oil industry workers sidelined by the administration 's six-month moratorium on deep-water drilling . 
That stance put BP 's stock price in a nose dive , and BP officials made clear that such claims would be beyond the pale . 
Instead , the president Wednesday asked BP for a voluntary contribution to a foundation that will support unemployed oil industry employees . 
BP agreed , offering $ 100 million . 
`` We made clear that we do not think this is a liability for the company . 
The president said he 's concerned about those workers . 
He asked if there was something we could do as a voluntary gesture , '' said Jamie Gorelick , a Washington lawyer who serves as an adviser to BP and sat in on the White House meeting . 
Asked if BP had requested a statement from Obama affirming that BP should remain strong and viable , Gorelick did not answer directly , saying : `` We know what it looks like when a company is driven into bankruptcy . 
The claims that come first are the creditors , then the employees , then the environmental claims , and then the likes of shrimpers . 
This would not be a good result for anyone ... I do n't think the administration needs persuasion of this . '' 
Obama participated at various times in the discussions , which senior administration officials described as a `` negotiation , '' and met alone afterward with Svanberg . 
Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. also participated in much of the session , a sign of the potential criminal liability the oil company may face . 
`` We have made it clear to the president that words are not enough . 
We understand that we will and we should be judged by our actions , '' Svanberg said when he faced the cameras after the meeting . 
He added , `` I would like to take this opportunity to apologize to the American people on behalf of all the employees of BP , many of whom are living on the Gulf Coast . '' 
He said BP for the rest of this year will not pay dividends to shareholders . 
The new fund will be administered by Kenneth Feinberg , the Washington lawyer who oversaw a similar fund for victims of the Sept. 11 , 2001 , terror attacks and who more recently was the Obama administration 's special master for executive compensation at firms receiving federal bailout money . 
Coast Guard Adm. Thad W. Allen , who is managing the federal response to the spill , said Wednesday that BP has already paid $ 81 million in claims , exceeding the $ 75 million cap on damages established by federal law two decades ago after the Exxon Valdez disaster . 
`` The president 's goal , as he said in the meeting , is to make sure there are adequate funds to help the people of the gulf get back on their feet , '' said Rahm Emanuel , the White House chief of staff , who attended the meeting . 
`` Those are his shareholders , and that 's who he 's trying to protect . '' 
As the two sides were meeting in Washington , BP announced that it had begun using a second containment system to capture oil leaking from the well , which according to the latest scientific estimate is gushing between 35,000 and 60,000 barrels a day -LRB- 1.5 million to 2.5 million gallons -RRB- . 
The new technique pulls oil and gas from the blowout preventer and up to a surface rig called the Q4000 , using one of the lines that had been employed to pump heavy drilling mud into the well during the ill-fated `` top kill '' attempt last month . 
BP did not reveal the quantities involved . 
At best , the new process can handle 10,000 barrels a day , the company has said . 
BP 's controversial chief executive , Tony Hayward , made no public statement after meeting with Obama , but he will testify Thursday before a House subcommittee . 
In prepared remarks released in advance , Hayward says he is `` deeply sorry '' and adds , `` I fully grasp the terrible reality of the situation . '' 
Congress received from the White House on Wednesday a $ 15 million request to fund the commission Obama has appointed to study the future of offshore drilling . 
Its work is supposed to conclude in six months . 
Wednesday 's Obama-BP meeting came a day after the president 's fourth visit to the gulf , a two-day trip that took him to Mississippi , Alabama and the Florida Panhandle . 
His experience seemed fresh in his mind . 
He said he told Svanberg in their private meeting that `` for the families I met with down in the gulf , for the small-business owners , for the fishermen , for the shrimpers , this is not just a matter of dollars and cents . '' 
`` A lot of these folks do n't have a cushion , '' he said . 
`` They were coming off Rita and Katrina , coming off the worst economy that this country has seen since the Great Depression , and this season was going to be the season where they were going to be bouncing back . '' 
Svanberg , a Swede who is not a native English speaker , said afterward of Obama : `` He cares about the small people . 
And we care about the small people . '' 
Later he issued a statement apologizing for speaking `` clumsily . '' '' 
