GOP leaders forced Rep. Barton to retract apology to BP By Aaron Blake and Paul Kane Thursday , June 17 , 2010 ; 5:11 PM Under pressure from Republican leaders who threatened to remove him from a ranking committee position , Rep. Joe Barton -LRB- R-Tex . -RRB- 
late Thursday retracted his apology to BP CEO Tony Hayward for the way his company has been treated by the U.S. government -- a comment that had drawn heavy criticism from both parties . 
Barton made that apology to Hayward in his opening statement Thursday morning before Hayward 's testimony to the House subcommittee , in which Barton decried the Obama administration for pressuring BP to open a $ 20 billion escrow account and to suspend dividend payments for the rest of the year . 
The ranking Republican on the House Energy and Commerce Committee said such arrangements have no legal basis , and that the political pressure exerted on the corporation in the midst of an investigation is a `` tragedy of the first proportion . '' 
`` I 'm ashamed of what happened in the White House yesterday , '' Barton said in the morning . 
`` I apologize . '' 
Barton called the escrow account , which will be distributed independently , a `` slush fund '' and said the situation amounted to a `` shakedown '' by the White House . 
He said if he , as a congressman , asked for something similar from a corporation he was investigating , he could go to jail . 
Later Thursday , when House Republican leaders called his statement `` wrong , '' Barton first said he was sorry for the `` misconstruction '' of his comments , then later put out a statement retracting his apology to BP . 
According to a GOP leadership aide , Barton met with House Minority Leader John Boehner -LRB- Ohio -RRB- and Minority Whip Eric Cantor -LRB- Va. -RRB- Thursday afternoon , and was told , `` Apologize , immediately . 
Or you will lose your -LRB- subcommittee -RRB- position , immediately . 
Now that he has apologized , we 'll see what happens going forward . '' 
Another aide said Barton would now not be removed unless he goes on `` the TV circuit '' and causes further controversy . 
The aides requested anonymity to discuss the private discussions of the Republican leaders . 
In his statement , Barton said , `` I apologize for using the term ` shakedown ' with regard to yesterday 's actions at the White House in my opening statement this morning , and I retract my apology to BP ... I regret the impact that my statement this morning implied that BP should not pay for the consequences of their decisions and actions in this incident . '' 
BP 's Hayward said in testimony at the hearing that he does n't think the $ 20 billion escrow account amounts to a `` slush fund . '' 
Pressed by Rep. Bruce Braley -LRB- D-Iowa -RRB- , Hayward repeatedly declined to give a yes-or-no answer about whether he thought the situation represented a `` shakedown . '' 
Almost immediately following Barton 's morning comments , the liberal blogs and Democratic campaign operatives sprang into action and the White House denounced Barton . 
Even before Barton 's comments , Democrats had been attempting to connect Republicans to BP , noting the many contributions GOP congressmen have received from it and other oil companies . 
