Elected officials should consider imposing ethics rules on oil and gas companies that do business with the federal government , the Interior Department 's acting inspector general plans to tell the House Natural Resources Committee on Thursday . 
Mary L. Kendall will also tell the panel that the Minerals Management Agency , which oversees offshore oil drilling , is probing the BP oil spill in a `` completely backwards '' way and needs to have its culture revamped . 
The Washington Post obtained a copy of Kendall 's prepared testimony late Wednesday . 
`` While there is ample opportunity to improve and strengthen the regulations that govern MMS and the industry that extracts valuable resources from federal lands , the greatest challenge in reorganizing and reforming MMS lies with the culture -- both within MMS and within industry , '' Kendall intends to tell lawmakers . 
The agency 's inspectors are not only underpaid and inadequately trained but are also faced with having to oversee too many rigs , she says in her prepared testimony . 
About 60 MMS inspectors oversee 4,000 facilities in the Gulf of Mexico , Kendall notes , while the Pacific Coast has 10 inspectors for 23 facilities . 
Kendall 's testimony was first reported Wednesday by the Wall Street Journal . 
Kendall documented improper behavior by MMS offshore regulators in a report last month , and she intends to say that new ethics rules imposed last year by Interior Secretary Ken Salazar address only part of the problem . 
`` But how do we address the conduct of industry representatives ? '' 
the prepared testimony says . 
`` Perhaps it is time to impose some ethics requirements on companies doing business with the government . '' 
Kendall also questioned the approach MMS has applied to investigating the Deepwater Horizon disaster , noting that the agency `` is bound by the Coast Guard regulations , which are comprehensive , but in my view , completely backwards , gathering evidence via public hearing , rather than developing evidence to culminate in a public forum . '' '' 
