Apr. 21 : An oil slick is seen as the Deepwater Horizon oil rig burns in the Gulf of Mexico . 
AP Apr. 21 : Fire boat crews battle the blazing remnants of the offshore oil rig Deepwater Horizon . 
Coast Guard via AP NEW ORLEANS -- The Coast Guard discovered Saturday that oil is leaking from the damaged well that fed a massive rig that exploded this week off Louisiana 's coast , while bad weather halted efforts to clean up the mess that threatens the area 's fragile marine ecosystem . 
For days , the Coast Guard has said no oil appeared to be escaping from the well head on the ocean floor . 
Rear Adm. Mary Landry said the leak was a new discovery but could have begun when the rig sank on Thursday , two days after the initial explosion . 
`` We thought what we were dealing with as of yesterday was a surface residual -LRB- oil -RRB- from the mobile offshore drilling unit , '' Landry said . 
`` In addition to that is oil emanating from the well . 
It is a big change from yesterday ... This is a very serious spill , absolutely . '' 
Coast Guard and company officials estimate that as much as 1,000 barrels -- or 42,000 gallons -- of oil is leaking each day after studying information from remotely operated vehicles and the size of the oil slick surrounding the blast site . 
The rainbow-colored sheen of oil stretched 20 miles by 20 miles on Saturday -- about 25 times larger than it appeared to be a day earlier , Landry said . 
By comparison , Exxon Valdez spilled 11 million gallons in Alaska 's Prince William Sound in 1989 -- the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
BP PLC , which leased the rig and is taking the lead in the cleanup , and the government have been using the remotely operated vehicles to try to stop the leak by closing valves on the well deep underwater . 
If that does n't work , the company could drill what 's called an intervention well to control the oil flow . 
But the intervention drilling could take months . 
`` Over the next several days , we should determine which method is the best one to follow , '' said Doug Suttles , chief operating officer for BP Exploration and Production . 
`` A huge number of engineers from ourselves , working with -LRB- the government -RRB- and across the industry are putting together the best technology and know-how to solve this problem . '' 
Complicating efforts to stop the leak is well head 's depth at 5,000 feet underwater , said Lars Herbst , the regional director for the Minerals Management Service . 
Leaks have been fixed at similar depths before , but the process is difficult , he said . 
The bad weather rolled in Friday , bringing with it strong wind , clouds and rain that interrupted efforts to contain the oil spill . 
Coast Guard Petty Officer John Edwards said he was uncertain when weather conditions would improve enough for the cleanup to resume . 
So far , crews have retrieved about 1,052 barrels of oily water , he said . 
The sunken rig may have as much as 700,000 gallons of diesel on board , and an undetermined amount of oil has spilled from the rig itself . 
Suttles said the rig was `` intact and secure '' on the seabed about 1,300 feet from the well site . 
BP said it has activated an extensive oil spill response , including the remotely operated vehicles , 700 workers , four airplanes and 32 vessels to mop up the spill . 
The Marine Spill Response Corp. , an energy industry cleanup consortium , also brought equipment . 
The 11 missing workers came from Texas , Louisiana and Mississippi . 
Neither the Coast Guard nor their employers have released their names , though several of their families have come forward . 
Karl Kleppinger Sr. , whose 38-year-old son , Karl , was one of the missing workers , said he does n't blame the Coast Guard for calling off the search . 
`` Given the magnitude of the explosion and the fire , I do n't see where you would be able to find anything , '' said Kleppinger , of Zachary , La. . 
The other 115 crew members made it off the platform ; several were hurt but only one remained hospitalized . 
The most seriously injured worker was expected to be released within about 10 days . 
Federal officials had already been working on new safety rules for offshore drilling before Tuesday 's blast . 
The U.S. Minerals and Management Service is developing regulations aimed at preventing human error , which it identified as a factor in many of the more than 1,400 offshore oil drilling accidents between 2001 and 2007 . 
An MMS review published last year found 41 deaths and 302 injuries during that period . 
The cause of Tuesday 's blast has n't been determined . 
The Deepwater Horizon was the site of a 2005 fire found to have been caused by human error . 
An MMS investigation determined that a crane operator on the rig had become distracted while refueling the crane , allowing diesel fuel to overflow . 
Records show the fire was quickly contained , but caused $ 60,000 in damage to the crane . 
Environmentalists said the rig explosion and oil spill should push the nation to develop new energy sources . 
`` This should be a wake-up call , '' said David Helvarg , the president of the Blue Frontier Campaign , a marine conservation group , and author of `` Rescue Warriors : The U.S. Coast Guard , America 's Forgotten Heroes . '' 
`` I would rather risk a ` wind spill ' than an oil spill offshore , '' he said , ruefully pointing out that the source of wind-powered energy ca n't sully the environment . 
