UK swine flu highest in Europe The UK has the highest number of confirmed swine flu cases in Europe An extra 141 cases of swine flu have been confirmed in England , making the UK home to the highest number of confirmed cases in Europe . 
The national total now stands at 1,461 patients since April 2009 . 
This number does not include clinically diagnosed cases in Scotland where the virus has spread particularly fast . 
These are yet to be confirmed . 
At the weekend a 38-year-old Scottish woman became the first victim of the virus outside America . 
Jacqui Fleming from Glasgow had given birth to a premature boy two weeks before her death at the Royal Alexandra Hospital in Paisley . 
The baby , named Jack , who also died did not have swine flu . 
In a statement the family said , `` our whole family is absolutely devastated . '' 
Professor Hugh Pennington , a bacteriologist at Aberdeen University , says the death does not indicate that the virus is any more virulent . 
`` It does not point to the virus getting nastier . 
All the evidence to date suggests the virus is not changing at all , '' he said . 
A Department of Health spokesperson said `` The localized cases of swine flu found in the UK have so far been generally mild in most people , but are proving to be severe in a small minority of cases . 
All the evidence to date suggests the virus is not changing at all `` We are continuing to work to slow the spread of the disease and to put in place arrangements to ensure that the UK is well-placed to deal with this new infection . '' 
Last week , the World Health Organisation -LRB- WHO -RRB- held an emergency meeting at which it declared a global flu pandemic , the first in 40 years . 
A pandemic is declared on geographical terms as the virus spreads , but it does not mean that it is causing more severe illness or a greater number of deaths . 
The swine flu -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- virus has now spread to 76 countries after it was first detected in Mexico in April . 
Young working age adults have been the most likely to contract the virus , with a third to a half of complications presenting in otherwise healthy people . 
The government has been stockpiling antivirals like Tamiflu and has ordered vaccine . 
The first doses could be administered in October . 
Anyone suffering from flu-like symptoms is advised to seek medical attention and stay at home . 
