Fergus Walsh | 18:17 UK time , Tuesday , 16 June 2009 Your eyes may glaze over at the thought of graphs . 
But if , like me , you find them useful , then read on . 
I 'm indebted to my colleague Kate Merriam from BBC Research for collating these figures from the World Health Organization website , from the HPA in England and from Health Protection in Scotland . 
Before the numbers , here are some points to bear in mind . 
First , health officials have been charting the spread of H1N1 swine flu for around seven weeks now . 
Most of the cases mentioned will now be virus-free and healthy . 
Second , the WHO figures lag behind the real total by a couple of days . 
For example , the death toll for the US is quite a bit below the current figures from the CDC . 
But the WHO figures , while out of date , are reliable . 
Third , all the graphs vastly underestimate the actual number of cases . 
The CDC has said that perhaps 19 out of 20 cases go unrecorded , and the state of Victoria in Australia has stopped laboratory testing of uncomplex community cases . 
Given those caveats , I think the figures are useful . 
Global H1N1 swine flu cases First , the global tally from the WHO . 
As of 1700 BST on 15 June 2009 , 76 countries have officially reported 35,928 cases of influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- infection , including 163 deaths . 
Now let 's look at some individual countries . 
The number of confirmed cases in the UK now stands at 1,562 . 
There has been one death , that of 38-year-old Jacqueline Fleming , a mother who gave birth prematurely after contracting the virus . 
Yesterday , it was announced that her son Jack had also died . 
He did not have the virus . 
A further 141 patients were confirmed with H1N1 swine flu in England today -LRB- I think this is a record number for one day in England -RRB- , bringing the total to 952 cases . 
Of the new cases in England , 124 appeared in the west Midlands , where 512 people have been affected by the virus . 
There was one new case in Northern Ireland , bringing the total to nine . 
Three cases have been recorded in Wales . 
Health Protection Scotland said there had been 10 new laboratory-confirmed cases today , taking the total to 508 , with 414 possible cases under investigation . 
17,855 cases and 45 deaths at 15 June . 
This represents a rise of 4,638 cases and 18 deaths since the last report on 12 June . 
6,241 cases and 108 deaths with no cases reported in the last three days . 
This can surely only mean that the figures were not forthcoming or that the authorities are not testing in the community . 
I will try to investigate further . 
Yesterday , the US State Department said that the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention -LRB- CDC -RRB- had lifted the recommendation that American citizens avoid all non-essential travel to Mexico . 
Proving the virus is incredibly mild , just look at the statistics . 
And lets not even mention the CDC saying 19 out of 20 cases go unmissed , its such a weak flu virus right now . 
CDC in new york claim at least half a million cases in NY in may alone . 
Using the recorded deaths in NY gives us a death rate of ... 0.000024 . 
At 08:26 am on 17 Jun 2009 , lincolnlerner wrote : The Uk has been tracking this virus for seven weeks with a total of over 1500 cases , as you said the majority of cases will no be fit and well , do we have an actual figure of cases that are currently suffering from the illness , and this would show the general puplic that like with any other flu it is self limiting at the moment , when you see a total of over 1500 you think that is the current figure of cases currently suffering the flu . 
At 08:40 am on 17 Jun 2009 , pap1976uk wrote : Lincolnlerner - agree with your point , but it would not be possible to collect that sort of data . 
There is no way of routinely collecting data on how many people are currently suffering . 
Obviously it 's great that at the moment the virus is `` mild '' , but even if it does stay that way , it does n't mean we wo n't have severe problems because of it . 
I feel the biggest issue from a public health perspective is the societal impact of large numbers of people having the virus at the same time . 
It wo n't take much to severely affect health services , not to mention other things we take for granted such as deliveries of food , petrol , and running of transportation systems -LRB- due to staff sickness -RRB- . 
As a resident of Gloucestershire , I know first hand how one event -LRB- flooding in that case -RRB- can have repercussions on the rest of life . 
That 's why the authorities are right to be concerned . 
At 08:43 am on 17 Jun 2009 , pap1976uk wrote : I meant to say , that the only real way of estimating how many people are currently suffering would be to look at the number of recent cases over , say , the past week . 
That would at least give some indication of current sufferers , but it would only be a rough estimate of course . 
At 08:40 am on 17 Jun 2009 , pap1976uk wrote : '' ... the biggest issue from a public health perspective is the societal impact of large numbers of people having the virus at the same time . 
It wo n't take much to severely affect health services , not to mention other things we take for granted such as deliveries of food , petrol , and running of transportation systems -LRB- due to staff sickness -RRB- . 
Now that IS the point , the whole point and nothing but the point . 
People -LRB- except virologists and academics -RRB- are n't particularly interested in how many people had the virus four weeks ago . 
They ARE concerned to try to factor in whatever degree of risk there may be to their interests and functional ability . 
Those interests might be trying to ensure a vulnerable relative is not exposed to the infection , or perhaps business continuity of a company , or local authority , or health trust in the event that the infection rate mushrooms . 
It 's all wrapped up in that term `` societal impact '' . 
At 3:32 pm on 17 Jun 2009 , Greenfrogflyinghigh wrote : I can completely take the point about societal impact and I agree that it would seem to be the real -LRB- economic -RRB- threat in this situation . 
However , I have an axe to grind about the way there seems to be a reaction to this type of flu that is way out of proportion - I mean new strains of viruses are constantly evolving , many far more virulent and dangerous , so why the huge fuss about this one ? 
There are , in fact , far more globally endemic diseases that claim millions of lives annually with far too few proactive resources in place in the countries worst affected . 
I have recently traveled back from the UK to a country in the Far East where I live and work . 
I 'm a community development worker in some of the poorest places in this region . 
Each day , each week , each year I am faced with the effects of preventable diseases that are also curable , yet no treatment is available , no effective strategies in place -LRB- despite apparent millions of dollars of aid -RRB- - TB is foremost in my mind , for instance , though I could name many others . 
Official figures for this country rate TB infection at 70 % . 
In the places I work , those without access to healthcare , our estimate is far higher and people are dying . 
Children are being disabled - yet there is no free medication or treatment program for children and their parents are too ill and too poor to afford drugs . 
Dengue - there 's another one . 
The unacknowledged presence of AIDS which I suspect underlies a large proportion of these fatalities . 
Why do I mention this on a blog on Swine Flu ? 
Well , on my return here last week I was astounded to see the latest technology monitoring body temperatures as we disembarked . 
All of a sudden every public place has sprouted disinfectant dispensers so we can all cleanse our hands . 
The government has produced a flurry of paperwork charting provenance , past travel , contact with foreigners and a part requiring a list of any possible symptoms . 
My daughter , suffering from jet lag , has been ordered to report to a hospital for tests . 
Everywhere there is paranoia and people react in fear if we , as foreigners , so much as sniffle . 
This paranoia is fuelled by posters that proclaim the dangers of Swine Flu - today I read with incredulity the bald , unqualified statement , ` This Disease is Fatal to Humans ' What is going on ?? Has the world gone mad ? 
Why is this such a perceived threat when real killers go untreated ? 
Why ca n't the resources ploughed into preventing such a mild infection be better targeted ? 
I 'm well aware of the devastation that H1N1 could wreak in one of the villages where I work - but the real problem would not be flu , it would be the pre-existing conditions that should have been recognized and dealt with a long time ago . 
Well , this flu is n't that great a threat in many respects , at least not a ` health ' threat . 
But it IS an administrative threat , meaning if civil servants and health experts are n't seen to be recommending and taking the best actions it could leave them open to criticism , or losing their jobs , or being sanctioned for poor performance . 
And it is a political risk . 
And it is a risk , as already suggested , to societal functioning . 
But in the main , it is not really a significant direct threat to most individual 's personal health . 
But you do have to factor in that if societal functioning were to be severely hampered by the effects of a flu outbreak , then the risks to an individual 's well-being and health might increase due to lack of access to medics , pharmacists , transport , etc. , etc. . 
Of course , it is also a journalistic risk . 
If the BBC do n't cover it , Sky or ITV will . 
And the BBC is funded to provide public service information as well as entertainment . 
So that might go some way to answering why there is so much media output about what is probably a comparatively minor risk when compared to some other infections . 
Finally , the number of infected people does have the potential to escalate significantly - whether it actually does that or not - so that is another reason for the quantity of media coverage . 
would suggest that the West Midlands region has had a higher number of reported and confirmed infections than Scotland per captita . 
The West Midlands has a slightly higher population -LRB- about 5.3 million -RRB- compared to Scotland -LRB- about 5.1 million -RRB- . 
But given that the first cases were in Scotland , the rate of spread in the West Midlands would seem to be faster . 
Of course , there could be many other factors in place . 
If , as may be the case , a higher percentage of the West Midlands cases involve children , then the involvement of medics may be more prevalent and , therefore , there may be better reporting and testing of cases . 
At 7:22 pm on 17 Jun 2009 , random_thought wrote : Well the graphs certainly still look to be increasing exponentially in countries in both the Northern and Southern hemispheres . 
The experts -LRB- and the Health Service -RRB- are hoping there will be a summer lull in new cases in the Northern Hemisphere with numbers not rising seriously until the Autumn -LRB- when we should have at least some vaccine stocks in place -RRB- . 
But I ca n't really see any sign of that yet . 
It would be interesting to know what the computer models are predicting , and at what point we should see the Northern Hemisphere case rate dropping off for the summer . 
At 9:06 pm on 17 Jun 2009 , CuriousAddition wrote : Given that London is one of the UK 's most densely populated areas and sees the most amount of flights , I find it surprising that there has n't been more confirmed cases in the capital . 
We 're almost at 200 now although I 'm sure there could be hundreds more cases that have gone undetected . 
True , we have more cases than most parts of the UK but the one place in England that has more than us , the West Midlands has seen far more cases then London and the same with Scotland . 
Perhaps its due to us being one of the warmest parts of the UK on average and thus the higher temperatures stop it from spreading as well as it would do in colder weather . 
Whatever the reason , it is an interesting thing to ponder . 
Hopefully , things will not increase here to the degree seen in Birmingham or Glasgow . 
At 11:25 pm on 17 Jun 2009 , cumbrianOAP wrote : I did not realize , until recently the great importance of taking advised FULL courses of antibiotics , rather than stop taking them as soon as you feel a little better . 
As this STRENGTHENS the `` BUG 'S '' IMMUNITY TO THE ANTIBIOTIC , HELPING TO BREED SUPER BUGS , which are much , much harder to deal with . 
I think it should be well publicised , and strong warnings of the dangers of not completing full courses of Antibiotics , in Doctors surgery 's and on the Medicine packaging . 
It is , of course , worth pointing out -LRB- for the avoidance of any doubt -RRB- that antibiotics are thoroughly useless in treating flu itself in the normal course of events . 
The only time they would be used is in treating the occasional opportunistic bacterial infections that might arise as a secondary result of flu . 
In the vast majority of cases this does n't happen and antibiotic treatment would be a waste of time . 
The point about finishing the course of a drug is well made though in general terms . 
Notwithstanding rare side effects that make a drug impossible to continue with , it 's important to complete the course of any treatment to prevent resistance and\/or reoccurrence of an illness . 
People should definitely be made aware of the necessity to complete drug treatments according to the correct instructions . 
At 5:36 pm on 19 Jun 2009 , sensiblegrannie wrote : Tracking does keep one up to date . 
June 17th appears significant , from Sao Paulo , may not be anything but I will keep checking . 
At 7:38 pm on 19 Jun 2009 , SkylineOnFire wrote : Sensible old grannie , you are refering to the `` mutation '' reported in sao paolo yes ? 
That was confirmed by the WHO to have no significance on the virus whatsoever , no increase in virluency , or infection methods , and it has no effect on a vaccine either , essentially it was literally nothing . 
Thats why most media didnt report it , everyone was sceptical and proven right , the scientists put out a statement with 99 percent made up information . 
Luckily the masses never got hold of it else it would be panic panic again for a week . 
SO yes , no mutation happened , the strain is the same as before . 
At 01:42 am on 21 Jun 2009 , Chris wrote : Fergus - I think you 're doing a great job keeping everyone up to date here but it pains me to look at your graphs . 
The fist thing you learn when doing basic IT is how to make line graphs look professional as the default settings in Excel are pretty awful . 
Try removing the gray background and the horizontal grid lines for a start - and it would n't hurt to make the line a bit thicker ! 
I 'm Fergus Walsh , the BBC 's medical correspondent . 
This is my blog for discussion of medical and health issues , especially research and ethics . 
Please get involved and leave a comment . 
For the latest updates across BBC blogs , You can stay up to date with Fergus 's Medical Files via these feeds . 
