India says it is fully equipped to deal with the disease The Indian government is urging people not to travel abroad until swine flu in the country is under control , after seven more people tested positive . 
The new cases come from the Indian city of Jalandhar where a group of students had recently returned from a trip to the US space agency , Nasa . 
The total number of those infected by swine flu throughout India now stands at 30 . 
Last week the World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- declared a global flu pandemic . 
The swine flu -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- virus first emerged in Mexico in April and has since spread to at least 74 countries . 
Official reports say there have been nearly 30,000 cases globally and 141 deaths , with figures rising daily . 
Doctors in Jalandhar city said the affected students are between 14 and 17 years of age . 
One of them had already tested positive over the weekend . 
They were part of a group of 31 students and three teachers who returned over the weekend after a 10-day educational trip to Nasa in the US . 
Indian officials say they have tracked down eight people who were sitting near the group of students on the flight to Delhi from New York . 
`` They have been advised to watch for flu symptoms and take adequate precautions against possibly spreading the virus , '' an official said . 
Federal health minister Ghulam Nabi Azad has urged Indians , especially students , to put off traveling abroad until the flu is under control , the Press Trust of India reported . 
`` Till the disease is controlled globally , I would like to request young people from educational institutions going abroad that they can suspend their visits from the time being , '' he was quoted as saying . 
As well as in Jalandhar , fresh cases of swine flu have also been detected in the southern cities of Hyderabad and Bangalore . 
Earlier this month , India issued an alert against the flu and tightened screening for the virus at airports . 
The government has said India is fully equipped to deal with the outbreak . 
