Reporters Bob Woodward -LRB- r -RRB- and Carl Bernstein in the Washington Post newsroom in 1973 . 
Photograph : AP The unmasking of Deep Throat serves as a potent reminder of a high point in American journalism . 
Through their doggedness , courage and skill , Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward , the two young Washington Post reporters , played a crucial role in bringing down Richard Nixon . 
Today , the two were careful to point out that there much more to the Watergate scandal than the revelations of Deep Throat . 
There were other sources , other investigators , dramatic senate hearings , those secret White House tape recordings - complete with an 18-minute silence - and the decisive intervention of a unanimous US supreme court . 
Yet none of that detracts from the achievement of the two reporters , who had the guts to confront a government that held itself above the law . 
Nixon and his cronies were engaged during this period in what the House judiciary committee later described as a series of criminal acts - obstruction of justice , withholding of material evidence , coercion of witnesses , and misuse of the CIA and the Internal Revenue Service . 
Watergate and the New York Times scoop on the Pentagon papers the year before represented the twin peaks of US journalism . 
But as anyone who has worked in the US can tell you , the Washington press corps is much more deferential these days , much more so than British journalists when confronting their politicians . 
Moreover the image of the US media has been badly tarnished recently . 
The New York Times was rocked by the Jayson Blair scandal , when a young reporter was caught fabricating stories . 
Newsweek recently had to retract its story about the Qu ` ran being flushed down the toilet . 
Just as serious was the easy ride the Bush administration received from the mainstream media in the run-up to the Iraq war . 
The New York Times famously bought into the line peddled by Ahmad Chalabi , the Iraqi exile , that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction . 
Subsequently there has been mistreatment of prisoners at Abu Ghraib , the transfer of suspected terrorists without any meaningful legal review to interrogation centres in south-east Asia and elsewhere , as detailed by the indefatigable Seymour Hersh . 
But apart from Hersh it is difficult to think of anyone else digging hard into the seamy side of the administration 's war on terror . 
Despite all the military investigations into prisoner abuse , Hersh says quite rightly : `` The question that never gets adequately answered is this : what did the president do after being told about Abu Ghraib ? '' 
The failure to challenge the administration before and after the Iraq war does not reflect well on the mainstream US media , which badly needs a few more Seymour Hershes to keep the spirit of Watergate reporting alive . 
