Michael Jackson ` warned about propofol use ' Cherilyn Lee fought back tears as she gave her testimony on Tuesday Singer Michael Jackson was warned by a nurse practitioner about using the sedative propofol to help him sleep , a Los Angeles court has heard . 
Cherilyn Lee said Jackson told her that Diprivan - a brand name for propofol - was the only thing that would knock him out and induce the sleep he needed . 
Ms Lee was testifying on Tuesday at the involuntary manslaughter trial of the singer 's physician , Dr Conrad Murray . 
His lawyers have told the judge they would not be calling him to the stand . 
Lee , a nutritionist and holistic nurse , was called to testify for the defense . 
She told jurors she had tried to give Jackson natural remedies to deal with his insomnia and had told him propofol was too dangerous to be used at his home . 
Under cross-examination by the prosecution , the tearful witness acknowledged a conversation with the singer in which she told him : `` No one who cared or had your best interest at heart would give you this . '' 
After refusing to supply him with the drug in April 2009 , she continued , she never saw Jackson again . 
Dr Conrad Murray is charged with involuntary manslaughter The superstar died on 25 June that year , a death the Los Angeles coroner subsequently attributed to `` acute propofol intoxication '' . 
Dr Murray has pleaded not guilty to involuntary manslaughter , arguing that Jackson self-administered the dose that killed him . 
If convicted he could face up to four years in prison and the loss of his medical licence . 
Dr Murray was hired in May 2009 by promoters AEG Live to be the star 's personal physician ahead of a 50-date concert comeback in London . 
His defense team had wanted to introduce Jackson 's contract to show he would have owed $ 40 million -LRB- # 25m -RRB- to the promoter if the concerts were canceled . 
The lawyers had wanted to argue that Jackson would have been desperate to make sure the shows continued and needed sleep to get through rehearsals . 
But Judge Pastor said there was no evidence Jackson was concerned about the money and allowing testimony about the contract might confuse jurors . 
`` This is not a contractual dispute , '' he said on Tuesday . 
`` This is a homicide case . '' 
It is believed the case , now in its fifth week , could go to the jury by the end of this week . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
