\* Barbados , Grenada rebuff cruise ship over flu scare \* Ship in quarantine in Venezuela , 3 H1N1 cases confirmed \* Cruise industry economic mainstay for Caribbean states -LRB- Updates with Barbados saying 43 crew had flu-like symptoms -RRB- CARACAS , June 17 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Venezuela quarantined a Spanish cruise ship on Wednesday after three crew members were diagnosed with the H1N1 flu virus and Barbados and Grenada refused to allow its passengers to disembark . 
The cruise ship , owned by Royal Caribbean Cruises -LRB- RCL . 
N -RRB- , is docked off the Venezuelan island of Margarita and the 1,200 people aboard will not be allowed off for a week , Venezuelan officials said . 
`` The virus was detected in three crew members and the boat must now stay in quarantine until June 24 , '' state health official Jorge Alchaer said in comments printed by the government news service . 
On Monday , the Ocean Dream operated by Pullmantur Cruises docked in Grenada , but no one was permitted to leave the ship because of reports several people on board had flu-like symptoms , a spokesman for Grenada 's Health Ministry said . 
The cruise liner 's next destination was Barbados on Tuesday , but health officials refused to let the ship dock because 43 crew members exhibited flu-like symptoms , the Barbados Ministry of Health said in a statement . 
Miami-based Royal Caribbean , which owns Pullmantur , said it could not comment on the situation . 
Pullmantur representatives were not immediately available for comment . 
Many of the small island states in the eastern Caribbean depend on cruise ship arrivals as an important source of foreign exchange for their vulnerable economies . 
A number of Caribbean states have reported confirmed cases of the H1N1 swine flu , which was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization last week . 
Venezuela has confirmed at least 45 cases , with no deaths . 
One person died from the virus in nearby Colombia . 
Royal Caribbean Chief Executive Richard Fain said last week the flu outbreak had `` a short , but highly disruptive impact to our operations , '' although he added vessels were returning to their original itineraries . 
The launch of a Pullmantur cruise targeting Mexican nationals , the Pacific Dream , had to be canceled because of the H1N1 outbreak in Mexico , the epicenter of the pandemic . 
-LRB- Reporting by Frank Jack Daniel in Caracas and Jane Sutton and Pascal Fletcher in Miami ; Editing by Peter Cooney -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
