LONDON | Sat Jul 23 , 2011 6:37 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Less than two months after attempting to become the most powerful man in world soccer , Mohamed Bin Hammam was banned from the sport for life on Saturday , completing a spectacular fall from grace . 
The 62-year-old Qatari , found guilty by FIFA 's ethics committee of attempting to bribe delegates in the Caribbean to vote for him in the FIFA presidential election , has been left with his reputation in tatters and a 29-year career as an administrator over . 
Pending any appeals he may pursue , Bin Hammam has lost his place on FIFA 's executive committee after 15 years , been stripped of the Asian Football Confederation -LRB- AFC -RRB- presidency and kissed goodbye to the lifetime privileges normally bestowed on FIFA 's elite after they have left office . 
His ban means he can not be involved with any club even at grassroots level , although no-one could stop him buying a ticket at the gate and watching a match as a spectator . 
Bin Hammam , though , is not just one of the crowd . 
A multi-millionaire businessman who prospered in construction , real estate and drilling as Qatar 's economy boomed in the 1980s and 1990s , he rose from the ranks of his local Al Rayyan Sports Club in Doha to the FIFA executive in 14 years . 
His position as the most powerful man in Asian soccer was reinforced in Doha as recently as January when he was re-elected unopposed as AFC president and , after mulling over the idea for several months , he launched his bid to depose Sepp Blatter as FIFA president and become the first Arab to rule world soccer . 
It seemed like the time was right . 
Not only did he have a fresh mandate to complete a third and final term as AFC president , but FIFA 's decision to award Qatar the right to host the 2022 World Cup finals gave him an air of confidence . 
Having supported Blatter closely , with logistical and strategic help when the Swiss fought Lennart Johansson for the FIFA presidency in 1998 and Issa Hayatou in 2002 , Bin Hammam knew full well the size of the task he was taking on . 
However , he decided that , old friendship and support aside , the time had come to reform FIFA and he was the man to do it . 
In some ways , for such an astute , personable and shrewd man , his plans were somewhat vague . 
Bin Hammam outlined proposals to expand the FIFA executive committee from 24 to possibly 40 members , declaring that he wanted the world governing body to `` be more transparent . '' 
He demanded more respect for clubs and member associations , promised more honesty and wanted a greater share of FIFA 's cash reserves to be distributed to the football associations . 
He maintained that after 13 years Blatter had been in power too long and said he would restrict the presidential term to eight years . 
However , as one Asian critic told Reuters at the time : `` Bin Hammam is no reformer and does not have a real program on how to change FIFA and the way the organization operates . 
`` There are many who think president Blatter is doing a good job -- that perceptions of FIFA can change through Blatter . 
I am not sure the world is ready for Bin Hammam to lead football into a new promised land . '' 
Anyone going into battle has supporters and opponents and clearly by mid-May , with the election just over three weeks away , Bin Hammam thought too many were still against him and he needed to make sure of more votes by paying for them with cash . 
Together with FIFA executive committee member Jack Warner , the president of CONCACAF and a FIFA vice-president , it was arranged that Bin Hammam would address members of the Caribbean Football Union urging them to support his attempt to unseat Blatter . 
He hoped that a $ 40,000 -LRB- 24,530.85 pounds -RRB- sweetener , placed in brown envelopes for them to collect on the way out , would help them make up their minds . 
All it did , though , was herald the suspension , then resignation of Warner after nearly 30 years on the executive committee , and provide the catalyst for Bin Hamman 's downfall . 
Despite his protestations of innocence , the ethics committee found Bin Hammam guilty of trying to bribe those delegates and that decision has cost him his future in the game . 
Bin Hammam was a familiar figure at FIFA 's showcase events , either resplendent in his Arab thobe or looking suave in his business suit . 
With his personal wealth and connections , he might well turn up at matches in the future , but as soccer turns its back on him , he can only look ahead to 2022 and the World Cup in his homeland and wonder what might have been . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
