People holding a giant Syrian flag protest against President Bashar al-Assad after Friday prayers in the city center of Hama , July 22 , 2011 . 
AMMAN | Sat Jul 23 , 2011 4:44 am EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian forces shot dead at least 11 people during mass protests on Friday against President Bashar al-Assad , rights activists and witnesses said . 
Five civilians were killed overnight in Homs , 165 km -LRB- 100 miles -RRB- north of the capital Damascus , when tanks were deployed to halt protests in the besieged city , residents said . 
Six more people were later shot dead in protests in the Damascus suburb of Mleeha , in Homs and in the Idlib area in the northwest , the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights and the National Organization for Human Rights said . 
`` So far we have six martyrs across the country . 
All six were killed today , '' said Ammar Qurabi , head of the National Organization for Human Rights . 
The 4-month-old uprising , mirroring unrest and dissent elsewhere in the Middle East and North Africa , is the biggest challenge to Assad 's authority since he succeeded his father 11 years ago and it is spreading . 
Rights groups say Assad 's forces have killed more than 1,400 civilians since the uprising began . 
U.N. human rights advisers said on Friday the crackdown might amount to crimes against humanity . 
Activists reported protests after Friday prayers in several places -- the Medan district of Damascus , Latakia on the coast , Deraa in the south and Deir al-Zor in the east -- as well as Homs , the latest focus of the armed crackdown . 
`` Tanks and armored vehicles have deployed in Homs thoroughfares but in every street adjacent to them there are people in the streets , '' a resident of Homs , who gave his name as Osama , said by telephone . 
Once confined to outlying towns and rural regions , the uprising has now taken a firm hold in cities such as Homs and Hama , scene of a 1982 massacre by the military . 
In the first crackdown on Kurds since the uprising began , dozens of people were wounded when police and militia used batons and teargas against protesters in the mainly Kurdish northeastern city of Qamishli , witnesses said . 
The protesters demanded political freedoms and an end to state-endorsed discrimination against Syria 's 1 million Kurds . 
They also voiced solidarity with the protesters elsewhere . 
Assad , 45 , has described the uprising as a foreign conspiracy intended to sow sectarian strife . 
Opponents say he has played on sectarian fears to maintain support of the minority Alawite sect and keep power for his family , which has ruled Syria for 41 years . 
Two special human rights advisers to U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called for an `` independent , thorough and objective investigation '' of events in Syria . 
`` The scale and gravity of the violations indicate a serious possibility that crimes against humanity may have been committed and continue to be committed in Syria , '' Francis Deng , adviser on prevention of genocide , and Edward Luck , adviser on the responsibility to protect , said on Friday . 
Once courted by the West to break Syria 's alliance with Iran and militant groups , Assad is becoming increasingly isolated internationally . 
Iran 's Shi'ite clerical rulers are maintaining their support , to the disquiet of Syria 's majority Sunnis . 
Rights groups say the killings of civilians are causing a backlash against Assad among the mostly Sunni rank and file in the army . 
Activists say several tank crews defected this week and joined protesters in the eastern town of Albu Kamal bordering Iraq 's tribal Sunni heartland , prompting the deployment of Alawite forces who surrounded the town and demanded the army defectors be handed over . 
Diplomatic pressure on Assad mounted this week after Qatar , previously a supporter , shut its embassy in Damascus and the European Union said it was considering tougher sanctions . 
Relations with Qatar deteriorated when Sunni Muslims were among those killed by Assad 's security forces , whose leaders , like the president , are Alawites . 
Assistant U.S. Secretary of State Jeff Feltman told U.S. based Al Hurra TV that fear of a sectarian crisis was being instigated by Assad to sow fear among the population . 
`` They are trying to raise the specter of the ghost of a civil war but it 's clear from the majority of demonstrations that everyone is protesting without concern about the dangers confronting them for the sake of a better future for Syria , '' Feltman said . 
