WASHINGTON | Tue Jun 28 , 2011 6:30 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A U.S. Senate panel on Tuesday approved a resolution formally authorizing continued U.S. participation in the NATO-led military intervention in Libya but banning the introduction of U.S. troops on the ground there . 
The Senate Foreign Relations Committee vote marked another round in the debate in Washington over who has the power to make war , sparked by the President Barack Obama 's decision to commit the United States to the Libya conflict in March without asking the U.S. Congress ' approval . 
The committee voted 14-5 to approve the measure offered by Senator John Kerry , a Democrat , and Senator John McCain , a Republican , both supporters of the Libya intervention . 
But the House of Representatives has already rejected a similar measure , reflecting the division in Congress over the issue and narrowing the chances that the Kerry-McCain resolution , which first has to be approved by the full Senate , will ever become law . 
While the Obama administration would like Congress to express support for the Libya mission , it says it does not strictly need formal authorization by Congress . 
This is because the U.S. military role in the NATO-led Libya operations has been limited , not rising to the level of war or `` hostilities '' under U.S. law , U.S. officials say . 
This legalistic position , which was explained again to the committee in detail earlier Tuesday by State Department lawyer Harold Koh , has angered or annoyed many in both parties in Congress -- even some of those who support the Libya action . 
Before passing the resolution , the senators effectively repudiated the administration 's argument by adopting an amendment that said continuation of the Libya operations does require congressional authorization . 
ALL THOSE WHO VOTED NO WERE REPUBLICANS The United States and its NATO allies launched the U.N.-backed mission in March , aiming to prevent Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 's forces from attacking civilians opposed to his rule . 
The mission , NATO-led since the end of March , now appears to have the unstated goal of driving Gaddafi from power . 
The panel 's vote in favor of the resolution was a bipartisan 10 Democrats and four Republicans . 
All those who voted against the measure were Republicans , including the panel 's top Republican , Richard Lugar , who cited the U.S. debt and two other wars in Afghanistan and Iraq as reasons not to wage war in Libya . 
`` In light of these circumstances , the lack of U.S. vital interest in Libya , I do not believe that we should be intervening in a civil war there , '' Lugar said . 
Kerry said that now was not the time to bail out of Libya , with Gaddafi `` bunkered down in Tripoli '' and facing an arrest warrant from the International Criminal Court . 
`` Do we want to stop this operation ? 
That 's really what it comes down to , '' Kerry said ahead of the vote . 
The resolution would authorize the U.S. role in Libya for up to one year after the date of enactment of the resolution by Congress , unless the NATO mission ends sooner . 
It also says that the removal of Gaddafi is a political goal of U.S. policy , and calls for the United States and NATO to be reimbursed for the costs of the operation from assets seized from Gaddafi 's government . 
Senator Bob Corker , a Republican who voted against the resolution , said the administration was basically `` sticking a stick in the eye '' of Congress by finding a narrow legal reason not to ask for authorization . 
`` The chairman mentioned -LRB- that -RRB- since no American is being shot , there 's no hostilities . 
By that reasoning we could drop a nuclear bomb on Tripoli and we would not be involved in hostilities , and this goes to the sort of preposterous argument that is being made , '' Corker said . 
Senator Jim Webb , a Democrat , agreed the administration 's argument that the Libyan conflict is not `` hostilities '' was `` contorted , '' but he voted for the authorization resolution . 
Koh , in his appearance before the committee , declined to comment on reports that Obama ignored the advice of Pentagon and Justice Department lawyers who argued that U.S. military intervention in Libya required congressional authorization . 
Since NATO took over the Libya operation on March 31 , the United States has conducted 755 strike sorties , including 119 in which the planes fired at targets . 
Thirty-nine of the strikes involved the use of drone aircraft . 
The United States has also been providing reconnaissance , refueling , planning and other services to the NATO-led mission . 
The committee voted down , 14-5 , a proposal by Lugar that would have ruled out U.S. participation in any more air strikes . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
So they are weak on not only taking care of our military personnel but they are weak on defense . 
First they could n't find Bin laden and now this . 
haha This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
