\* Barnier joins Germany , regulators in wanting rethink \* EU bank law could be amended to tackle zero risk rule -LRB- Adds more detail , background -RRB- By Gernot Heller and Huw Jones BERLIN\/LONDON , Nov 17 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A top European Union official wants a rethink of a rule seen as discredited by the euro zone crisis that allows banks to avoid setting aside capital against risky sovereign debt holdings . 
Under the rule , a bank holding sovereign bonds denominated in the currency it operates in can treat them as having a zero risk weighting when calculating the size of its capital buffer . 
Financial experts say such zero risk weighting is untenable now that the bonds of countries like Greece , Portugal and Ireland , all rescued by EU funds , have been sharply downgraded . 
`` We will be working on that in the next months , '' the EU 's financial services chief , Michel Barnier said during a visit to the German capital on Thursday . 
The rule is long enshrined in global bank standards authored by the Basel Committee and remains in their new version , Basel III , which comes into force from 2013 . 
Insurers have a similar rule and are also major holders of sovereign debt . 
Past attempts to revisit the rule were rebuffed amid fears that a two-tier sovereign debt market would emerge in regions like the euro zone . 
The issue will become even more acute under Basel III as banks will have to build liquidity buffers that must include a large chunk of highly rated government debt , which would be hard for Greek banks at the moment . 
Euro zone debt worries are also spreading . 
Spain and France struggled on Thursday with government bond auctions , with Madrid forced to pay the highest borrowing costs since 1997 as investors prefer what they perceive to be less risky German Bunds . 
Barnier said the zero-risk weighting issue should first be tackled at the level of the Group of 20 -LRB- G20 -RRB- top economies , who endorsed Basel III a year ago . 
`` We 'd like to have a common approach , '' Barnier said . 
There should be a coherent approach to banks and insurers but there is no precise timeline at this stage , he added . 
Barnier 's is the latest influential voice in the debate after Germany 's deputy finance minister Joerg Asmussen , who joins the European Central Bank 's Executive Board at the end of this year , said on Monday the rule should be reviewed once the euro zone crisis has passed . 
Gabriel Bernardino , chairman of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority said on Wednesday he wanted a review of the rule in the wake of the euro zone debt crisis as a two-tier debt market has already emerged . 
`` The change in perception in relation to the risk of sovereign exposures is out there , '' Bernardino said . 
European Banking Authority Chairman Andrea Enria has said supervisors will have to consider risks from sovereign debt holdings when checking if banks hold enough capital . 
Barnier has already proposed a draft law to turn Basel III into EU law . 
Sharon Bowles , the UK Liberal Democrat chairman of parliament 's lead economic affairs committee is also drawing up amendments to end zero risk weighting . 
`` I will do something in the capital requirements directive . 
There is a lot of parliamentary support , '' Bowles said on Thursday . 
She is considering deleting the reference to zero risk in the draft EU law , giving powers to the European Systemic Risk Board to recommend that banks with risky government debt increase their buffers , or cap bank exposures to debt . 
-LRB- Reporting By Gernot Heller in Berlin and Huw Jones in London -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
