U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article France recalls Syria envoy , security HQ attacked AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - France recalled its ambassador to Damascus and Syria 's suspension from the Arab League took effect on Wednesday , intensifying diplomatic pressure on President Bashar al-Assad to halt a violent eight-month-old crackdown on protests . 
Syrian army defectors attacked an intelligence complex on the edge of Damascus in a high-profile assault that showed how close the popular uprising is to sliding into armed conflict . 
Hours after the Arab League suspension took effect , Assad supporters threw stones and debris at the embassy of the United Arab Emirates and smeared its walls with graffiti , witnesses said . 
The embassy is in one of the most secure districts of the capital , near Assad 's home and offices . 
Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said France was working with the Arab League on a draft resolution at the United Nations . 
Last month Russia and China vetoed a Security Council resolution that would have condemned Damascus , but since then the normally cautious Arab League has suspended Syria for failing to implement an Arab peace plan . 
`` New violence is taking place and that has led to the closure of the missions in Aleppo and Latakia and to recall our ambassador to Paris , '' Juppe said , referring to weekend attacks by pro-Assad demonstrators on French diplomatic premises , as well as Turkish and Saudi missions , in Syria . 
Arab foreign ministers met in Rabat for an Arab-Turkish forum , where a Syrian flag was placed by an empty chair . 
Turkey , now a fierce critic of its former ally , said Syria had failed to honor an Arab peace plan to halt the unrest . 
Speaking through a translator , Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu compared Syria with Libya , where rebels captured , humiliated and killed Muammar Gaddafi last month . 
`` The regime should meet the demands of its people , '' he said . 
`` The collective massacres in Syria and ... the bloodshed can not continue like this . '' 
In Tehran , Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi criticised the Arab League for `` acting in a way that will hurt the security of the region . '' 
He told the official news agency IRNA that Syria , an ally of Iran since 1980 , had repeatedly pledged to meet legitimate popular demands and enact reforms . 
`` Unfortunately , some countries believe that they are outside the crisis ... but they are mistaken because if a crisis happens they will be entangled by its consequences . '' 
Saudi Arabia , which is eager to loosen the ties between its regional rival Iran and Syria , said the Arab League was acting in Syria 's interest , not interfering in its affairs . 
`` What 's important is not about suspending or not suspending -LRB- Syria from the League -RRB- , it 's stopping the bloodshed , starting the dialogue , and withdrawing troops from Syrian cities , '' Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal told Al Arabiya channel . 
Western countries have tightened sanctions on Syria and on Monday Jordan 's King Abdullah became the first Arab head of state to urge Assad to quit after ensuring a smooth handover . 
In the early months of the uprising , attempts by security forces to crush mainly peaceful protests accounted for most of the violence . 
But since August there has been a growing number of reports of army defectors and armed civilians fighting back . 
Activists said Free Syrian Army fighters fired machineguns and rockets at a large Air Force Intelligence complex on the northern edge of the capital at about 2:30 a.m. -LRB- 0030 GMT -RRB- . 
A gunfight ensued and helicopters circled over the complex , on the Damascus-Aleppo highway . 
There were no immediate reports of casualties . 
Syrian state media did not mention the attack . 
The U.S. State Department said it had few details and no direct confirmation of the incident , but blamed Assad 's crackdown on protesters . 
`` It 's not surprising that we are now seeing this kind of violence , '' State Department spokesman Mark Toner said . 
`` We do n't condone it in any way , shape or form . 
But let 's be very clear that it is the brutal tactics of Assad and his regime in dealing with what began as a non-violent movement is now taking Syria down a very dangerous path . '' 
A Western diplomat in Damascus described the assault as `` hugely symbolic and tactically new , '' saying that if the reported details were true it would be `` much much more coordinated than anything we have seen before . '' 
`` To actually attack a base like this is something else , and so close to Damascus as well , '' said the diplomat , adding that fighting in recent weeks involving army deserters in the town of Rastan and the city of Homs resembled a localized civil war . 
`` It 's not a nationwide civil war , but in very specific locations , it is looking like that , '' said the diplomat . 
The Free Syrian Army was set up by deserters and is led by Colonel Riad al-Asaad , who is based in southern Turkey . 
It announced this week that it had formed a `` temporary military council '' of nine defecting officers , led by Asaad . 
The statement said the Syrian Free Army aimed to `` bring down the regime and protect citizens from the repression ... and prevent chaos as soon as the regime falls , '' adding that it would form a military court to try `` members of the regime who are proven to have been involved in killing operations . '' 
Syrian television showed thousands of Assad 's supporters rallying in Damascus and Latakia to mark the day his father Hafez al-Assad seized power in 1970 . 
It said the crowds were also voicing their rejection of the Arab League 's decision . 
`` God , Syria , Bashar , that 's all ! '' 
demonstrators shouted in central Damascus after turning out in heavy rain to wave flags and posters of the president . 
Two large posters of Assad and his father hung from a building . 
`` Neither rain nor sanctions will stop us expressing our nationalism , '' they said , according to the television report . 
The Arab League has stopped short of calling for Assad 's departure or proposing any Libya-style military intervention , but its ostracism of Syria is a blow to a country whose ruling Baath party puts Arab nationalism at the center of its credo . 
Syrian authorities have banned most independent media . 
They blame the unrest on `` armed terrorist gangs '' and foreign-backed militants who they say have killed 1,100 soldiers and police . 
Hundreds of people have been killed this month , one of the bloodiest periods of the revolt . 
Syria says it remains committed to the Arab peace plan , which calls for the withdrawal of troops from urban areas , the release of prisoners and a dialogue with the opposition . 
State media said more than 1,000 prisoners , including prominent dissident Kamal Labwani , were freed on Tuesday . 
But human rights campaigners say tens of thousands have been detained since anti-Assad protests began . 
-LRB- Additional reporting Souhail Karam in Rabat , Dominic Evans in Beirut , John Irish in Paris , Mahmoud Habboush in Dubai and Ramin Mostafavi in Tehran ; Writing by Alistair Lyon ; Editing by Tim Pearce and Eric Walsh -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
