This article quoted World Bank President Robert B. Zoellick as saying the world financial system may have reached a `` tipping point . '' 
Zoellick was referring to the effects of global turmoil on developing countries . 
Unfolding Worldwide Turmoil Could Reverse Years of Prosperity Traders work at the Brazilian Mercantile and Futures Exchange in Sao Paulo . 
Brazilian stocks plunged the most in a decade as commodity producers dropped , and trading was halted twice because of the decline . 
-LRB- By Marcos Issa -- Bloomberg News -RRB- Last week , the nation 's political leaders said the financial system would collapse unless they passed a $ 700 billion rescue package for Wall Street . 
On Monday , the first day of trading after the plan passed , the financial system continued to melt down anyway . 
Here 's why : The plan developed by Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. to buy troubled U.S. mortgage assets might not start for another month . 
And , despite its huge price tag , it already seems paltry compared with the scale of the rapidly evolving global crisis . 
`` People are realizing that the Paulson plan is not going to be nearly enough . 
It 's not because the plan is ill-conceived . 
It looks like it 's the right thing to do , but the problem is just growing astronomically , '' said Martin Evans , a professor of finance and economics at Georgetown University . 
The bailout plan is focused on buttressing U.S. financial institutions . 
But it was global markets that plunged yesterday , as investors sold off commodities in Brazil , currency in Mexico , bank stocks in Russia and the short-term debt of the state of California . 
Robert B. Zoellick , president of the World Bank , said the global financial system may have reached a `` tipping point '' -- the moment when a crisis cascades into a full-blown meltdown and becomes extremely difficult for governments to contain . 
The mushrooming problems `` will trigger business failures and possibly banking emergencies . 
Some countries will slip toward balance-of-payment crises , '' he said yesterday , speaking at the Peterson Institute for International Economics . 
The crisis threatens to reverse years of prosperity that financed the economic growth in developed and emerging countries through a global financial system that made credit widely available . 
Banks and governments were able to borrow money on an unprecedented scale by selling debt in new kinds of packages , allowing even the least creditworthy consumers to borrow and spend . 
China exported goods and then loaned the money back to the United States by buying those new debt packages . 
The story was similar for Russia , which exported massive amounts of energy to Europe , and for Brazil , which exported commodities including orange juice and sugar . 
All used the massive inflows of borrowed money from the developed world to fuel economic expansions and stock market bubbles . 
Yesterday , trading on the major stock exchanges in Russia and Brazil was halted after prices crashed . 
China 's major indexes fell about 5 percent . 
The bubbles appear to be bursting in rapid succession . 
Faced with these developments , the markets have not been in a mood to cheer the passage of the Paulson rescue package . 
At one point yesterday , the Dow Jones industrial average had fallen nearly 800 points , more than 7 percent . 
It ended the day off 3.6 percent , below 10,000 for the first time since 2004 . 
`` Quite frankly , what the market is looking for is some kind of coordinated action from central banks around the world . '' 
said Kathy Lien , director of currency research at GFT Forex . 
The Paulson plan , she added , is like a `` Band-Aid for a problem that stretches way beyond the banking system now . '' 
