David Dykes -- the federal regulator now leading his agency 's investigation of the BP oil spill -- has spent five years as a senior investigator and office chief enforcing oil industry safety in the Gulf of Mexico . 
For much of that time , his brother was a top executive at an energy company with significant activities under Dykes 's purview . 
But David Dykes did not formally recuse himself from matters involving his brother 's company . 
No rule required him to do so . 
Unlike many federal agencies that make employees distance themselves from matters involving friends , relatives or former bosses , the nation 's chief oil regulatory agency had no such policy . 
Now , in the wake of the BP disaster , Congress is pressing the agency formerly called the U.S. Minerals Management Service to clamp down on potential conflicts of interest . 
The case of David and Rodney Dykes highlights the challenges of the task . 
The oil industry of the Gulf Coast is an insular world in which rig foremen and the federal inspectors charged with regulating them sometimes work side by side , or grew up in the same towns and even homes . 
Investigations into the BP spill have focused on whether MMS regulators properly oversaw the Deepwater Horizon rig or merely accepted company assurances that the rig was safe . 
An inspector general investigation in May showed that MMS regulators in the gulf sometimes viewed themselves more as industry friends and fishing buddies than policemen . 
In one office , they took free trips , sporting tickets and gifts from industry officials they were supposed to be monitoring , the investigation found . 
Since June , the newly renamed Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement -LRB- BOEM -RRB- has worked to develop new rules that would require inspectors to recuse themselves from matters in which they have a family or other personal conflict . 
Michael Bromwich , the new head of BOEM , said the agency needs a strong recusal policy to assuage public concerns about closeness between regulators and industry . 
`` Since arriving a month ago to lead reforms at BOEM , it is clear to me that there are concerns about conflicts of interest that we must address within the agency 's inspections and investigation programs . 
We 're looking very closely at these issues , including implementing new recusal policies and taking appropriate action where necessary , '' Bromwich said . 
Bromwich said he and Interior Secretary Ken Salazar have confidence in David Dykes 's work as co-chair of a team investigating the BP spill . 
Both David Dykes and his brother declined to comment . 
A spokesperson at the former MMS said David Dykes was never asked to review any matters involving Energy Partners , where Rodney Dykes was a senior vice president for production , or Stone Energy , a company under a tentative merger with the firm in 2006 . 
David Dykes , a native of Hammond , La. , has worked in the gulf oil business for nearly three decades , as had Rodney Dykes . 
David Dykes drew the attention of MMS officials when , as a safety manager at Taylor Oil , he helped shape a model safety plan . 
In 1999 , he joined MMS , and by 2005 , he was a senior safety inspector in the Office of Safety Management . 
He became office chief in February 2007 . 
David Dykes was considered a `` junkyard dog '' as an investigator , a former MMS manager said . 
His office oversaw accident investigations , issued industry safety alerts , imposed civil penalties and recommended regulation changes . 
Rodney Dykes stayed on the corporate side , including a short stint with his brother at Maxus Energy . 
By 2001 , he had joined Energy Partners Ltd. , and he rose to senior vice president in 2003 . 
From 2006 to early 2008 , Energy Partners and a company under a tentative merger agreement with it in 2006 reported 30 incidents including fires , explosions , collisions and injuries on their rigs and facilities , according to MMS records . 
The MMS judged 25 to be very minor or not meeting the criteria for an investigation , and did not probe further . 
District offices far below Dykes 's investigated the other five . 
In three cases where MMS inspectors found company violations and failures , MMS fined the companies an average of $ 18,000 for each incident . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
