The author is a Reuters Breakingviews columnist . 
The opinions expressed are his own . 
A young Syrian called Ausama Monajed was on a train to London . 
One of his hobbies was reading e-books . 
On this trip , he picked Gene Sharp s From Dictatorship to Democracy , which maps out strategies for using non-violent struggle to bring down repressive regimes . 
Monajed , now one of the revolution s leaders outside the country , became engrossed . 
It was as if I was reading an exact description of Syria , Monajed told Reuters Breakingviews . 
The next thing he noticed was a conductor tapping him on the shoulder . 
The train had arrived at its terminus in Euston Station . 
He asked me if I wanted to return where I d come from . 
Sharp , who was inspired by India s Mohandas Gandhi and who himself influenced some of the activists behind the Egyptian revolution , stresses that a dictator s power isn t monolithic . 
It relies on the army , police , civil service , business and , indeed , the wider society just to function . 
Activists should therefore analyze those pillars of support and systematically undermine them . 
The best way to do this is not to fight dictators with their own weapons - matching violence with violence in a struggle they are likely to lose but to use non-violent tactics . 
It is much harder for the security forces to kill unarmed civilians than those who fire back at you . 
The more brutally the regime represses them , the shakier its pillars of support become . 
Eventually , the violence boomerangs on the regime and destroys it . 
Sharp makes clear that non-violent struggles normally don t succeed through spontaneous combustion . 
They need planning and training . 
Most importantly , it is vital to maintain nonviolent discipline which isn t easy when activists are being killed , tortured and detained . 
Monajed , now 31 , was smitten . 
An economist by training , he had hoped that Syria s president Bashar al-Assad would be a reformer when he succeeded his father Hafez Assad , who died in 2000 . 
Monajed worked for the United National Development Programme and then the European Commission on development programs inside Syria . 
But then he became disillusioned and joined the opposition . 
After being arrested several times , Monajed quit the country in 2005 and has never returned . 
He says he has become one of the regime s most wanted people after writing an article in the Washington Post this April . 
This said the U.S. government had several years ago funded Barada TV , a London-based channel beaming anti-regime programming into Syria which he had helped establish . 
After coming across Sharp s work , Monajed studied previous nonviolent revolutions , especially the Serbs overthrow of Slobodan Milosevic in 2000 . 
He went to see Sharp , now an 83-year-old academic , in Boston . 
He also wrote a master s degree dissertation on the role of the internet and information technology in non-violent struggle with a focus on Syria . 
In 2007 Monajed organized a meeting with some disaffected Syrian friends in London . 
He says it is too risky to reveal their names . 
They decided to get trained in the techniques of nonviolent struggle and use that as the basis for training others . 
We brought Syrians out of the country and trained them in nonviolent techniques , Monajed says . 
The idea was to train leaders and send them back to train others . 
They found it hard to recruit volunteers . 
They were told nonviolent struggle wouldn t work in Syria because of religious and geopolitical factors . 
In the end , they managed to train around 100 people . 
Then came the Tunisian and Egyptian revolutions . 
The whole Middle East was electrified . 
Syrians began to think they too might get their freedom . 
People contacted Monajed s group , saying that now they understood what it was advocating . 
The first protest took place on March 15 in the Hamidiyeh bazaar in the heart of old Damascus . 
They chose Hamidiyeh because it is a covered market . 
There were only about 40 protesters but their chants , calling for freedom , echoed off the iron roof making it seem like there were more . 
Because the bazaar was crowded , it was hard to distinguish who was a protestor and who was just an onlooker - again exaggerating their numbers . 
The next protests took place spontaneously in Deraa , near the border with Jordan , after 15 school children had been arrested for scrawling anti-regime graffiti on walls . 
These protests were much bigger , with thousands eventually taking part . 
The security services fired on unarmed civilians . 
The killing began in earnest . 
After that , protests started mushrooming around the country . 
Facebook pages were created ; people communicated via Twitter ; protesters took video clips with their mobile phones and posted them on YouTube . 
Everything was happening faster than Monajed and his colleagues had imagined . 
Most of the protests had nothing to do with them . 
The challenge was how to put some order into the revolution . 
An early priority was to set up a virtual operation center , staffed by dozens of volunteers outside the country , feeding what was happening on the ground to the world outside . 
Most foreign journalists were quickly kicked out of the country , including one Reuters journalist who was beaten up by the secret police , so it was important to get information out to the international media . 
Many of the most popular internet pages were coordinated through a new body , The Coalition of Syrian Pages . 
On the ground , local coordinating committees started emerging in different neighborhoods . 
They organize campaigns , raise money to cover living costs of the families of those who had been killed or detained , and help communicate what is happening in their area . 
The Coalition of Syrian Pages has gradually taken a bigger role in coordinating activity . 
It consists of about 20-25 people , some inside the country and some abroad . 
Monajed won t reveal their names . 
The authorities don t know who all the members of the Coalition are or where they are , he explains . 
One of the current priorities is to have a strategic plan that includes action on the ground and international lobbying for things like an oil embargo . 
This has involved coordinating the work of the activists , most of whom are young , with the traditional cohort of opposition made up of politicians , lawyers and human rights campaigners , many of whom signed the anti-regime Damascus Declaration in 2005 . 
Initially there wasn t a plan ; just an idea of demonstrating until the regime falls , says Monajed . 
Now , with the Coalition , we are trying to guide the effort in a strategic manner to knock down the -LRB- regime s -RRB- pillars of support . 
A particularly sensitive issue , which didn t exist in either Egypt or Tunisia , is the potential for sectarian conflict . 
Assad is an Alawite , a minority Shi ite Muslim sect . 
Many of the top positions in government , the military and business are also held by Alawites . 
But most of the population is Sunni Muslim . 
Given this background , the regime s four main pillars of support in order of importance , according to Monajed , are : the security forces including secret police ; the Alawites ; army generals , especially those who are Alawite ; and the Sunni business elite , many of whom have prospered since Assad partly liberalised the economy . 
In order to knock down these pillars , it is essential to keep the campaign peaceful , says Monajed . 
People don t want a Libyanisation of the situation , he says , referring to the civil war across the Mediterranean Sea . 
So demonstrators give roses to the army and don t insult them in their chants . 
The underlying message they are trying to send to the top generals is : We differentiate between you and the security service . 
Some soldiers have mutinied after being ordered to kill unarmed protesters . 
The message to the Alawites is that they are being held hostage by the Assad regime - and it can t be in their interests to engage in a war of elimination . 
The protesters have used chants stressing the unity between Sunni , Alawites and Christians -LRB- another minority -RRB- and called on Alawite and Christian generals to lead the transition to democracy . 
Despite this , there are signs of sectarian violence . 
There has already been at least one case of a group of Alawites being killed -- in retaliation for a Sunni elder being killed and cut into pieces , according to Monajed . 
That , in turn , provoked a ferocious backlash against Sunnis in the city of Homs . 
Meanwhile , the message to the business community is that they won t continue to prosper under Assad . 
The Syrian pound has fallen on the black market , tourism is dead , consumer demand has been thwacked and the economy is shrinking . 
What about the secret police ? 
This is the toughest part of the regime to crack , according to Monajed . 
He doesn t have a simple message for them . 
Rather , he predicts that , as the revolution goes on , the regime will get tired and exhausted . 
The top generals may then liaise with Alawite leaders , arrest Assad and the top security chiefs , and form a transitional council with members from all parts of the community . 
While strategizing is important , nothing will happen without action on the ground . 
Although protests have been the most visible tactic , they are not the only method being deployed . 
There are low-risk tactics for those who don t want to go on protests where they could get killed . 
One is to release freedom balloons at a specific time in a particular city , to give people courage that they are not alone . 
Another is to open their windows at night time and play revolutionary rap songs . 
Activists have drawn up lists of shame of businesses , actors , intellectuals , imams and priests who are considered too close to the regime . 
These are used to determine boycotts and strikes . 
Campaigners have also produced lists of government informers , according to the Financial Times . 
Their aim is to put pressure on them and isolate them . 
However , there are also reports of at least two informers being killed . 
The Assad regime has been far from idle . 
As of last week , 1,634 civilians had been killed , according to Avaaz , the human rights group . 
Then on Sunday tanks were sent into the central Syrian city of Hama , in what looks like an attempt to break the protesters ' morale before the holy month of Ramadan , which has now started . 
Demonstrations have been particularly big on Fridays after people have gathered to pray in mosques . 
Some protesters have been saying that Ramadan could be like a month of Fridays . 
As the regime 's violence ramps up , it would be natural for the protesters either to lose courage or to take up arms themselves . 
The challenge for Monajed 's group will be to ensure that neither happens . 
If they succeed , they will then have a chance to witness whether a nonviolent struggle can really bring a brutal regime tumbling down . 
Revolutions -- for better or worse -- are flash points in the process of human evolution which can be traced back to advances in technology . 
History shows that to be a universal truth . 
For the so called `` Western World , '' the advent of written Language and Law is the story of Moses . 
The printing press made it possible for many more humans to have their own copy of the Bible . 
Once the word got out the next period of unrest gave us the Protestant reformation . 
Fast forward to Vietnam . 
As soon as video of the mayhem became television fodder , government propaganda insisting that people on the other side of the world are somehow less human became repugnant . 
The Soviet Union disintegrated because their citizens desire for Blue Jeans and MTV made it impossible to maintain the illusion that the West lived in abject poverty . 
Likewise the Internet and World Wide travel have forced the sun shine of truth into every hell hole on the planet . 
One person with a cell phone can reach out and touch the hearts of more people then the President of the United States . 
America , China , Russia and even Saudi Arabia have had to appease citizens opinion by saying Syria 's is a dictatorship that has to go even though they know full well that such sentiments may be applied at home as well . 
What we are witnessing is a none economic kind of creative destruction that will bring down all the pillars of false power -- government corruption , fiat monitory schemes and religious dogma . 
The American revolution lead to years of instability and adjustments as the theory of individual sovereignty met the reality of human existence . 
Without the isolation and vast open lands giving the US space and time to experiment ,1776 might just have been another Tienanmen Square or Prague Spring . 
Today the world is moving forward a bit . 
Let us hope there is enough room or someone hurries up and opens the next frontier -- Space -- so we can catch our breath while figuring out how to live and prosper without ANY evil enemy empires , local government mafias or in-deflatable paper dollars . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The company was founded in 1999 as Breakingviews.com and was acquired by Thomson Reuters in 2009 , becoming Reuters brand for financial commentary . 
Every day , we comment on the big financial stories as they break . 
Our expert analysis is provided by a global team of 30 correspondents based in New York , Washington , London , Hong Kong , Madrid , Dubai and Mumbai . 
For the full commentary and analysis service from breakingviews.com , including regular emails containing the latest views , contact sales@breakingviews.com . 
Breakingviews has published a selection of books for purchase and download . 
