U.S. dollar notes are seen in this picture illustration taken at the Korea Exchange Bank in Seoul November 10 , 2010 . 
NEW YORK | Mon Aug 1 , 2011 9:55 pm BST NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Swiss franc soared on Monday and the U.S. dollar rallied against the euro , with demand for safe-haven currencies set to continue on concerns about slowing global economic growth and a possible cut of the United States ' credit rating . 
U.S. manufacturing grew at its slowest pace in two years in July , the Institute for Supply Management said , casting doubt on expectations the faltering recovery would quickly regain steam . 
In Europe , the euro zone manufacturing PMI also fell in July to a two year low and perhaps more worrying , China 's official government PMI dropped to its lowest level in two years also . 
Initial euphoria about the U.S. Congress agreeing on a deal to raise the government 's statutory borrowing limit faded as investors worried that the country might still lose its triple-A credit rating even though the risk of a default appeared to be off the table . 
`` The undercurrents of risk aversion still remain very strong , '' said Samarjit Shankar , managing director of global foreign exchange strategy at BNY Mellon in Boston . 
`` Existing riskier positions that were funded in the yen , Swiss franc and dollars are being unwound , which is why all three currencies have been gaining relative to the others . '' 
The Swiss franc climbed to record highs against both the euro and dollar , continuing a recent trend as investors fretted about sovereign debt crises on both sides of the Atlantic . 
`` The Swiss franc still stands out head and shoulders above the other so-called safe-haven currencies , '' Shankar said . 
The euro plumbed a record low at 1.1030 Swiss francs on trading platform EBS , and last traded down 1.3 percent at 1.1171 francs . 
The dollar hit as low as 0.77323 Swiss franc , before pulling back to 0.7834 , down 0.2 percent on the day . 
U.S. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid said debt limit increase legislation would be completed in the Senate by Tuesday , but uncertainty about its fate in the more fractious Republican-controlled House of Representatives kept markets nervous . 
The cuts proposed over the next ten years also fall short of the $ 4 trillion set by some ratings agencies as the threshold needed to avert a U.S. ratings downgrade . 
`` The markets are unsure about how this will play out and it is down to the wire , so the market is cautious right now , '' said Jessica Hoversen , FX analyst at MF Global in New York . 
The euro fell to $ 1.41847 and last traded at $ 1.4260 , down 0.9 percent on the day . 
Yields on Italian and Spanish bonds continued to rise , suggesting persistent worries about the risk of contagion in the euro zone crisis and adding to risk aversion the market . 
The dollar fell as low as 76.29 yen on EBS , its weakest since coordinated intervention by major central banks in mid-March to weaken the surging Japanese currency . 
The record low for the pair was at 76.25 set in mid-March . 
The yen also jumped against the euro and Australian and New Zealand dollars . 
The U.S. currency briefly surged against the yen in morning New York trade , though traders said the move did not appear to be related to intervention by Japanese authorities . 
A trader said the jump in the dollar against the yen was partly due to a big order from a large Japanese bank under 76.50 yen and was part of the normal flow of the market . 
An official from the Japanese Ministry of Finance in Tokyo said that while the office is aware of currency movements , he can not comment on the dollar\/yen move . 
Still , the intraday spike heightened the market 's alertness for potential official yen selling , helping the dollar rebound to 77.17 yen , up 0.6 percent on the day . 
Analysts said a slew of key U.S. economic releases in the coming days , including Friday 's monthly jobs report , should keep risk appetite subdued . 
Against a basket of currencies , the dollar index was up 0.6 percent at 74.314 . . 
DXY -LRB- Additional reporting by Julie Haviv and Gertrude Chavez-Dreyfuss -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
