Former Chair of the President 's Economic Recovery Advisory Board -LRB- January 2009-January 2011 -RRB- Volcker brought instant credibility to President Barack Obama 's 2008 presidential campaign . 
His weighty experience helped dispel the notion that Obama lacked the economic credentials to become chief executive during the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression . 
While he is not taking a full-time job in the administration , as chairman of an economic advisory committee , he will be a critical voice as Obama tries to forge a path out of the recession . 
Volcker left the committee in January 2011 and was replaced by GE Chairman Jeffrey Immelt . 
In a pivotal moment in the final 2008 presidential debate , Sen. John McCain -LRB- R-Ariz . -RRB- 
questioned the associates of the junior senator from Illinois , a persistent campaign theme . '' 
` Let me tell you who I associate with , ' Obama told McCain . 
` On economic policy , I associate with Warren Buffett and former Fed chairman Paul Volcker . ' '' 
Volcker has a reputation for fairness and strong leadership during troubled times . 
When he became chairman of the Federal Reserve in 1979 , he faced the worst inflationary crisis America had seen in decades . 
He ended it by raising interest rates sharply , sparking the deepest downturn since the Great Depression . 
The interest-rate hikes are now widely viewed as a necessary step to end the cycle of soaring prices and stagflation that set in , but at the time the tactic was deeply controversial , as the unemployment rate climbed above 10 percent . 
Since being replaced by Alan Greenspan in 1987 , Volcker has become an eminence grise , lending independent credibility to a range of organizations . 
For example , he investigated alleged corruption in the United Nations Oil for Food Program in Iraq . 
He is also chairman of the Group of 30 , an assemblage of leading financial experts that seeks an overhaul of global financial regulations . 
In his later years , he 's still helping to shape the nation 's future economic policies , and was even discussed as an Obama Treasury secretary . 
Though he has taken an advisery position rather than a full-time job , `` When the team discusses the financial crisis , ` The most important question to Obama : What does Paul Volcker think ? ' 
says Jason Furman , the 2008 campaign 's economic-policy director . '' 
Career History : Chairman , Federal Reserve -LRB- 1979 to 1987 -RRB- ; Undersecretary for Monetary Affairs , Department of the Treasury -LRB- 1969 to 1974 -RRB- ; Deputy Undersecretary for Monetary Affairs , Department of the Treasury -LRB- 1963 to 1965 -RRB- Alma Mater : Princeton University , BA , 1949 ; Harvard University , MPA , 1951 Raised in Teaneck , N.J. , Volcker learned from an early age how government affects people . 
He learned this from his father , who worked as a city manager for the Jersey town , and even helped it escape a small financial crisis of its own . 
Volcker went to Princeton University , graduating summa cum laude before moving to Harvard to earn a master 's in public administration . 
The 6-foot-7-inch student found himself leaning towards work in government even back then . 
`` When I was in college and graduate school , at institutions thought to be among the elite , a career in the foreign service or in one of the great domestic departments and agencies was considered by many a natural professional objective , a means by which those able and interested in government expect over time to gain satisfaction and ultimately a reasonable measure of prestige from constructive public service , '' he said . 
While at Harvard , Volcker interned as a research assistant at the New York Fed . 
He stayed with the Fed after he graduated in 1952 , and worked his way up to special assistant in the securities department . 
He then moved to Chase Manhattan Bank as a financial economist . 
By 1962 , Volker was back in the public sector , working at the Treasury Department . 
He would return to the private sector for a few more years , but in 1969 became undersecretary to the Treasury for monetary affairs . 
After a brief stint as a professor at Princeton , President Carter named Volcker Fed Chairman in 1979 . 
Volcker 's first meeting with Obama came in June 2007 , when Obama was seen as a longshot to win the presidency . 
Volcker walked away from a dinner with the upstart Democrat , saying he was ` genuinely impressed . ' 
But no one in Obama 's campaign thought of asking for Volcker 's help . 
When Obama economic adviser Austan Goolsbee discovered Volcker 's comment , he quickly urged the team to get Volcker involved . 
`` Paul Volcker is a legend ! 
We do n't want to use his contacts for money , we want to pick his brain , '' Goolsbee said . 
Obama was soon speaking to him regularly for counsel on responding to the burgeoning crisis . 
Obama 's proclamation in September 2007 that the housing market downturn could cause a ` crisis in confidence ' in the financial markets originated with Volcker . 
Volcker at first disagreed with the notion that the U.S. needed an economic stimulus package , but recent events changed his mind . '' 
I 've gone through a number of crises , but I 've never seen one more complicated or difficult , '' he said . 
Volcker expressed some public skepticism of the Federal Reserve 's decision to put $ 29 billion at risk to arrange the sale of investment bank Bear Stearns in March 2008 . 
In an April speech , Volcker said that the Fed took actions that `` extend to the very edge of its lawful and implied powers , transcending in the process certain long-embedded central banking principles and practices . '' 
In January 2009 , Obama proposed new financial regulations that would attempt to prevent a future economic downturn while also solving the `` too-big-to-fail '' problem , which forced the government to interve and save collapsing banks . 
The new rule outlined would limit banks ' ability to invest in hedge funds and private equity funds . 
If approved by Congress , the rule would revive parts of the Glass-Steagall Act , repealed in 1999 , which separated corporate banks from investment banks . 
Dubbed the `` Volcker Rule , '' Obama 's proposal attempts to bring back similar limitations . 
In January 2009 , the Group of 30 economists and finance experts , chaired by Volcker , issued a report on a global financial regulatory overhaul . 
Among other steps , it called for preventing any one financial institution from becoming so large that its failure could bring down the entire financial system . 
It also calls for money-market mutual funds , which are similar to banks in many ways but are far less regulated , to be overseen more carefully . 
And the report calls on the U.S. government to clarify the legal status of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , the government-sponsored housing finance companies that it took over in 2008 but whose relationship with the government has historically been ambiguous . 
Because of Volcker 's closeness to Obama , it is widely believed that many of the ideas in the report will be embraced by the new administration . 
Volcker has been around Washington since the 1950s and has amassed an historic reputation . 
Although shy , he has built a career that had direct dealings with Presidents Carter and Reagan . 
He went on fishing trips with Gerald Corrigan , ex-CEO of the Federal Reserve and managing director at Goldman Sachs . 
