Prescient Young Blogger Did What S. Korea Could n't -- Foresee Global Financial Crisis As a financial blogger named Minerva , Park Dae-sung was the dark prophet of market decline in South Korea . 
In this education-obsessed country , where academic credentials are often taken as a measure of human value , he was also something of an idiot savant . 
He had no degree in economics . 
He had no professional experience in finance . 
He was not a wealthy investor . 
He had been a so-so student who studied communications at a so-so junior college in a backwater town south of Seoul . 
Thirty-one years old and single , he spent much of his time alone in his room . 
As his father noted , `` He ca n't even get a job . '' 
But he knew a global economic smack-down when he saw one . 
Minerva saw it coming last fall , far earlier and with far more acuity than the South Korean government , which his blog has humiliated and angered . 
Besides getting mad , the government got even . 
In a move widely perceived by the public as a chilling echo of the 1970s , when a military dictatorship ruled South Korea , the government detained Park this month , invoking a seldom-used telecommunications law that charges him with harming the public by spreading `` false rumors . '' 
Yet Minerva -LRB- no one knew him as Park until police raided his house Jan. 7 -RRB- made his reputation by spreading rumors that turned out to be all too true . 
He predicted the collapse of Lehman Brothers five days before it happened . 
He predicted a sharp decline in the value of South Korea 's currency a few days before the won imploded against the dollar . 
By the time he was taken away from his computer in handcuffs , he was a cyber-sensation . 
His blog had garnered more than 40 million page views -LRB- there are 48 million people in this well-wired country -RRB- . 
He was lionized in the South Korean news media as the `` online oracle '' and the `` Internet president of the economy . '' 
Although Park has told authorities he is Minerva , claims have emerged here that Minerva might be a few people . 
Several economic and financial experts have said they wrote online postings under the name . 
Prosecutors , though , have declined to investigate , saying they have irrefutable electronic evidence that Minerva is Park . 
