By the CNN Wire Staff Fighting fierce 40 miles from Tripoli NEW : A Libyan official says neither Gadhafi , his wife or children are leaving NEW : U.S. and NATO officials say they have no indication Gadhafi is leaving Former Libyan prime minister joins opposition forces , rebels say Gadhafi could be planning a final offensive against civilians , one official says Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Libyan officials are rejecting rebel claims that Moammar Gadhafi is seeking refuge for his family , saying Friday that neither the leader nor his wife and children plan to leave the country . 
Libyan Deputy Foreign Minister Khaled Kaim told CNN that Gadhafi and his family are staying in the country , countering rebel reports that the governments of Egypt , Morocco , Tunisia and Algeria have been asked to accept the family . 
U.S. and NATO officials also say they have no indication Gadhafi is making preparations to leave . 
Abdel Monem al-Houni , a representative of the rebel Transitional Council in Cairo , told CNN he was informed about the request by the Arab governments who received it . 
Rebels capture Zawiya oil refinery Kaim said the four governments could speak on their own behalf about the rebel claims . 
The reports come as U.S. officials say the embattled leader may be making preparations for a last stand in Tripoli as a months-long NATO air campaign continues amid reports of rebel advances . 
`` We believe he could be planning for a last stand , '' one U.S. official said . 
A second U.S. official confirmed a similar concern and said the Gadhafi plan could involve a final military offensive against civilians , launched from his last major strongholds around the Libyan capital . 
The officials , who have knowledge of the situation on the ground , did not want to be named because of the sensitive intelligence matters . 
In an address broadcast on Libyan state television Monday , Gadhafi urged supporters to take up arms and battle rebel forces . 
`` Move always forward to the challenge ; pick up your weapons ; go to the fight in order to liberate Libya inch by inch from the traitors and from NATO . 
Be prepared to fight if they hit the ground , '' Gadhafi said . 
Both U.S. officials emphasized that if a final push by Gadhafi happens , the United States does n't have a clear idea what form it could take . 
However , State Department spokesman Mark Toner said Friday that U.S. officials in Benghazi have been working with the Libyan opposition `` on exactly what it 's going to look like post-Gadhafi . '' 
`` Impossible to say when he 'll go , but it 's clear that he will go , '' Toner told CNN 's Brooke Baldwin . 
Meanwhile Friday , opposition forces said a former Libyan prime minister has left Tripoli and joined with rebels in the country 's western mountains . 
Abdel Salam Jalloud `` is in Zintan and he is a free man among the rebels , '' said Jumma Ibrahim , a spokesman for the Military Council of the Western Mountain Region , a rebel group . 
Kaim declined to confirm or deny the report . 
Jalloud was among members of Gadhafi 's inner-circle responsible for the 1969 coup that put Gadhafi into power . 
Jalloud fell out of favor with the regime in the mid-1990s . 
The speculation over a Gadhafi `` last stand '' comes as his troops are battling rebel forces on a number of fronts , including in the west , where fighting has raged for days over the strategic city of Zawiya , about 30 miles west of Tripoli and a major supply route to the capital . 
Fierce artillery fire could be heard around Zawiya on Friday . 
Rebels took a major oil refinery there , said Hobab Jomaa , a rebel fighter . 
They were in control of the western part of the city , but battles continued in the eastern part , he said . 
When asked when rebels might begin their move toward Tripoli , one fighter in Zawiya told CNN 's Sara Sidner , `` Two days , maybe by the end of the week . '' 
`` They are becoming more emboldened , '' Sidner said of the rebels . 
`` They feel like they can really have a chance at Tripoli . '' 
The International Organization for Migration said Friday that it is working to evacuate an unknown number of foreign nationals from Tripoli and other western cities `` who are increasingly vulnerable and now want to leave . '' 
Government spokesman Musa Ibrahim downplayed the movements Friday , saying rebel supply lines have been cut off from the coast and from the south , rendering them unable to advance . 
`` We have paid a heavy price , and we have nothing in front of us except the prize , and the prize is victory over those traitors who collaborated with the crusader enemy and transformed Libya into a bloodbath , '' Ibrahim said . 
Meanwhile , a NATO airstrike destroyed the home of Abdullah al-Sanussi , the head of Libya 's intelligence service and a brother-in-law of Gadhafi 's , neighbors and Libyan government officials said Friday . 
The strike also destroyed a school and medical store , neighbors and officials said . 
One person -- not al-Sanussi -- was killed , they said . 
In June , the International Criminal Court issued an arrest warrant for al-Sanussi along with Gadhafi and his son Saif al-Islam for actions taken as a popular uprising morphed into civil war . 
The warrants are for `` crimes against humanity , '' including murder and persecution committed in Libya in February `` through the state apparatus and security forces . '' 
Gadhafi 's government has rejected the court 's authority . 
The attack on al-Sanussi 's house followed a NATO airstrike Thursday night that killed a brother of Ibrahim , the government spokesman , a Libyan government official said . 
Hasan Ali Ibrahim , a younger brother of Musa Ibrahim , was working as a civilian volunteer for the Gadhafi government , the official said . 
The 25-year-old university student had left Tripoli with a group of people to check on friends in Zawiya ; he and the others were struck by bullets fired from an Apache helicopter while on foot in Zawiya 's central square , the official said . 
CNN 's Ben Wedeman , Matthew Chance , Barbara Starr and Yasmin Amer contributed to this report . 
