BP oil spill : A Louisiana tragedy For Tim Gautreaux , a Louisiana local whose family is immersed in the oil industry , the BP leak means the death of his whole community . 
And things can only get worse ` The spill is slathering four states now . 
It could be blown over to Texas . 
It could show up in the marinas of Key West ... Law suits are spill ing out with no judicial blowout preventer to slow them down . ' 
Photograph : Stuart Franklin\/Magnum Photos Those who live in Louisiana all their lives develop an understanding of disaster . 
We know a hurricane can turn over hundreds of offshore oil rigs in one pass and then come to land and do the same to our homes . 
Refineries explode , rigs blow up , pipelines burst , well pressures cause accidents that take fingers , feet , arms , legs and life itself . 
There 's hardly a family in the Gulf region that does not have a member involved in the oil industry . 
My father was a tugboat captain who handled barges of crude oil for the sprawling refineries , my brother sells oilfield equipment and technology , my nephew captains offshore supply vessels , my great-nephew operates a giant crane currently picking Katrina-smashed equipment from the Gulf floor . 
Cousins manage oil leases . 
So , even though I am not an oil worker , the industry is part of my environment , my history , and when I saw images of the April Deepwater Horizon explosion and fire , I thought at once , `` Wait a minute . 
That rig is state-of-the-art , the size of a small factory , loaded with technology that rivals the space program in complexity . 
Why is the fire so enormous ? '' 
And later , when the labyrinth of pipes and valves keeled over in a rumbling , hissing nimbus of flame , I was astounded , thinking , `` Why did n't the blowout preventer shut down the well ? '' 
And days later , when it was revealed that the device was not functioning , a dark spill began to spread in my soul , a burgeoning realisation that nothing could stop a runaway well 5,000 ft below the Gulf 's surface . 
A wide open fire hydrant blasting a plume of water out of a four-inch opening operates on a pressure of 50 pounds per square inch . 
The oil and gas venting from the rig 's seven-inch pipe is propelled by at least 3,000 psi . 
And if the pipe beneath the blowout preventer fails ? 
The reservoir pressures , I understand , are 11,000 psi . 
Unchecked , the subterranean caverns of oil would roar to the surface for years . 
BP has made a number of attempts to stop the fountain of oil and all have failed , except for the latest cap . 
But even this success poses many dangers , including a well rupture far below the ocean floor , initiated by the high pressure caused by the cap . 
No one knows what the result of such a failure would be , and this highlights the most frightening facet of the catastrophe : its unpredictability . 
The final solution is supposed to be the relief wells BP is drilling , and on the day I realized even these might not arrest the blowout , I decided to stop thinking about it all . 
I drove into my south-east Louisiana town of Hammond to get something good to eat . 
At a seafood cafe I ordered Oysters Scampi . 
The TV was on above the bar , showing miles-long strands of red oil streaming across the face of the Gulf . 
I thought of the men killed in the explosion , how they spent their lives trying to avoid something like this . 
My oysters were large and plump ; I ate the first fellow , then looked up at the oil . 
Locally , it 's well known that 60 % of the US 's oysters come from Louisiana 's coastal regions . 
The oyster beds would be killed by the oil and take years to regenerate . 
Longer , if the oil kept coming next year . 
The spill inside me widened as I realized that the shrimp fisheries would soon be closed , the commercial taking of red snapper , grouper and all their delectable cousins banned . 
I remembered that Louisiana supplies 73 % of the nation 's shrimp . 
My God , what about the charter boat industry and sport fishermen from Texas to Florida ? 
The nightly news told of oil coming ashore . 
Unlike its neighbor states , Louisiana has no shore , no sand beach except for a small spit called Grand Isle , no dunes , hills , cliffs . 
The entire Gulf border and its wide attendant marshes are exactly at sea level . 
The shore is mostly gritty mud held in place by tall , dense marsh grass . 
What is not water is grass , thousands of square miles of it . 
When the oil kills the grass , the shore will begin to melt away . 
This coastal marsh is home to millions of birds pelicans , terns , egrets , great herons and a rich variety of mammals and reptiles . 
It is threaded through by countless miles of narrow bayous , inlets and lagoons , all spawning areas for shrimp and succulent blue-claw crabs , nesting grounds for vast flocks of migratory geese and ducks a hot and humid greenhouse teeming with life . 
Louisiana is a relatively small state , but it contains 40-45 % of the nation 's coastal wetlands . 
The neighbor states of Texas , Alabama , Mississippi and Florida have similar fertile and productive marshes , though such areas are much smaller . 
The oil that began to show up , the so-called tar balls , were really reddish pancakes of axle grease ; they began to appear on Grand Isle , then east , on the Alabama beaches , followed by a nasty invasion of the lovely green water and white sand shores of Pensacola and Santa Rosa Island . 
Heavy dark oil began to pool against the Louisiana marshes , coating wildlife with a greasy , glue-like batter no one can ever know how many thousands of animals have died , how many carcasses are at the bottom of the quarter million square miles of the Gulf . 
Next , every fisherman 's greatest fear happened . 
The government had to close over 80,000 square miles of the Gulf to all fishing , and suddenly tens of thousands of fishermen were out of work , losing their identity and a way of life they and their ancestors have pursued for generations . 
The Cajuns have fished since they arrived in the 1700s ; the Vietnamese , Croatians , African Americans , Native Americans , Islenos and plain American country boys who trawl and fish and process are all on the bank watching their livelihoods drown in oil . 
Who will ever know ? 
As of now , a safe final estimate , if the cap holds and the relief wells work , is 200m gallons . 
The oil washing up in July might have leaked in April . 
Locals are losing sleep about how much oil is looming underwater to bedevil us next year or for 10 years . 
Calls to counselling and crisis lines are through the roof . 
Fourteen million people depend on fishing and oilfield work for a living in the Gulf region . 
The fishermen ca n't pay rents and mortgages , utility bills , insurance , buy fuel for their boats , save for any kind of future ; they stand in charity food lines on 100-degree days . 
The oilfield people are facing cutbacks because of the new ban on deepwater drilling ; this is affecting shipbuilding , crewboat , supply and helicopter fleets , machine shops , pipe yards , supply houses , foundries and a hundred other businesses . 
The fishermen are hurting acutely at the moment , but the oil workers are worried for their futures as well , as the industry is facing a wind-down that could last for years . 
The news keeps getting more uncertain and , yes , things can get worse because hurricane season is now upon us and no one knows what havoc a big storm in the Gulf could cause . 
It could do anything from pushing a bow wave of killing oil over the estuaries to painting New Orleans with black rain . 
I do n't think people living outside the region understand what is happening . 
One so-called environmentalist suggested Gulf fishermen and oil workers should just get educated in green technology and work in solar panel factories . 
What are they supposed to do for 20 years until the technology is perfected and the factories built ? 
Fishermen want to work as fishermen ; the Gulf is 1,000 miles wide and they are independent members of a huge culture , not employees . 
By the end of June I tried to limit my news intake . 
It was now clear the enormous Gulf tourism industry was on shaky ground because all the beaches from Panama City , Florida to Grand Isle , Louisiana were fouled or soon to be fouled , and the result was a freefall in hotel , condo and restaurant bookings , and trade in the thousands of gift shops , filling stations , convenience stores , bait-and-tackle shops Each type of business was firing workers , cutting orders , falling into debt . 
After a charter boat captain shot himself in the head , I turned off the television . 
But everywhere I went , neighbors , bank tellers , waitresses , university professors all fretted about the spill . 
Last year , one billion pounds of fish was harvested from the Gulf ; now only a tiny fraction of that is being caught in the small areas still open , and chances are even that clean catch will be distrusted by buyers outside the region . 
How many years will it take for Gulf seafood 's reputation for quality to return ? 
This disaster rides like a tumor on the back of the monster Katrina , a storm that in 2005 killed more than 1,800 people in the New Orleans area . 
Many residents of the region were finally getting their homes rebuilt , their boats and docks restored . 
It is true a few hundred men have been hired by BP at low wages to shovel muck off the shores . 
Several motels have been rented to house workers and BP has been leaking out cheques to fishing families and charter boat operators -LRB- though there are tales of cheques never arriving -RRB- . 
Hundreds of boats have been hired to go after the oil , but not a man in a thousand miles is glad about any of it . 
Everyone has a sense of why the accident happened . 
Weeks before the explosion , it seems BP knew the blowout preventer was leaking and missing a crucial seal . 
About 10 hours before 11 men were burned up , employees report an argument broke out between the rig 's BP manager , who wanted a speedy and cheap sealing of the well , and the driller and cementer , who demanded traditional , safe plugging methods . 
The company man overruled the experts . 
He wanted to save money , ignoring the first rule of industry economics : safety is never more expensive than an accident . 
The clean-up bill is complex and will extend for years . 
In Florida , workers clean a beach at dusk ; at sunrise it 's covered again . 
The spill is slathering four states now . 
It could be blown over to Texas . 
It could show up in the marinas of Key West , or even Wilmington , North Carolina on the Atlantic , wherever the Gulf Stream carries it . 
The coming expense is not to be imagined . 
Lawsuits are spilling out with no judicial blowout preventer to slow them down . 
Injury and loss of livelihood suits , suits from hotels for loss of bookings , suits from restaurants , bars , stores , suits for mental anguish , even claims from municipalities for loss of taxes . 
There is a large , years-old black spot in my driveway where my old Jeep once leaked a quart of transmission oil . 
It 's not fading away . 
The BP spill is likewise staining the coast 's soil , and sinking into the psychological fabric of the Gulf . 
Beneath the sorrow lies suspicion and anger based on the notion that if this spill had occurred near a place like Boston harbor where a lot of wealthy , well-connected people live , every oil-skimmer in the hemisphere would have been brought in and every offer of foreign help accepted immediately , instead of 71 days after the spill began . 
The locals have watched with disbelief some of BP 's lunatic and expensive clean-up methods , such as wiping down each blade of marsh grass with paper towels . 
They have watched their own , more effective , home-grown efforts ridiculed and crushed by irrelevant Coast Guard regulations and `` experts '' who have never seen Louisiana 's coast except perhaps through the windows of a plane . 
In three to 10 years , maybe the lawsuits will be settled , maybe the sea grasses will grow back to hold the marshlands together , maybe the fish now trying to breathe clouds of undersea oil will somehow propagate , maybe trust in the world 's best seafood will return . 
But a person 's life is composed of minutes and is most fulfilled by working and bringing one 's earnings to the family table . 
And who can give back even one ruined minute ? 
