BP said there was a ` massive effort ' to control the leak BP has admitted full responsibility for cleaning up the spill . 
It has refused to accept blame for the accident , however , as the failed equipment that caused the explosion was owned and operated by drilling firm Transocean . 
By mid-afternoon , BP shares closed down 3 % lower at 558.5 p. Transocean shares also continued to fall , down 3.7 % at $ 70.11 in early trading in New York . 
Its shares have fallen more than 20 % since the explosion . 
BP said the cost of containing the spill and securing the original well is running at about $ 6m -LRB- # 3.9 m -RRB- a day . 
`` This figure is rising as activity increases . '' 
it said in a statement . 
`` It is too early to quantify other potential costs and liabilities associated with the incident . '' 
Experts have warned that the total cost of clearing up the spill , including compensation claims , could run into billions of dollars . 
Some estimates are as high as $ 15bn . 
Under US law it is the oilfield operator that has financial responsibility , even if fault lies with a contractor . 
BP has already said it will pay the costs of the clean-up , though observers suggest it could pursue Transocean at a later stage to try to get some money back . 
The British oil giant has a two-thirds stake in the field , so its minority partners will also be liable for some of the cost , too . 
BP said it had begun to drill a relief well to try to isolate the one that is spilling oil into the Gulf of Mexico and permanently seal it . 
It added the drilling is estimated to take three months . 
`` At the same time , we are continuing with our efforts to stop the leak and control the oil at the seabed , to tackle the oil offshore , and to protect the shoreline through a massive effort together with government agencies and local communities , '' said BP 's chief executive Tony Hayward . 
Thousands of barrels of oil have been leaking into the Gulf of Mexico every day since the Deepwater Horizon rig sank , two days after the initial explosion . 
The oil is already having a devastating effect on the area 's fishing industry , and officials fear much wider environmental damage if the full slick hits land . 
BP insures itself through its own insurance company , so there 's little scope to pass the cost on to outside insurers , says BBC World Service business reporter Mark Gregory . 
`` But even in the worst case scenario , the direct financial burden of the clean-up and paying compensation is unlikely to be a crippling burden for a firm as gigantic as BP , which last year made profits of over $ 40bn , '' our reporter says . 
Analysts say the main damage could be to the company 's reputation in the US , which has yet to recover from a refinery accident in Texas and pipeline problems in Alaska . 
The fall in BP 's shares is largely to do with investors ' fears that the reputational damage may undermine BP 's ability to do business in the US , its most important market . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
