HOUSTON | Wed Jun 2 , 2010 2:42 pm EDT HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP CEO Tony Hayward , on the front lines of his company 's battle to contain the massive Gulf of Mexico oil spill , apologized on Wednesday for saying he wants `` my life back . '' 
Hayward , who has been thrust into a media spotlight since an April 20 rig explosion that killed 11 workers and caused the worst oil spill in U.S. history , said in a statement he was appalled when he read his comment . 
The BP chief had remarked `` I want my life back , '' to several news organizations , including Reuters , in recent days . 
`` I made a hurtful and thoughtless comment , '' Hayward said in a statement . 
`` I apologize , especially to the families of the 11 men who lost their lives in this tragic accident . 
Those words do n't represent how I feel about this tragedy . '' 
`` My first priority is doing all we can to restore the lives of the people of the Gulf region and their families - to restore their lives , not mine , '' he added . 
Hayward 's `` life back '' gaffe was not the first by the plain - speaking and press-shy geologist at the helm of the oil giant . 
On May 18 , he told Britain 's Sky News : `` I think the environmental impact of this disaster is likely to have been very , very modest . '' 
Hayward and BP executives have been challenged with the comment -- made before oil hit the Gulf shore -- regularly since in television interviews in the United States , where the spill is dominating the national news . 
As much as 19,000 barrels of oil -LRB- 800,000 gallons or 3 million liters -RRB- a day has been pouring into the Gulf off the coast of Louisiana , threatening fisheries , wildlife and beaches along a coastline that stretches to Florida . 
In an interview with the Guardian newspaper published on May 14 , Hayward said : `` The Gulf of Mexico is a very big ocean . 
The amount of volume of oil and dispersant we are putting into it is tiny in relation to the total water volume . '' '' 
That remark was typical of the technically accurate comments Hayward makes , which -- particularly when abbreviated -- have led critics to charge that BP is trying to play down the environmental damage . 
An abbreviation of the Guardian quote , where Hayward simply refers to the spill as `` tiny , '' also regularly features in news reports . 
BP is beefing up its public relations effort to deal with the spill . 
This week a former campaign press aide to former Vice President Dick Cheney started as BP 's U.S. spokesperson . 
That hire raised some eyebrows , given critics of Cheney -- a one-time chief executive of oil field services firm Halliburton -- associate the former vice president with what they see as excessively close ties between the government and Big Oil under former Republican President George W. Bush . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Bergin , Editing by Frances Kerry -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Even though they may provide an excuse for bubble-heads to wrap themselves around yet another axle ! 
The BP CEO shows his true , narcissistic colors . 
He might want his life back , but the fish and other wildlife want their lives and homes back . 
The human victims would like their loved ones back ; the fisherman would like their livelihoods back . 
After the BP CEO sits in jail , THEN he can complain about wanting his life back . 
He 's a selfish , heartless , cold bastard who has now hired the former press agent of another selfish , heartless , cold bastard . 
people make sure you read his repose to this story , right on the money my American Brother . 
keep up the awesome comments . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
