Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi gives a speech in Rome in this August 30 , 2010 file photo . 
TRIPOLI | Fri Jun 3 , 2011 4:48 pm EDT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - China made its first confirmed contact with Libyan rebels in the latest diplomatic setback for Muammar Gaddafi , and France said on Friday it was working with those close to the veteran ruler to persuade him to leave power . 
The meeting in Qatar between a Chinese diplomat and the leader of the rebel National Transitional Council follows a spate of defections by high profile figures this week , including top oil official and former prime minister Shokri Ghanem . 
Libyan rebels and NATO have made Gaddafi 's departure a condition for agreeing a ceasefire in a conflict that has killed thousands , but he emphatically told visiting South African President Jacob Zuma this week he would not leave Libya . 
A NATO-led military alliance extended its mission to protect civilians in Libya for a further 90 days this week , and France said it was stepping up military pressure as well as working with those close to Gaddafi to try to persuade him to quit . 
`` He is more and more isolated , '' French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe told Europe 1 radio . 
`` There have been more defections around him and we have received messages from his close entourage which has understood that he must leave power . '' 
In Beijing , a terse Chinese Foreign Ministry statement said Beijing 's ambassador to Qatar , Zhang Zhiliang , had met and `` exchanged views on developments in Libya '' with Mustafa Abdel Jalil , the chairman of the rebel council that is trying to offer itself as a credible temporary alterative to Gaddafi . 
The ministry gave no details of the talks but the meeting itself was an indication that Beijing wants to keep open lines of communication with the rebel forces . 
China was among the emerging powers that abstained in March when the United Nations Security Council voted to authorize NATO-led air strikes . 
China was never especially close to Gaddafi , but it generally tries to avoid taking firm sides in other countries ' domestic conflicts , including in the Middle East , where it has been buying growing quantities of oil . 
In Tripoli , government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim said he had no immediate comment on China 's meeting with the rebels . 
CLASHES REPORTED IN WESTERN MOUNTAINS Now in its fourth month , the Libyan conflict is deadlocked , with rebels unable to break out of their strongholds and advance toward Tripoli , where Gaddafi appears to be entrenched . 
Rebels control the east of Libya around Benghazi , where the rebel council is based , and a mountain range stretching from the town of Zintan , 150 km -LRB- 95 miles -RRB- south of Tripoli , toward the western border with Tunisia . 
In London , Major General John Lorimer said British warplanes destroyed two tanks and two armored personnel carriers on Thursday in Yafran , 100 km -LRB- 60 miles -RRB- southwest of Tripoli , where he said Gaddafi 's forces were continuing to attack rebels . 
A rebel spokesman in the Western Mountains town of Nalut , Kalefa Ali , said rebels had been fighting forces loyal to Gaddafi in Trumeet to the south of Yafran and in Bir Ayyad . 
The rebels took over Bir Ayyad , a road junction which controls access to Yafran from the north , and replaced the green Libyan flags there with the red , black and green rebel flag , a Reuters cameraman said . 
`` Bir Ayyad is under rebel control , '' a rebel called Mohammed told Reuters by telephone . 
He said no rebel fighters were wounded in the fighting . 
In Misrata , rebel leader Abdelsalam reported fighting in Dafniyah to the west of the city . 
`` It started at 10 am and Gaddafi 's forces have been shelling Dafniyah since then , using mortars and heavier rockets , '' he said . 
He said revolutionaries in Zlitan had been supplied with weapons and telecommunications equipment from Misrata and Benghazi , and had been waging attacks at night , `` but not on the scale that threatens Gaddafi 's forces ' iron grip on Zlitan . '' 
Zlitan is the next town to the west of Misrata , and one of only three between there and Tripoli . 
Libyan television reported on Friday that forces of the `` crusader coalition '' had shelled civilian and military targets in Al Jufrah , 450 km -LRB- 300 miles -RRB- southeast of Tripoli . 
BODIES OF AFRICAN REFUGEES FOUND In Tunisia , a U.N. official said the bodies of 150 African refugees fleeing turmoil in Libya had been recovered off the Tunisian coast after the vessels carrying them illegally to Europe got into difficulty . 
Tunisian authorities rescued 570 people , but many others went into the water when a stampede to get off the small fishing boats -- combined with the effect of rough seas -- capsized some of the vessels , a Tunisian official said . 
In all about 250 people were reported on Thursday as missing from the vessels . 
The United Nations has warned government-held parts of Libya were running out of food and the capital Tripoli this week saw the first big protest in months against Gaddafi 's 41-year rule . 
Gaddafi says the rebels are armed criminals and al Qaeda militants , and has called the NATO intervention an act of colonial aggression designed to grab Libya 's plentiful oil . 
Western governments say they believe they are wearing down Gaddafi 's ability to control Libya through a combination of diplomatic pressure and military action , although the U.S. role in the conflict in particular has been controversial at home . 
The House of Representatives prepared to vote on differing approaches to U.S. involvement in Libya , one directing President Barack Obama to pull U.S. forces out of NATO operations and a second that demands more information about U.S. strategy . 
The resolutions are a response from U.S. lawmakers in both main parties who are unhappy the United States is now in a third conflict after Iraq and Afghanistan . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
But Not -LRB- !!! -RRB- , they 've thought `` comedy must go on '' : -LRB- This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
