OTTAWA | Thu May 13 , 2010 3:28 pm EDT OTTAWA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Exasperated Canadian legislators grilled the head of BP Plc Canadian unit on Thursday , concerned about the risks of the company 's plans to drill in Arctic waters after the catastrophic Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
But Anne Drinkwater , president of BP Canada , offered few answers at a hearing at Parliament 's Standing Committee on Natural Resources on the safety of drilling in the Far North . 
Drinkwater , who has also run BP operations in Indonesia , Angola and Norway , declined to answer technical questions and said she had not compared Canadian and U.S. drilling regulations , straining the credulity of some on the committee . 
`` You 'd think coming to a hearing like this that British Petroleum would have as many answers as possible to assure the Canadian public . 
We got nothing today from them , '' said Nathan Cullen of the left-leaning New Democrats . 
`` I was very disappointed . 
I think British Petroleum is going to have to do a lot better job if they want to drill in Canadian waters , '' Cullen told reporters afterward . 
Larry Bagnell of the Liberals , after asking Drinkwater to compare regulations in Canada and the United States , said : `` I thought she did n't have answers to a lot of questions ... I was asking for a very simple answer . '' 
Critics say an oil blowout in the Canadian Arctic would be much worse than the current Gulf disaster , given the ice , severe weather conditions and the lack of infrastructure in one of the world 's most remote regions . 
In 2008 , BP paid C$ 1.2 billion -LRB- $ 1.8 billion -RRB- for rights to explore three parcels in Canada 's Beaufort Sea , north of the Arctic Circle . 
It has yet to announce plans to drill in the region but shortly before the U.S. disaster , BP and other oil companies urged Canadian regulators to drop a requirement stipulating that companies operating in the Arctic had to drill relief wells in the same season as the primary well . 
Cullen argued the companies had made this request because drilling a relief well within the required time limit would be too expensive , given the difficult Arctic conditions . 
`` It 's not a question of cost , '' said Drinkwater . 
`` Your submission does say it 's a question of cost . 
... You cite money because you 're concerned about money , '' retorted Cullen , reading from a BP document filed with the NEB , then listing recent disasters BP had been involved in . 
Drinkwater -- who said BP was not rejecting the option of a relief well -- declined to answer reporters ' questions following the hearing . 
Canadian governments and regulators are reassessing the country 's preparedness for an offshore disaster following the April 20 explosion of Transocean Ltd 's Deepwater Horizon drilling rig . 
The explosion killed 11 workers and triggered what could prove to be the worst U.S. oil spill if the crude keeps spewing unchecked into the Gulf . 
The National Energy Board , Canada 's federal oil and gas regulator , launched a review of Arctic safety and environmental drilling requirements this week and canceled hearings into the relief well issue . 
NEB Chief Executive Gaetan Caron said it was too early to say what the review might conclude . 
Asked whether a similar accident could happen in the Arctic , Caron replied : `` No safety regulator can possibly say that an accident will never happen . '' 
Provincial governments are also reviewing offshore drilling regulations . 
The government of Nova Scotia on Thursday extended a moratorium on oil and gas exploration on the Georges Bank , an important fishing region , by three years to the end of 2015 . 
The government of Newfoundland is also launching a review of offshore safety practices , though it said it is satisfied with the current level of environmental protection practiced by the industry . 
Indeed , Chevron Corp earlier this week began drilling a deepwater well in the Orphan basin off the province . 
The Atlantic off Newfoundland is home to Canada 's three producing oil projects . 
