MIAMI | Thu May 13 , 2010 6:00 am EDT MIAMI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Companies linked to the massive Gulf of Mexico oil spill are facing a flood of lawsuits , as legal actions from the disaster spread faster than the crude gushing from BP Plc 's blown-out undersea well . 
Nearly 100 lawsuits have already been filed across the Gulf region , and the disaster , which lawyers envision becoming one of the biggest class actions in U.S. history , involves billions of dollars in potential liabilities . 
`` This is not just an environmental disaster , this is a legal disaster , Alabama Attorney General Troy King told reporters on Wednesday . 
`` It seems clear that this one will eclipse the Exxon Valdez payout , '' said Zygmunt J.B. Plater , who chaired a legal task force for a special commission in Alaska following the Exxon Valdez oil tanker spill there in 1989 . 
`` The hit in terms of economics is going to be measurable and it 's going to be greater , '' said Plater , a law professor at Boston College , who noted that the population and levels of investment along the Gulf coast dwarfed those at stake in remote Alaska more than 20 years ago . 
BP is the most exposed to potential damages in the case . 
The London-based oil giant is the owner of the ruptured undersea well spewing out oil at an unchecked rate of about 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons\/795 ,000 liters -RRB- per day . 
The resulting oil slick threatens fisheries , beaches and wildlife refuges -- and livelihoods -- along the Gulf Coast . 
Other companies involved in the spill include Transocean Ltd , owner of the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig licensed to BP , and Halliburton Co , which provided a variety of services on the rig and was involved in cementing the well to stabilize its walls . 
Families of some of the 11 workers who died in the April 20 Deepwater Horizon rig blast have filed wrongful-death claims , and people who were injured have also taken legal action . 
The companies also face lawsuits brought by fishermen , restaurants , charter boat companies , hotels and rental property owners . 
Gulf Coast states could also sue , as could municipalities , for lost tax revenues , and shipping companies if traffic into major ports or the Mississippi River is disrupted . 
`` You 're talking about the entire economic structure of five states and all their ancillary businesses , '' said Tim Howard , a Tallahassee lawyer who last week filed one of Florida 's first class-action suits over the oil spill . 
`` You 're talking maybe about close to a half a trillion dollar economy here , '' Howard added . 
`` This is why you do not mess around and play around with something toxic . '' 
BP 's shares have been pummeled since the accident , wiping about $ 30 billion from its market value . 
The company has said repeatedly that it takes responsibility for the oil spill and will pay any legitimate damage claims . 
BP Chief Executive Officer Tony Hayward has said that includes interrupted business activity . 
BP declined to comment on Wednesday on the number of lawsuits it now faces in connection with the spill . 
But it moved last week to have what it then described as `` at least 70 suits '' consolidated in a court in Houston , the U.S. oil hub which also serves as the command center for teams directing the oil spill clean-up efforts . 
In its appeal to a judicial panel that will decide which court is best equipped to hear the cases , BP also took the unusual step of asking that Houston Judge Lynn Hughes , appointed to the federal bench by former President Ronald Reagan , handle the multi-district `` It 's a little unusual for the defendants in massive litigation to request a judicial panel to send them to a particular court with a particular judge , '' said Brent Coon , a lawyer who spearheaded civil action against BP after the 2005 explosion at its Texas City refinery , which killed 15 workers . 
`` It certainly raises some red flags for some people , '' added Coon , whose firm is representing a survivor of the rig explosion suing BP , Transocean and Halliburton , among others . 
`` BP 's blueprint -LRB- is -RRB- saying that they 're transparent when in fact they 're not ; saying that they accept responsibility when in fact they 're already pointing their finger at the other guys , '' Coon said . 
A lawsuit brought against BP by one of its own shareholders , who alleged the company helped cause the Gulf spill by putting profit before safety , was dropped by the plaintiff on Tuesday without any explanation from lawyers . 
But the move may offer little solace to BP . 
`` The number of cases is going to increase dramatically , '' said Robert Gordon , an attorney with New York law firm Weitz & Luxenberg , which is representing 500 Gulf area commercial fisherman in the oil spill litigation . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Ken Salazar says he 'll break the Minerals Management Service into two agencies . 
Did Salazar make a mistake with Cape Wind and Oil ? 
Coast Guard Rear Admiral Mary E. Landry told us early on in the Gulf spill `` there is no leak . '' 
Landry was also in charge of the 2003 Bouchard Oil spill in Buzzards Bay which had low estimates by the Coast Guard that ended up with seven times that amount ! 
On April 27 , 2003 , eight years ago the Bouchard Barge B-120 hit an obstacle in Buzzards Bay , creating a 12-foot rupture in its hull and discharging an estimated 100,000 gallons of No. 6 oil . 
The oil is known to have affected an estimated 90 miles of shoreline , killing 450 numerous bird species the day it happened , and recreational use of the bay , such as shell fishing and boating . 
Where , or how did you find out about the spill in April 2003 ? 
Please name your source . 
Also , even with all the class action suits , there is no way the taxpayer is going come out even on this diaster . 
The magnitude of the spill is simply enormous . 
That we do n't have a man made vessel that can withstand the pressure of a one mile deep ocean floor amazes me This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
