LONDON | Thu Apr 28 , 2011 10:19 am EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - High world oil futures prices could rise yet further if the European Union puts sanctions on Syrian oil this week , although the country exports modest amounts and the quality is low , analysts and traders said . 
`` The physical market impact is very small . 
But the current futures market is bullish so even if 50,000 barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- go out , prices will go ballistic , '' an oil trader with a major bank said Thursday . 
The European Union will discuss in Brussels Friday possible sanctions against Syria 's leadership over its crackdown on protesters , EU diplomats have said . 
Any sanctions would probably begin with asset freezes and travel bans on the leadership and it could take up to two weeks before the measures formally pass into law . 
If measures are taken against the leadership , state oil export monopoly Sytrol is likely to be affected . 
Syrian security forces have shot dead at least 400 civilians in their campaign to crush month-long pro-democracy protests , Syrian human rights organizations have said . 
The United States is also considering sanctions against Syrian government officials to increase pressure on President Bashar al-Assad to end the crackdown . 
`` Pressure on Syrian elites keeps mounting ... However , a condemnation of Syrian actions by the U. N , Security Council has so far been thwarted by Russia , China and Lebanon , '' said David Wech from JBC Energy . 
Syrian crude oil output was around 400,000 bpd in 2010 compared with a peak of around 600,000 bpd in the 1990s . 
Today 's volumes are only a fraction of Libya 's output of 1.6 million bpd or around 2 percent of the global consumption , which has been shut by sanctions and a civil war since March . 
RUSSIAN CRUDE TO GET SUPPORT A key difference with Libya is that Syria exports mainly sour and heavy crude , which is harder to process than the sweet and light Libyan oil that yields more light products such as gasoline and gasoil . 
U.S. and Brent oil futures , as well as premiums on sweet versus sour grades , have rallied since March after Libya stopped exporting its predominantly sweet barrels . 
Brent oil futures traded above $ 125 a barrel Thursday , not far from their highest level since August 2008 . 
`` This would mean that a possible shut-in would not be too dramatic for the European crude market as it would be relatively easy to find substitutes for Syrian Heavy , particularly as there is plenty of sour crude available in the region , something that can not be said for light-sweet grades , '' Wech said . 
Syria 's two key production streams are the sour and heavy Souedie crude , which yields lower quality products , and the sweet and lighter Syrian Light grade . 
More than half the output is processed at domestic refineries , which can refine around 240,000 bpd , while some 150,000 bpd or around 6 tankers a month of mostly sour Souedie is exported mainly to Italy , the Netherlands , France and Spain . 
An Italian refiner said interest in the Souedie grade was low as the official selling price of minus $ 10.6 per barrel to the benchmark dated Brent was still too high , given the poor returns to be gained at present from refining heavy oil . 
`` This is a minor problem for the market since you do n't have the physical tightness even despite Libya . 
But the very bullish futures market has long been ignoring fundamentals , '' said a trader at a trading firm in the Mediterranean . 
The trader said Syrian exports would halt very quickly if sanctions were imposed on the country as international banks would quickly stop accepting payments , as they did with Libya . 
`` Although the impact on the physical market will be limited , some similar grades might benefit -- primarily -LRB- Russia 's -RRB- Urals , -LRB- Iraq 's -RRB- Kirkuk and Iranian Heavy , '' he said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Dmitry Zhdannikov and Ikuko Kurahone , editing by Anthony Barker -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
