LONDON | Thu Apr 28 , 2011 11:01 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Crowds camped out in London and foreign dignitaries flew in from around the world for Friday 's wedding of Prince William and Kate Middleton , a service full of pomp and ceremony that has thrust the monarchy to center stage . 
Underlying the diplomatic minefield of an event taking place in the full glare of the world 's media , Britain withdrew Syria 's invitation , saying Syria 's crackdown on calls for democracy made it inappropriate that its ambassador should attend . 
Middleton , 29 , accompanied by William 's younger brother and best man Prince Harry , attended a rehearsal on Thursday at the wedding venue , Westminster Abbey , the coronation church for the monarchy since William the Conqueror in 1066 . 
In the evening , Prince William reached into the crowds waiting on the Mall , the ceremonial avenue running from Buckingham Palace , shaking hands and telling delighted members of the public he was focusing on `` remembering the lines '' for the `` big day , '' a live BBC broadcast showed . 
In a message of thanks to well-wishers worldwide , the couple said they were deeply touched by the outpouring of affection ahead of a wedding service that will combine ancient traditions of the monarchy with a sense of modernity to reflect the times . 
In the service , Middleton will not promise to `` obey '' William as part of her wedding vows in front of a congregation gathering royals , politicians , celebrities and friends . 
`` We are both so delighted that you are able to join us in celebrating what we hope will be one of the happiest days of our lives , '' William , second in line to the throne , and Kate wrote in a statement printed in an official souvenir program . 
On the street across from the abbey , crowds began to swell at a makeshift campsite , with tents draped in British `` Union Jack '' flags , pictures of the couple and banners reading `` It 's cold but worth it '' and `` It could have been me . '' 
`` I 'm a romance novelist so I had to come for the most romantic event in the world , '' said Sheree Zielke , 55 , who came from Canada to watch the event -- which is being met by republicans with indifference and by royalists with excitement . 
Cindy Sagar , from Oxford in central England , said she had been one of about 600,000 who watched the 1981 wedding of William 's father Prince Charles to Princess Diana . 
`` It was electric , it was one of the best days of my life . '' 
Tourism chiefs predict an extra 600,000 visitors will be in the capital on Friday , taking the total to about 1.1 million and bringing in up to 50 million pounds -LRB- $ 80 million -RRB- . 
Security will be tight , as Britain is on its second highest threat level meaning an attack by militants is considered `` highly likely , '' and police have carried out thorough searches along the route . 
Militant Islamists and Irish republicans , anarchists , and stalkers are all seen by security experts as possible threats . 
Across London , flags and red , white and blue bunting fluttered across buildings and shops , with similar scenes in cities , towns and villages across the country . 
Prime Minister David Cameron said Britons `` felt deeply '' about the constitutional monarchy , which went through scandals in the 1990s -- notably William 's parents ' divorce -- and has described the nuptials as `` unadulterated good news . '' 
Some Britons , however , are indifferent or hostile as the wedding comes at a time when government austerity measures are leading to deep spending cuts and large-scale job losses . 
While the royal family and the Middletons will pay for the ceremony and reception , the taxpayers will foot the bill for security costs , which republicans say could exceed 10 million pounds . 
An Ipsos MORI poll for Reuters this month found 47 percent of Britons were not very , or not at all , interested . 
`` I want to get as far away as possible from the wedding because it really does n't mean anything to me , so my wife and I are going for a long weekend to Italy , '' Londoner Alex Joseph told Reuters . 
Artist Ollie Sam , 26 , commented : `` It makes me laugh that many people here are leaving town to get away for the long weekend , while foreigners are coming to see the wedding . 
I personally think it 's a waste of money . '' 
The government estimates about two million people will join 5,500 street parties in England and Wales , though officials said the affluent south seemed more royalist than the poorer north . 
Economists say the extra public holiday will cost billions of pounds and could damage Britain 's fragile economic recovery , one saying it will knock a quarter of a percentage point off second-quarter GDP growth . 
Abroad , the world 's fascination with the British royal family is undiminished . 
An estimated 8,000 journalists have arrived in London to cover the ceremony , and hundreds of millions across the world will watch on television . 
That interest stems partly from the lasting appeal of William 's mother Diana , particularly in the United States . 
Fourteen years ago , the world 's gaze was upon William and Westminster Abbey for Diana 's funeral after her death in a Paris car crash , and William and Kate want her to be remembered on Friday . 
They have included the final hymn sung at her funeral among their choices ; Diana 's friend Elton John , who sang `` Candle in the Wind '' at her funeral , will be a wedding guest ; and William gave Kate her dazzling sapphire and diamond engagement ring . 
William , now 28 , was 15 when his hugely popular mother died and the image of the prince and his brother Harry walking behind their mother 's funeral cortege was striking . 
While Diana 's death marked a low point for senior royals -- their cool reaction in sharp contrast to a huge outpouring of public grief -- they hope William 's wedding will ignite enthusiasm and modernize the monarchy 's image . 
Kate , from an affluent middle-class background , is seen as adding a dash of glamour , reportedly winning William 's attention by appearing at a charity fashion show in little more than her underwear . 
Diana 's death and other scandals saw support for the House of Windsor dive in the 1990s but their approval ratings are now much improved . 
Three-quarters of those polled for Reuters last week said they favored Britain remaining a monarchy . 
The revival of the family fortunes meant there was little opposition when Charles married his long-term lover Camilla in 2005 , a marriage thought inconceivable less than a decade earlier because of Diana 's public standing . 
Kate , whose parents run a successful business and whose mother 's ancestors were miners , will be the first commoner to marry a monarch-to-be since Anne Hyde wed the future James II in the 17th century . 
`` Their marriage will breathe new life into the monarchy as the queen enters the twilight of her reign , bringing new blood and a fresh perspective to an institution that faces criticism for being elitist and out of touch , '' royal biographer Claudia Joseph told Reuters . 
