Looking for someone to blame for the shambles in U.S. financial markets ? 
As someone who owns both an investment bank and commercial banks , and also runs a hedge fund , I have sat front and center and watched as this mess unfolded . 
And in my view , there 's no need to look beyond Wall Street -- and the halls of power in Washington . 
The former has created the nightmare by chasing obscene profits , and the latter have allowed it to spread by not practicing the oversight that is the federal government 's responsibility . 
I find it hard to stomach the fact that investment banks that caused this financial crisis immediately ran to the government asking for assistance , which Bear Stearns received and Lehman Brothers , thankfully , did not . 
This is one of many eerie parallels that the current meltdown bears to the Great Depression , when Washington and the taxpayers had to step up and take unprecedented action to stabilize the financial markets and the economy . 
Unfortunately , the government today has already put enormous taxpayer resources at risk -- bailing out investment firm Bear Stearns , mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and insurer AIG , and proposing to buy risky assets from the banking system -- to stop the economy from plummeting into another depression . 
But these events only underscore the toxic relationship between Washington and Wall Street that has brought us to this point . 
To understand the role of that relationship in our current troubles , let 's go back to 1999 . 
That was when the hype about the Internet reached its pinnacle . 
Technology spending by the government and corporations was booming as both sought to address economic and security fears surrounding the so-called Y2K problem , a potential massive computer shutdown at the start of the year 2000 . 
In the run-up to the millennium , the Federal Reserve , led by then-Chairman Alan Greenspan , began to pump money into the capital markets to deal with any financial problems that might arise from a Y2K meltdown . 
In the end , 2000 arrived to nothing but a wonderful celebration . 
But the monetary stimulus , coupled with the aforementioned hype , created an unfortunate bubble in Internet , technology and telecommunications stocks . 
At the center of this bubble were the large Wall Street investment banks , which understood the profit potential in promoting the technology boom to overeager clients looking for the investment of a lifetime . 
From mid-1999 to mid-2000 , Wall Street firms took approximately 500 companies public , raising a total of nearly $ 77 billion for these companies through initial public offerings , or IPOs . 
For every IPO , the investment banks themselves earned an underwriting fee of 6 percent , returning them an enormous profit . 
But apparently that was not enough for Wall Street . 
As the middlemen between the insatiable investor demand for anything technology-related and young tech entrepreneurs needing to raise capital , the investment banks demanded the opportunity to invest in these companies before the public offerings , when the companies 's stocks were valued at a fraction of what they would bring post-IPO . 
It was n't uncommon for Wall Street firms to invest tens of millions of dollars in `` anything.com '' before taking it public , charge a multimillion-dollar fee for the public offering and then watch their investment multiply within a matter of months . 
Main Street investors , meanwhile , did not realize that the investment banks had essentially thrown away their underwriting guidelines , which had been in place since the Depression , to take companies public . 
Among these guidelines were rules requiring that a company be in business for more than five years , be profitable for two or three consecutive years and have certain levels of revenue and profitability . 
The business models of many of the companies that went public simply were n't viable . 
Once the Internet bubble burst and the dust settled , America 's corporate landscape was littered with bankruptcies and mass layoffs , and investor losses have been estimated at more than $ 1 trillion . 
In an effort to offset the economic strain from these losses , the Fed once again rapidly increased the money supply and slashed short-term interest rates to 1 percent -- a level that had n't been seen in more than 45 years . 
This enormous monetary stimulus -LRB- along with significant federal spending -RRB- energized the overall economy , but it also led to the greatest housing boom -- and possible bust -- this country has ever encountered . 
From 2002 to 2006 , housing values appreciated at an astounding rate of 16 percent per year . 
It became impossible for the typical American family to buy an average-priced house using a conventional 30-year fixed-rate mortgage . 
Wall Street found another perfect opportunity to propel and take advantage of another forming bubble . 
The result was the explosion of toxic new mortgage products that enticed homebuyers into supporting escalating housing prices while eliminating the need for the traditional 20 percent down payment . 
Whether it was interest-only loans , low - or no-doc `` liar loans , '' or piggyback home-equity loans , the mortgage and banking industries found a way to place almost anyone with -- or even without -- a credit score into a home . 
Wall Street played its part by packaging those mortgages into complex financial products and selling them to other investors , many of whom had no idea of what they were buying or the associated risks . 
Once again , the investment banks raked in billions of dollars in fees , giving them incentive to keep lowering underwriting standards , allowing mortgage companies to originate and sell even the most unscrupulous home loans , which Wall Street then dumped onto the investment community . 
Wall Street never once questioned the ethics of these activities ; it too was focused on the enormous rewards that allowed its firms to pay out an unfathomable $ 62 billion in bonuses in 2006 alone . 
Without Wall Street , the housing bubble would have ended shortly after the Fed started to raise interest rates in 2004 , because no lenders would have originated these toxic mortgages if they had to keep the loans on their own balance sheets . 
The price of all this greed ? 
Sadly , because of the actions of the investment banks , the mortgage industry and the rating agencies , the investment community has now incurred an estimated $ 1 trillion and more in losses . 
Even more troubling , housing prices have dropped 20 percent from their July 2006 highs , with the very real likelihood that housing could contract another 15 to 20 percent -- essentially wiping out more than $ 4 trillion in housing values . 
This would be the biggest hit since the Depression to Americans ' most important asset . 
What is even more remarkable is that at the same time , firms such as Goldman Sachs and Lehman not only made billions of dollars packaging and selling these toxic loans , they also wagered with their own capital that the values of these investments would decline , further raising their profits . 
If any other industries engaged in such knowingly unscrupulous activities , there would be an immediate federal investigation . 
Why is Washington so complicit in this intricate and lucrative affair ? 
First , the Fed laid the groundwork for both these asset bubbles by lowering interest rates to historic lows . 
In an attempt to protect his legacy after the Internet-bubble collapse , Greenspan provided unprecedented stimulus to re-inflate the economy and maintain his popularity with Wall Street . 
-LRB- Remember the `` Greenspan put '' ? -RRB- 
But in doing so , he spawned the largest debt and asset bubble in U.S. history . 
At the same time , federal regulatory agencies such as the SEC stood idly by as Wall Street took advantage of the investment public during both the Internet and the housing bubbles . 
The SEC took almost no action against Wall Street after the dot-com implosion . 
And in the midst of the housing bubble , in 2006 , only the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency pushed for any level of regulation to address subprime lending . 
One has to wonder why Treasury secretaries under Presidents Clinton and Bush -- Robert Rubin and Hank Paulson , respectively -- took no action to curb these abuses . 
It certainly was not because they did not understand Wall Street 's practices -- both are former chief executives of Goldman Sachs . 
And why has Congress been so silent ? 
The Wall Street investment banking firms , their executives , their families and their political action committees contribute more to U.S. Senate and House campaigns than any other industry in America . 
By sprinkling some of its massive gains into the pockets of our elected officials , Wall Street bought itself protection from any tough government enforcement . 
This is no doubt the same reason why so many members of Congress were consistently blocking attempts to reform and downsize Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , which are essentially giant , undercapitalized hedge funds . 
These two entities have been huge money machines for Democrats in both the House and the Senate , many of whom recently had the gall to ask why these companies had n't been reformed in the past . 
Nor should several Republican congressmen and Senators who likewise contributed to watering down legislation aimed at reforming these institutions be let off the hook . 
Wall Street 's actions are now profoundly hurting American families , communities and the entire U.S. financial system . 
People are being thrown out of their homes . 
Once seemingly indestructible financial entities are succumbing to the crisis they have created and have jeopardized the stability of the global financial system . 
Is n't it ironic that the same firms that preached free-market capitalism are now the ones begging for a taxpayer bailout ? 
Many investment professionals operating in my world believe , as do I , that we are facing the greatest financial crisis since 1929 . 
Fortunately , today we have safety nets , such as federal deposit insurance , that were non-existent during the Great Depression . 
Yet there has not been a time since the 1920s when Wall Street has enjoyed as much influence over Washington as it has for the last 12 years . 
Let 's hope that this influence fades rapidly -- and that this financial crisis does n't end the same way as the one of nearly 80 years ago . 
