Russia is one of President Bashar al-Assad 's few remaining allies Russia has said Syria should not be issued with any more ultimatums , a day after the West called for more action against President Bashar al-Assad . 
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said further attempts should be made to engage Damascus in political dialogue . 
Meanwhile , Turkey has said it is considering imposing a buffer zone along its border to protect Syrians . 
On Monday , a UN panel said Syrian forces were committing `` crimes against humanity '' in their crackdown . 
The study by an independent panel , appointed by the Human Rights Council , said civilians - including children - had been murdered , tortured and sexually assaulted during the uprising against Mr Assad . 
`` Right now , the most important thing is to stop acting by means of ultimatums and try to move toward political dialogue , '' Mr Lavrov said . 
Speaking in Moscow , he also criticised a possible arms embargo against Syria , suggesting it could prevent the government from gaining weapons but not its opponents . 
Turkey has suggested the creation of a buffer zone to protect Syrian refugees `` We know how that worked in Libya when the arms embargo only applied to the Libyan army , the opposition received weapons , '' Mr Lavrov told reporters . 
Mr Lavrov said it was unfair to expect the Syrian government not to respond to the unrest . 
`` For the most part , armed groups are provoking the authorities , '' he said . 
Russia has resisted attempts by the US and Europe to draft a UN Security Council resolution condemning Mr Assad 's crackdown . 
Syria is a significant purchaser of Russian arms . 
State-run Russia Today reported on Monday that Moscow had deployed warships to its base on Syria 's Mediterranean coast , in what appears to be a further show of support for the Assad government . 
A navy spokesman however denied the move was connected to the crisis in Syria , Izvestia newspaper reports . 
Soldiers were ordered to `` shoot to kill '' unarmed demonstrators Pattern of summary executions , arbitrary arrests , and enforced disappearances Extensive practice of torture indicate state-sanctioned policy Men and boys sexually abused at military facilities At least two children killed as a result of torture by security forces Mr Lavrov 's comments come as pressure on the Syrian government mounts , with Turkey 's foreign minister saying it was looking to create a buffer zone along its border with Syria , with international support . 
In a TV interview , Ahmet Davutoglu said Turkey had no plans for a military intervention in Syria but that it was ready for any scenario . 
`` We hope that a military intervention will never be necessary . 
The Syrian regime has to find a way of making peace with its own people , '' he said . 
France has suggested that Turkey should join a European Union foreign ministers ' conference on the crisis in Syria later this week . 
A UN Human Rights report released on Monday accused Syria of systematic human rights violations , including killing at least 253 children . 
Denied entry to Syria itself , the UN investigators interviewed more than 200 victims , eyewitnesses , and army defectors . 
The claims can not be independently verified as most foreign media are banned from entering Syria . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites 
