Before Robin Bohnen and her husband , Shane , bought a $ 1.16 million Mediterranean-style house in an upscale Southern California suburb two years ago , they were not cash-strapped , debt-ridden or credit-impaired . 
Now they are all of the above . 
Soon they also may qualify for one more distressing category : home lost to foreclosure . 
`` Wake me up , can this really be happening ? '' 
the 42-year-old Bohnen says . 
As she tries to describe how it feels to have the nation 's financial crisis land in her living room , the phone rings . 
`` It 's probably the bank -- again , '' she says . 
Bohnen once owed her comfortable lifestyle to the dizzying growth that transformed Southern California over the past decade , creating a boom that led many to believe their home values would keep climbing . 
As the owner of a furniture store born during the housing boom , she provided bean bag chairs and bedroom sets for the brand-new communities that easy credit built . 
Now , she and husband just owe . 
They can not afford their $ 6,400 monthly payment , and in this plummeting market , they would n't make enough on a sale to pay off their mortgage or recoup the 20 percent they put down to buy their Riverside County home . 
They 're `` underwater , '' industry parlance for borrowers who owe more on their mortgage than their houses are worth . 
They have joined the growing line of homeowners seeking a break from their lenders . 
Both the departing and incoming administrations in Washington have promised help on the foreclosure front , but providing help requires federal regulators to get their collective arms around the size and shape of the crisis . 
That is n't easy . 
No one agency collects information on every loan , every borrower and every delinquency . 
But interviews and a Washington Post analysis of available data show that the foreclosure crisis knows no class or income boundaries . 
Many borrowers ensnared in the evolving mortgage mess do not fit neatly into the stereotypes that surfaced by early 2007 when delinquency rates shot up . 
They do n't have subprime loans , the lending industry 's jargon for the higher-rate mortgages made to borrowers with shaky credit or without enough cash for a down payment . 
The wave of subprime delinquencies appears to have crested . 
But in October , for the first time , the number of prime mortgages in delinquency exceeded the subprime loans in danger of default , according to The Post 's analysis . 
This trend shows up most acutely in California and other high-growth regions , such as Arizona , Nevada , Florida and pockets of the Washington region , most notably in Prince William and Prince George 's counties . 
The recession has made it tougher for people to pay their mortgages , and crashing home prices have left many borrowers underwater , unable to sell or refinance their way out of trouble . 
One of every five mortgage holders now has a home worth less than the mortgage on it , according to First American CoreLogic , a firm that tracks mortgages and provided data for The Post 's analysis . 
Of the 20 Zip codes with the highest share of underwater loans , seven are in California and four are in Riverside County , the vast exurb southeast of Los Angeles where the Bohnens live . 
Riverside 's unemployment rate has zoomed to 10 percent , well above the national average of 7.2 percent . 
About 94,200 people in the county are looking for work , many of them formerly employed in the real estate , banking and construction industries , according to the county 's economic development agency . 
