By Peter Bowes BBC News , Los Angeles Jackson was due to play 50 UK dates Michael Jackson died from an overdose of sedatives on 25 June , 2009 at the age of 50 . 
The death of the music superstar prompted an outpouring of grief from fans around the world and resulted in the singer 's doctor , Conrad Murray , being charged with involuntary manslaughter . 
We take a look at some of the unresolved issues surrounding the late King of Pop . 
In the months before his death , Michael Jackson employed Dr Conrad Murray , a cardiologist with practices in Las Vegas and Houston , as his personal physician . 
He was with the singer on the day he died but the doctor has always maintained that nothing he did should have killed Jackson . 
Dr Murray denies any wrongdoing On 8 February , 2010 , Dr Murray appeared in court in Los Angeles and pleaded not guilty to the charge of involuntary manslaughter . 
He has since made two further court appearances in the case and remains on $ 75,000 -LRB- # 50,000 -RRB- bail . 
He is free to practice medicine , providing he does not administer powerful sedatives , such as Propofol . 
Dr Murray is due to appear in court again on 23 August , when Judge Michael Pastor is expected to set a date for a preliminary hearing , which should start within 60 days of that date . 
A trial date can not be set until the process is completed and Judge Pastor has had an opportunity to consider the evidence . 
Dr Murray could be sent to jail for up to four years if found guilty . 
Like Elvis Presley , Michael Jackson remains a hugely powerful commodity from beyond the grave . 
Jackson is estimated to have made more than $ 1bn since his death According to estimates by music newspaper Billboard , the singer 's estate made more than $ 1bn -LRB- # 668m -RRB- since his death . 
The publication says album sales have generated about $ 383m -LRB- # 259m -RRB- and revenue from the film , This Is It , amounted to nearly $ 400m -LRB- # 267m -RRB- . 
Jackson 's This is It concerts , despite never taking place , also proved to be hugely profitable . 
Many fans held on to their tickets as souvenirs , instead of refunding them , which brought in about $ 6.5 m -LRB- # 4.3 m -RRB- , to be shared with the promoter AEG . 
The estate also made money from DVD sales , downloads , royalties and ringtones . 
It was revealed last week that the estate has agreed to foot the bill for Jackson 's memorial service in Los Angeles , with $ 1.3 m -LRB- # 868,169 -RRB- to be paid to the City of Los Angeles and the LA Police Foundation . 
In death , Jackson achieved the musical comeback that he had yearned for in the latter years of his life . 
He was the biggest selling album artist of 2009 , with 8.3 million sales , the vast majority of which were posthumous . 
In the past year , nearly 9 million of his albums have sold in the US alone , according to chart analyists Nielsen SoundScan . 
This is It , the film that documented the singer 's rehearsals for his London concerts , is the highest-grossing concert film and documentary in cinematic history . 
Sony Music Entertainment will release 10 albums of Jackson 's music over the next seven years , including one of previously unreleased material . 
Jackson 's children spoke at a Grammy awards tribute to the late singer Jackson 's children , Michael Joseph Jackson Jr. -LRB- 13 -RRB- , Paris Katherine Jackson -LRB- 12 -RRB- and Prince Michael Jackson II -LRB- 8 -RRB- , commonly known as Blanket , are being cared for by their grandmother , Katherine , who was awarded guardianship in accordance with Jackson 's wishes . 
The children have largely stayed out of the public eye , with the exception of Jackson 's memorial service and the Grammy Awards ceremony . 
The children have been schooled at home although it has been reported that Michael Joseph -LRB- Prince -RRB- will attend a private school from September . 
Jackson 's fans are an ever-present force at court hearings for Dr Conrad Murray . 
They claim the charge of involuntary manslaughter is too lenient and have criticised prosecutors on the case . 
Fans reflect on the Jackson annniversary Many fans have vowed to continue fighting for `` justice '' for their idol . 
`` I love him even more than I did already , '' said Natalia Franco , at a recent hearing . 
`` It 's just now that we 're really grasping his message of love and humanitarianism , '' added Amy Kimes . 
`` On the one-year anniversary I 'm very anxious ... I 'm asking lots of questions of why . '' 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
