Fans around the world marked one year since the singer 's death Pop star Michael Jackson 's father has filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the doctor charged with giving him a lethal overdose one year ago . 
The civil suit from Joe Jackson accuses Dr Conrad Murray of professional negligence in administering a fatal mix of sedatives to the singer . 
The suit was filed as fans around the world marked the first anniversary of Jackson 's death at the age of 50 . 
Dr Murray has pleaded not guilty to involuntary manslaughter in his death . 
Mr Jackson 's complaint seeks damages of more than $ 75,000 -LRB- # 50,000 -RRB- and alleges that Dr Murray was negligent in administering his son with the anesthetic propofol and other drugs . 
It also accuses him of secrecy and poor training and claims that Dr Murray 's clinics in Las Vegas , Nevada , and Houston , Texas , did not adequately supervise him . 
Fans sing outside the Jackson family home A spokeswoman for the doctor said she would not comment until his lawyers had reviewed the lawsuit . 
The case will run parallel with the criminal trial against Dr Murray , which is expected to begin next year . 
Dr Murray was treating Jackson as he prepared for a series of concerts in London . 
As the suit was filed in a federal court in Los Angeles , fans of the singer around the world paid him tribute . 
In New York , the Apollo Theatre - where Jackson and his brothers won a talent contest and were subsequently signed to Motown Records - fans recreated his famous dance moves and a letter from his mother Katherine was read out . 
In Los Angeles , celebrities including Mickey Rooney and Corey Feldman attended a tribute to the singer , Forever Michael , at the Beverly Hills Hilton hotel . 
The show included a performance by Michael 's brother , Tito . 
Proceeds from the event went to the Jackson Family Foundation . 
In his hometown of Gary , Indiana , Jackson 's mother attended a memorial service outside the performer 's childhood home and unveiled a monument to him . 
Other family members visited the Los Angeles cemetery where the musician is at rest and greeted some of the fans who had gathered outside . 
Flowers were also left in tribute to the late star in Tokyo , where 50 fans spent the night in an exhibition of his possessions . 
Meanwhile , prisoners in the Philippines were to mark the anniversary by staging a version of Thriller for invited members of the public on Saturday . 
The inmates of Cebu jail became an internet phenomenon when they were filmed performing the dance in 2007 . 
Jackson has been named as the biggest selling artist in the UK since his death last year , with 4.3 million sales . 
That exceeds his chart performance during his 1980s heyday , the Official Chart Company has said . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
