This cat has about them -- on it 's fat and the -- outside of the UK . 
And it 's no ordinary candidate you back . 
John Lennon composed his peace action in mountain on it . 
I 'm in 2000 Cilic Michael pointed at auction for over two million US dollars . 
Now the singer has decided to land it 's an anti will exhibition in the United States but just organized by his -- like Kenny -- Upside is going to wow . 
Dallas Texas so that 's what quite interesting -- also I 'm really excited because it 's going to . 
George Bush 's home which is . 
He was heavily involved in getting into . 
Heavily he was that he has been getting it into into this war so . 
It 's not it 's because . 
The ca n't stands for peace and hope in the future and that 's enough for war . 
So I 'm really really that 's that 's one thing -- excited about as well we have house Dallas and it 's very exciting it 's going to the gallery in Dallas and show that we created . 
Around but he 's fantastic . 
War photographers it 's just it 's a real message . 
Let me in -- Obama . 
That he is loved it and I we did n't know for sure -- I was . 
The reason I liked this is either going to be the best time of his life or the biggest disaster of my life it . 
Can see that suvs so miserably and he 's loving it the fans have been incredible . 
The it 's been pretty easy and it 's you know that he easily pleasurable enjoyable experience for him . 
I think I actually think he might do it again he likes it selects . 
If he put it back . 
The cat though will be in Dallas Texas until -- January . 
And it is meant to stand for his -- that happens as John Lannan could defend the actions . 
In London I 'm serious spinal reporting -- relatives . 
George Michael sends his piano to US -LRB- 2:17 -RRB- Nov. 11 - The singer bought John Lennon 's old piano in 2000 for two million dollars , now he 's sending it to the USA to be part of an anti-war exhibition . 
-LRB- Transcript -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
