Lt. Gen. Charles Bouchard , commander of the Libyan mission , said Thursday that NATO was still enforcing the arms embargo . 
As NATO takes over Libya mission , it says it wo n't provide arms to rebels NATO commander : `` We have very strict rules of engagement '' A Vatican envoy says up to 40 civilians were killed as a result of NATO operations Brussels , Belgium -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- On NATO 's first day of command in Libya on Thursday , the alliance reaffirmed its commitment to enforcing the arms embargo and not providing weapons to the rebels . 
`` The Alliance has the assets in place to conduct its tasks under Operation Unified Protector -- the arms embargo , no-fly zone and actions to protect civilians and civilian centers . 
In line with the mandate of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 , NATO 's focus is on protecting civilians and civilian-populated areas against the threat of attack , '' NATO said in a statement , adding that the `` operational tempo '' of the mission had not changed because of the handover . 
NATO officials say the handover has been smooth and seamless . 
On his first day as commander of the Libyan mission , Lt. Gen. Charles Bouchard fielded questions on the possibility that civilians had been hurt as a result of NATO operations . 
A Vatican envoy reported that as many as 40 civilians had been killed . 
A closer look at Bashar al-Assad `` It is a news report and I appreciate the source of this report , but it is worth noting that I take every one of those issues seriously , '' said Bouchard from the mission 's operational command in Naples , Italy . 
`` We are very careful in the prosecution of any of the possible targets that we have . 
We have very strict rules of engagement provided to us and we are operating within the legal mandate of our United Nations mandate , '' he added . 
Russian diplomatic officials , meanwhile , warned against a `` creative '' interpretation of the U.N. resolution and hinted it was beginning to regret its decision to abstain during the U.N. vote . 
Russia , as one of the Security Council 's permanent members , has veto power . 
But NATO officials insist they are employing the strictest interpretation of the resolution . 
`` The alliance has nothing to hide -- not to Russia and not to you , '' Adm. Giampaolo Di Paola , chairman of NATO 's Military Committee , told a press briefing at NATO headquarters . 
