CNN Student News - 4\/1\/11 Download PDF maps related to today 's show : THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT . 
CARL AZUZ , CNN STUDENT NEWS ANCHOR : It is Friday , April 1st -- no foolin ' -- and you 're watching CNN Student News ! 
I 'm Carl Azuz . 
First up today , we 're heading to the North African nation of Libya . 
AZUZ : But a top ranking official from that country is heading out ! 
Libya 's foreign minister turned up in London yesterday . 
His name is Moussa Koussa , and he told the government in London that he had resigned his position in Libya . 
Koussa is someone who , just a month ago , was defending the Libyan government . 
British officials say Koussa 's resignation is a serious problem for Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi and his authority in Libya . 
U.S. military commanders have said that Libya is not a `` boots on the ground '' operation , meaning they are n't planning to send ground troops into the country . 
We 've heard President Obama say that , too . 
But the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency -- the CIA -- is on the ground in Libya . 
A source told CNN that operatives from the agency are gathering intelligence and sometimes connecting with rebel fighters . 
NATO -- the North Atlantic Treaty Organization -- has taken command of the coalition military operation in Libya . 
Now , when we say that NATO has taken command , so what ? 
What does that mean ? 
Well , NATO is an organization that 's made up of 28 countries from North America and Europe . 
The United States is a key member . 
So are the United Kingdom , France , Germany . 
NATO does n't have its own unique troops . 
NATO forces are made up of troops from those member countries . 
So U.S. forces , British forces , French forces : They 're still very much a part of this operation in Libya . 
AZUZ : In Japan , officials are worried about the levels of radiation in the ocean water near the damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant . 
Officials say those levels are skyrocketing , and there 's no clear idea of what 's causing the spike or how to stop it . 
Samples taken on Wednesday show that the levels of one radioactive isotope in the water are more than 4,000 times higher than the limit that 's approved by regulators . 
But one official said the seawater radiation does n't pose a risk to people eating seafood , at least , not yet . 
MEGAN CLOHERTY , CNN CORRESPONDENT : In response to rising gas prices , President Obama outlined a plan to expand offshore oil and natural gas drilling to provide short-term relief and other steps that would allow the nation to transition to cleaner and cheaper sources of energy . 
U.S. PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA : We consume about 25 percent of the world 's oil . 
We only have two percent of the reserves . 
CLOHERTY : Obama said the demands of global oil consumption and the instability in the oil market leave America with no other choice but to act now to establish its energy independence . 
OBAMA : We 've got to discover and produce cleaner renewable sources of energy that also produce less carbon pollution , which is threatening our climate . 
And we 've got to do it quickly . 
CLOHERTY : The president said that despite fears raised by the nuclear plant emergency in Japan , he is not abandoning nuclear power as an alternative to oil . 
While Obama 's plan to increase offshore drilling may upset the environmental lobby , his energy secretary emphasized the drilling is a short-term fix . 
U.S. SECRETARY OF ENERGY STEVEN CHU : Ultimately , what this is about is diversifying our supply of energy . 
CLOHERTY : Republican leaders charged the president 's program wo n't do much to make things better for Americans anytime soon . 
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL , -LRB- R -RRB- MINORITY LEADER : The president 's target is decades from now , but Americans should be able to expect action now . 
CLOHERTY : While the president 's efforts to reduce oil prices bring motorists relief at the gas pump , the administration plans to raise fuel efficiency standards for car makers this fall , which could result in an increase in sticker prices . 
Megan Cloherty , for CNN , Washington . 
TOMEKA JONES , CNN STUDENT NEWS : What 's the word for when something on the internet spreads very quickly ? 
AZUZ : The video about bullying that 13-year-old Alye Pollack posted on YouTube went viral . 
Within two weeks , nearly 50,000 people had seen it . 
Alye sat in front of the camera and held up pieces of paper introducing herself and sharing some of the names bullies have called her . 
There 's been a lot of talk recently about the internet giving bullies more ways to pick on people . 
Alye turned the tables , going online to speak out against it . 
And she says her video is making an impact . 
ALYE POLLACK , MADE ANTI-BULLYING VIDEO : I 've had a lot of people come up to me and say , `` Now I know not to say bad things . 
I think before I do say something . '' 
And that 's just amazing , because people are actually being affected by my video . 
EUNICE YOON , CNN INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENT , HONG KONG : It 's 4:00 in the afternoon , rush hour . 
Most people in China are starting to go home from work . 
But for the people of Qingyanliu village , their day has just started . 
This tiny village near the manufacturing hub of Ewu sets its clock by the online habits of China 's shoppers . 
Until five years ago , this place was a rural backwater . 
Now , its 10,000 residents generate $ 120 million in sales thanks to a popular e-retailing site called Taobao . 
E-commerce chief Liu Wengao says the village has grown five-fold , and is now a base for entrepreneurs looking to make it rich off online stores . 
LIU WENGAO , LOCAL E-COMMERCE CHIEF -LRB- TRANSLATED -RRB- : `` There are hundreds of millions of people in China and tens of millions on the internet , '' he says . 
`` We will never run out of customers . '' 
YOON : When China 's shoppers place their orders on Taobao , Chin Yao Moon 's merchants fill them at shops like this . 
Liu Jin has inventory of his own . 
But if he does n't have what his customers want , someone else in this town will . 
LIU JIN , ONLINE MERCHANT -LRB- TRANSLATED -RRB- : `` We are over here picking up what we need to fulfill their order , '' Liu explains . 
YOON : Once his basket is full , he is off to start packing the evening shipments . 
The entire village is alive with vendors like Liu . 
Express trucks come and go seemingly nonstop into the wee hours . 
Thousands of parcels are stacked daily , emerging from underground warehouses . 
These basements have a mind-boggling array of goods , everything from the practical to the strange . 
The government keeps rents in these buildings low , so people like Lin Saila can get started investing only in a room and a computer . 
Today , she received over 3,000 orders . 
LIN SAILA , STORE MANAGER -LRB- TRANSLATED -RRB- : `` Every year , there 's a lot of growth , '' she says . 
`` Each year is better than the last . '' 
YOON : Nearly all of this stuff is made right here in Ewu , so it 's convenient and it 's cheap to get . 
So , what vendors do is that they take orders online , and then they package everything up and ship it right across the country . 
Liu has been to Beijing and Shanghai , but now this farmer 's son can stay closer to home . 
LIU -LRB- TRANSLATED -RRB- : `` I make money , '' he says . 
`` It gives me more freedom . '' 
YOON : The express truck is about to leave . 
Liu hustles to make sure his customers get what they want on time . 
LIU -LRB- TRANSLATED -RRB- : `` Every day is this hectic , '' he says . 
`` We 'll be back at it tomorrow in the town the Internet built . '' 
YOON : Eunice Yoon , CNN , Qingyanliu , China . 
AZUZ : Weird is how a lot of you describe yesterday 's `` TVs watching you '' story , when information about what people watch is shared with advertisers . 
Sam does n't see a problem with it , writing `` it 's important for advertisers to locate a demographic to help them with their research . '' 
Sadam can see how it would be better if ads were more relevant , but feels this is a major invasion of privacy . 
`` Random companies seeing what we watch on TV is not their business ; it 's ours . '' 
Levi states `` it 's not like they are watching you get dressed or anything ; they 're just trying to do business . 
I think they have every right to . '' 
From Brenna : `` It allows you to watch ads for things you 're interested in , instead of things you do n't even care about . '' 
But Natalie writes `` the idea is n't foolproof in any way . 
If it 's some sort of setting that can be turned off , though , it could help us greatly . '' 
And Kaylee , who says our privacy is being violated , adds it should either stop , or the companies could ask customers if they 're comfortable being monitored . 
Great comments , y ' all ! 
AZUZ : Some guys need to work up a lot of nerve to ask someone to prom . 
Jason here did n't seem to have that problem . 
He wrote a song , roped his buddies into being a back-up band , got the whole class in on the idea . 
And all for one simple question . 
Sure , he put her on the spot , but you know she said yes . 
We 're just glad someone was recording the whole thing and posted it on YouTube . 
AZUZ : That way we can prom-ote Jason 's impressive proposal . 
You might think a video like that would prom-pt us to make some jokes . 
But we prom-ise not to . 
We do promise that we 'll be back on Monday . 
Hope you have a great weekend . 
For CNN Student News , I 'm Carl Azuz . 
