March 31 , 2011 | By Fawaz A. Gerges , Special to CNN Almost two weeks of intense bombings and the enforcement of a no-fly zone in Libya by Western-led forces have neither broken the will of Col. Moammar Gadhafi nor subdued his followers . 
Instead , the past couple of weeks have proved that Libya is much more divided than the world had feared . 
The major challenge facing the opposition now will be in reaching out to tribal supporters of Gadhafi -- and skeptics and bystanders -- to allay their fears . 
This kind of reconciliation will be the only means to avert a protracted , costly civil war that could allow Gadhafi to regain some degree of control . 
The coalition 's airstrikes have indeed severely degraded Gadhafi 's military infrastructure and paved the way for the rebels to recapture , at least for a time , a number of coastal communities and important oil installations , including Ras Lanuf , Brega and Bin Jawad . 
But loyalist forces pushed them out in recent days -LRB- Ajdabiya and Uqayla still appear to be in rebel hands at the moment -RRB- . 
According to Pentagon spokesman Vice Adm. Bill Gortney , any military gains made by the rebels will be tenuous because of their lack of organizational structure . 
Two high-level Libyan officials , Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa and Ali Abdussalam el-Treki , did defect this week . 
Despite this , Gadhafi 's entourage is fiercely defending the cities and towns recaptured from the rebels . 
That they continue to persevere in the face of international force should not come as a surprise , given the tribal structure of Libyan society and Gadhafi 's manipulation and co-opting of tribal divisions and allies . 
What is even more alarming is that Gadhafi 's forces have managed to insert themselves into urban areas across Libya . 
To defeat these loyalists will necessitate boots on the ground fighting a long , bloody , guerrilla-style war . 
Civilians would undoubtedly become targets . 
Even if the Western-led coalition arms and trains the rebels and dislodges Gadhafi from power , the morning after will likely be messy , costly and even less certain . 
Libya appears to be sliding into a prolonged conflict with no light at the end of the tunnel . 
