By the CNN Wire Staff Libyan foreign minister flees country NEW : Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa is old and sick and had permission to leave , Libya claims The International Criminal Court does not consider him a suspect at the moment Koussa is the highest-ranking defector from the Gadhafi government so far Experts : He probably has information about the Lockerbie bombing , Libya 's arms program London -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The surprise arrival Wednesday of a tall , gray-haired man at a small airport outside of London raised eyebrows -- and it also raised hopes of a breakthrough on many fronts . 
The man on the plane was Moussa Koussa , Libya 's foreign minister and former intelligence chief , and he was defecting from the regime of Moammar Gadhafi , the highest-ranking official yet to do so . 
Koussa was a stalwart defender of the government as recently as a month ago . 
But in recent weeks , his demeanor has visibly changed . 
At one recent media briefing , he kept his head down as he read a statement and left early . 
He did not tell the Libyan government he was planning to quit before he arrived in Britain , Libyan government spokesman Mousa Ibrahim said Thursday . 
Hoekstra : What may be next in Libya Libyan opposition speaks out on tactics Anderson : Gadhafi opposition badly armed But Ibrahim downplayed the defection itself , saying Moussa was an old man in poor health who had not been able to handle the pressure of his job . 
`` We gave him permission to leave , '' Ibrahim said , less than 24 hours after Libyan government denials that Koussa had defected , and insisted he was coming back . 
The British Foreign Office announced late Wednesday that Koussa had resigned and come willingly to the United Kingdom . 
There 's debate about whether his departure from Tripoli will weaken Gadhafi , with some saying it will be a signal to other doubters around Libya 's leader that it 's time to jump ship . 
`` It could potentially have a devastating impact on morale within the Gadhafi regime , '' said Noman Benotman , a former Libyan militant now with the Quilliam Foundation , a counter-extremism think tank . 
`` Strategically , this move attacks the center of gravity within the regime , '' Benotman said . 
`` I hope other senior figures within the regime now realize that they too need to be part of the solution and not remain part of the problem . '' 
But others say that Koussa was never in Gadhafi 's innermost circle and that his departure is a significant blow but not a critical loss to the regime . 
Whether his defection precipitates further crumbling of the government in Tripoli or not , Koussa may be able to shed light on Libya 's exact role in events like the Lockerbie bombing in 1988 and the killing of a British policewoman in 1984 . 
`` Let 's remember , Moussa Koussa is the single most important Libyan official who was responsible for the intelligence service , the planning and execution of -LRB- the bombing of -RRB- Pan Am 103 , '' CNN national security contributor Frances Fragos Townsend said . 
He was also a key player in Libya 's decision to give up its weapons of mass destruction program , said Townsend , who was a homeland security adviser in the George W. Bush administration . 
`` He was the single individual who had to approve or disapprove my going forward to meet with Gadhafi . 
And so he really does have secrets to tell , '' she said , adding that Libya 's leader confided in Moussa and relied on him . 
British intelligence will be questioning him and passing information to Americans , she anticipated . 
And she 's certain he arranged everything carefully before he boarded the plane for Britain . 
`` His finances , his immunity from prosecution and his freedom from extradition process -- he would have worked that all before he left , '' she said . 
British Foreign Secretary William Hague said Wednesday that Koussa had not been offered any immunity . 
On Thursday , Hague reiterated calls for senior members of the Gadhafi government to step down . 
Koussa 's defection provides evidence `` that Gadhafi 's regime ... is fragmented , under pressure and crumbling from within , '' he said . 
Koussa is voluntarily speaking with officials in the UK , he said . 
The International Criminal Court , which has opened an unprecedented investigation into possible crimes against humanity during the ongoing Libya civil war , said Thursday that Koussa is not a suspect . 
`` We have no individuals under investigation , and we will see where the evidence leads us , '' ICC prosecution spokeswoman Florence Olara said . 
She said she did not know whether Koussa had been in touch with prosecutors seeking immunity or offering testimony . 
But Scottish prosecutors want to question him about the Lockerbie bombing , the government there said Thursday . 
Scottish officials said they have informed the Foreign Office in London that they want to speak to him . 
`` The investigation into the Lockerbie bombing remains open and we will pursue all relevant lines of inquiry , '' the government said in a statement . 
The only person convicted in connection with the bombing , Abdelbeset Ali Mohmed al Megrahi , was freed from prison in Scotland in 2009 and sent home to Libya on the grounds that he had terminal cancer . 
CNN 's Nic Robertson , Anderson Cooper , Ben Wedeman , Richard Allen Greene and Carol Jordan contributed to this report . 
