BP 's chief executive Tony Hayward met with Abu Dhabi 's crown prince Wednesday while BP 's investment bankers worked to raise money without shedding any of the company 's crown jewels . 
Hayward is looking to shore up BP 's standing with foreign partners , investors and host countries . 
In recent visits to Russia and Azerbaijan , he reaffirmed the company 's commitment to exploration projects there , and he told reporters in the United Arab Emirates Wednesday that he had a `` very good '' meeting with the crown prince , Sheik Mohammed bin Zayed al-Nahyan . 
Hayward heads next to Angola , where BP has deep-water offshore exploration and production projects . 
Meanwhile , the company is also looking to shore up its finances , pressing ahead with plans to raise $ 7 billion to $ 10 billion by selling `` non-core '' assets over the next year . 
Industry sources familiar with the negotiations said this week that investors -- including U.S. and European oil firms , BP 's Russian partners , and one of China 's state oil companies -- have been approached about buying BP oil and gas production assets in countries including Argentina , Venezuela , Vietnam , Indonesia and Algeria . 
BP also may look to sell some of its 35 percent interest in Alaska 's aging Prudhoe Bay field , some sources said , though others said the company would not want to do anything to raise fears that it is reducing its U.S. exposure . 
The sources spoke on condition of anonymity because the talks are private . 
Brian Youngberg , an oil analyst with Edward Jones , said that BP has sold an average of $ 2.5 billion a year of assets over the past three years as part of the normal repositioning strategy . 
`` Companies routinely buy and sell assets , '' he said . 
`` This would be just a bit more than normal . '' 
`` BP will have no trouble selling these assets , '' said Fadel Gheit , an oil analyst with Oppenheimer & Co. . 
China , which is expanding oil holdings worldwide , might want reserves in Venezuela or Asia . 
Gheit also said that Exxon Mobil might use the opportunity to try to buy minority positions in some of BP 's extensive holdings off the coast of West Africa . 
BP 's assets in Argentina may be the most likely to go . 
When it bought Amoco , BP acquired 60 percent of a venture that has boosted output from an aging field , which now produces 100,000 barrels a day of oil and 450 million cubic feet a year of natural gas . 
Gheit said other oil companies with fields in Argentina might be able to operate BP 's fields profitably because of economies of scale . 
BP denied reports that it was looking for a sovereign wealth fund to take a big equity stake in the company , much as Middle East investors propped up the shares of beleaguered U.S. financial firms by taking substantial minority stakes . 
But BP spokesman Andrew Gowers said that `` we are talking to investors about the attractions of coming into BP at current attractive prices . '' 
He said Hayward 's message was `` we welcome new shareholders on our register or existing shareholders who see an opportunity to top up . '' 
Abu Dhabi 's crown prince is also head of the emirate 's sovereign wealth fund . 
Sovereign funds are already big BP shareholders . 
They include the government of Norway , which reported on May 1 that it bought a 1.7 percent stake ; the People 's Bank of China with 1.1 percent ; the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation with 1.07 percent ; and the Kuwait Investment Authority with 1.75 percent . 
In a strong day for stock markets , BP jumped $ 1.28 a share , or 4 percent , to $ 33.19 a share on the New York Stock Exchange . 
But uncertainty remains over the upper limit of BP 's legal liabilities . 
Sanford C. Bernstein investment analysts said this week that the oil spill disaster could cost the company $ 33 billion . '' 
