U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article US firm buys `` mystery '' cargo of Libyan rebel oil NEW YORK | Thu May 26 , 2011 6:17 am IST NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - U.S. refiner Tesoro has bought the first oil cargo sold by rebels who control eastern Libya , a deal that could help them drum up funds to fight Muammar Gaddafi . 
San Antonio-based Tesoro told Reuters on Wednesday it bought the Libyan rebel crude to process in its Hawaii refinery . 
The deal was first agreed upon in late April , company spokesman Mike Marcy said . 
`` We purchased a cargo of Libyan crude that was available at the time , '' he said in an email . 
Swiss oil trading firm Vitol SA , which loaded the crude onto a tanker in Libya in early April , acted as middleman in the transaction , trading sources said . 
While Vitol marketed the crude , Tesoro 's purchase of the cargo marks the first transaction involving Libya 's eastern rebels -- fighting with NATO 's backing to topple Muammar Gaddafi -- and a major foreign commercial user of oil . 
`` It 's an important precedent because it proves the rebels can find international buyers for their oil , '' a source at a major oil tanker operator told Reuters , requesting anonymity . 
That could help pave the way for more Libyan oil sales . 
Rebels , who need funds to continue their fight against Gaddafi , want to sell more oil from the chunk of Libyan territory they control . 
But due to the country 's civil war , Libyan oilfield production has fallen to a small fraction of its normal 1.6 million barrels per day . 
Potential buyers of eastern Libyan crude have also worried that international sanctions against doing business with Libyan firms make any transaction risky , traders and shippers said . 
The Liberian-flagged tanker , called Equator , is laden with a million barrels of light Libyan crude worth around $ 100 million , and is scheduled to arrive in Honolulu around June 7 , according to Reuters tanker tracking data . 
Tesoro told Reuters that the Libyan crude cargo is not subject to sanctions . 
`` This purchase was made in strict accordance with the relevant White House Executive Order , signed by President Obama , '' Marcy wrote in an email . 
In late February , the U.S. government pronounced it legal to do business with the rebel-controlled oil firm Agoco , which usually produces around 400,000 barrels a day . 
The firm had been part of the Gaddafi-controlled National Oil Corp until it fell under rebel control . 
The tanker cargo had been floating idle near Singapore since late April , GPS data shows . 
The Tesoro deal lays to rest a mystery that has surrounded its eventual destination and buyer , which have been subject to speculation among shipbrokers and oil traders . 
`` There has been a lot of secrecy , '' a U.S.-based oil trader said . 
`` Everyone wanted to know where the cargo was headed , but it was hard to track . '' 
Vitol declined to comment on why the cargo was delayed , and did not reveal its buyer . 
While the U.S. government executive order exempts rebel crude cargoes from sanctions , the United Nations and the European Union have also placed sanctions on Libya , and some legal experts say that buying oil from eastern Libyan may still entail risks . 
Reuters wrote a special report about the Libyan crude cargo on May 16 . 
At that time , several sources said it appeared the cargo was in legal limbo , with oil companies weighing the potential risks of buying it . 
-LRB- Emma Farge contributed reporting from London ; Editing by David Gregorio and Lisa Shumaker -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
