British and US mythology about the second world war ignores our own crimes and legitimises Anglo-American warmaking Tuesday 10 May 2005 00.37 BST In 1945 , as at the end of all wars , the victor powers spun the conflict 's history to serve the interests of their elites . 
Wartime propaganda thus achieved an extraordinary afterlife . 
As Vladimir Putin showed yesterday , the Great Patriotic War remains a key political resource in Russia . 
In Britain and the US , too , a certain idea of the second world war is enthusiastically kept alive and less flattering memories suppressed . 
Five years ago , Robert Lilly , a distinguished American sociologist , prepared a book based on military archives . 
Taken by Force is a study of the rapes committed by American soldiers in Europe between 1942 and 1945 . 
He submitted his manuscript in 2001 . 
But after September 11 , its US publisher suppressed it , and it first appeared in 2003 in a French translation . 
We know from Anthony Beevor about the sexual violence unleashed by the Red Army , but we prefer not to know about mass rape committed by American and British troops . 
Lilly suggests a minimum of 10,000 American rapes . 
Contemporaries described a much wider scale of unpunished sex crime . 
Time Magazine reported in September 1945 : `` Our own army and the British army along with ours have done their share of looting and raping ... we too are considered an army of rapists . '' 
The British and American publics share a sunny view of the second world war . 
The evil of Auschwitz and Dachau , turned inside out , clothes the conflict in a shiny virtue . 
Movies , popular histories and political speeches frame the war as a symbol of Anglo-American courage , with the Red Army 's central role forgotten . 
This was , we believe , `` a war for democracy '' . 
Americans believe that they fought the war to rescue the world . 
For apologists of the British Empire , such as Niall Ferguson , the war was an ethical bath where the sins of centuries of conquest , slavery and exploitation were expiated . 
We are marked forever as `` the good guys `` and can all happily chant `` Two world wars and one world cup . '' 
All this seems innocent fun , but patriotic myths have sharp edges . 
The `` good war '' against Hitler has underwritten 60 years of warmaking . 
It has become an ethical blank cheque for British and US power . 
We claim the right to bomb , to maim , to imprison without trial on the basis of direct and implicit appeals to the war against fascism . 
When we fall out with such tyrant friends as Noriega , Milosevic or Saddam we rebrand them as `` Hitler '' . 
In the `` good war '' against them , all bad things become forgettable `` collateral damage '' . 
The devastation of civilian targets in Serbia or Iraq , torture at Abu Ghraib and Guantnamo , the war crime of collective punishment in Falluja , fade to oblivion as the `` price of democracy '' . 
Our democratic imperialism prefers to forget that fascism had important Anglo-American roots . 
Hitler 's dream was inspired , in part , by the British Empire . 
In eastern Europe , the Nazis hoped to make their America and Australia , where ethnic cleansing and slave labor created a frontier for settlement . 
In western Europe , they sought their India from which revenues , labor and soldiers might be extracted . 
American imperialism in Latin America gave explicit precedents for Germany 's and Japan 's claims of supremacy in their neighbouring regions . 
The British and Americans were key theorists of eugenics and had made racial segregation respectable . 
The concentration camp was a British invention , and in Iraq and Afghanistan the British were the first to use air power to repress partisan resistance . 
The Luftwaffe - in its assault on Guernica , and later London and Coventry - paid homage to Bomber Harris 's terror bombing of the Kurds in the 1920s . 
We forget , too , that British and US elites gave aid to the fascists . 
President Bush 's grandfather , prosecuted for `` trading with the enemy '' in 1942 , was one of many powerful Anglo-Americans who liked Mussolini and Hitler and did what they could to help . 
Appeasement as a state policy was only the tip of an iceberg of practical aid to these dictatorships . 
Capital and technology flowed freely , and fascist despots received dignified treatment in Washington and London . 
Henry Ford made Hitler birthday gifts of 50,000 marks . 
We least like to remember that our side also committed war crimes in the 1940s . 
The destruction of Dresden , a city filled with women , children , the elderly and the wounded , and with no military significance , is only the best known of the atrocities committed by our bombers against civilian populations . 
We know about the notorious Japanese abuse of prisoners of war , but do not remember the torture and murder of captured Japanese . 
Edgar Jones , an `` embedded '' Pacific war correspondent , wrote in 1946 : '' ` We shot prisoners in cold blood , wiped out hospitals , strafed lifeboats , killed or mistreated enemy civilians , finished off the enemy wounded , tossed the dying into a hole with the dead , and in the Pacific boiled flesh off enemy skulls to make table ornaments . '' 
After 1945 , we borrowed many fascist methods . 
Nuremberg only punished a handful of the guilty ; most walked free with our help . 
In 1946 , Project Paperclip secretly brought more than 1,000 Nazi scientists to the US . 
Among their ranks were Kurt Blome , who had tested nerve gas at Auschwitz , and Konrad Schaeffer , who forced salt into victims at Dachau . 
Other experiments at mind control via drugs and surgery were folded into the CIA 's Project Bluebird . 
Japan 's Dr Shiro Ishii , who had experimented with prisoners in Manchuria , came to Maryland to advise on bio-weapons . 
Within a decade of British troops liberating Belsen , they were running their own concentration camps in Kenya to crush the Mau Mau . 
The Gestapo 's torture techniques were borrowed by the French in Algeria , and then disseminated by the Americans to Latin American dictatorships in the 60s and 70s . 
We see their extension today in the American camps in Cuba and Diego Garcia . 
War has a brutalising momentum . 
This is the moral of Taken By Force , which shows how American soldiers became increasingly indiscriminate in their sexual violence and military authorities increasingly lax in its prosecution . 
Even as we remember the evils of nazism , and the courage of those who defeated it , we should begin to remember the second world war with less self - satisfaction . 
We might , in particular , learn to distrust those who use it to justify contemporary warmongering . 
Richard Drayton is senior lecturer in history at Cambridge University . 
After reports that unarmed drones might be deployed to search for self-proclaimed killer Christopher Dorner near Los Angeles , should law enforcement agencies use armed drones against an ` imminent threat ' on US soil ? 
