On Friday morning Helen Clark MP lost her seat of Peterborough to the Conservative candidate by a narrow margin . 
On Sunday , Clark announced that she was leaving the Labor party and joining the Tories . 
Their campaign had somehow convinced her that they would be `` a more inclusive and effective party '' . 
As apostasy goes , this is extraordinary . 
Clark was a caricature loyalist in the heady days after 97 , always plus Blairiste que le Blair , and now here she is , ripping into her former leader . 
For those who want to say it , I 'm there before you . 
Have n't I also moved , like Clark , from my former leftiness , to become - as one BBC presenter put it to me - a `` cheerleader for George Bush '' , an apologist for US imperialism , a British neocon , a neoliberal , and all that ? 
Last summer I was sitting outside a cafe talking to a friend when a young black woman , walking by , stopped and asked me whether I was n't David Aaronovitch , `` the evil writer '' . 
She was n't to be persuaded to sit down and talk things over , but told me that my articles were `` racist and sexist '' , and stalked off . 
In the grand scheme of things , if we establish continuums between , say , Richard Littlejohn and Benjamin Zephaniah on race and Jeremy Clarkson and the late Andrea Dworkin on gender , I think that my stuff would tend to be on the left side of the median point . 
Certainly people on the right tend to accuse me of excessive liberalism on such issues . 
So I felt that my accuser was really reacting to something else . 
What has put me beyond the pale has been my support for the Iraq war and - to a lesser extent - my support for the imposition of top-up tuition fees . 
Somehow or other these have become the key determinants of one 's position on the political spectrum . 
Iraq you know about . 
There is a leftwing case for supporting the overthrow of a fascist regime , even if it is done by a rightwing American government . 
And there most certainly is a leftwing case for funding the expansion of higher education through fees that are repayable on graduation into the qualified middle classes , especially when linked to a substantial package for supporting students from poorer backgrounds . 
None of that seems to matter . 
Since I decided , in January 2003 , that if Iraq was invaded I would not oppose it , I have had the almost astral experience of finding myself excommunicated from the movement , sometimes by fellow journalists who I know do not possess a political bone in their entire bodies . 
All of a sudden I began to experience the left from the outside . 
And the first thing that struck me was its capacity for smug certainty and uniformity of response . 
Look at the cartoonists , whose work trumps debate . 
You may have Blair the poodle , Blair with blood-stained hands , Blair the liar , Bush the absurd chimp , but never , ever , Galloway the consort of tyrants or Kennedy the comforter of `` insurgents '' . 
Look at the millionaire publisher Felix Dennis , who read out a poem on the Today program in the middle of the election -LRB- a poem , incidentally , written more than a year earlier -RRB- . 
`` Why do they do it ? 
Why do they do it ? 
Why do they stand on their hind legs , Lying and lying and lying and lying ? '' 
This was , he explained , aimed mostly at Blair for having lied . 
He was n't challenged . 
It was beyond argument . 
Dennis , I 'd guess , had never been challenged . 
Not by the researcher , the producer , the editor , his pals , not by anyone . 
Like a lot of middle-class anti-Blairites , I do n't think he had ever heard the contrary case put . 
During the election people wrote to this newspaper saying that they had n't met a single person who was voting Labor . 
And it does n't matter what is proved to have happened . 
The attorney general 's advice ? 
Never mind what they actually say - that intelligence did judge that Saddam possessed WMDs , that the attorney general did advise that the war was probably legal - the cartoonists tell you that Blair is a liar , the comedians tell you that Blair is a liar , so he 's a liar . 
Sometimes this predetermination becomes bizarre . 
Let me take one example , where I could take thousands . 
These are the words used by writer Richard Gott to describe Blair during this election campaign . 
`` An arrogant and God-fuelled appeaser '' , and `` a war criminal who should be locked up behind bars without a vote '' . 
And this is Gott on Iraqi leaders in mid-2002 . 
`` Saddam has had a violent past '' , but `` is not a charismatic leader '' , partly because he uses `` unconvincing rhetoric '' and is `` incompetent at getting his message across '' . 
Problems are caused by his `` lack of sophistication and the secretive nature of his regime '' . 
Fortunately , however , his deputy , Tariq Aziz - Yuletide host of the new MP for Bethnal Green and Bow - is `` an intelligent , articulate and persuasive politician '' . 
Gott , on a journey to Baghdad , notices that the many pictures of Saddam are not defaced at all . 
Is it , he asks , `` terror , or apathy , or a cultural reluctance to disturb something associated with the state ? 
It is difficult to say , but of overt signs of opposition to the regime , there are none . '' 
Oh , I 'd say it was down to cultural reluctance , would n't you ? 
If they 'd only been a little bit more uninhibited , those Kurds and Shias would happily have taken their magic markers to the odd Saddam statue , Mukhabarat or no Mukhabharat . 
Gott is , of course , a slightly extreme example . 
But it seems to me that mild forms of Gottism are to be found all over the place . 
I know where I 'd have advised readers to put them . 
The Hornsey and Cambridge effects , where Liberal Democrats overturned hefty Labor majorities ? 
With the honorable exception of immigration , a protest vote for the Lib Dems was a vote to say one was on the left while paying nothing for the privilege . 
And it was also a vote for the utterly immoral proposition that , having sent our troops to topple Saddam , we should pull them out no matter what the Iraqi government asked us to do . 
And now we have ancient `` left '' hits revisited , with Frank Dobson , Glenda Jackson and others inviting other Labor party members to join them in a chorus of that 80s press favorite , `` Is this the way to Armageddon ? '' 
You want to know the two reasons she gives for joining the Tories ? 
The `` disastrous escapades '' of the imposition of student top-up fees and the war in Iraq . 
Oh , the unbelievable irony of it ! 
It is for none of these reasons that this is my last column for G2 . 
I 'll not be here for the format change , which I know will be fantastic . 
However , with writers such as Emma Brockes , Laura Barton , Lucy Mangan and Hadley Freeman , not to mention the comic talent of Tanya Gold , you wo n't miss me . 
I will , however , miss some of you . 
