Space Hulk cruises onto mobile THQ Wireless has acquired the rights to bring Games Workshop 's Space Hulk brand to mobile phones . 
Based in the Warhammer 40k universe , the title pitches space marines against evil alien Genestealers in tense galactic battle . 
Space Hulk originated as a board game but was turned into a PC title in the early nineties , and according to the press release , `` THQ Wireless interactive implementation of the brand will remain true to the existing rules and gameplay systems , whilst also addressing the needs of the quick play aspect of mobile handset gaming . '' 
The release goes on to mention some gameplay details : The dynamic game environment offers a multiplicity of game modes and scenarios , including tactical , turn based like the classic tabletop game , as well as frenetic real-time action . 
This makes the game accessible and compelling for as wide a spectrum of handset users as possible . 
With Macrospace 's long-awaited battle strategy sequel Ancient Empires II also due out soon , mobile owners looking for something more mentally stimulating than the next retro conversion are in for a challenging summer . 
Posted by Keith Stuart at 10:48 AM | Comments -LRB- 2 -RRB- | Permalink Attack of the Star Wars games THQ has revealed its opening suite of Star Wars mobile phone games after securing the rights to the movie series earlier this year . 
I 'll do a few reviews later , but for now , here 's a quick rundown of what 's on offer . 
The key release will probably be Star Wars Revenge of the Sith , a side-scrolling light sabre hack em up which allows you to control Obi-Wan , Yoda or Darth Vader . 
Then theres Star Wars : Battle for The Republic , which from the brief press release would appear to be a multiplayer battle strategy game where you guide either Separatist or Republican forces into turn-based battle . 
Advance Wars meets Star Wars ? 
Oh go on then ! 
Star Wars : Grievous Getaway seems to be a sort of flight racing game where you play as Obi-Wan Kenobi on his varactyl beast , hunting down General Grievous . 
Next we have Star Wars : Jedi Arena , which is like Pokemon Stadium , only you select , customise and train a Jedi or Sith warrior instead of a silly monster . 
You then shove your combatant into light saber battles against other players in over-the-air bouts . 
Another Star Wars take on a previously successful title is Star Wars Puzzle Blaster , based around the popular shareware puzzler , and Bust A Move clone , Snood . 
Finally , there are two lighter weight offerings . 
Star Wars Trivia speaks for itself , while the curious Ask Yoda is a sort of Magic 8-ball simulator , where you ask a cartoon depiction of Yoda any ` yes ' or ` no ' question you like and he responds with wise advice . 
I asked if Manchester City would secure a third home win under Stuart Pearce on Saturday , to which he replied You will know when you are calm and at peace . 
Thanks you daft Jedi midget . 
Hell also impart random phrases of Jedi wisdom and Star Wars trivia if you ask . 
This , I think , is not aimed at hardcore gamers . 
Do you remember Yoda Stories on the PC , by the way ? 
Terrible game , but I loved those cute little super-deformed Storm Troopers . 
All of these titles will be probably be released as excitement surrounding Episode III reaches a crescendo rather than afterwards when it deflates like an enormous stinky inflatable Jabba the Hut . 
Posted by Keith Stuart at 10:42 AM | Comments -LRB- 5 -RRB- | Permalink EA has announced its first eight titles as a mobile games publisher . 
As you 'd expect , conversions of the company 's major console brands make up a majority of the offerings with EA SPORTS FIFA Football 2006 , The Sims 2 , Need for Speed Underground 2 , Tiger Woods PGA TOUR 2006 and Madden NFL 2006 all figuring . 
Alongside these , EA has also transferred three casual titles - Poppit ! 
, Turbo 21 , and Tri Peaks Solitaire - from its online gaming service , Pogo . 
From the screens I 've seen , the console conversions look pretty impressive with sharp 3D visuals and , it seems , a few gameplay elements nicked from the latest PS2 and Xbox iterations . 
Bringing the Pogo stuff across to mobile is a smart idea - there are plenty of card and puzzle games available for Java handsets , but few will be as poslished and universally available as EA 's . 
All the titles will be playable at E3 , and EA is promising 12 more before the end of the year . 
Posted by Keith Stuart at 10:37 AM | Comments -LRB- 4 -RRB- | Permalink ` Mobile gamers are n't brand suckers ' claims research company Mobile Games Analyst , a fortnightly research service for the telecomms industry , has studied the mobile game download charts for the last year and come up with some surprising findings . 
It seems that mobile gamers are distinctly unimpressed by big movie and TV licences , prefering to spend their download cash on nostalgic classics and new mobile titles , such as Iomo 's Pub series . 
Here 's what the press release says ... MGA 's research findings also cast doubt on the wisdom of publishers paying inflated licensing fees to secure movie-related brands . 
Of the 47 games that charted during the 12-month period , just two - Digital Bridges ' The Fast And The Furious and Jamdat 's Lord Of The Rings : Return Of The King - were based on movies , and both spent just a single month on the chart . 
Meanwhile , the success rate of console brands was patchy . 
Some console brands , such as Digital Bridges ' FIFA Football and Tiger Woods 2004 , and Gameloft 's Splinter Cell : Pandora Tomorrow performed well , but others - including Wonderphone 's Crash Nitro Kart and Sorrent 's DRIV3R - spent just a single month on the chart . 
`` The poor performance of movie-related brands and some of the console ports indicates that games companies can no longer afford to rely on brands alone to achieve sustainable sales , '' says Pamela Clark-Dickson , editor of MOBILE GAMES ANALYST . 
`` Investment in the development of original IP will likely accelerate in the short-to-medium term , particularly with the increased commitment to mobile of video-games publisher Electronic Arts , which has already stated its intention to create original mobile games . '' 
Okay , so the most successful downloads included Pac-Man and Tetris , but right up there was Pub Pool , a great little pool sim blatantly not based on a movie , TV show or current console brand . 
Of course , there 's every possibility that , when the big videogame publishers realize they ca n't get away with lazy conversions , they 'll just abandon the mobile platform altogether , scratching their heads in bemusement . 
Let 's hope , instead , that they set up dedicated development teams -LRB- hey , we 're talking six people at the most -RRB- and start really investigating what people want from mobile games . 
Or more pertinently , how to get more people to want mobile games . 
Because shoving some lobotomised mini conversion onto the platform and hoping the kids are dumb enough to download it is clearly NOT WORKING . 
Here is the proof . 
Read it and weep . 
And when you 've finished weeping , start writing some decent games . 
Posted by Keith Stuart at 06:33 PM | Comments -LRB- 0 -RRB- | Permalink Keith - I know you love your mobile games , but to me they 've always been little more than a mindless distraction between real games -LRB- i.e. PC\/console -RRB- . 
But a little lookie at some of I-Play 's games has changed my mind a little . 
Nate Adams Freestyle Motocross , which reminded me of 80s budget stormer Kickstart , had a impressive physics engine which gave a subtlety more usually associated with console games . 
Jewel Quest was an addictive version of the casual gaming webgame , but the most enjoyable and instant hit was Skipping Stones - a one button treat that will be good fun on the tube . 
Do n't ditch the DS or PSP just yet , but clearly there is some interesting mobile stuff out there . 
Posted by Greg Howson at 01:12 PM | Comments -LRB- 10 -RRB- | Permalink Motorola has announced that it is launching a mobile multiplayer games service via its HelloMoto portal . 
Owners of Motorola handsets will be able to download games then play them against other phone users in different countries and on various networks - the site is also set to support leagues , tournaments and in-game chat . 
Motorola has elected to use Terraplay 's mobile multiplayer gaming infrastructure - the same system 3 is using for it 's 3G multiplayer titles . 
`` Motorola believes immersive human-to human-applications will be key drivers for growth in the mobile industry and we are very pleased to be offering such exciting multiplayer games to our customers . 
As part of our ` Innovate ' program we are always looking for the very best technologies , such as Terraplay , to support the considerable capabilities of our handsets , and in addition drive additional revenues for our operator customers . '' 
says Ronan Smyth , Applications Manager , Motorola . 
I like the way he starts with `` Motorola believes ... '' as though the company were a single sentient intelligence . 
Only two launch titles are mentioned - No Refuge by Mobile Interaction and Mole War from Digital Chocolate - but more are promised . 
Clearly , there 's a growing confidence that multiplayer is going to be the missing element that kickstarts this mobile gaming mega-explosion we 've all been waiting for . 
Well , some of us have been waiting for . 
Okay , that I 've been waiting for . 
Posted by Keith Stuart at 05:28 PM | Comments -LRB- 1 -RRB- | Permalink Just received preview code of Skipping Stone , a masterful little mobile game from eccentric Korean developer , Gamevil . 
It 's being released in the UK by I-play very soon , and fans of Wario Ware and its ilk should keep an eye out for it . 
The concept is ridiculously simple - you stand on the beach and skim stones across the sea . 
But the implementation is fantastic , combining Hyper Sports-style sports sim and rhythm action elements . 
To begin with , you select the power of your throw by hitting the 5 button when the speedy power meter reaches its highest point . 
Then , as your pebble skims across the ocean , you keep hitting the 5 button at the right point to maintain the height of the bounces . 
If you hit the perfect position more than twice in a row , you start building up combos - earn enough and you release power-ups , like whales surfacing and shooting your stone even higher . 
Alright , it sounds daft , but it 's wonderfully presented with surreal Anime visuals , and the interface works perfectly . 
There are two game modes , one where you 're looking to make as many splashes as possible and another where your aim is to make the stone go as far as possible before it sinks . 
Offbeat theme , fun graphics , compelling one-touch interface , high-score focus . 
This is where mobile gaming comes into its own . 
Posted by Keith Stuart at 04:10 PM | Comments -LRB- 7 -RRB- | Permalink Misty-eyed Amiga veterans may be interested to know that Kuju Wireless is ready to release its mobile conversion of Sensible Software classic , Cannon Fodder . 
Developed by Tower Studios -LRB- set-up by several ex-Sensibles including Jon Hare -RRB- , it 's a radically sawn-off version of the top-down strategy shooter , missing most of the team-based tactical elements , but still heavy on the relentless enemy blasting action . 
The visuals have been nicely re-produced and you still get to control up to four soldiers , using a sort of rotating cursor interface . 
But there are no hostage missions , or civillians to shoot at ` by accident ' . 
Level design has been simplified too , taking into account the smaller display and the fact that you can no longer set up two of your men on guard duty while the others plough ahead . 
It is possible to split your squad into two , but one lot just stands there while you control the other . 
This lets you protect your men and save a couple of lives for later in the level , but most of the time you 'll be grateful for the extra firepower afforded by having your whole platoon blasting away beneath your cursor . 
Cannon Fodder on mobile includes the jungle , snow and desert terrains but no underground levels . 
Oh and you do get to drive the tanks and take over gun emplacements - these were the moments I really felt I was back there again , back at college , mourning the loss of my veteran soliders , rather than reading Tender is the Night , or some such irrelevant tosh . 
Cannon Fodder kind of works on mobile . 
It works as a fragment of its former self . 
There definitely are moments of the old genius . 
And , if you grew up on cult Amiga titles , it will bring a smirk of recognition to your face . 
Posted by Keith Stuart at 06:01 PM | Comments -LRB- 6 -RRB- | Permalink Another one of those quick mobile game round-ups ... An interesting selection of mobile games has been released and\/or announced over the last couple of days , so here 's a quick run-through . 
This is all rather low-key considering Microsoft 's announcement , but , well , life goes on . 
After all , will the new Xbox have a pub fighting simulation ? 
No , but you can now play one on your phone ... Yes , Iomo 's funny and pretty daft pub sim is now available for download from all the usual sources . 
You play as Terry the landlord fighting off four generations of lager louts , including gangsters , hippies and break dancers . 
It 's not a beat 'em up really , more a rhythm action game based around casual alcohol-fuelled violence . 
There 's a different setting for each decade - the seventies is set in a pub toilet and each bout starts with you at the urinal . 
Your character zips up , turns round and starts kicking disco dancers . 
That , to the best of my knowledge , never happened in Street Fighter . 
Just released by Elkware this is , as the title cunningly suggests , a 3D golf sim . 
The visuals look quite nice , and there are weather effects and customisable characters . 
Another new release , this is a very polished , very playable 2D pool sim from Gameloft . 
The single player mode has a kind of Hustler feel - it 's all based in a smokey pool hall , and you have to gamble cash on each match . 
You also get extra money for pulling off special shots , which is quite a good idea . 
The press release they sent me proudly boasts ` with Lynyd Skynyrd 's Sweet Home Alabama , Midnight Pool is the first mobile game featuring licensed music ! ' . 
This is both funny and sad : funny because it reminds me of the eighties when you got things like ` featuring digitised speach ! ' 
and ' 100 % machine code ' emblazoned on game covers . 
It 's sad because mobile gaming is obviously desperate to ape the console games market , treating any form of licensing as a guaranteed cash cow . 
It 's out everywhere now and you really have to try it . 
This 2D take on the stealth adventure genre is a lesson in brutally simple yet highly effective game design . 
Possibly the most accomplished mobile game conversion I 've ever seen . 
The press release comes with some impressive stats : `` On the day of its release , Tom Clancys Splinter Cell Chaos Theory was made available to Gamelofts 130 operating partners , as well as 150 affiliates . 
Seven hundred different versions were developed in Gamelofts internal studios to accommodate 180 mobile phone models and 5 languages . 
The game is available today in 65 countries worldwide '' . 
Gameloft has acquired the rights to produce a mobile game based around this French cartoon series . 
If you 've somehow missed it , here 's what it 's about : `` Totally Spies is an animated series that enjoys worldwide success . 
Sam , Alex and Clover , three young college students from Beverly Hills , find themselves thrust into the thrilling world of international espionage . 
Thanks to their respective talents , the three heroines must meet a formidable challenge : balance school with the fast paced lives of secret agents ! '' 
Posted by Keith Stuart at 02:13 PM | Comments -LRB- 23 -RRB- | Permalink Lib Dems target mobile users This is slightly off-message , but interesting nethertheless . 
The Liberal Democrats have launched a mobile phone application that invites users to re-assign the # 5bn spent on the Iraq war to other areas such as health , education and the environment . 
Once you 've completed your alternative spending plan you can text it in to an online poll . 
`` Making use of new technology is a good way to engage a section of the population who are used to mobile phones and texting , but do n't find most political campaigning of interest , '' says John Howson , Reading East 's prospective parliamentary candidate for the Liberal Democrats . 
Obviously this is just a slightly more compelling means of polling the electorate , but the interactivity involved in creating your own budget is actually a very simple form of strategy sim . 
Perhaps the Iraq War Calculator hints at a future where parties use downloadable games to introduce election issues to apathetic , technology-literate youngsters . 
It 's certainly something that the major charities are investigating - Unicef , for example , has a great little Flash games site which communicates its work to younger audiences . 
And of course , the next logical step is voting by text . 
Indeed , research company Mobile Youth has recently issued a press release on this very subject : New research form mobileYouth has found that UK teenagers are currently sending over 22 million text messages a year , and with the successful convergence of TV and messaging in formats such as Big Brother , there looks set to be an increase to well over 24 million messages . 
That 's on average of 5 text messages per youth a day . 
The ease of mobile messaging and its mass market appeal has not gone unnoticed with companies such as MTV , BBC and ITV having already incorporated the idea of ` text voting ' into their TV shows . 
Politicians may also find that mobile messaging will enable them to reach directly to the youth population , and harness in those who are able to vote but still do not have the motivation to do so . 
It is precisely among young voters , aged 18-19 where activity peaks and messaging becomes an essential tool for social activity . 
Around 77 % of boys actually considered themselves ` heavy texters ' compared to around 23 % of girls , who all routinely send more than 15 text messages a day . 
On average a UK teenager will spend 20 pounds a month on messaging alone . 
I 'm slightly concerned about giving teenagers the idea that voting for the next government should be viewed in the same context as voting for the next Pop Idol . 
However , maybe this is the logical conclusion for a political culture based around sanitised sound bites and shameful pantomime performances at Prime Minister 's question time . 
Posted by Keith Stuart at 11:08 AM | Comments -LRB- 4 -RRB- | Permalink Guardian Unlimited Guardian Newspapers Limited 2004 
