Gulf oil spill reaches Texas as tar balls wash ashore It is not clear if the tar balls drifted from the spill or were carried on a ship Tar balls have landed on a Texas beach , meaning oil from the Gulf of Mexico spill has hit all five US Gulf states . 
Tests identified the small amount of tar found on the Bolivar Peninsula , north-east of Galveston , as coming from BP 's blown-out well off Louisiana . 
But officials said it was unclear if it had drifted hundreds of kilometres from the leak site or had fallen from ships taking part in the clean-up operation . 
Up to 60,000 barrels of oil a day have leaked into the Gulf since 22 April . 
BP has said its oil-capture systems collected or burnt off 24,980 barrels of oil on Monday , according to the Reuters news agency . 
Over the past week , efforts to clean up the spill have been hampered by the first hurricane of the Atlantic season , Hurricane Alex. Separately , BP said it could cover the costs of the clean-up and compensation claims without selling new shares , amid rumors that a Middle Eastern sovereign wealth fund was about to buy a stake . 
The commander of the US Coast Guard in the Galveston region , Capt Marcus Woodring , said about five gallons -LRB- 19 litres -RRB- of tar balls from the Deepwater Horizon leak had been found on Saturday . 
But he said it was impossible to confirm whether they had drifted from the site of the leak , about 550 miles -LRB- 885km -RRB- away , or had dropped off one of the ships carrying collected oil to Texas to be processed . 
The joint BP-US government response team said there were doubts that the oil had drifted all the way from the spill . 
`` The testing found that the oil was lightly weathered , raising doubts that the oil traversed the Gulf from the spill source , '' a statement said . 
Galveston 's mayor , Joe Jaworski , said he was hopeful the analysis was correct and that the tar balls were not a sign of more oil to come . 
`` This is good news . 
The water looks good . 
We 're cautiously optimistic this is an anomaly , '' he said . 
Texas Land Commissioner Jerry Patterson meanwhile promised in a statement that any of the state 's coastline affected by the spill `` will be cleaned up quickly and BP will be picking up the tab '' . 
The coasts of four other US Gulf states - Louisiana , Alabama , Mississippi and Florida - have so far been more seriously affected by the spill . 
Tar balls and oily water were spotted on Monday near the mouth of Lake Pontchartrain , a large lake to the north of New Orleans , in Louisiana . 
The world 's largest skimmer is one recent arrival to the Gulf Rough weather since Hurricane Alex passed through the Gulf , to the south of the spill , has hampered clean-up operations for the last week . 
Tests of a giant tanker refitted to scoop up oil have been inconclusive because of high seas , the ship 's operators said . 
The first of two relief wells being drilled to permanently cap the well is seven days ahead of schedule , but officials said on Tuesday that it was still likely to be mid-August before the operation could be completed . 
In the meantime , some of the leaking oil is being piped to the surface from a cap over part of the well . 
BP spokesman Mark Proegler has said the company hopes to connect `` by the end of the week '' a third tanker , Helix Producer , to its collection system to increase capacity to 53,000 barrels a day from the current limit of 28,000 . 
The Helix Producer will form part of a new collection system involving a so-called floating riser and four vessels which will be able to disconnect and reconnect quickly , reducing the time lost when collection is halted because of rough seas . 
The new system should be able to handle up to 80,000 barrels of oil a day . 
The Deepwater Horizon rig - operated by Transocean on behalf of BP and its partners - exploded on 20 April and later sank with the loss of 11 lives , leading to the worst oil spill in US history . 
US scientists estimate 35-60 ,000 barrels per day are leaking from the well , about one mile -LRB- 1.6 km -RRB- below the surface of the water . 
Mud that is heavier than the oil will be pumped into the well to stop the flow of oil . 
Cement will then be pumped in to seal it . 
CBC Oil spill reaches New Orleans and Texas - 17 hrs ago Miami Herald Oil 's fingers reach into Louisiana 's inland waters - 23 hrs ago NPR Texas Tar Balls Mean Oil Now Fouls All Gulf States - 29 hrs ago The Independent BP oil spill hitting all gulf states - 33 hrs ago MSNBC BP spill now hitting all Gulf states - 38 hrs ago The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
