By Laurence Knight Business reporter , BBC News BP want some way to draw a line under the Gulf of Mexico disaster and move on Things are not so bad now . 
BP 's share price - which had more than halved since the Deepwater Horizon oil rig explosion in April first triggered the company 's woes - has staged an impressive recovery in recent weeks . 
Yet talk continues to circulate of a possible strategic investor in BP - either as a welcome provider of fresh capital to the company , or an unwelcome opportunist sniffing a bargain . 
So what are the options now for BP ? 
On 16 June , the cost of buying financial protection for one year against a possible debt default by BP reached a staggering 10 % . 
I think markets are -LRB- pricing in -RRB- a scenario considerably bleaker than will prove to be the case . '' 
End Quote Alan Sinclair Oil and gas analyst , Seymour Pierce During those panicky days , credit markets were in effect saying that a BP bankruptcy in the next few years was more likely than not . 
Things have calmed down since then , although the oil giant 's bonds still trade at prices comparable with companies rated `` junk '' , even though the credit rating agencies have yet to actually stick that ignominious label on BP . 
The about turn has been extraordinary . 
Before its money and reputation began bleeding away in the Gulf of Mexico , the oil giant was considered the safest of blue chip companies , because its debts were so low and its income so high . 
`` I think markets are -LRB- pricing in -RRB- a scenario considerably bleaker than will prove to be the case , '' says Alan Sinclair , oil and gas analyst at stock brokers Seymour Pierce . 
He points out that just by canceling its remaining dividends this year , the company should already have enough money in hand to cover what he expects to be the $ 6bn -LRB- # 4bn -RRB- direct cost of the clean-up . 
That is about double what the company has already forked out to date . 
`` If you add in all the civil liabilities ... I would be surprised if it comes to more than the $ 20bn they already agreed to set aside , '' Mr Sinclair adds , on the assumption that the relief wells currently being drilled succeed in stopping the leak in August . 
The company could seek ways to limit its liability to the oil spill . 
There is already a statutory limit under US law for oil spill costs of a mere $ 75m , but BP long ago waived this limit , as hiding behind it would have been politically untenable . 
However , BP had two co-investors in the Deepwater Horizon well - Anadarko of the US and Mitsui of Japan - who together own 35 % of the project . 
The UK company has called on its partners to pay their share of the spiralling costs , and Mr Sinclair thinks that if it comes to a legal fight , BP would prevail . 
The oil firm could also take more active steps to limit its liability , for instance through a selective bankruptcy of its US business . 
But this would almost certainly be unpalatable to the company 's board , as it would enrage US politicians , including President Barack Obama , and probably cut off the entire US market to BP . 
So the political reality is that BP 's liability in the Gulf of Mexico remains unlimited , and this continues to weigh down the company 's share price . 
Strategic investor or acquisition target ? 
In this context , speculation has arisen that BP may look to an outside investor to provide a capital injection to help cover these costs . 
Share price lowest point -LRB- on 25 June -RRB- : 296p -LRB- 55 % fall -RRB- Credit default swap spread -LRB- 5 years -RRB- : 4.1 % per annum Data : Bloomberg as of 6 July 2010 Or alternatively it could fall victim to an unwanted suitor looking to buy up the company cheaply on the stock market . 
Kuwait is high on the list . 
It has had a relationship with the company ever since the UK government sold British Petroleum on the stock exchange in 1987 . 
But Kuwait 's involvement in that flotation serves as a useful case study in the politics of such investments . 
The Kuwait Investment Authority helpfully bought almost 30 % of the company after the sale was almost derailed by the stock market crash . 
But the Arabs later came under pressure from Downing Street to give up hopes of a takeover and scale back their investment . 
Yet today Kuwait may be the most attractive suitor . 
On Monday , Libya voiced interest in making a grab for the company . 
Resource-hungry China is also mentioned as a possibility . 
Its national oil company attempted to buy California 's Unocal in 2005 , only to be blocked by the White House on national security grounds . 
Among fellow oil companies , the names of Exxon Mobil and Shell are also being bandied about . 
But the resulting company might be unacceptably big and powerful for US and European anti-trust authorities . 
`` Even in Europe , the EU would have a fit about the anti-trust implications , '' says Mr Sinclair of Seymour Pierce . 
Indeed , he thinks the entire idea of an investor buying BP itself is questionable . 
Libya may be one of the less welcome suitors `` Why take on a company that is about to undertake several years of litigation ... -LRB- with -RRB- unquantifiable potential civil penalties ? '' 
Instead , he points to asset sales by BP as the likely way forwards . 
BP could for example spin off US subsidiary Atlantic Richfield to one of its rivals . 
Or it could sell individual wells and exploration rights to the Chinese . 
This would minimize both political and anti-trust issues , and allow BP 's existing management to keep control . 
`` BP can afford to fork out $ 4bn a year by selling assets ... and being flexible about -LRB- capital expenditure -RRB- , '' notes Mr Sinclair . 
The last possibility , and one that some market participants may be considering seriously again , is that BP will recover fully from its current debacle . 
Having promised to set aside $ 20bn in a dedicated `` escrow '' account , some are hopeful there may be a tacit agreement with the White House that this figure will represent a cap on the company 's liabilities . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
