CAIRO | Fri May 27 , 2011 3:21 pm BST CAIRO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Thousands of Egyptians packed Cairo 's Tahrir Square on Friday in what organisers called a `` second revolution '' to push for faster reforms and a speedy trial for ousted President Hosni Mubarak and his former aides . 
Activists complain of delays in putting Mubarak , his family and members of his ousted regime on trial and that the army has not restored order quickly enough to the country of 80 million . 
Egyptians are also demanding an end to endemic graft , one of the main grievances that drove thousands of protesters onto the streets in the uprising that began on January 25 . 
`` After some 1,000 martyrs ... people do not see any change , '' said Mustafa Ali Menshawi , a 38-year-old accountant , who was helping marshal crowds flooding into the square . 
`` The only change we see is that the Mubarak metro station has been changed to the Martyrs station , '' he said . 
In a move seen as aimed at appeasing protesters , authorities on Tuesday ordered Mubarak to stand trial on charges of graft and `` pre-meditated killing '' of protesters during the uprising that ousted him on February 11 . 
If convicted , Mubarak could face the death penalty . 
He has been detained at a hospital in the tourist Red Sea resort of Sharm el-Sheikh since April when he was reported to have suffered heart problems during an initial questioning . 
Hundreds staged a protest in front of the hospital calling for his departure . 
They said his presence was driving tourists away , according to state TV . 
FLAGS , PLACARDS AND NO SOLDIERS The ruling military council withdrew the army from near the protests in Cairo and has ordered security forces to stay away . 
Tahrir Square was decked with Egyptian flags and placards demanding that officials who worked under Mubarak and squandered state funds be investigated . 
`` We want to dissolve all local councils that are famous for being the most and worst corrupt institutions during Mubarak 's regime , '' said Mohammed Adel , of the April 6 Youth group . 
`` We also ask that all political powers get involved in the drafting of important political laws , '' Adel added . 
Thousands of Egyptians also took to the streets in the Mediterranean city of Alexandria and in the Suez Canal 's cities of Suez and Ismailia . 
Smaller protests also took place in northern Sinai and in the city of Port Said on the Suez Canal . 
However , some Egyptians expressed opposition to the protests , saying military rulers needed time to sort things out . 
A few hundred gathered in Cairo 's al-Hussein area to express support for Egypt 's military rulers , chanting : `` For the sake of our country , we want to be ruled by the army . '' 
Some political parties , including Egypt 's powerful Muslim Brotherhood , said no protests were needed and warned they could lead to confrontations between the army and demonstrators . 
The absence of the Brotherhood angered some protesters , some of whom chanted : `` Where is the Brotherhood ? '' 
The Supreme Council of the Armed Forces , in a Facebook message posted on Thursday , called on protesters to exercise caution on Friday , saying there were `` suspicious elements trying to take actions that would sow strife between Egypt 's people and the military . '' 
