The next shot at killing BP 's well in the Gulf of Mexico could begin as early as Monday night , as engineers plan to pump heavy mud into the capped but still dangerous well and `` bullhead '' the rogue oil back down into its source rock 21\/2 miles below the seafloor . 
The `` static kill '' is part of a double whammy of mud and cement that would hit the runaway Macondo well high and low in quick succession . 
The static kill starts at the top , firing the mud and possibly cement into the blowout preventer that sits on the wellhead . 
That effort , which would take a day or two , would be followed in another five to seven days by the start of the more laborious `` bottom kill , '' in which mud and cement will be injected into Macondo through a relief well that engineers began drilling at the beginning of May . 
If all goes perfectly , the one-two mud punch will literally be overkill . 
The static kill will terminate Macondo , and the bottom kill will be more like a confirmation test , akin to poking the body to make sure it 's dead . 
But optimism has been a dangerous attitude throughout the oil spill disaster , and the federal point man for the spill response , retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , has warned against complacency . 
`` We should not be writing any obituary for this event , '' Allen said late last week . 
As he delivered the latest update on the static-kill plan Sunday afternoon , he also defended the government 's decision to let BP and its contractors use vast quantities of dispersants . 
He said that the goal of reducing the amount of dispersant used was `` generally met '' and that the government 's field commander made decisions to allow additional dispersant on a case-by-case basis . 
Although the environmental crisis has hardly passed , there is a sense these days among BP engineers and government scientists that they 've got the well in a headlock . 
The disaster began with cascading failures and continued with cascading disappointments as attempts to kill or contain the gusher never quite worked . 
But since July 15 the well has been shut in , thanks to a 75-ton cap lowered onto the re-configured chimney atop the damaged blowout preventer . 
-LRB- See photos of the cleanup and containment efforts . -RRB- 
The well has since passed an `` integrity test '' and , according to Allen , shows no sign of squirting oil and gas into the rock formation or up into the gulf . 
The positive turn of events has led to a change in the endgame . 
The static kill has emerged as a potential fix that could take the pressure off the relief-well job . 
With hurricane season about to hit its busiest stretch , officials have feared that a tropical storm could force the rig drilling the relief well to disengage and sail away temporarily , delaying the termination of Macondo . 
The static kill , which officials say could start late Monday or Tuesday , is effectively the same thing as the `` top kill '' attempted in late May . 
No one has ever been sure why the May attempt failed , but BP believes the mud simply shot out the top of the well through cracks and openings in the collapsed riser pipe . 
This time should be different , and easier . 
The hydrocarbons are n't flowing . 
The mud can be injected gradually , just a couple of barrels per minute . 
Where the mud will go is unclear ; engineers say only that it will follow the path of least resistance . 
The mud weighs about 13 pounds per gallon and is much heavier than the oil , so it should push -- or `` bullhead '' -- the oil back down the well toward its origin in the ancient rock more than 13,000 feet below the wellhead . 
Ideally the mud will fill the well all the way to the bottom of the well bore , where the final seven-inch pipe juts into the porous Macondo reservoir . 
If it works , the pressure in the well will slowly drop to zero from its current pressure of nearly 7,000 pounds per square inch . 
At that point , engineers could decide to send in a large dose of cement . 
That would permanently plug the well at its base . 
BP has said Macondo will never be resurrected as a production well . 
-LRB- See video of the oil spill 's impact on one Louisiana community . -RRB- 
But there could be complicating factors . 
Still unknown after all these months is which avenue from the reservoir the hydrocarbons have exploited . 
No one is sure if the oil and gas are flowing inside the pipe or outside the casing in what is called the annulus -- the space between the pipe and the rock wall of the hole . 
Or the flow could be through both . 
Because of such uncertainties , officials plan to proceed with the relief well regardless of what happens with the static kill . 
The relief well is only about 4 feet laterally from Macondo , angling in gradually , with about 100 feet to go before it intercepts the annulus . 
What happens in the bottom kill , and how long it takes , will depend on the circumstances of the static kill . 
The standard plan , outlined for months , has been to send mud through the relief well , initially into the annulus . 
After the mud will come cement . 
Then the drill string will be withdrawn and a new bit will be attached , a `` mill . '' 
That would be used for the next stage : cutting into the steel casing of the well and repeating the mud-and-cement injection . 
`` Once we 've made the intercept , depending upon the status of the well , whether we still have to kill the annulus , the casing , or both , the kill procedure could take anywhere from a number of days to a few weeks , '' BP Senior Vice President Kent Wells said Friday . 
It 's conceivable that the static kill will take care only of hydrocarbons in the central pipe and leave hydrocarbons flowing in the annulus , Allen said . 
`` We 're not going to be satisfied until we drill into the annulus outside that pipe , '' he said . 
The endgame is having reverberations on the shore . 
Some Louisiana officials are concerned that the government and BP will bail out prematurely in their response to the spill . 
Roughly 1,500 private `` vessels of opportunity '' have been enlisted to skim oil , but with the gusher clamped and oil now harder to find , there will be `` resource leveling , '' Allen said Thursday . 
But he said the government has put together a plan to keep the fishermen employed at least through August . 
`` Obviously as we transition to a point where there is not a threat of a spill , and this is all conditioned on the fact that we will have a successful static kill and bottom kill of the well , the employment of vessels of opportunity is going to necessarily have to change , '' Allen said . '' 
