`` Organizational downsizing '' is one of the most detested phrases in the management vocabulary . 
Many managers say that the one action they hate more than anything else is letting somebody go , and downsizing entails letting dozens , sometimes thousands go . 
For those on the receiving end , aside from the immediate loss of income , health care , and work identity , the dreaded pink slip can foreshadow personal anguish , family stress , and the decline or even end of a work career . 
This is especially true when widespread hiring freezes and mass dismissals leave few employment alternatives . 
For those who unfortunately must lead the downsizing process , research from prior recessions point to the value of imagining they themselves may be riffed -LRB- a verb from the acronym , RIF , or `` reduction in force '' -RRB- . 
From this not so imaginary perspective -- those engineering a first round of layoffs are sometimes the victims of a second round -- here are four simple implications : 1 . 
Look for ways to minimize the downsizing as much as possible . 
Organizations have employed a host of measures to do so , including wage reductions and work furloughs . 
Disclose as much detailed information as possible . 
Employees hate an information vacuum when their work lives depend on it as much as nature abhors a vacuum . 
Provide as many forms of personal support as possible . 
These range from employment counseling and placement services to the temporary extensions of medical and dental benefits . 
Avoid repeated rounds of layoffs if possible . 
To be recurrently subjected to the threat of dismissal is to undergo a work version of water torture . 
Such steps are essential both for those let go as well as for those who survive . 
The latter must still get the job done , and their willingness to do so depends on the respect that remains for those who have led the downsizing . 
If the leaders ' actions are perceived as unavoidable , fair , and taken in ways that minimize the human toll , employee faith in them can constitute foundation for the next and very demanding step of turning around the enterprise . 
Here 's how not to do it . 
One manufacturing firm in a prior recession sent a manager around the shop floor late in the afternoon to tap employees on the shoulder and then walk them to a nearby room . 
There , the downsizing victims learned of their fate , and minutes later they were ushered out another door directly onto the street , with little more than a promise that their personal effects would be mailed . 
Knowing that a tap on the shoulder presaged such a fate , some employees took to hiding in the restrooms late in the day , an understandable if unsuccessful expression of the dread that downsizing strikes in all . 
