Get the Morning Fix and the new Afternoon Fix delivered to your inbox or mobile device for easy access to the top political stories of the day . 
All you need is one click to get Morning Fix and Afternoon Fix ! 
Send an email with `` Politics and Pints '' in the subject line to us and we 'll make sure you know about upcoming `` Politics and Pints '' events . 
Behind McCain 's Decision to Suspend His Campaign John McCain 's decision to suspend his campaign comes as two new polls show him slipping in the head to head matchup against Barack Obama . 
-LRB- AP Photo\/Gerald Herbert -RRB- Sen. John McCain 's surprise announcement that he would temporarily suspend his campaign to return to Washington to help broker a deal to save the financial industry is the latest in a series of political gambits surrounding the financial crisis on Wall Street , and is sure to reshape political calculations and voter attitudes around the volatile issue . 
The move is an obvious attempt by McCain and his campaign to paint the Arizona senator as above politics , willing to put aside his campaign for the good of the country . 
It comes as two new national polls -- including one conducted by the Washington Post -- show McCain slipping in the head-to-head matchup against Barack Obama due in large part to voters ' inclination to trust the Illinois senator to solve the financial problems of the country . 
The McCain campaign believes that their candidate is at his best when he is seen as a deal-maker , willing to reach across party lines to get things done for the good of the country . 
This economic crisis , they believe , provides McCain a chance to show the sort of leadership that voters value in the Arizona senator . 
`` John McCain 's leadership and experience credentials outrank Barack Obama 's , '' said Sarah Simmons , a McCain campaign strategist , this morning . '' 
-LRB- We are -RRB- walking through a crisis and people are looking to see how it is going to be handled . '' 
Obama , however , refused to allow McCain to dictate the terms of the campaign 's next few days during a press conference in Florida just before 5 p.m. ET . 
`` There are times for politics and then there are times to rise above politics and do what 's right for our country , '' said Obama . 
`` This is one of those times . '' 
He added , however , that he had no plans to re-schedule Friday night 's presidential debate in Oxford , Miss. , as McCain had proposed in announcing the suspension of his campaign . 
`` It 's my belief that this is exactly the time when the American people need to hear from the person who in approximately 40 days will be responsible for dealing with this mess , '' said Obama . 
`` Part of the president 's job is to deal with more than one thing at once . '' 
It was not immediately clear what the fate of the debate will be if only Obama decides to show up on Friday night . 
Both McCain and Obama have struggled to deal with the real-time challenges of the economic crisis since it emerged on the national political landscape last weekend . 
Neither man is particularly well versed in the intricate complexities of the economy and have been cautious to announce their support -LRB- or opposition -RRB- to the proposed $ 700 billion bailout of the financial firms being pushed by the Bush Administration . 
McCain appeared to be getting the worst of the exchanges on the economy -- if recent polling is to be believed . 
In a new Washington Post\/ABC News survey released today , Obama led McCain 52 percent to 43 percent , an edge largely built on the increase in the number of voters who believe the Illinois senator is best positioned to handle the economic crisis . 
A survey also released today from Fox News\/Opinion Dynamics showed Obama with a 45 percent to 39 percent lead -- a significant improvement from a poll done by the same organization earlier this month that put McCain ahead by three points . 
The move was announced in a statement in New York City this afternoon in which the Arizona senator said he was pulling his campaign ads down and canceling all fundraising beginning tomorrow . 
Obama did not respond in kind . 
The announcement came just hours before President George W. Bush is preparing to address the nation at 9 p.m. ET tonight on the economic crisis . 
`` Tomorrow morning , I will suspend my campaign and return to Washington after speaking at the Clinton Global Initiative , '' McCain said . 
`` I have spoken to Senator Obama and informed him of my decision and have asked him to join me . '' 
McCain went on to compare the current crisis in the financial markets with the attacks of Sept. 11 and called on politicians to draw on the bipartisan spirit created during those times in order to solve the economic problems of the country today . 
`` Following September 11th , our national leaders came together at a time of crisis , '' McCain said . 
`` We must show that kind of patriotism now . 
Americans across our country lament the fact that partisan divisions in Washington have prevented us from addressing our national challenges . 
Now is our chance to come together to prove that Washington is once again capable of leading this country . '' 
The next 48 hours will be the equivalent of a political staring contest . 
Who will blink first ? 
And , if neither candidate does , what will happen Friday night ? 
A presidential debate with only one presidential candidate ? 
By Chris Cillizza | September 24 , 2008 ; 5:15 PM ET `` McCain is wrong for not showing up to debate . 
This maybe the only time he will be able to show that he is better than Obama . '' 
OOOH Please , Obama is n't qualified for this people plain and simple he would have voted for this to pass without thinking twice . 
He 's a mouthpiece that 's about it . 
I commend McCain for getting in the middle of it and slowing the damn thing down so it can be scrutinized . 
The coveted debate that everyone seems to think needs to happen right THIS MINUTE could potentially cost the taxpayers 700 Billion dollars . 
They do n't need a blank check I would much rather see the government buy up the bad housing loans . 
That will stop the bleeding . 
Banks tighten up loan criteria and ride it out . 
This maybe the only time he will be able to show that he is better than Obama . 
No , I 'm not talking about tomorrow 's debate with Barack Obama : `` With new polls showing his campaign dead in the water among California Republicans , Arizona Sen. John McCain has pulled out of a long-scheduled debate with Texas Gov. George Bush , set for Thursday in Los Angeles . '' 
`` McCain campaign officials tried desperately yesterday to put the best face on their withdrawal , even as a new Field Poll showed Bush far ahead among likely Republican voters in the winner-take-all race for the state 's 162 GOP delegates . '' 
`` The bait and switch on the debate left the Arizona senator -- whose favorite campaign line is `` I 'll always tell you the truth '' -- wide open to blistering criticism from his rivals . '' 
`` Clearly , this is more double-talk from the McCain campaign , '' said Alixe Mattingly , a spokeswoman for Bush . 
`` Pulling out of this debate at the last minute is an indication that they 're pulling out of California , where McCain 's antagonistic message clearly is n't working . '' 
And clearly , McCain has a habit of trying to `` cut and run '' when things are n't going his way . 
Send Sarah Palin in his stead . 
That 's what Vice-Presidents are for , right ? 
Before you blame the Republicans , guess who wanted to regulate ... and guess who did not want to -- Watch the vid in my blog ! 
You will be shocked . 
We the taxpayers pay them a pretty hefty salary . 
They are not just running for office . 
At a time when congress is working on such a crucial package , I would rather see my senator in Washington doing his job than spending his time , paid for by my taxpayer money , out campaigning . 
`` On Sunday , in an interview with CNBC and The New York Times , Mr. McCain responded to a question about Mr. Davis s role in the advocacy group through 2005 by saying that his campaign manager `` has had nothing to do with it since , and I ll be glad to have his record examined by anybody who wants to look at it . '' 
And found that he was n't telling the truth . 
Not even close : `` One of the giant mortgage companies at the heart of the credit crisis paid $ 15,000 a month from the end of 2005 through last month to a firm owned by Senator John McCain s campaign manager , according to two people with direct knowledge of the arrangement . '' 
Well , though , at least Davis is n't involved with his own firm anymore , right ? 
Newsweek reports : `` Jill Hazelbaker , the campaign 's communications director , said in an e-mail Tuesday that Davis `` left '' Davis Manafort in 2006 . 
In a statement attacking The New York Times , posted on the campaign 's Web site on Wednesday , campaign spokesman Michael Goldfarb said that Davis `` separated from his consulting firm , Davis Manafort , in 2006 . '' 
-LRB- A senior campaign official , in an e-mail statement to NEWSWEEK that was not for attribution on Tuesday night , said `` Rick is no longer affiliated with the firm . '' -RRB- 
Oh , my ... You can see where this is going , right ? 
Yep , you guessed it . 
They 're lying yet again . 
According to Newsweek : `` Rick Davis , John McCain 's campaign manager , has remained the treasurer and a corporate director of his lobbying firm this year , despite repeated statements by campaign officials that he had ended his relationship with the firm in 2006 , according to corporate records . '' '' 
-LRB- McCain campaign -RRB- statements appear to have overstated the extent to which Davis had severed his relationship with his lobbying firm . 
Filings made by `` Davis Manafort Partners '' with the Virginia Corporation Commission as recently as April 1 , 2008 , show that Davis was still listed as one of only two corporate officers and directors of the firm , according to records on the commission s Web site reviewed by NEWSWEEK . 
That filing records Davis as the `` treas\/clerk '' of the firm ; his business partner , Paul Manafort is listed as the president and chief executive officer . '' 
`` Another filing by `` Davis Manafort , Inc. '' -LRB- with the same Alexandria , Va. address , and recorded on Oct. 17 , 2007 -RRB- also lists Davis as an officer and director of the firm , reporting his position as `` T\/Clerk , '' a reference to his formal title as corporate treasurer and clerk . '' 
So ... `` left '' ? 
`` No longer affiliated ? '' 
That 's a hell of a definition . 
What 's so hard about this , for the McCain campaign ? 
It 's not doing you any good . 
You are soooo correct ! 
McCain Lies about Campaign Suspension . 
Andrew Sullivan has reports from two different readers in two different media markets that McCain ads are up and running as relentlessly as ever . 
David Kurtz at Talking Points Memo reports on McCain surrogate Nancy Pfotenhauer appearing on Fox to attack Obama : And then Pfotenhauer scoots on over to the Washington Times for a friendly little chat about the campaign . 
Guess we 'll be seeing McCain at the debates tomorrow since he 's decided to keep his campaign going . 
| September 25 , 2008 1:51 PM | Report abuse Now any human being with the intelligence just above that of a tree sloth should know that most senators and reps do n't read the majority of the bills that pass or fail . 
There are how many congressmen\/women in Washington ? 
I 'd say enough to handle the problem . 
So two people are n't in attendence - Senators running for the highest office in the world , and you 're telling me nothing is going to get done without them ? 
Here 's the deal , these companies made poor business decisions . 
They paid themselves exorbitant amounts of money that should have been reinvested in their companies and used to hedge against the higher risk investments they were delving into . 
They should have been diversifying . 
Remember the Junk Bond fiasco or the Derivatives problem from years back ? 
Because we 're greedy and now the government is rewarding our greed . 
Adopt high risk investment strategies . 
Pay yourselves a ton of money . 
But do n't worry , the government will give you more money so you can continue this track . 
Where 's my money ? 
My movie does n't sell . 
My company does n't survive . 
I did n't get a bailout package . 
Oh , because you allowed them to consolidate to the point of creating a virutal financial oligopoly and now you have to bail them out . 
If the Republicans are so against big govermnet and for a free enterprise system sans government regulation and intervention , why are they intervening like big government in this case ? 
Do n't tell me it 's the economy . 
Why should multi-millionaires continue to be multi-millionairs when they screw up so bad that they must be bailed out by taxpayers . 
They should be bankrupt as well . 
They should sell everything , liquidate the company 's assets , distribute to investors and account holders , and save the taxpayer money for the competitors who did not screw up . 
Reward those who managed to make good , strong , prudent decisions , not those who acted like spoiled greedy bastards . 
And finally , McCain is using an economic debacle to run from Obama . 
He is a dolt . 
He makes rash , emotional , child-like decisions that will literally end the U.S. as a global force . 
The empire is falling and he is exacerbating it . 
If anyone has studied the Ethiopians , Carthaginians , Persians , Rome , Sparta , The Ottomans , Egypt , England or any other significant empire , they know this to be true . 
It 's going to end . 
It 's just a matter of when and how . 
Mark my words , if McCain and Palin win , we will spiral down to the depths of our own arrogance and greed at an increasing rate . 
I take exception to your assessment that `` neither man is particularly well versed in the ... complexities of the economy . 
Obama has a much better handle on this matter . 
He first addressed the financial mess on Wall Street in March 2008 , he met with some sound advisers last week and issued a 6 part plan to address the Paulson Bail out and protect tax payers . 
Camparing the financial crisis to the attacks on 9\/11 conjures up the `` old warrior '' is now prepared to go to war with Wall Steet when it has been McCain 's steadfast support of trickle down economics and limited government that has led to this mess . 
McCain once again is a Johnny come lately . 
Sen. Dodd said while he has been in constant contact with Obama during these negotiations , that he had not heard from John McCain . 
If McCain had really been aware of the seriousness of the Wall Street debacle , he might have asked questions sooner instead of waiting for the resolution to be near and then jump in trying to take credit for something others accomplished . 
The debates should go forward as scheduled and the Republican Governor of Mississippi agrees as he announced this morning . 
He knows we know there are only two reasons for avoiding debate . 
He 's too old . 
He 's too scared . 
It emerged in the White House briefing today that McCain called Bush and asked him to initiate a meeting today at 4 pm at the White House , putatively for him to `` deal with '' the crisis . 
That is , McCain asked Bush to help him create an avoidant trifecta : To try ti \ o lend some credence to McCain 's desperate assertion that a suspension of his campaign is necessary , in effect avoiding a debate in which he would face critical questions about his stance on the economy ; attempting to co opt the financial crisis thereby trying to put an end to his plummeting in the polls created by his flailing positions on the economy -- perhaps best reflected by his statement days ago that the `` fundamentals of the economy are strong '' ; and , while avoiding his own debate , also buying more time for Sarah Palin after her embarrassing photo op at the UN yesterday , by moving her debate forward as well . 
Here 's how it happened , according to Q and A at the WHB : McCain emailed Bush asking for the 4 P.M. meeting . 
Now , one reasonably might ask , why is today such a necessity for McCain , if his interest is solely the national good ? 
Because it is before the debate . 
McCain hopes to stage a meeting at the White House , thereby , with Bush 's cooperation , lending plausibility to his claim to need to suspend his campaign . 
Then , if Republicans , in their own electoral interest , can be persuaded to come to agreement , before the debate , he would claim -- in an act of utter stage management -- to have `` resolved '' the crisis . 
Thereby hoping to take the heat off on his past careening stances and sliding polls and staunch the bleeding on the polls -- before the debate . 
This is Kabuki Theatre masquerading as substance -- no different than what we saw at the U.N. yesterday . 
It is utterly stage managed , utterly cynical , and utterly unrelated to the substantive deliberation necessary to actually resolve these matters on the merits and for our nation 's future , rather than for short-term and desperate political advantage . 
These occurrences are equally important for what they indicate about McCain 's governing style as they are for their impact upon democratic process : impulsive acts that rely on drama and theatrical posture rather than substantive reasoning and long-term deliberation ; a strong willingness to sacrifice substantive reasoning , deliberative process , and even prior structures and agreements to immediate political need ; an attempt to reach outcomes through last minute stage management rather than substantive argument . 
These should create deep concern for anyone who wishes for a change in governmental process from the past eight years . 
We have an economy , rather than a campaign , to rescue . 
Putting nation before politics means putting all attempts to resolve it before political attempts to co opt it -- and to move towards one 's commitments , rather than towards a more immediate and short-term salvation . 
-LRB- A VP is supposed to fill in for the President , no ? -RRB- 
Ok I do n't really think that ... just a goofy thought , but it would be amusing to say the least . 
I would love to see how Obama would respond to that curveball being thrown . 
McCain personally said that Obama called him . 
McCain is pulling a flea-flicker out of his political play-book . 
A Politician is always a politician even when they say they are not being political . 
What does McCain have to add to the financial equation when he has admitted he knows little or nothing about finances ? 
When you trail in the polls , you will do some desperate things . 
Even the Drudge Report will tell you , Obama called McCain first , then McCain returned his call . 
Not that it matters . 
At least Obama can multitask . 
Last I checked , that 's an important skill for a world leader . 
Oh I forgot , you already have . 
McCain always puts the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA FIRST unlike Obammie who prefers to hang with the socialists , Marxists , communists and terrorists . 
Barack Hussein Obama has been treated like a rock star by the MSMM and has NOT answered questions about the huge gaps in his background , because if the truth does manage to come out , he will lose this election . 
I say Obammie should go to Mississippi and debate himself because he loves the sound of his own voice and never says antyhing of substance that would benefit the people of this country . 
There is nothing in that job description that says `` Campaign for President '' , `` engage in Presidential debate '' , etc. . 
He is obligated to take care of the people 's business before he takes care of his personal `` extracurricular '' business . 
He should be on Capitol Hill working on this bill . '' 
I 'm sorry , I could n't let this ridiculous statement pass without comment . 
So , how many votes has Mr. McCain made or missed on the peoples ' business this year ? 
How does that compare with Mr. Obama 's voting record ? 
Or does your concern only apply to a single issue ? 
There is nothing in that job description that says `` Campaign for President '' , `` engage in Presidential debate '' , etc. . 
He is obligated to take care of the people 's business before he takes care of his personal `` extracurricular '' business . 
He should be on Capitol Hill working on this bill . '' 
I 'm sorry , I could n't let this ridiculous statement pass without comment . 
So , how many votes has Mr. McCain made or missed on the peoples ' business this year ? 
How does that compare with Mr. Obama 's voting record ? 
Or does your concern only apply to a single issue ? 
There is nothing in that job description that says `` Campaign for President '' , `` engage in Presidential debate '' , etc. . 
He is obligated to take care of the people 's business before he takes care of his personal `` extracurricular '' business . 
He should be on Capitol Hill working on this bill . '' 
I 'm sorry , I could n't let this ridiculous statement pass without comment . 
So , how many votes has Mr. McCain made or missed on the peoples ' business this year ? 
How does that compare with Mr. Obama 's voting record ? 
Or does your concern only apply to a single issue ? 
There is nothing in that job description that says `` Campaign for President '' , `` engage in Presidential debate '' , etc. . 
He is obligated to take care of the people 's business before he takes care of his personal `` extracurricular '' business . 
He should be on Capitol Hill working on this bill . '' 
I 'm sorry , I could n't let this ridiculous statement pass without comment . 
So , how many votes has Mr. McCain made or missed on the peoples ' business this year ? 
How does that compare with Mr. Obama 's voting record ? 
Or does your concern only apply to a single issue ? 
What do they provide that is unavailable to the rest of Congress and can not be shared over the phone ? 
Are those special qualities and abilities of the candidates more important to the country than the candidates ' debates ? 
We have the financial equivalent of 9\/11 or Pearl Harbor -LRB- depending on the age of the economic analyst you listen to -RRB- and 0bama is saying `` you guys do all the work and let me know how you want me to vote '' . 
As the potential President who would be bound to operate by this legislation , he should be in there fighting to make sure it is what he wants . 
His are not the actions of a leader , but a follower . 
In addition , 0bama , like McCain , is a U.S. Senator . 
There is nothing in that job description that says `` Campaign for President '' , `` engage in Presidential debate '' , etc. . 
He is obligated to take care of the people 's business before he takes care of his personal `` extracurricular '' business . 
He should be on Capitol Hill working on this bill . 
Unless he is afraid that he might have to contribute to the discussion , and then he could subsequently be held accountable if his suggestions were adopted and failed . 
Sounds cowardly to me . 
But what would you expect from an empty suit ? 
If you support McCain , you 've been f-u-c-k-e-d in the a-s-s ! 
Only four of them held up their hands . 
Paulson then called , according to my sources , Senator Lindsey Graham , who is very close to John McCain , and told him : you ve got to get the people in the McCain campaign , you ve got to convince John McCain to give these Republicans some political cover . 
If you don t do that , this whole bailout plan is going to fail . 
So that s how , McCain , apparently , became involved . 
He has gotten what he wants , he s going to have this meeting , kind of a summit today with the president and Barack Obama . 
I m told that the leaders of both parties are getting close to having some kind of a bill . 
The question , though , is whether rank-and-file Republicans , especially , are going to vote for this . 
who ever posted that is absolutely insane . 
brainwashed , mindless , bible thumping fools . 
did you also know that the new testament was written DECADES after the death of Jesus ? 
and it was written not in Aramaic , but in Greek ? 
gosh , i bet there was NOTHING lost to interpretation and translation in any of those words ! 
maybe you should hire Palin 's witchdoctor to run him out of the country ? 
this is why , after being raised catholic , i refuse to go to church . 
Think of the prayers which begin `` boruch atah Adonoy ' -LRB- pardon my bad transliteration -RRB- which in English translate to `` blessed art thou oh lord our G-d . '' 
Easy : the Old Trickster at Work ! 
Obama is reacting the correct way and McCain is about to outsmart himself and fool no one . 
We 've had enough of his three-ring-circus ! 
| September 25 , 2008 10:36 AM | Report abuse `` Behind the decision '' ? 
Did he - ask - anyone or just be a slacker and limit his efforts to reading a press release ? 
There they go again -- framing BO in the best possible light and McCain in the worst . 
I wish the press would get more tired of doing it than I am of watching it . 
In the end the author ultimately makes it clear that all he 's really thinking about is his precious-precious debate . 
He cancels on Letterman , but on the same night , tapes an interview with a national network news anchor . 
Is he returning donations that come in on the net and in the mail ... I doubt it . 
Are his ads still running ... yep . 
IOW this is yet another desperate campaign scheme to stall Obama 's momentum ... and a clear indicator of what type of government McCain would run . 
And neither candidate serves on the Senate Finance Committee ... so what exactly is the pressing urgency of returning to DC and canceling the debate ? 
Did n't McCain tells us just last week that the fundamentals of the economy were strong and he was going to appoint a `` 9-11 style '' commission to `` study '' the problem ? 
My what a difference a week and a few polls makes . 
No knucklehead would take a lead in the polls and throw it away . 
Only a loser looking for something , anything to change the game would do something that stupid . 
Why not just go straight to DC ? 
Holding a press conference to say you are putting politics aside is putting politics into the equation . 
Just what is McCain going to be doing over the next few days in DC ? 
A late planned photo op with the President ? 
Now he wants the presidential debate moved to the VP slot next week and the VP debate scheduled for a later date . 
That explains his motive . 
Country first - sure . 
I ca n't believe this combination has a chance to become president . 
Racism in America sucks . 
Has he now decided not to suspend his Campaign ? 
9\/25\/08 Pennsylvania Posted by : DD | September 25 , 2008 9:35 AM | Report abuse It 's a shame this had to happen during then election cycle . 
I am an independent and appreciate that Senator McCain feels that it is necessary to go to Washington to do his job . 
He is after all the sennator from his state . 
Yes it appears on the face that it could be politically motivated . 
And I do not believe we should bail out these companies , but it is a very important piece of legislation and a bipartisan approach is needed . 
Bip -LRB- artisanship is not something I believe Obama is capable of . 
I can also see Obama 's desire to try and take political advantage of the current situation -LRB- polls , republican watch when this happened , etc. . . -RRB- 
but that just reinforces the public opinion that it is all about Obama himself and\/or the Democrats and not the best ibnterest of our country . 
I hope they save the morgagees by having the govt . 
take on their loans , but I 'd be just as happy to tell Wallstreet , that after having protected the taxpayer that they tell the businesses that they are on their own . 
Obama is afraid to commit to this vote because he sees the disadvantage to him and democrats . 
It exposes Obama 's incredible speed at which he got money from Fannie Mae . 
Yeah , I know the stupified libs claim it 's from employees , but why would employees in Virginia of a GSE give so much money to an unknown ? 
It was n't the employees ! 
That my friends is part of the FBI investigation ! 
There 's more here than meets the eye and OBummer is worried ! 
Maybe Sarah sold the campaign plane on Ebay ? 
This would be the perfect anti-mperialist demonstration . 
It does not take long to re-correct a new market elsewhere and the austral-asian market has already absorbed much of this shock and is still in a pretty strong position ... I would seriously think twice . 
If McCain does n't care enough about the University of Mississippi , Jim Lehrer , all the networks and thousands of media people all engaged in preparation for this debate , to spend 90 MINUTES in a debate , then he is a self-centered JERK . 
This is such a big deal for Ole Miss , giving them a national stage to show how far they have come since they admitted their first black student in 1962 . 
FOR SHAME , John McCain . 
The economy has n't collapse all week , it wo n't collapse if you spend 90 minutes in a debate . 
LOL - We need to have this debate because of Ole Miss , Jim Lehrer and the media . 
It costs $ 5 million to put on a 90-minute debate ? 
And we are scratching our heads why this country is in an economic mess ? 
McCain is stupid , that is what it is about . 
the world goes on , and the debate is still on , ok instaed of foreign policy they will debate on economy which is relevant and obama is happy to do it why in heaven sake is not mccain unless he feels he is not fit to discuss it and try to pass the baby to bush - sorry sirree but the debate and life goes on and any candiadte who reffuses to debate in front of me of his future policy is dismal and will not get my vote ... good grief and I thought the republicans were better on economy ... how wrong was I Posted by : saintixe | September 25 , 2008 6:54 AM | Report abuse i like obama but i still think that americans in the south and midwest are too racist to vote for a black man . 
i seriously doubt obama will get elected . 
some might say they support obama , but behind the curtain in the booth , their racism will take over and they will vote mccain . 
and he will be so more Presidential , taking care of the nations business , then swooping in and running circles around Obama . 
But ... one must admit . 
Obama does not set the bar real high ... uhhh ... agh ... . 
uh ... ... duh ... . 
`` You can seek from the Lord , and if you find demonic forces you cast them out . '' 
Maybe Palin can start a new Department of Witchcraft . 
Are we really going back to Salem days ? 
This is the single most pathetic moment in Republican history since Nixon begged Kissinger to pray with him . 
Then allow Obama to speak and any rep from McCain to do same . 
McCain 's people do n't show , too bad . 
The statement means more than George Bush . 
The John McCain campaign is being protected by every major media outlet in america . 
The republican voters are making excuses for John McCain and the media is giving McCain and Palin all the rope they need to succeed and this election . 
Palin maybe the next president of the United States and no one knows what she is about and Palin does not know anything about politics and the way american government is set up to be run . 
The american people are so much against the democrats that these so called republican middle class would rather loose their freedom than gain their independence . 
We will loose all respect that any country has for us if we are stupid enough to elect John McCain as president . 
Palin is hiding information and regards to her investigation and the republicans are still saying she can be trusted to run the country and we do n't know if she can be trusted to run Alaska , and guess what republicans are so selfish that they wo n't ask her to show everyone that she did the right thing in Alaska . 
But than again that explains why america is becoming a second power . 
GREED Posted by : kevin | September 25 , 2008 4:32 AM | Report abuse It 's easy to suspend a campaign when it 's going nowhere . 
This is purely a stunt and illustrates that the McCain campaign is flailing . 
What exactly will he do in DC for the bailout ? 
He 's not on the Finance Committee and will just get in the way . 
And what words of wisdom could McCain proffer since he told us a week ago that the economy was fundamentally sound ... Posted by : RickJ | September 25 , 2008 4:20 AM | Report abuse `` This economic crisis , they believe , provides McCain a chance to show the sort of leadership that voters value in the Arizona senator . '' 
The ones who make decisions based on some tired scipt , which the media never fails to repeat , or the ones who are actually familiar with McCains execrable voting record ? 
The exact time of the debates . 
I watched some news video of McCain today and noticed that it looks like there is a problem with his left eye and the left side of his face -LRB- maybe a mini-stroke ? -RRB- . 
I checked out some video of him from a week or so ago and it looks normal then . 
Are he and his camp possibly trying to hide some health problem that he is having ? 
If this is true , then this election is just getting scarier and scarier ! 
Especially after the footage I just saw about Sarah Palin and the pastor from her church on Countdown with Keith Olbermann - apparently the guy is a witch hunter ? 
Also , this church supposedly believes that homosexuality can be cured through prayer . 
Are we all getting bamboozled by some demonic woman with some sort of extreme agenda who is just chomping at the bit to take over as prez if McCain 's health fails ? 
Do the words `` religious cult '' and `` Jim Jones '' ring a bell to anyone ? 
It is truly frightening Posted by : christine | September 25 , 2008 2:48 AM | Report abuse `` I find it really incomprehensible that Americans still do not have a clue on what Mccain represents '' - Mobi All the more reason he should show up to the debates on Friday . 
His stance changes daily , so I would like for him to commit to something -LRB- for more than just a day would be nice -RRB- . 
He is not the McCain of 2000 . 
He is not even the McCain of March 2008 . 
No one can claim to know what he represents when all he does is pander . 
I judge him by his record and his campaign `` strategies '' , and I do not agree with his decisions . 
well ... Good for the other world powers ... Posted by : Mobi | September 25 , 2008 2:09 AM | Report abuse NO ! 
Keep Senator McCain out of the debate over the economy ! 
He has screwed up enough and has admitted he does n't know enough about it . 
Why does he think he is needed ? 
Or to make sure his friends in banking get free taxpayer money ? 
Conflict of interest and lack of knowledge is not what we need . 
Learn to multi-task , McCain . 
The world does not stop when there is one crisis and a President must be able to juggle all obligations . 
If you ca n't handle that , then step aside because you are not qualified . 
Obama is n't even a real American , a middle name of our country 's enemy , and has no backbone . 
You say something positive about that ? 
I was proud to be an American until I read your blogs above . 
Do you not care about America ? 
Do you not own anything valuable in America ? 
Have you any education ? 
God Help us all if any of you get in a position of importance . 
`` Yesterday , Harry Reid said that consensus could n't be achieved without John McCain 's leadership '' . 
Sen. McCain stepped up and is providing that leadership today and now Sen. Reid does not want the help he just asked for yeterday . 
He could of went to Washington the day of the crisis . 
He could have been working on solving the economic crisis all this week , instead he wait 1 day before the presidential debates to cancel . 
Your ignorance can not save you . 
McCain Country fried chicken first . 
Okay , so where was he when congressional\/senate leaders with Paulson and Bernanke began negotiating terms of the bailout plan over the last 6 days ? 
I 'll give him a D for the effort , but come on ... JMac is running from his and palins poll numbers , the rick davis-fanni mac story , resurrection of keating 5 , and the uncomfortable issue of the economy dominating the news cycle . 
It is apparent to me that he is clearly trying to drive his narrative in the press towards his favor ... it 's a bunch of bull if you ask me . 
He 's over reacting at every turn . 
It does n't matter if you are a democrat or a republican , we need to solve the crisis first ! 
If McCain does n't care enough about the University of Mississippi , Jim Lehrer , all the networks and thousands of media people all engaged in preparation for this debate , to spend 90 MINUTES in a debate , then he is a self-centered JERK . 
This is such a big deal for Ole Miss , giving them a national stage to show how far they have come since they admitted their first black student in 1962 . 
FOR SHAME , John McCain . 
The economy has n't collapse all week , it wo n't collapse if you spend 90 minutes in a debate . 
This is war , he murmured to his aides . 
The sound of scrambling fighter planes rattled the windows , sending a tremor of panic through the room . 
Erik Jacobs for The New York Times John McCain said he had consulted Henry A. Kissinger on foreign policy before and after the Sept. 11 attacks . 
Within hours , Mr. McCain , the Vietnam War hero and famed straight talker of the 2000 Republican primary , had taken on a new role : the leading advocate of taking the American retaliation against Al Qaeda far beyond Afghanistan . 
In a marathon of television and radio appearances , Mr. McCain recited a short list of other countries said to support terrorism , invariably including Iraq , Iran and Syria . 
There is a system out there or network , and that network is going to have to be attacked , Mr. McCain said the next morning on ABC News . 
It isn t just Afghanistan , he added , on MSNBC . 
I don t think if you got bin Laden tomorrow that the threat has disappeared , he said on CBS , pointing toward other countries in the Middle East . 
Within a month he made clear his priority . 
Very obviously Iraq is the first country , he declared on CNN . 
By Jan. 2 , Mr. McCain was on the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt in the Arabian Sea , yelling to a crowd of sailors and airmen : Next up , Baghdad ! 
Now , as Mr. McCain prepares to accept the Republican presidential nomination , his response to the attacks of Sept. 11 opens a window onto how he might approach the gravest responsibilities of a potential commander in chief . 
Like many , he immediately recalibrated his assessment of the unseen risks to America s security . 
But he also began to suggest that he saw a new opportunity to deter other potential foes by punishing not only Al Qaeda but also Iraq . 
Just as Sept. 11 revolutionized our resolve to defeat our enemies , so has it brought into focus the opportunities we now have to secure and expand our freedom , Mr. McCain told a NATO conference in Munich in early 2002 , urging the Europeans to join what he portrayed as an all but certain assault on Saddam Hussein . 
A better world is already emerging from the rubble . 
To his admirers , Mr. McCain s tough response to Sept. 11 is at the heart of his appeal . 
They argue that he displayed the same decisiveness again last week in his swift calls to penalize Russia for its incursion into Georgia , in part by sending peacekeepers to police its border . 
His critics charge that the emotion of Sept. 11 overwhelmed his former cool-eyed caution about deploying American troops without a clear national interest and a well-defined exit , turning him into a tool of the Bush administration in its push for a war to transform the region . 
He has the personality of a fighter pilot : when somebody stings you , you want to strike out , said retired Gen. John H. Johns , a former friend and supporter of Mr. McCain who turned against him over the Iraq war . 
Just like the American people , his reaction was : show me somebody to hit . 
Whether through ideology or instinct , though , Mr. McCain began making his case for invading Iraq to the public more than six months before the White House began to do the same . 
He drew on principles he learned growing up in a military family and on conclusions he formed as a prisoner in North Vietnam . 
He also returned to a conviction about the common identity of dangerous autocracies as far-flung as Serbia and North Korea that he had developed consulting with hawkish foreign policy thinkers to help sharpen the themes of his 2000 presidential campaign . 
While pushing to take on Saddam Hussein , Mr. McCain also made arguments and statements that he may no longer wish to recall . 
He lauded the war planners he would later criticize , including Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and Vice President Dick Cheney . 
-LRB- Mr. McCain even volunteered that he would have given the same job to Mr. Cheney . -RRB- 
He urged support for the later-discredited Iraqi exile Ahmad Chalabi s opposition group , the Iraqi National Congress , and echoed some of its suspect accusations in the national media . 
And he advanced misleading assertions not only about Mr. Hussein s supposed weapons programs but also about his possible ties to international terrorists , Al Qaeda and the Sept. 11 attacks . 
Five years after the invasion of Iraq , Mr. McCain s supporters note that he became an early critic of the administration s execution of the occupation , and they credit him with pushing the troop surge that helped bring stability . 
Mr. McCain , though , stands by his support for the war and expresses no regrets about his advocacy . 
In written answers to questions , he blamed Iraq s opacity under Saddam for any misleading remarks he made about the peril it posed . 
The Sept. 11 attacks demonstrated the grave threat posed by a hostile regime , possessing weapons of mass destruction , and with reported ties to terrorists , Mr. McCain wrote in an e-mail message on Friday . 
Given Mr. Hussein s history of pursuing illegal weapons and his avowed hostility to the United States , his regime posed a threat we had to take seriously . 
The attacks were still a reminder , Mr. McCain added , of the importance of international action to prevent outlaw states like Iran today from developing weapons of mass destruction . 
Mr. McCain has been debating questions about the use of military force far longer than most . 
He grew up in a family that had sent a son to every American war since 1776 , and international relations were a staple of the McCain family dinner table . 
Mr. McCain grew up listening to his father , Adm. John S. McCain Jr. , deliver lectures on The Four Ocean Navy and the Soviet Threat , closing with a slide of an image he considered the ultimate factor in the balance of power : a soldier marching through a rice paddy with a rifle at his shoulder . 
To quote Sherman , war is all hell and we need to fight it out and get it over with and that is when the killing stops , recalled Joe McCain , Senator McCain s younger brother . 
Vietnam , for Senator McCain , reinforced those lessons . 
He has often said he blamed the Johnson administration s pause in bombing for prolonging the war , and he credited President Richard M. Nixon s renewed attacks with securing his release from a North Vietnamese prison . 
He has made the principle that the exercise of military power sets the bargaining table for international relations a consistent theme of his career ever since , and in his 2002 memoir he wrote that one of his lifelong convictions was the imperative that American power never retreat in response to an inferior adversary s provocation . 
But Mr. McCain also took away from Vietnam a second , restraining lesson : the necessity for broad domestic support for any military action . 
For years he opposed a string of interventions in Lebanon , Haiti , Somalia , and , for a time , the Balkans on the grounds that the public would balk at the loss of life without clear national interests . 
The Vietnam thing , he recently said . 
In the late 1990s , however , while he was beginning to consider his 2000 presidential race , he started rebalancing his view of the needs to project American strength and to sustain public support . 
The 1995 massacre of 5,000 unarmed Bosnian Muslims at Srebrenica under NATO s watch struck at his conscience , he has said , and in addition to America s strategic national interests in that case , the future and credibility of NATO Mr. McCain began to speak more expansively about America s moral obligations as the only remaining superpower . 
His aides say he later described the American air strikes in Bosnia in 1996 and in Kosovo in 1999 as a parable of political leadership : Mr. McCain , Senator Bob Dole and others had rallied Congressional support for the strikes despite widespread public opposition , then watched approval soar after the intervention helped to bring peace . 
Americans elect their leaders to make these kinds of judgments , Mr. McCain said in the e-mail message . 
It was during the Balkan wars that Mr. McCain and his advisers read a 1997 article on the Wall Street Journal editorial page by William Kristol and David Brooks of The Weekly Standard both now Op-Ed page columnists at The New York Times promoting the idea of national greatness conservatism , defined by a more activist agenda at home and a more muscular role in the world . 
I wouldn t call it a eureka moment , but there was a sense that this is where we are headed and this is what we are trying to articulate and they have already done a lot of the work , said John Weaver , a former McCain political adviser . 
And , quite frankly , from a crass political point of view , we were in the making-friends business . 
The Weekly Standard represented a part of the primary electorate that we could get . 
Soon Mr. McCain and his aides were consulting regularly with the circle of hawkish foreign policy thinkers sometimes referred to as neoconservatives including Mr. Kristol , Robert Kagan and Randy Scheunemann , a former aide to Mr. Dole who became a McCain campaign adviser to develop the senator s foreign policy ideas and instincts into the broad themes of a presidential campaign . 
-LRB- In his e-mail message , Mr. McCain noted that he had also consulted with friends like Henry A. Kissinger , known for a narrower view of American interests . -RRB- 
One result was a series of speeches in which Mr. McCain called for rogue state rollback . 
He argued that disparate regional troublemakers , including Iraq , North Korea and Serbia , bore a common stamp : they were all autocracies . 
And as such , he contended , they were more likely to export terrorism , spread dangerous weapons , or start ethnic conflicts . 
In an early outline of what would become his initial response to the Sept. 11 attacks , Mr. McCain argued that swift and sure retribution against any one of the rogue states was an essential deterrent to any of the others . 
But Mr. McCain s advisers and aides say his rogue state speeches stopped short of the most sweeping international agenda put forth by Mr. Kristol , Mr. Kagan and their allies . 
Mr. McCain explicitly disavowed direct military action merely to advance American values , foreswearing any global crusade of interventions in favor of relying on covert and financial support for internal opposition groups . 
As an example , he could point to his 1998 sponsorship of the Iraqi Liberation Act , which sought to direct nearly $ 100 million to Iraqis who hoped to overthrow Saddam Hussein . 
The bill , signed by President Bill Clinton , also endorsed the ouster of Mr. Hussein . 
Mr. McCain said then that he doubted the United States could muster the political will to use ground troops to remove the Iraqi dictator any time soon . 
It was much easier when Saddam Hussein was occupying Kuwait and threatening Saudi Arabia , the senator told Fox News in November 1998 . 
We d have to convince the American people that it s worth again the sacrifice of American lives , because that would also be part of the price . 
Mr. McCain spent the afternoon of Sept. 11 in a young aide s studio apartment near the Capitol . 
There was no cable television , nothing but water in the kitchen , and the hallway reminded him of an old boxing gym . 
Evacuated from his office but stranded by traffic , he could not resist imagining himself at the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue . 
There are not enough Secret Service agents in the world to keep me away from Washington and New York at a time like this , Mr. McCain told an adviser . 
Over the next days and weeks , however , Mr. McCain became almost as visible as he would have been as president . 
Broadcasters rushed to him as a patriotic icon and reassuring voice , and for weeks he was ubiquitous on the morning news programs , Sunday talk shows , cable news networks , and even late-night comedy shows . 
In the spotlight , he pushed rogue state rollback one step further , arguing that the United States should go on the offensive as a warning to any other country that might condone such an attack . 
These networks are well-embedded in some of these countries , Mr. McCain said on Sept. 12 , listing Iraq , Iran and Syria as potential targets of United States pressure . 
We re going to have to prove to them that we are very serious , and the price that they will pay will not only be for punishment but also deterrence . 
Although he had campaigned for President Bush during the 2000 general election , he was still largely frozen out of the White House because of animosities left over from the Republican primary . 
But after Mr. Bush declared he would hold responsible any country condoning terrorism , Mr. McCain called his leadership magnificent and his national security team the strongest that has ever been assembled . 
A few weeks later , Larry King of CNN asked whether he would have named Mr. Rumsfeld and Colin L. Powell to a McCain cabinet . 
Oh , yes , and Cheney , Mr. McCain answered , saying he , too , would have offered Mr. Cheney the vice presidency . 
Even during the heat of the war in Afghanistan , Mr. McCain kept an eye on Iraq . 
To Jay Leno in mid-September , Mr. McCain said he believed some other countries had assisted Osama bin Laden , going on to suggest Iraq , Syria and Iran as potential suspects . 
In October 2001 , when an Op-Ed page column in The New York Times speculated that Iraq , Russia or some other country might bear responsibility for that month s anthrax mailings , Mr. McCain interrupted a question about Afghanistan from David Letterman on that night s Late Show . 
The second phase is Iraq , Mr. McCain said , adding , Some of this anthrax may and I emphasize may have come from Iraq . 
-LRB- The Federal Bureau of Investigation says it came from a federal government laboratory in Maryland . -RRB- 
By October , United States and foreign intelligence agencies had said publicly that they doubted any cooperation between Mr. Hussein and Al Qaeda , noting Al Qaeda s opposition to such secular nationalists . 
American intelligence officials soon declared that Mr. Hussein had not supported international terrorism for nearly a decade . 
But when the Czech government said that before the attacks , one of the 9\/11 hijackers had met in Prague with an Iraqi intelligence official , Mr. McCain seized the report as something close to a smoking gun . 
The evidence is very clear , he said three days later , in an Oct. 29 television interview . 
-LRB- Intelligence agencies quickly cast doubt on the meeting . -RRB- 
Frustrated by the dearth of American intelligence about Iraq , Mr. McCain s aides say , he had long sought to learn as much as he could from Iraqi opposition figures in exile , including Mr. Chalabi of the Iraqi National Congress . 
Over the years , Mr. McCain often urged support for the group , saying it had significant support , in my view , inside Iraq . 
After Sept. 11 , Mr. Chalabi s group said an Iraqi emissary had once met with Osama bin Laden , and brought forward two Iraqi defectors who described terrorist training camps and biological weapons efforts . 
At times , Mr. McCain seemed to echo their accusations , citing the two defectors in a television interview and attesting to credible reports of involvement between Iraqi administration officials , Iraqi officials and the terrorists . 
But United States intelligence officials had doubts about Mr. Chalabi at the time and have since discredited his group . 
In 2006 , Mr. McCain acknowledged to The New Republic that he had been too enamored with the I.N.C. . 
In his e-mail message , though , he said he never relied on the group for information about Iraq s weapons program . 
At a European security conference in February 2002 , when the Bush administration still publicly maintained that it had made no decision about moving against Iraq , Mr. McCain described an invasion as all but certain . 
A terrorist resides in Baghdad , he said , adding , A day of reckoning is approaching . 
Regime change in Iraq in addition to Afghanistan , he argued , would compel other sponsors of terrorism to mend their ways , accomplishing by example what we would otherwise have to pursue through force of arms . 
Finally , as American troops massed in the Persian Gulf in early 2003 , Mr. McCain grew impatient , his aides say , concerned that the White House was failing to act as the hot desert summer neared . 
Waiting , he warned in a speech in Washington , risked squandering the public and international support aroused by Sept. 11 . 
Does anyone really believe that the world s will to contain Saddam won t eventually collapse as utterly as it did in the 1990s ? 
In retrospect , some of Mr. McCain s critics now accuse him of looking for a pretext to justify the war . 
McCain was hell-bent for leather : Saddam Hussein is a bad guy , we have got to teach him , let s send a message to the other people in the Middle East , said Senator John Kerry , Democrat of Massachusetts . 
But Mr. McCain , in his e-mail message , said the reason he had supported the war was the evolving threat from Mr. Hussein . 
I believe voters elect their leaders based on their experience and judgment their ability to make hard calls , for instance , on matters of war and peace , he wrote . 
It s important to get them right . 
MCCAIN HAS NOT PRACTICED AND SPENDS LONG PERIODS OF TIME SLEEPING LATELY . 
It ended , `` I 'm John McCain and I approve this message . '' 
I watched it myself . 
Webwatch at 8:33 , to McCain ... '' ... fire your team of Karl Rove wannabe 's and stop this circus . 
If you say `` Country First '' mean it . '' 
The debate will go on Friday with or without you . 
He then tied his Coming to the appearance of Barack or Lightning aka SATAN ! 
Many political pundits describe the charisma of Barack Obama as Messianic ! 
Perhaps they should read their Bibles closer and see it is really SATANIC Posted by : Anonymous | September 25 , 2008 12:52 AM | Report abuse After the Swift Boaters took on Kerry and Saxby slandered Chambliss , the shock value of `` attacking a vet '' is long gone . 
And it 's not as if Obama is attacking McCain 's veteran status -- just his technology literacy , which seems relevant in the 21st century . 
The Biden comment just reinforces Obama is willing to suffer dissent within his White House , something the current resident famously does not tolerate . 
Therefore the republicans continue insulting the intelligence of the people in USA . 
Same old tactic of the fear . 
Bush goes to media give a speech , focused in the fear , with face that sucked sour lemon : `` Our economy is dangerous '' . 
Then laster McCain give his show to media as a great leader worried with the future of the nation , calling all the parties to solution crisis . 
But week ago he said `` our economy is strong '' . 
And thus focusing in the fear they deceive same stupids and idiots in USA that elected Bush by second time . 
The debate not brings any damages for the job in Washington , because all know that nobody will work 9 p.m. of the Friday to approve the Bush bailout package . 
It sound clearly as more one tactic to stop the growing of Obama in the polls and bring the focus to McCain , putting Obama as a lain of the history . 
They want with it to pass the following ideas : Obama is n't so worried with the economy ; And McCain is the leader to solution the problem . 
I do n't know how the Americans accept this circus during so many time . 
Or really do they like of circus and clown politicians ? 
HUGS FROM BRAZIL FOR ALL CONSCIOUS CITIZENS IN USA !!! Posted by : Dalmo | September 25 , 2008 12:30 AM | Report abuse So Mccain says `` the bailout needs to be studied it needs more attention ! '' 
Hey John , to bad you didnt take any quality time to study the Iraq War a little more ! 
Word has it `` you were one of the first in line '' to sign the articles for War ! 
Leadership we can believe in baloney ! 
`` Real change we can believe in , '' Posted by : rube | September 25 , 2008 12:08 AM | Report abuse McCoward running away from the first debate . 
He is such a coward that he wo n't allow Sarah Palin to talk freely what 's in her mind . 
He expects her to sayonly the words that are put in front of her through a teleprompter . 
The only discussion that happened between Sarah Palin and Hamid Karzai was comparing notes on each others babies . 
What 's the point in suspending a campaign . 
And what 's the point in suspending ads ? 
Does he physically have to be present at the TV stations when they air the ads ? 
Anyway all he says is `` I am John McCain . 
I approve this message . '' 
The rest of the ads are written by professional marketing firms to whom McCain pays millions -LRB- tax payer money f course -RRB- . 
I would rather see this McChicken work at McDonalds than in the white house . 
Did Bush and McCain have this all set up before today ? 
Bush says this is the worst economic crisis of all time . 
The end of the world is coming . 
THIS IS HIS PRESIDENCY ! 
No statement of hope , just more fear mongering . 
We must attack Iraq , if not the free world will end and we will lose the war on terror ! 
Did you see him tonight . 
He was scared to death . 
And , him calling in Obama for a meeting . 
Neither McCain or Obama is on the committees working on the bill . 
And , the major hold-up is coming FROM THE REPUBLICANS ! 
But , Bush needed to help out McCain Because McCain already said he was coming and Bush want to try to make Obama look bad . 
With the economy in the shape it is in , Bush\/McCain have politicize this to the hilt . 
The debate is supposed to be on foreign policy . 
Did the war on Terror end ? 
N. Korea just announced it was restarting its nuclear reactor . 
It is reported that Iran is a year away from a nuclear weapon . 
18 Americans have died so far in Iraq this month and there are over 200 terrorist attacks in Iraq a month . 
Russia is still in Georgia . 
The war in Afghanistan is being lost and Secretary Gates says we ca n't get any U.S. troops there until April because we are all tied up in Iraq . 
There are real , serious , and immediate foreign policy issues that need to be address . 
McCain 's desire to postpone the debate -LRB- and , by the way , Palin 's debate too - big surprise -RRB- is shameful . 
We had presidential debates during the Iranian hostage crisis . 
We had them right after the Cole bombing . 
They have never been postponed . 
McCain is a coward and desperate . 
Just the termperment we need in the White House . 
Read George Will 's column yesterday where he said McCain is too erratic and dangerous to be President . 
Yes , George Will ! 
He calls off the presidential debate as to offer his `` day late & a dollar short '' oversight for the bailout of said institutions that have crashed due to lack of political oversight and regulation created by hacks like himself ! 
Does anyone see the sick irony here ? 
Shakespeare couldn t write this stuff ! 
Mccain are you strong enough , are you mentally fit and is your health capable to endure the demands of the job ? 
Your McCain\/Palin ticket is quickly becoming the laughing stock in American politics . 
McCain wanting to suspend the first debate is nothing more then saying he is not ready and Palin is not ready for prime time . 
Listen there really is n't a soft way to put this ; Palin on the Katy Couric interview just verified the fact that she takes stupid to a whole new level . 
This ticket is just way to Risky and not ready to lead -LRB- Period -RRB- . 
In Luke 10:18 Jesus I beheld Satan as Lightning fall from Heaven . 
How does a Jewish Rabbi , which Jesus is credited with being -LRB- John 1:38 -RRB- , say in HEBREW , that Satan is like LIGHTNING from heaven ? 
Barack , also transliterated as Baraq in Hebrew , is LIGHTNING -LRB- Strongs Hebrew word 1300 -RRB- . 
Even in Greek , Barak is LIGHTNING -LRB- Strongs Greek word 913 -RRB- for the name of a person ! 
The ONLY WAY , a Jewish Rabbi can say in Hebrew that SATAN is LIGHTNING is , SATAN BARACK ! 
We should not hand over a blank check to the discretion of one man . 
We support an independent , bipartisan board to ensure accountability and complete transparency . 
Second , we need to protect taxpayers . 
There should be a path for taxpayers to recover their money , and to turn a profit if Wall Street prospers . 
Third , no Wall Street executive should profit from taxpayer dollars . 
This plan can not be a welfare program for CEOs whose greed and irresponsibility has contributed to this crisis . 
Fourth , we must help families who are struggling to stay in their homes . 
We can not bail out Wall Street without helping millions of families facing foreclosure on Main Street . 
Fifth , we both agree that this financial rescue package should move on its own without any earmarks or other measures . 
We have different views about the need for other action , but this must be a clean bill . 
This is a time to rise above politics for the good of the country . 
We can not risk an economic catastrophe . 
This is not a Democratic problem or a Republican problem - this is an American problem . 
Now , we must find an American solutions . 
He obviously supports multi-million dollar golden parachutes for failure heads of corporations , and he 's been in bed with lobbyists in the past , so he 's very much pro-big-business and could care less about the average American . 
$ 5 Million as a cutoff for the rich ? 
This guy is seriously out of touch . 
Just another politician in it for the power and money . 
`` Poll '' more African Americans who are voting 95 % for Obama , higher than the relative percentage of African Americans of the total US Population . 
That 's a campaign commercial for their candidate . 
Does the Post have an ounce of Morality or Ethics present , ... anywhere ... from anyone who ` works ' there ... anyone ... . . 
The post is an all Lib Club where you have to check your brains at the door . 
their polls are always way off and everbody knows it . 
They do n't have any reporters over there . 
you can not take any poll from the post with any seriousness . 
`` Poll '' more African Americans who are voting 95 % for Obama , higher than the relative percentage of African Americans of the total US Population . '' 
Hey , moron , learn to read . 
More blacks are polled so that they can still do a statistically significant breakout . 
The oversample is not included in the general populace numbers , only when the split says `` AMONG AFRICAN AMERICANS '' Posted by : Section 506 -LRB- Before moving -RRB- | September 24 , 2008 11:00 PM | Report abuse What a joke of a paper this Washington Post outfit is ; Conduct a `` Poll '' , contact 18 % more Democrats than Republicans . 
`` Poll '' more African Americans who are voting 95 % for Obama , higher than the relative percentage of African Americans of the total US Population . 
That 's a campaign commercial for their candidate . 
Does the Post have an ounce of Morality or Ethics present , ... anywhere ... from anyone who ` works ' there ... anyone ... . . 
McCain 's hope is that showing a command of international issues at this Friday 's `` international issues '' debate will give him a boost . 
BUT he knows that wo n't happen if the economic issue is still out there . 
If that is the situation , the debate on `` international issues '' will be diluted by economic issues , which will further hurt McCain . 
By getting a deal in place before the debate , McCain hopes to take the bailout off the table . 
So , at the end of the day , this is n't about country first for Sen. McCain -- its about campaign first . 
Say hi to the loser 's circle , Sen. McCain . 
Oh , why did n't we choose Kay Bailey Hutchinson . 
She also a right wing nut , but at least she 's informed . 
Just like what the Bushies did to Kerry . 
Different sets of followers , different ideologies , same kind of people . 
But is he a war hero in the conventional sense like Audie Murphy and John Glenn ? 
Or is his `` war hero '' status the creation of a very slick publicity campaign that plays on flag , duty , honor and country ? 
For sure , McCain has the fruitsalad a Silver Star , a Legion of Merit for Valor , a Distinguished Flying Cross , three Bronze Stars , two Commendation medals plus two Purple Hearts and a dozen service gongs . 
On a purely medal count basis , he outweighs Murphy and Glenn , who both for years repeatedly performed extraordinary deeds on the ground or in the air against an armed enemy . 
McCain 's valor awards are based on what happened in 1967 , when during his 23d mission over Vietnam , he was shot down , seriously injured , captured and then spent 51\/2 brutal years as a POW . 
In an attempt to find out exactly what the man did to earn these many hero awards , I asked his Senate office three times to provide copies of the narratives for each medal . 
I 'm still waiting . 
I next went to the Pentagon . 
Within a week , I received a recap of his medals and many of the narratives that give the details of what he did . 
None of the awards , less the DFC , were for heroism over the battlefield where he spent no more than 20 hours . 
Two Naval officers described the awards as `` boilerplate '' and `` part of an SOP medal package given to repatriated -LRB- Vietnamera -RRB- POWs . '' 
McCain 's Silver Star narrative for the period 27 October 1967 the day after he was shot down to 8 December 1968 reads : `` His captors subjected him to extreme mental and physical cruelties in an attempt to obtain military information and false confessions for propaganda purposes . 
Through his resistance to those brutalities , he contributed significantly towards the eventual abandonment '' of such harsh treatment by the North Vietnamese . 
Yet in McCain 's own words just four days after being captured , he admits he violated the U.S. Code of Conduct by telling his captors `` O. K , I 'll give you military information if you will take me to the hospital . '' 
A Vietnam vet detractor says , `` He received the nation 's third highest award , the Silver Star , for treason . 
He provided aid and comfort to the enemy ! '' 
The rest of his valor awards issued automatically every year while he was a POW read much like the Silver Star . 
More boilerplate often repeating the exact same words . 
An example : `` By his heroic endeavors , exceptional skill , and devotion to duty , he reflected great credit upon himself and upheld the highest traditions of the Naval Service and the United States Armed Forces . '' 
Yet McCain 's conduct while a POW negates these glowing comments . 
The facts are that he signed a confession and declared himself a `` black criminal who performed deeds of an air pirate . '' 
This statement and other interviews he gave to the Communist press press were used as propaganda to fan the flames of the antiwar movement . 
Accounts by McCain and other writers tell of the horror he endured : relentlessly beatings , torture , broken limbs . 
All inflicted during savage interrogations . 
Yet no other POW was a witness to these accounts . 
A former POW says `` No man witnessed another man during interrogations We relied on each other to tell the truth when a man was returned to his cell . '' 
The U.S. Navy says two eyewitnesses are required for any award of heroism . 
But for the valor awards McCain received , there are no eyewitnesses , less himself and his captors . 
And they 're not talking . 
Our POWs in Vietnam were treated appallingly . 
The Viets would either break a POW or kill him . 
POWs provided info beyond name , rank and serial number or they did n't come back . 
Based on these stalwart men 's horrific experiences , the Code of Conduct has been changed . 
A POW says , `` Now the training is to give them something do n't risk permanent damage to health , mind or body . '' 
McCain refused an early release . 
An act of valor ? 
Three former POWs told me he was ordered to turn it down by his U.S. POW commander and he `` just followed orders . '' 
McCain certainly does n't appear to be a war hero by conventional standards , but rather a tough survivor whose handlers are overplaying the war hero card . 
David H. Hackworth died in June 2005 , he was a much-decorated and highly unconventional former career Army officer who became a combat legend in Vietnam . 
Col. Hackworth received 78 combat awards including a Distinguished Service Cross , a Silver Star , a Bronze Star and eight Purple Hearts during his 25-year military career which spanned the Korean and Vietnam wars . . 
Just like what the Bushies did to Kerry . 
Different sets of followers , different ideologies , same kind of people . 
tell them the country needs you and you must react , paint your opponent as uncaring and insensative to the needs of every day people . 
Come America if McCain ca n't figure out how to have a debate and make decisions impacting the nation ! 
do you really want him to be POTUS !!! He has already stated the economy is not his thing ! 
what good will he be in this debate . 
He has never even said what that `` change '' might be . 
I bet 100 % that the change will be for the `` worse '' . 
Two years ago hardly anyone knew who he was . 
Now , he is poised to become president . 
He has put together a nationwide campaign organization better than anyone ever has . 
He has raised almost $ 400 million , mostly from small contributions . 
He has brought in advisors from both sides of the aisle . 
He has impressed foreign leaders , and has been cool under fire . 
No one can truly say he does n't have experience . 
John mccain 's been running for president for 9 years and has turned himself into a revolving door joke . 
I salute his five years of captivity , but ask , what the heck has he really done in the 35 years since ? 
Voted against regulations before he was for them . 
BUT , BOTH MCCAIN AND PALIN ARE CREEPS . 
McCain 's ill-thought-out decision to suspend his campaign while he heads to DC only highlights the ineptitude and inexperience of his VP pick . 
If she ca n't take over for a few days , how in the world will she help run the country ? 
Then explain why the navy felt the need to establish the top gun program ? 
According to the US , the results were dramatic as the Navy kill-to-loss ratio or exchange rate against the North Vietnamese Air Force -LRB- NVAF -RRB- MiGs soared from 3.7:1 to 13:1 , while the Air Force , which had not implemented a similar training program , actually had its kill ratio worsen for a time after the resumption of bombing , according to Benjamin Lambeth 's The Transformation of American Airpower - wikepedia Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2 Its already been explained , read the whole comment . 
No VietNam pilot had to endure 8 to 10 hours flying to a target or facing 100 enemy aircraft in the skys at once . 
Vietnam was not an Airwar , what do n't you understand . 
You are simply questioning some kill rate ratios which has nothing to do with actual flying conditions . 
That would come under tactics . 
McCain 's ill-thought-out decision to suspend his campaign while he heads to DC only highlights the ineptitude and inexperience of his VP pick . 
If she ca n't take over for a few days , how in the world will she help run the country ? 
He called mccain this morning and they agreed . 
But mccain came out with his own statement so it could look like he took the initiative . 
Obama stayed in Fla. because he believes mccain was trying a politcal ploy . 
Canceeled Letterman -LRB- can you say `` celebrity '' ? -RRB- 
appearance at last minute because he had to fly to DC , yet was being interviewed by Katie Couric at the same time . 
Also , he 's meeting with Indian minister tomorrow morning . 
So much for rushing back to DC . 
The man is a fraud , trying to make up for all his flip-flops on the economy . 
While it appears that both Obama nd mccain will meet with bush tomorrow , Rep. Frank is correct in saying that neither one has anything to do with the bailout discussion as neither are on the banking committees . 
Obama is looking more presidential because he is the unflappable one , as suggested by conservative Post columnist George Will . 
Mccain is running aroud like the proverbial headless chicken trying to make people , like you , believe he knows what he is doing . 
Both presidential candidates have their private campaign jets and can be from Oxford , Mississippi and Washington in two hours , if needed . 
Since Sarah Palin is only a heart beat away from the presidency if they are elected and must jump in in the case of crisis perhaps she should stand-in and bebate Obama at Ole Miss. . 
He is n't in the majority , he is n't in the executive branch , he is n't in Republican leadership , and he is n't on the relevant committees . 
As far as I know , there is no plan for Congress and the exec branch to meet from 8-9 :30 pm on Friday night to work on the bailout and even if they were , McCain is n't needed there to figure it out . 
I frankly do n't want a man who thought the fundamentals of our economy were sound 8 days ago directing or even giving input on how to fix the very obviously broken economy . 
The man is not ready to lead . 
He is so desperate . 
If he feels his input is so vital to this process then why is he just going to Capitol Hill tomorrow ? 
Why not earlier this week ? 
He is still in NYC and will be attending a Bill Clinton event tomorrow morning in the Big Apple . 
So why the delay , John ? 
Look at the fine job he 's doing . 
`` Buddy , can you spare a dime ... ? '' 
-- an Independent for Obama THE EXPERIENCE MYTH OF OBAMA I have worked with the Obama campaign on a local level since December and have met and spoken with Obama numerous times . 
Anyone who thinks Obama is not prepared for the office of president does not know Barack Obama . 
I do n't think the campaign has spoken about it , although there have been articles written , maybe because it may have seemed kind of presumptive doing all this so many months before he even had the nomination , but that is not how Obama works . 
Little is left to chance . 
So here is what the deal is : Does Obama have the experience to be president , is he ready ? 
It would be hard to say anyone is ready to be president , but what prepares one for the job ? 
Obama has been getting ready when his nomination was still no more then a dream . 
Obama has an advisory staff of over a 300 . 
Most all are the top people in their fields . 
4 of his staff are the top people on middle east politics in the world . 
He has numerous people on pretty much everything you could think of from global warming to world economics to energy and foreign policy to the military . 
Generals to scholars you name it , he has been working with these people for more then a year . 
Obama is a brilliant man , who easily knows more right now then any candidate who ever ran for the office of president . 
He is so up to speed it is astounding . 
John Mccain does not know or grasp a fraction of what Obama does . 
Mccain is in effect , a dinosaur , compared to Obama now . 
Mccain has no real practical experience or understanding in many of these areas at all . 
Just being in Washington for many years does not necessarily make you an expert nor knowledgeable in `` Anything '' . 
Bill Clinton said it best when he said , `` No one is really prepared to be president '' . 
He was right and Obama understood that better then anyone long before he even began his journey for the presidency . 
So for over a year he has been quietly preparing . 
Like anything such as being a doctor or lawyer or any profession , your first introduction is academic , you go to school . 
Obama will by no means be learning on the job , he has been in school for more then a year . 
When enters office , Obama will be the most well prepared and ready president to ever walk into the white house . 
He will also be surrounded by the finest staff ever assembled by any president in history . 
If you do not want to vote for Barack Obama I can respect that , but by no means think he is not ready to be president . 
He will be the most ready man to ever win the office . 
Look at the fine job he 's doing . 
`` Buddy , can you spare a dime ... ? '' 
-- an Independent for Obama Posted by : wolf | September 24 , 2008 9:50 PM | Report abuse Rick Davis threw another `` Flash Bang Grenade '' I told you in previous posts that he would do this . 
Here is the reason for todays grenade . '' 
... The disclosure undercuts a remark by Mr. McCain on Sunday night that the campaign manager , Rick Davis , had had no involvement with the company for the last several years ... '' ... As president of the Homeownership Alliance , Mr. Davis received $ 30,000 to $ 35,000 a month . 
He , along with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , have characterized the alliance as a coalition of many housing industry and consumer groups to promote homeownership , but numerous current and former officials at both companies say the companies created and bankrolled the operation to combat efforts by competitors to rein in their business . 
The companies dissolved the group at the end of 2005 as part of cost-cutting in the wake of accounting scandals and , at Freddie Mac , a lobbying scandal that forced out its top Republican lobbyist ... On Monday , the McCain campaign attacked The Times for its account of those payments to Mr. Davis , saying the paper was 150 percent in the tank for Mr. Obama . 
Mr. Davis said that he had worked not for the two companies but for the advocacy group , which included other organizations as well and , he said , was focused only on promoting homeownership ... . . 
After the Homeownership Alliance was dissolved , Mr. Davis asked to stay on a retainer , the people familiar with the deal said . 
Hollis McLoughlin , who was chief of staff to Richard F. Syron , Freddie Mac s chief executive , arranged for a new contract with Davis Manafort at the reduced rate of $ 15,000 a month , they said ... '' The unintended victim is ... well , remember George F. Will 's comment `` McCain has lost his head '' Posted by : Rick Davis threw another ` FLASH BANG GRENADE '' | September 24 , 2008 9:48 PM | Report abuse `` Where does Obama stand on the $ 700 Billion dollar givaway that the republican morons cooked up last week ? 
Right beside McCain and all the other piggies at the trough . '' 
I see Obama will do what McCain does ! 
The man is not ready to lead . 
Unfortunately , I have not seen one economist say , that this 700 billion dollars will actually FIX the problem . 
They all seem to treat it as a temporary solution to the next crisis . 
Most Americans are already losing their shirts ... and now , we 're expected to bail out the criminals who first stole from us . 
I forgot about the experience a candidate needs . 
It 's true , very true that Obama lacks the proper experience becoming a representative of our proud government : He has had so little time . 
Give him a chance and he may surprise you . 
In time he might be cruising for gay sex in Minneapolis airport restrooms or he may even aspire to turn a blind eye to the shenanigans in the real estate and credit markets like McCain did for so many years . 
He may even get a chance to rack up some sweet pork like McCain did over his illustrious career . 
Just give him a chance to shine . 
Then explain why the navy felt the need to establish the top gun program ? 
According to the US , the results were dramatic as the Navy kill-to-loss ratio or exchange rate against the North Vietnamese Air Force -LRB- NVAF -RRB- MiGs soared from 3.7:1 to 13:1 , while the Air Force , which had not implemented a similar training program , actually had its kill ratio worsen for a time after the resumption of bombing , according to Benjamin Lambeth 's The Transformation of American Airpower - wikepedia Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 9:44 PM | Report abuse `` I was also , where were you deployed ? '' 
1st ,2 nd and 7th Cavalry Division and ASA . 
Korea 9th Div Vietnam If you 're really a vet I wo n't argue with you . 
Too much horror shared . 
Right beside McCain and all the other piggies at the trough . 
If Bush was serious about fixing Wall Street he would have done this years ago when it would have an impact . 
His shameless move now is insincere and too late . 
Now id McCain what to jumb when McCain Pulls his string thats up to him . 
Maybe McCain is running to protect the interests of his millionaire friends and backers -- which is now far more important to them than his presidency or the campaign . 
How about prisoner of his wealth and puppet of his wealthy powerbroker associates -- who show themselves to be no friend of his ? 
Like Bush Senior threw his re-election away by not campaigning til it was too late to stop Clinton , the Republican powers-that-be are throwing this election away . 
Rob the Treasury , make a getaway , and leave a big mess in a deep hole for the Democrats to fix . 
McCain is smart - again he 's putting this country before his own political aspirations . 
He 'd rather lose an election than lose this country 's financial future . 
He loves this country , and Obama only loves himself . 
Obama was flat-footed today when McCain suspended his campaign . 
And now , guess who 's going to Washington with McCain ? 
Going with his tail between his legs . 
I 'm sure he 's fuming because McCain got the better of him today . 
He 's a senator from Illinois , and he should be there representing the people from his state , not himself . 
Just lost the election . 
\*\*\* \*\*\* \*\*\* \*\* \*\*\* \*\*\* \*\*\* \*\*\* \* \*\*\* \*\*\* \*\*\* \*\*\* \*\* \*\*\* \*\*\* \*\*\* \*\* \*\*\* \*\*\* \*\*\* \*\* Activists accused McCain of stonewalling the release of POW records because they contained evidence he had collaborated with the North Vietnamese . 
McCain is the worst . 
I am so glad I decided to support Obama . 
During WW II they retired you after 25 missions for fear of pushing your luck or pushing you over the edge mentally ! 
All of you who scoff at McCain 's POW record try getting blown out of the sky once . 
Vietnam was nowhere near the airwar as ww2 . 
Vietnam pilots were mostly flying close support missions of bombing here and there . 
WW2 pilots sometimes flew 8 to 10 hours just to get to the target , on top of that they had to face sometimes 50 maybe 100 enemy aircraft in the skys at one time . 
So please do n't even make that comparison again , its an insult to the ww2 pilots who really fought for survival . 
Lame Brain McCain spent his time crashing into telephone wires while flying trying to showoff flying low . 
What major legislation has he pushed thru to become law ? 
Where does he stand on the 700 billion giveaway . 
Will he vote yes no or present ? 
McCain is smart - again he 's putting this country before his own political aspirations . 
He 'd rather lose an election than lose this country 's financial future . 
He loves this country , and Obama only loves himself . 
Obama was flat-footed today when McCain suspended his campaign . 
And now , guess who 's going to Washington with McCain ? 
Going with his tail between his legs . 
I 'm sure he 's fuming because McCain got the better of him today . 
He 's a senator from Illinois , and he should be there representing the people from his state , not himself . 
Just lost the election . 
Make that man president . 
He 's got the right stuff for the job . 
Without mentioning Obama and his obvious lack of military experience , please explain to our dear readers how exactly a military background is more valuable preparation for an individual to succeed as the president who can best address ALL the problems we suffer as a nation RIGHT NOW , than perhaps other types of backgrounds and preparations one might bring ? 
His father Admiral John S. Junior McCain was commander of U.S. forces in Europe - later commander of American forces in Vietnam while McCain III was being held prisoner of war . 
His grandfather John S. McCain , Sr. commanded naval aviation at the Battle of Okinawa in 1945 . 
McCain III , like his father and grandfather , also attended the United States Naval Academy . 
McCain III finished near the bottom of his graduating class in 1958 . 
McCain III lost five U.S. Navy aircraft 1 - Student pilot McCain III lost jet number one in 1958 when he plunged into Corpus Christi Bay while practicing landings . 
2 - Pilot McCain III lost another plane two years later while he was deployed in the Mediterranean . 
Flying too low over the Iberian Peninsula , he took out some power lines which led to a spate of newspaper stories in which he was predictably identified as the 3 - Pilot McCain III lost number three in 1965 when he was returning from flying a Navy trainer solo to Philadelphia for an Army-Navy football game . 
McCain III radioed , I ve got a flameout and ejected at one thousand feet . 
The plane crashed to the ground and McCain III floated to a deserted beach . 
4 - Combat pilot McCain III lost his fourth on July 29 , 1967 , soon after he was assigned to the USS Forrestal as an A-4 Skyhawk combat pilot . 
While waiting his turn for takeoff , an accidently fired rocket slammed into McCain Jr s . 
He escaped from the burning aircraft , but the explosions that followed killed 134 sailors , destroyed at least 20 aircraft , and threatened to sink the ship . 
5 - Combat pilot McCain III lost a fifth plane three months later -LRB- Oct. 26 , 1967 -RRB- during his 23rd mission over North Vietnam when he failed to avoid a surface-to-air missile . 
McCain III ejected from the plane breaking both arms and a leg in the process and subsequently parachuted into Truc Bach Lake near Hanoi . 
After being pulled from the lake by the North Vietnamese , McCain III was bayoneted in his left foot and shoulder and struck by a rifle butt . 
He was then transported to the Hoa Lo Prison , also known as the Hanoi Hilton . 
1973 New York Daily News labeled POW McCain III a PW Songbird On McCain III s fourth day of being denied medical treatment , slapped , and threatened with death by the communist -LRB- they were demanding military information in exchange for medical treatment -RRB- , McCain III broke and told his interrogator , O . 
K. , I ll give you military information if you will take me to the hospital . 
U.S. News and World Report , May 14 , 1973 article written by former It was then that the communist learned that McCain III s father was Admiral John S. McCain , the soon-to-be commander of all U.S. Forces in the Pacific . 
The Vietnamese rushed McCain III to Gai Lam military hospital -LRB- U.S. government documents -RRB- , a medical facility normally unavailable By Nov. 9 , 1967 -LRB- U.S. government documents -RRB- Hanoi press was quoting McCain III describing his mission including the number of aircraft in his flight , information about rescue ships , and the order of which U.S. attacks would take place . 
While in still in North Vietnam s military hospital , McCain III gave an interview to prominent French television reporter Francois Chalais for a series titled Life in Hanoi . 
Chalais interview with McCain III was aired in Europe . 
Vietnamese doctors operated on McCain s Leg in early December , 1967 . 
Six weeks after he was shot down , McCain was taken from the hospital and delivered to a In May of 1968 , McCain III allowed himself to be interviewed by two North Vietnamese generals at separate times . 
May 14 , 1973 article written by former POW John McCain In August 1968 , other POWs learned for the first time that John McCain III had been taken On June 5 , 1969 , the New York Daily News reported in a article headlined Reds Say PW Songbird Is Pilot Son of Admiral , ... Hanoi has aired a broadcast in which the pilot son of United States Commander in the Pacific , Adm. John McCain , purportedly admits to having bombed civilian targets in North Vietnam and praises medical treatment he has received since being taken prisoner ... The Washington Post explained McCain III s broadcast : The English - Language broadcast beamed at South Vietnam was one of a series using American prisoners . 
It was in response to a plea by Defense Secretary Melvin S. Laird , May 19 , that North Vietnam treat prisoners according to the humanitarian standards set forth by the Geneva Convention . 
In 1970 , McCain III agreed to an interview with Dr. Fernando Barral , a Spanish psychiatrist who was living in Cuba at the time . 
The meeting between Barral and McCain III -LRB- which was photographed by the Vietnamese -RRB- took place away from the prison at the office of the Committee for Foreign Cultural Relations in Hanoi -LRB- declassified government document -RRB- . 
During the meeting , POW McCain sipped coffee and ate oranges and cakes with the Cuban . 
While talking with Barral , McCain III further seriously violated the military Code of Conduct by failing to evade answering questions to the utmost of his ability when he , according government documents , helped Barral by answering questions in Spanish , a language McCain had learned in school . 
The interview was published in the in January 1970 . 
McCain III was released from North Vietnam March 15 , 1973 In 1993 , during one of his many trips back to Hanoi , McCain asked the Vietnamese not to make public any records they hold pertaining to returned U.S. POWs . 
McCain III claims , that while a POW , he tried to kill himself . 
McCain III was awarded medals for valor equal to nearly a medal-and-a-half for each hour he spent in combat For 23 combat missions -LRB- an estimated 20 hours over enemy territory -RRB- , the U.S. Navy awarded McCain III , the son of famous admirals , a Silver Star , a Legion of Merit for Valor , a Distinguished Flying Cross , three Bronze Stars , two Commendation medals plus two Purple Hearts and a McCain had roughly 20 hours in combat , explains Bill Bell , a veteran of Vietnam and former chief of the U.S. Office for POW\/MIA Affairs -- the first official U.S. representative in Vietnam since the 1973 fall of Saigon . 
Since McCain got 28 medals , Bell continued , that equals to about a medal-and-a-half for each hour he spent in combat . 
There were infantry guys -- grunts on the ground -- who had more than 7,000 hours in combat and I can tell you that there were times and situations where I m sure a prison cell would have looked pretty good to them by comparison . 
The question really is how many guys got that number of medals for not being shot down . 
For years , McCain has been an unchecked master at manipulating an overly friendly and biased news media . 
The former POW turned Congressman , turned U.S. Senator , has managed to gloss over his failures as a pilot and his collaborations with the enemy to become America s Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 9:31 PM | Report abuse McCain blown out of the sky ? 
Make that man president . 
He 's got the right stuff for the job . 
Without mentioning Obama and his obvious lack of military experience , please explain to our dear readers how exactly a military background is more valuable preparation for an individual to succeed as the president who can best address ALL the problems we suffer as a nation RIGHT NOW , than perhaps other types of backgrounds and preparations one might bring ? 
How cool that you can now read minds when reporting on these candidates . 
You have stopped writing like a reporter and are now writing like a novelist with an omniscient perspective . 
Now that Bush himself called and asked Obama to attend a meeting on the crisis at the white house & Obama has accepted will you post a news item that describes how Obama is obviously posturing for attention and leadership points , too ? 
I was in Nam when you draft dodgers cut and ran . 
`` WITCHCRAFT '' WTF ... `` TROOPERGATE '' `` UNWED PREGANCY '' What else is she trying to hide ? 
It just get uglier and uglier ! 
Bring on Rev. Wright ca n't be as bad as this sh \* t ! 
The NATIONAL ENQUIRER S exclusive ongoing investigation of GOP VP Nom Sarah ` Barracuda ' Palin s goes far beyond a mere teen pregnancy crisis this week ! 
The Enquirer s team of reporters has combed the Alaskan wilderness to discover the hidden truth about Gov. Palin s family , which has become a central part of her political identity . 
The ENQUIRER has learned exclusively that Sarah 's oldest son , Track , was addicted to the power drug OxyContin for nearly the past two years , snorting it , eating it , smoking it and even injecting it . 
And as Track , 19 , heads to Iraq as part of the U.S. armed forces , Sarah and her husband Todd were powerless to stop his wild antics , detailed in the new issue of The ENQUIRER , which goes on sale today . 
THE ENQUIRER also has exclusive details about Track 's use of other drugs , including cocaine , and his involvement in a notorious local vandalism incident . 
I ve partied with him -LRB- Track -RRB- for years , a source disclosed . 
I ve seen him snort cocaine , snort and smoke OxyContin , drink booze and smoke weed . 
The source also divulged the girls would do anything for Track and he d use his local celebrity status to manipulate other guys to get them to steal things he wanted . 
He finally did what a lot of troubled kids here do , the source divulged . 
You join the military . 
And as Gov. Palin has billed the state of Alaska for various expenses related to her children , as reported by The Washington Post , The ENQUIRER 's investigation reveals that she was so incensed by 17-year-old Bristol 's pregnancy that she banished her daughter from the house . 
Another family friend revealed pre-prego Bristol was as much of a hard partier as Track was . 
Bristol was a huge stoner and drinker . 
I ve seen her smoke pot and get drunk and make out with so many guys . 
All the guys would brag that the just made out with Bristol . 
When Sarah found out the teen was pregnant by high schooler Levi Johnston , she was actually banished from the house . 
As part of the cover-up , Palin quickly transferred Bristol to another high school and made her move in with Sarah s sister Heather 25 miles away ! 
And the ENQUIRER also learned that Levi Johnston , the baby mamma s future wedded dada , who was glad handed by John McCain at the GOP Convention , isn t too happy about his impending shotgun nups either . 
Levi got dragged out of the house to go to Minnesota , Levi s friend told The ENQUIRER . 
Levi realizes he s stuck being with Bristol because her mom is running for Vice President . 
The friend also confided that both Bristol and Levi broke up a few times and they definitely messed around with other people . 
Meanwhile , as members of the Palin family s war viciously over Trooper-Gate and claims of Sarah s extramarital affair have turned the political race into a chaotic arena of threats , denials and vicious attacks by political black ops , The ENQUIRER has discovered shocking new details about the red-hot affair scandal ! 
For the full story of the secrets Sarah Palin is trying to hide pick up the new ENQUIRER ! 
The Nation Calls McCain 's Bluff ! 
Debates on as scheduled . 
The man ca n't fy planes with any skill , graduates in the bottom 5 of his class and ca n't even call a good bluff . 
He is such a national treasure . 
You 've got to be kidding . 
Medals courtesy of his father . 
Do n't you kids have any sense of morals any more ? 
Is Obama really ready to be President ? 
Will he able to handle the daily pressure of making difficult decisions ? 
do I feel good about this ... ? 
During the last several days of this economic crisis , he was silent for a while and later repeated himself , `` We need a plan ... We need a plan ... '' We all knew that , . . 
But it 's Obama . 
he knows how to sweat-talk the crowd with his eloquent sense of empathy with our needs . 
Of course , most of the time , we feel fine if we find someone who empathizes with us in difficult times ... . . 
So , at the end of the elegant speech and the emotional heap , when the lights are out , we , on our way home , wonder what he said , `` Solution ?? What solution ??? the problem ?? uh , uh , nothing ... '' And it 's still Ok . 
`` Obama ai n't goin ' nowhere near that White House . . 
, to be sure . '' 
He 's just fine , with me , keep 'n that sweat talk . 
We have computers , we have emails . 
Why ca n't John just keep in touch via ema ... ooooooooooooh . '' 
During WW II they retired you after 25 missions for fear of pushing your luck or pushing you over the edge mentally ! 
All of you who scoff at McCain 's POW record try getting blown out of the sky once . 
But seriously , I think you may want to read the REST of my comment before you jump out at the first apparent disagreement you may have with it , MR. -LRB- or is it Ms. -RRB- self appointed protector of the democracy . 
And now you are with the guy who in all his talk about Iraq never ever mentions the word `` victory '' once ? '' 
Again , when and where did you serve to speak so lightly of war ? 
Are you even 18 ? 
Tell me what you won Anon . 
-LRB- 53 -RRB- -LRB- 56 -RRB- He improved the unit 's flight readiness and safety records , -LRB- 57 -RRB- and won the squadron its first-ever Meritorious Unit Commendation . 
- Wikipedia Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 9:16 PM | Report abuse I suppose that 's why Barack sat down with the right-wacko O'Reilly ? 
McCain and Palin are terrified of the media . 
Invite the libertarian candidate , whoever that is . 
He can bring Alan Greenspan with him to show how the elites would NEVER do anything to hurt them so government is responsible for this mess . 
BUSH LOOKS A LITTLE WORRIED . 
BUT LIKE CLINT EASTWOOD SAID . 
A MAN HAS TO KNOW HIS LIMITATIONS ! 
SO I SAY TO YOU WALL STREET CEO 'S AND EXECUTIVES GET YOUR ASSES UNDER THAT BUS ! 
GOOD JOB PRES. YOU GO BOYEEEEEEEEEEEE Posted by : POOR PEOPLE | September 24 , 2008 9:15 PM | Report abuse The clown is on ca n't stand to see his mouth move without saying anything . 
The man belongs in an orange jumpsuit with DOC on the back not the white house . 
Obama was community organizer . 
Not exactly the same kind of CO ! '' 
Now you 're just being ignorant . 
McCain was a POW and bottom of his class . 
Are you going to tell me to tell me John Mccain with his high school education and next to last in his class navel academy finish , you want for the leader of the country ? 
He has never held a job in his life or even brought home a paycheck . 
He never built a business ran a company in fact did anything on his own without someone else doing it for him . 
First his family , then his wife , whose father by the way , bought him his political career . 
McCain was commanding officer . 
Obama was community organizer . 
Not exactly the same kind of CO ! 
That 's why you should not give away 700 billion dollars . 
Only gullible Dems would buy that dog and pony show . 
And it looks like they will . 
Who 's the bigger fool then ? 
Bush or the guy who will hand Bush the money ? 
As McCain said a few months ago about Phil Gramm : `` He s probably the smartest not just economist , but politician there is . '' 
`` We have sort of become a nation of whiners . 
You just hear this constant whining , complaining about a loss of competitiveness , America in decline '' despite a major export boom that is the primary reason that growth continues in the economy . 
`` You 've heard of mental depression ? 
This is a mental recession . '' 
Old news , right ? 
By the way , how many of you Republican posters out there voted for our current Economist-in-Chief ? 
MCCAIN JUST LAST WEEK SAID OUR ECONOMY WAS SOUND AND STRONG ! 
Obama was community organizer . 
Not exactly the same kind of CO ! 
Mccain is tanking because he and his campaign staff are demonstrable LIARS . 
The NYT article peeled the outer layer of the reeking onion that is Mccain . 
If you 'd bother to read you 'd be embarassed to throw up the blatant falsehood about Johnson and Raines . 
And you run hide from shrub , the worst president ever , with the right wing trickle on mantra as the only religion the right wing has . 
Please tell me , from your post : how is a cranky feeble 72 year old going to resolve this ? 
Last I looked , gramps was in the MINORITY party . 
Is he already annointed king in your head ? 
And now you are with the guy who in all his talk about Iraq never ever mentions the word `` victory '' once ? 
What a commander in chief he will make eh ? 
Let leave Iraq to Iran ! 
The economic situation is so dire that McCain believes he must suspend his campaign , cancel the presidential debate , and no-show for tonight 's program on David Letterman . 
But ... he 's available for an interview on CBS tonight and can attend the Global Initiative conference tomorrow . 
THEN he 'll head to Washington to solve all America 's economic woes , even though he does n't `` know much about the economy '' . 
On the other hand , Senator Obama is capable of multi-tasking : monitoring and participating in the bail-out negotiations in Washington while managing his campaign operations AND preparing for Friday night 's debate . 
Let the debate go on . 
Perhaps McCain 's very qualified second-in-command , Ms. Palin , can sit in for her boss . 
That 's her role after all . 
So is she ready or is she not ? 
`` WITCHCRAFT '' WTF ... `` TROOPERGATE '' `` UNWED PREGANCY '' What else is she trying to hide ? 
It just get uglier and uglier ! 
Bring on Rev. Wright ca n't be as bad as this sh \* t ! 
Get your facts correct . 
And by the way : Do you even `` KNOW '' , what it means to vote present ? 
Unlike John Mccain who just never even bothers to show up and vote . 
To vote present means you are here and ready to vote but what you are voting on is not ready to be voted on in your opinion . 
There are things in it you support and things you do n't . 
You want to see it worked on some more so instead of just voting `` YES '' like a lot of senators do who are too lazy to fight for what they believe in . 
Or voting `` NO '' and killing what may be a good bill if it was just worked on , you vote `` PRESENT '' meaning `` Im am here and ready to vote but not on what has been presented to me '' . 
IT IS A `` GOOD '' THING TO VOTE PRESENT , IT MEANS YOU ARE THERE READY TO WORK AND TAKE YOUR JOB SERIOUSLY BUT NOT SOME STOOGE WHO WILL JUST SIGN ANYTHING MANY TIMES THINGS THEY DID N'T EVEN READ . 
How much multitasking skill does it take to vote present more than you vote yes or no ? 
I 'm not losing , I 'm not running away from these debates because I 'm afraid . 
I have important business in washington where all the world will watch me expound upon my advanced economic idears . 
I 'll pound on the table , I 'll point my finger real pointy , and I 'll blame Bush , you watch ! 
How dare Obama and the American people ask me , John McCain to meet this messiah in a debate , I WILL NOT LOSE ! 
Screw you democrats , you ... sputter ... socialists ! 
Look , let 's quit campaigning for a while , you know , until the heat is off . 
let 's start talking about how cute Sarah is again . 
Oh no , that Obama character is not going down in flames like Karl said . 
This is what I get for listening to that fat slob , he has bigger boobs than sarah , what a bummer 5 -RRB- Acceptance . 
Get that gun out of your mouth ! 
That leaves the old man plenty of time to get his sorry ass in gear and get on down to Miss. for the debate with Obama on Friday night . 
The American people need to see this showdown , and if McCain turns tail , he will be seen as a cowardly weakling . 
I served six years . 
I was shot and saved by own of those multitaskers . 
Yes , Obama wants to continue with his campaigning and the upcoming debate rather than show leadership and fulfill his role as Senator . 
In what has to be the quote of the day , if not the election , Obama said : Apparently , this was something that , you know , he was more decisive about Barack Obama speaking about John McCain action to stop campaigning . 
McCain rolls up his sleeves and says let s get something done . 
And Obama says call me if you need me . 
Saying the President needs to do more than one thing at a time - and yet , Obama himself was holed up in Tampa , FL , not campaigning , but preparing for the damned debate on foreign policy . 
In other words , focusing on the debate about foreign policy , NOT the financial bail-out . 
The man is total B.S. ! 
I believe she saw Russia from her window once . 
What more is needed ? 
I think there are a few other qualified folks for other border states such as Texas , Arizona , California , Washington , Montana , North Dakota , Minnesota , Michegan , New York , Maine who are similarly qualified who could also be drafted to enlighten us on Republican foreing policy views . 
They have peered over at Canada and Mexico and had deep thoughts . 
Make it the Palin\/McCain ticket and have done . 
Knowing what I know , we are on the brink of an economic depression . 
If there is no bailout things will spiral out of control very quickly . 
In my opinion the bailout gives us about a 25 % chance of averting a depression in the next 2 years . 
The outlook is not good . 
This started in the late 90 's when the Clinton administration pushed for more minority home ownership , enlisting Freddie mac and Fannie Mae to spearhead the program . 
It then spread throughout the mortgage industry due to weak regulations of mortgage brokers , appraisers and lenders . 
The selling of portfolios was the fuel for the fire to spread . 
The Republican rank and file are just waiting for the signal from McCain . 
They do n't want this socialist bailout . 
If McCain says no deal 90 percent of the Republicans will also vote no. . 
Pelosi , Reid and Obama will then be left in the most awkward position of standing side by side with Bush on a bailout the public clearly disapproves . 
Do we want a President who lurches into bizarre directions , trying to shake things up -LRB- see George Will 's latest column -RRB- ? 
Or do we want a thoughtful , steady hand ? 
I think the debate should go on . 
If McCain ca n't make it , Sarah Palin can substitute . 
Since she has foreign policy experience -LRB- she can see Russia from Alaska -RRB- and has met the Mayor of Kabul -LRB- I mean the President of Afghanistan -RRB- , she is fully qualified to debate foreign affairs . 
You dont have to be in DC to get your point across dont be scared face the people the debate only takes 2 hours tops . 
Please do not ask me any questions , McSame said . 
Please ... only photograph my $ 5,583.00 face . 
Who are you people trying to kid other than yourselves . 
I guess baseball games will now be canceled for this reason . 
As will trials , real estate closings and who knows what else . 
McCain is not a member of any committee with jurisdiction , is totally lacking in relevant expertise , and has yet to say one word of substance on the present financial crisis . 
: if sen. McCain is not willing to debate with sen. Obama , why not Sarah Palin instead of him ? 
Down 10 points in a day . 
People are not buying his BS . 
Some of the best doctors came out of MASH units . 
Or do you just hate the military ? '' 
Oh so you love the military now ? 
You need to keep up with the time then . 
There are no MASH any more . 
They are Combat Support Hospitals now . 
And what the hell does MASH doctors have to do with multitasking ? 
You must be watching too many reruns of that old show where Hawkeye is flirting with the nurse while cutting the soldier up . 
Does n't work like that in real life dude . 
Your surgeon does that you die . 
We are American citizens who have a right to know more about the candidate 's positions before we elect them . 
These candidates are public servants . 
`` Trifling debates ? '' 
You feel theses debates have little importance ? 
What country are you writing from , China ? 
Yes , perhaps we should put the debates off until after the election . 
Can anyone imagine him dealing with the Iranian thug , Korea , China , Russia , Chavez et al ?? He has no experience with economic issues except to raise campaign funds . 
If , if McCain is successful in dealing with this mess , Obama should be looked at as the naif he is . 
The Congressional Dems , Obama 's own advisors : Raines , Johnson , Gorelik , all ought to be held responsibile for this economic mess . 
The FBI might actually find that out . 
As to the MSM ABC driven polls finding a 9 % lead for the Messiah : Dems were overpolled by a 3-2 margin . 
Polls such as Ras , RCP and the Battleground polls show the true race : so close that this act of leadership by McCain may give him back the lead . 
McCain is a humble patriot . 
He doesn t like to toot his own horn . 
Contrary to what you may have heard , McCain is one of the top economists in the world . 
His deep understanding of the most recondite subjects of global finance and economics is well known . 
But alas , his solemn prognostications about the fragile state of our economy fell on deaf ears for years . 
Had we just taken him more seriously for the past 8 years we may have narrowly avoided this impending disaster . 
Now is not the time to prevent this man from his selfless efforts to rescue his constituents , and possible the nation . 
Please give this beautiful human being a chance to -LRB- as Sean Pdiddy Coombs once remarked -RRB- do his beautiful mind thing when he gets to Wash D.C. before you all rip into him for trying to duck out of a scheduled debate with Obama . 
If your post was not just snark , my apologies for missing the serious point in the obvious humor in it . 
If you are at all serious then I understand why you are angry , belief system collapsing and all . 
Practically anywhere other than Washington . 
Obama is now trying to tell the American people that he will be working hard in Washington to solve all of their problems . 
Practically anywhere other than Washington . 
It would be nice if Senator Obama would do the job he was elected to do before trying to get a promotion . 
This citizen of Illinois has no confidence that he can manage the country when he has shown no ability to manage the affairs of our state . 
His indifference to the current national crisis is appalling . 
I 'm not sure what kind of president McCain will make , but I appreciate that he has his priorities in order . 
Of course , the liberal haters would be saying just the opposite if Obama went back to Washington and McCain attended the debate alone . 
It is beyond most of them to admit a conservative is right , even when it is obvious . 
| September 24 , 2008 8:48 PM | Report abuse McCain 's grandstanding is pathetic and stupid . 
He would also love to cancel the debates for him and his cipher as a twofer . 
He 's trying to seize the `` presidential high ground '' by acting like he is fixing things , ala Bush ... ACTING LIKE HE IS FIXING THINGS HE F \* CKED UP IN THE FIRST PLACE . 
I know , I feel the same way , especially now . 
I want to show all of you how I 'm suffering from my own stupidity , just like many of you - see , I 'm the kind of guy you 'd like to share a suppository with . 
I 'm John McCain and I approved this message . 
Do you honestly believe that surgeons do n't multitask ? 
Some of the best doctors came out of MASH units . 
Or do you just hate the military ? 
We should gracefully accept that McCain must return to the hard work of helping to solve the impending crisis . 
Who are we to demand trifling debates from him ? 
Of these two champions of our well being , I must say that John McCain s conscientiousness is unsurprising . 
If any man is needed more in Washington to save us now it surely must be John McCain . 
The man was on the front lines this war on credit crunch , he fought deep in the trenches working hand-in-hand with consumer advocacy groups to stem the growing abuses in the real estate market , fighting for the people long before the bubble burst . 
He was an effective ally in insulating his home state , Arizona , from over-speculation , unscrupulous and even criminal lending practices , poor investment or any other nastiness this boom and bust are having on the rest of the country . 
In fact , Arizona to date has one of the most stable and prosperous real estate markets in the world . 
Arizona should be proud of their native son . 
McCain is a humble patriot . 
He doesn t like to toot his own horn . 
Contrary to what you may have heard , McCain is one of the top economists in the world . 
His deep understanding of the most recondite subjects of global finance and economics is well known . 
But alas , his solemn prognostications about the fragile state of our economy fell on deaf ears for years . 
Had we just taken him more seriously for the past 8 years we may have narrowly avoided this impending disaster . 
Now is not the time to prevent this man from his selfless efforts to rescue his constituents , and possible the nation . 
Please give this beautiful human being a chance to -LRB- as Sean Pdiddy Coombs once remarked -RRB- do his beautiful mind thing when he gets to Wash D.C. before you all rip into him for trying to duck out of a scheduled debate with Obama . 
Something about McCain 's decision does n't pass the smell test . 
Call McCain 's debate delay tactic what it is , a political stunt to look presidential and bi-partisan when it comes to his political weakness , the economy . 
The McCain campaign saw how the polling numbers were turning back into Obama 's favor on the economy combined with Joe Biden 's fiery foreign policy speech today and pulled out another late `` major political stunt '' . 
This whole financial market crisis happened 10 days ago ! 
If McCain wanted to appeal presidential and bi-partisan , he would have suggested this action 9 to 10 days ago . 
But after stating that the `` fundamentals of the economy are strong '' and he was against the AIG bailout but did a 24-hr 180 degree turn and was for the bailout , McCain realized he was falling again in the polls . 
McCain and Palin ca n't hide forever from the media and the electorate ! 
The most insulting part of the McCain campaign backing out of the debate is that they wanted to move the Friday Sept. 26th debate to the same date as the VP debate on Oct. 2nd and then reschedule the Biden-Palin at a later date . 
How insulting is this to the American people ? 
... Oh , my giddy aunt ... '' Posted by : wardropper | September 24 , 2008 8:36 PM | Report abuse McCain is a Punk !!! Anyone can see this phoney is stalling cuz he knows nothing about what the hell is going on especially regarding the economy . 
The phoney war hero punk is even trying to shield Palin from questions for fear she will say or do something stupid . 
He picks a VP running mate then tries to hide her from the public . 
This guy is a BIG loser idiotttt ! 
I am not Democ-RAT or a Republi-CON but an independent , but anyone can see the BS McCain is putting forth . 
The BS is thick with John McCain ! 
`` Among them : `` Late Night 's '' David Letterman , who told his own audience in taping at CBS today that he was hoping to see the Republican nominee for president but McCain called him to say that he had to rush back to Washington to deal with the nation 's financial crisis . 
Then , as Letterman told it , he got word that in fact McCain was down the hall sitting for an interview with his colleague at CBS , Evening News anchor Katie Couric , which aired this evening . '' 
And the Top 10 most cynical methods for avoiding a drop in the polls tonight are ... Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 8:33 PM | Report abuse McCain has been a huge disappointment so far ... and to think I respected the guy in 2000 . 
McCain if there is any prayer of hope for you on Nov. 4th , fire your team of Karl Rove wannabe 's and stop this circus . 
If you say `` Country First '' mean it . 
As has been widely reported , Congressional leaders have come close to agreement with the Bush administration on key aspects of the proposed bailout bill . 
Representative Barney Frank said this afternoon he believes a bill will be passed within `` a few days . '' 
McCain is completelely irrevelant to the negotiations between leaders of Congress and Secretary Paulson . 
Yet McCain wants to create a potential major photo-op and propaganda ploy by making a bold entry , claiming he helped broker a deal , saving the global financial system . 
The vast majority of informed Americans will easily see through this phony `` suspension '' of his campaign and this obvious political stunt . 
That 's why I am voting for him , and am now writing my first check of this campaign . '' 
Ha ... just getting round to that ? 
One of McCain 's many devoted supporters . 
I hope obama is the only idjut who shows up at the debate . 
Where would you want your leader to be ; standing alone at a political debate blowing their horn or trying to resolve a national financial disaster that is impacting all of us ? 
Check the vid clip in my blog : Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 8:30 PM | Report abuse If Dems are so smart how come they are even talking about giving Bush 700 billions to give away four months before his term is over ? 
Who 's the bigger fool ? 
Where is that money going to go , Folks ? 
The Federal Reserve is not a governmental institution . 
We gotta wake up ... our attention is being redirected . 
Extremely well played , Mr. Obama . 
He 's not ready to debate , and neither is Palin . 
I 'm all for giving people the benefit of the doubt and extra time to think about things , but this is ridiculous . 
Besides , Barack 's right . 
Sometimes the president might just need to think fast and multitask . 
Best possible case for them . 
No debates ; no Palin press conference ; go negative , stoke the racism thing and hope for the best . 
earl | September 24 , 2008 8:25 PM | Report abuse Obama is in a hurry to to be president . 
He would rather see our credit situation worsen over the weekend to take advantage of it . 
Goes well with his suggestion to Iraqi leaders to postpone troop withdrawals till elections . 
Does this man even care about our country ? 
I do n't really no to much . 
Heck I am the first to admit that I am not the brightest bulb in the lamp . 
But I like many other McCain supporters know that to vote for McCain is the right thing to do because we do n't have to think . 
McCain is the man who will do all of our thinking for us . 
Our only job is to vote McCain and then just sit back and put our trust in McCain and Palin . 
Sure some say McCain is old , if something happens Palin will step in , she is right for the job especially in dealing with Russia . 
Remember she is from Alaska and she can see the coast of Russia from Alaska so that should stand for something . 
Obama being from Chicago ca n't see Russia so how can he be qualified ? 
The democrats are voting for a man they know nothing about . 
We know all about Palin now since its all been reported on the news the last 2 weeks . 
It 's McCain first . 
So let 's get this straight . 
McCain told an interviewer earlier this year that he did n't know much about economics but was reading Greenspan 's book ! 
And yet McCain feels HE is needed to rescue the country from economic disaster ? 
This is a PLOY to DELAY BOTH McCain and Palin from having to debate . 
CNN is reporting that McCain 's camp wants the Presidential debate to be Oct. 2 , thus postponing the VP debate ! 
-LRB- until ... umm ... maybe NEVER ?! -RRB- What a joke . 
Flee | September 24 , 2008 8:19 PM | Report abuse SurveyUSA says that only 10 % of Americans support a delay of the debate . 
Sorry McCain , we see through your political gimmick ! 
Once again , Congress is being asked to rush through emergency legislation -- to cede effective control of the economy to the government . 
Officials continue to blame lax lending policies on the part of the mortgage industry for spawning this crisis . 
But is that entirely true ? 
Is a network of extra-judicial programs `` targeting '' American citizens by offering them `` easy credit '' a root cause of the mortgage meltdown ? 
This would be the classic situation in which to do so . 
It would put to bed the age factor . 
But instead he 's pandering to the undecided b\/c he 's down in the polls . 
The last time we had a president who was governed by the polls was Richard Nixon . 
For those of you who do n't remember his years as POTUS , he was referred to as King Richard ... ala Richard III . 
He too had a bad relationship with the press and lied and procrastinated with the Watergate investigation . 
And eventually had Capitol Hill in an uproar until he sealed his fate with the 16 minute gap in the tapes requested by Judge Sirica . 
He did open the doors to trade with China ... and now we deal with tainted goods from there ... autism is suspiciously high amongst infants today . 
And now they own our debt ... except for this $ 700B which has yet to be allocated . 
I 'm not so sure I understand why the VP nominees who are inasmuch seeking the role of President of the Senate are n't rushing to DC instead of the Presidential nominees . 
The VP has more legislative responsibilities as opposed to the President . 
Both he and Obama should be there for open debates and voting in the senate but they are not needed before that and will only further politicize an already volatile situation . 
We do need to hear from our candidates on the issues , McCain could have suggested that they swap the order of the debates to focus on the economy first but I suspect that this might be as much about trying to avoid the debates on foreign policy as anything else . 
People trust Obama on the economy and when he does well in the debate on foreign policy as well he 'll have the election sewed up and McCain just might want to avoid that . 
Because if O sticks to his guns and appears at the debate on Friday regardless of whether Mac does , O probably closes out the election for good . 
For Mac , it would be the political equivalent of a Roberto Duran `` No Mas . '' 
Read this great excerpt from Paul Slansky 's piece in HuffPo today , `` Note to Clinton '' complaining about Bitter Bill 's past week of campaigning on TV and elsewhere AGAINST Obama : `` Oh , and stop talking about how much you like Senator McCain . 
Have you forgotten the vile joke he told a decade ago at your wife 's and daughter 's expense ? 
Let me remind you : `` Do you know why Chelsea Clinton is so ugly ? 
She 's the child of Janet Reno and Hillary Clinton . '' 
Are you saying , Bill , that you can forgive McCain for calling Chelsea `` ugly '' but you ca n't forgive Obama for defeating Hillary ? 
If Obama loses a close election -- one in which even one state where you could have made a difference goes for McCain because you sat home and pouted -- it will be on you . 
We will remember that you could n't be bothered to rise above your petty resentments for something as trivial as saving your country from the enemies of everything you profess to believe in . 
We forgave you for Monica , Bill , but we wo n't forgive you for this . '' 
END Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 8:15 PM | Report abuse Obama is p-ssed because he 's been totally focused on prepping for the debates , and like always he could n't care a rat 's @ss about doing his job and earning his salary as a Senator , or attending to the needs of this country before the need to feed his ambition . 
McCain would rather save the country than save his election . 
That 's why I am voting for him , and am now writing my first check of this campaign . 
He would like the people to think the republicans are in control when if fact they are manifesting a new can or worms - read here : Posted by : time to clean house | September 24 , 2008 8:13 PM | Report abuse Last time I checked this debate is about foreign policy , are the troops in Iraq and Afghanistan going to get a time out too for the economic crisis ? 
-LRB- 7:56 PM , Sep 24 . -RRB- 
In any case , McFlip wants to be seen as wheeler and dealer but came out as a pathetic little man desperately trying no to loose more terrain . 
And this garbage wants to be president of my US of A ? 
This is getting funnier by the minute ! 
McCain is a dangerous old fool . 
Republicans are going to be out of power for a generation . 
Put on a smile while you are getting beat up ! 
Pretend you are winning . 
Try to make the other guy look bad . 
Maybe his health ca n't take the stress and strain and this is just a coverup for his failing health . 
To forestall that , the Dems are insisting that McCain must take full responsibility for the bailout in exchange for their voting for it . 
Otherwise they wo n't vote for it and they 'll just let America face the economic consequences . 
So this puts McCain on the side of Bush and against the conservatives like Pence and DeMint . 
It 's just like the immigration bill all over again in that regard . 
Oh wait ... we are pretty dumb . 
We 've fallen for things more transparent than this . 
Considering his self confessed limited knowledge of economics what on God 's earth can he contribute to these compex negotiations already taking place in Washington . 
McCain is part of the problem , his call for deregulation and less government oversight is what got us into this mess in the first place . 
Now Mr. Deregulator is going to Washington as Mr. Regulator ? 
Here is the reason for todays grenade . '' 
... The disclosure undercuts a remark by Mr. McCain on Sunday night that the campaign manager , Rick Davis , had had no involvement with the company for the last several years ... '' ... As president of the Homeownership Alliance , Mr. Davis received $ 30,000 to $ 35,000 a month . 
He , along with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , have characterized the alliance as a coalition of many housing industry and consumer groups to promote homeownership , but numerous current and former officials at both companies say the companies created and bankrolled the operation to combat efforts by competitors to rein in their business . 
The companies dissolved the group at the end of 2005 as part of cost-cutting in the wake of accounting scandals and , at Freddie Mac , a lobbying scandal that forced out its top Republican lobbyist ... On Monday , the McCain campaign attacked The Times for its account of those payments to Mr. Davis , saying the paper was 150 percent in the tank for Mr. Obama . 
Mr. Davis said that he had worked not for the two companies but for the advocacy group , which included other organizations as well and , he said , was focused only on promoting homeownership ... . . 
After the Homeownership Alliance was dissolved , Mr. Davis asked to stay on a retainer , the people familiar with the deal said . 
Hollis McLoughlin , who was chief of staff to Richard F. Syron , Freddie Mac s chief executive , arranged for a new contract with Davis Manafort at the reduced rate of $ 15,000 a month , they said ... '' The unintended victim is ... well , remember George F. Will 's comment `` McCain has lost his head '' Posted by : Rick Davis threw another ` FLASH BANG GRENADE '' | September 24 , 2008 8:04 PM | Report abuse Sean : `` Everyone is entitled to his own opinion , but not his own facts . '' 
-LRB- Moynihan -RRB- So only by McCain , the De-regulator , stopping everything to attend a meeting in DC , will our deep financial crisis then be resolved ? 
Last week , McCain declared our economy was still fundamentally `` strong '' . 
Instead of him showboating , how about a frank debate on how each presidential nominee would handle further economic abuses without the taxpayer 's taking the hit ? 
Rick Davis is the latest in a string of advisors to be in hot water . 
The Palin honeymoon is over . 
She did a dreadful job tonight with Katie Couric . 
So McCain is trying to duck the debate . 
Oh , and possibly postpone the VP debate too . 
Answer : How the f \* ck is McCain going to help with this crisis ? 
He 's not a member of ANY senate committee addressing the issue . 
It 's painfully obvious that McCain sincerely believes he can help his colleagues solve this problem by roaming the halls of the Senate looking for photo ops . 
John McCain is a dangerous old fool . 
Republicans are going to be out of power for a generation . 
This Economic Whiz , John McCain , is needed to craft a bi-partisan bill ? 
Is he bringing along Phil Graham ? 
daman do n't say I did ` nt say ... told you so ! 
Palin having the demons praised out of her . . 
John McCain needs to stop the gimmicks . 
Here is the reason for todays grenade . '' 
... The disclosure undercuts a remark by Mr. McCain on Sunday night that the campaign manager , Rick Davis , had had no involvement with the company for the last several years ... '' ... As president of the Homeownership Alliance , Mr. Davis received $ 30,000 to $ 35,000 a month . 
He , along with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , have characterized the alliance as a coalition of many housing industry and consumer groups to promote homeownership , but numerous current and former officials at both companies say the companies created and bankrolled the operation to combat efforts by competitors to rein in their business . 
The companies dissolved the group at the end of 2005 as part of cost-cutting in the wake of accounting scandals and , at Freddie Mac , a lobbying scandal that forced out its top Republican lobbyist ... On Monday , the McCain campaign attacked The Times for its account of those payments to Mr. Davis , saying the paper was 150 percent in the tank for Mr. Obama . 
Mr. Davis said that he had worked not for the two companies but for the advocacy group , which included other organizations as well and , he said , was focused only on promoting homeownership ... . . 
After the Homeownership Alliance was dissolved , Mr. Davis asked to stay on a retainer , the people familiar with the deal said . 
Hollis McLoughlin , who was chief of staff to Richard F. Syron , Freddie Mac s chief executive , arranged for a new contract with Davis Manafort at the reduced rate of $ 15,000 a month , they said ... '' The unintended victim is ... well , remember George F. Will 's comment `` McCain has lost his head '' Posted by : Rick Davis threw another ` FLASH BANG GRENADE '' | September 24 , 2008 7:58 PM | Report abuse One thing noticed , , all but just a few blogs support poor mr mcsmall guy and his concepts of a campaign thats a well oiled machine further positive blogs by republicans during treats like this only help undecided 's bite the hands of the ones whom feed them ! 
So in saying that carry on as usual boys see you in mcduckville I 'll have my bells on ! 
I 'd rather just hear Obama anyway . 
Postpone them at least until the polls swing in McCain 's favor . 
Anyone who votes for the con-artist must be certifiable , just like this demented old man . 
I would just love to hear the Republicans if Obama pulled this stunt , the venom and the vitriol would be amazing . 
Yet the trailer-trash of America and their Alaskan Beauty Queen , the true patriots who hold up pregnant unwed teens as the future leaders of this country will all be down at the corner gro buying smokes , beer , hunting licenses and cheering their American War Hero on . 
McCain is willing to lose his dignity right along with the election . 
The world has to be scratching their heads , I know I am . 
This was the real reason for McCain 's unilateral decision to skip the Presidential debate Friday . 
Ms Palin is approaching her quest for -LRB- Vice -RRB- President of the US as if she 's preparing for the SAT : her handlers can see how unprepared she is and they are scheming to get more time for her to cram for the debate-test . 
McCain is simply buying her time in an artful , convoluted way . 
`` HEY JOHN , YOU COMPARED ME TO HILTON AND SPEARS REMEMBER ? '' 
McCain `` yeah i remember '' Obama . . 
`` come here you little b \* tch '' Obama has McCain in a head lock . 
`` now talk that sh \* t you little gimpy ass fool '' McCain `` ow ow ow stop ! '' 
Obama `` slap slap slap slap slap slap '' McCain `` uncle ... tom ! '' 
`` you mother f \* cker get your ass back here '' `` slap slap slap slap '' McCain `` KARL KARL ! '' 
Just like those losers Gore and Kerry , Obama is going to lose . 
America does n't elect liberal posers for President . 
It will be fun to watch ! 
Why are n't Bush the deregulator and his congressional followers looking at the lessons learned in Sweden ? 
Showboating -LRB- I know better than you do about these things -RRB- ? 
Back on point - How did Sweden get to the point where its economy nearly blew up during its banking and real estate implosion ? 
\* Financial deregulation in the 1980s fed a frenzy of real estate lending by Sweden s banks , which did not worry enough about whether the value of their collateral might evaporate in tougher times . 
-LRB- Does this SOUND familiar to the deregulator lovers ? -RRB- 
\* Property prices imploded . 
The bubble deflated fast in 1991 and 1992 . 
A vain effort to defend Sweden s currency , the krona , caused overnight interest rates to spike at one point to 500 percent . 
The Swedish economy contracted for two consecutive years after a long expansion , and unemployment , at 3 percent in 1990 , quadrupled in three years . 
-LRB- More of the same here ? -RRB- 
\* After a series of bank failures and ad hoc solutions , the moment of truth arrived in September 1992 , when the government of Prime Minister Carl Bildt decided it was time to clear the decks . 
-LRB- Where we are now - trying to figure out what to do , amid the panic - or what I would call a faux emergency for something that was in plain sight all along -RRB- . 
Here 's what Sweden did to solve its crisis - without extracting ransom from its taxpayers -LRB- exact text from the article : \* -LRB- The Swedish -RRB- government announced that the Swedish state would guarantee all bank deposits and creditors of the nation s 114 banks . 
Sweden formed a new agency to supervise institutions that needed recapitalization , and another that sold off the assets , mainly real estate , that the banks held as collateral . 
\* Sweden did not just bail out its financial institutions by having the government take over the bad debts . 
It extracted pounds of flesh from bank shareholders before writing checks . 
Banks had to write down losses and issue warrants to the government . 
That strategy held banks responsible and turned the government into an owner . 
When distressed assets were sold , the profits flowed to taxpayers , and the government was able to recoup more money later by selling its shares in the companies as well . 
The result from the move by Sweden ? 
The final cost to Sweden ended up being less than 2 percent of its G.D.P. . 
Some officials say they believe it was closer to zero , depending on how certain rates of return are calculated . 
So , why is Bush and supporters in Congress are pushing for picking OUR pockets and raiding OUR personal bank accounts to rescue his Wall Street buddies ? 
Is this only thing that the Bush administration can come up to address this issue ? 
Looks too much to me that that a bunch of folks in the White House and in the halls of Congress are trying to pull a fash one on the taxpayers -- while trying to help their friends hold on to their cash . 
Enough of the privatizing profits and socializing risks and loss . 
The folks in Congress who are on the side of the taxpayers MUST hold firm because Bush and his followers are obviously not going to stand up against Wall Street . 
Congress must push for other remedies that require that the people who created this mess to take on the burden of paying for the clean up . 
No wonder John McCain is running back to the Hill ... he has plenty of experience with this type of mess , since his front line experience extends from the savings and loan crap from the corrupt Lincoln Savings & Loan that was run by Charles Keating during the 1980s . 
Anyway , what can McCain possibly add that he has n't since April of this year ? 
And why two days before a major debate in your area of strength -- foreign policy ? 
Would that be because the European and South American countries called out Bush on this financial fiasco ? 
Because the world no longer sees Bush as credible ? 
Or is that the world now sees the United States as hypocritical ? 
McCain does not head committees that directly impact this issue . 
He 's only one voice out of one hundred . 
Besides , we have a President Bush who is supposed to be on the job to take leadership over finding a solution . 
We 've been through a meltdown with a President Bush I -- once again , with Jr. trying again to carry out another heist in a massive transfer of wealth . 
McCain putting country first ? 
If you believe that , then I have a bridge to sell to nowhere . 
A President has to be one who knows how to chew gun and walk at the same time . 
Apparently , McCain does n't show that he can accomplish that feat at the moment . 
She will prove that she is not a good pick for VP in the debates , so some kind of stall was necessary to save face . 
My guess it the closed door meetings with foreign officials earlier this week did not go well . 
She crossed culture lines , possibly spoke in an annoying raspy voice , or did n't expect to see so many foreigners after years of pleasantville in Alaska -LRB- few brown skinned people in them hills thar -RRB- . 
Now is the fall of Republican Discontent , for having to surrender four years to Democrats , after 8 years of their failed regime , so tragic ! 
-LRB- not really -RRB- . 
Get over the ideal . 
Republicans and undecideds , please , make the right choice , be graceful and give change a chance , if it fails , it will only last for 4 years , half of the suffering we 've faced thus far ... Think about it ... Realize that sticking to someone because of race , religion , and party affiliation is an ignorant move . 
The world stage dose n't care about race as much as we do , your president and VP will have to understand that and act gracefully under fire and in difficult situations . 
McCain has betrayed public trust with this shoddy and flimsy excuse for a `` Country First '' campaign . 
He does not respect your intelligence and he ca n't pick a VP worth a damn or judge the economy correctly , just imagine how shoddy his cabinet will be ? 
The horse trainer picked by bush for FEMA ? 
-LRB- That worked out great ! -RRB- 
McCain has shown he would sell his soul and lie , cheat , and steal to win , as his biography on the campaign trail shows . 
What does a man have to gain when he 's already sold his soul ? 
8 houses and a 5 million dollar spot in the middle class . 
But do we know in fact O is manning-up and going forward with the Friday date ? 
O HAS to man-up . 
He ca n't back down on this one . 
This is a batting practice pitch down the middle of the plate for O. Show up sitting next to Mac 's empty seat , but be there on Friday ready to roll . 
Mac way overplayed his hand here with this circus stunt . 
someone should be objecting to that analysis . 
They always bellow that a `` bipartisan '' effort is needed every time they get in a losing position . 
McCain knows this is exactly his economic plan that is tanking . 
He is afraid of the beating he will likely take in a debate and so he tries to make the best of it by cutting and running back to his beloved Washington to see if he can coax along his greed based trickle down bs . 
He is using the same logic on himself that he used on puppet Palin . 
Hide from the light and maybe the sunshine will go away . 
McCain CHANGE IS COMING ! 
This whole thing is unbelievably disgusting . 
These liars have got to stop keeping our country hijacked . 
I will walk all over my precinct tomorrow night and tell anyone who will listen . 
This has to stop . 
America is heading for utter disaster unless we all wise up and fast . 
It 's time that wealthy white men step aside for the rest of us . 
Obama may not be perfect , but his intelligence and demeanor are needed now . 
Demonstrates true leadership in a crisis . 
Where is Barry ?? Where 's his plan ? 
Cowboy up , John ! '' 
This must be one of the `` brain children '' of McCain 's campaign . 
No wondering he 's losing . 
He has a tainted campaign manager who has been accepting 15,000 per month from Fannie\/Freddie . 
Caught red-handed with their hand in the cookie jar while preaching something else on the campaign trail . 
Unfortunately , someone who is vying for the highest office in the land should know that \*\*\* t happens ! 
McSame is showing his weakness . 
Run , Lassie , Run . . 
Time-outs are for LOSERS !!! Posted by : Virginia Gal | September 24 , 2008 7:52 PM | Report abuse Normally when you get on a plane , the one like Obama is the pilot , the one like McCain is the funny guy behind making jokes and flirting with the female crew . 
I usually take a seat near McCain and have some fun while the pilot brings me safely home . 
McCain has lost it . 
Palin ca n't answer questions . 
I look forward to President Obama . 
regards Posted by : Post American | September 24 , 2008 7:50 PM | Report abuse McSCAM trying to save PALIN 's BUTT -LRB- CNN -RRB- McCain supporter Sen. Lindsey Graham tells CNN the McCain campaign is proposing to the Presidential Debate Commission and the Obama camp that if there 's no bailout deal by Friday , the first presidential debate should take the place of the VP debate , currently scheduled for next Thursday , October 2 in St. Louis . 
In this scenario , the vice presidential debate between Joe Biden and Sarah Palin would be rescheduled for a date yet to be determined , and take place in Oxford , Mississippi , currently slated to be the site of the first presidential faceoff this Friday . 
Graham says the McCain camp is well aware of the position of the Obama campaign and the debate commission that the debate should go on as planned but both he and another senior McCain adviser insist the Republican nominee will not go to the debate Friday if there 's no deal on the bailout . 
Unfortunately , this great country will likely have to endure at least 2 more years of Nancy , the least effective speaker ever but most dishonest , Pelosi and her attempts to lie her way out of her own ignorance . 
How about Wednesday , November 5 ? 
I 'm sure he called McCain because his campaign people , his in-house ad agency , said that if he did n't do it , he 'd look like a chump yet again . '' 
Lol ... that does n't make any sense . 
McCain is the one behind in the polls . 
He 's the one that jumped ship on the bi-partisan conference just to get some extra attention and move up Palen 's V.P. debate date . 
He has allowed his campaign to be hijacked by the Democrats : McCain 's campaign is on hold until legislation is passed , yet the Democrats control Congress and will determine if and when legislation will be passed . 
McCain may have postponed not only his campaign . 
He may have also postponed the date legislation will be passed . 
How is this in the best interests of the country ? 
Democrats are now more likely to dither a few extra days to keep McCain in DC . 
Each day legislation is not passed , the McCain campaign will not be in operation -LRB- if you can believe McCain 's promise and sudden political altruism -RRB- . 
I wish I would be there to watch your tears fall . 
not laughing at you , just laughing with you ! 
ca n't wait to see this debate . 
McCain knows nothing on economy , foreign issue 's . 
Spain being part of south america . 
laundry list goes on and on and on ! 
danan have your reaction of the dabate on youtube ! 
Demonstrates true leadership in a crisis . 
Where is Barry ?? Where 's his plan ? 
Cowboy up , John ! 
You fools will blindly follow a loser simply because of his party affiliation . 
McCain is no hero . 
He 's a coward . 
Unable to win an election in his own right , now he 's going into hiding from the voters just as Palin is doing . 
The American voter is not falling for this `` hurry up and spend 1 trillion dollars '' scheme and they 're not falling for McCain 's bluster . 
The best news is that Obama annouced that he 's going to the debates whether McCain is attending or not . 
And the Commission on Presidential Debates announced this evening that the debate will be held as scheduled . 
McCain is going to change his mind once he figures out that Obama will have the stage and the millions in the audience all to himself . 
What a doddering , old fool McCain is . 
Republicans are going to be out of power for a generation . 
McCain can not survive a debate and is using this mess as an opportunity to get out of the debate pickle . 
However , right now really is the time for the debate . 
From that perspective Obama is correct . 
If McCain fails to show up then the folks running the debate should use McCain statements from the last week and allow Obama to respond to them or to lead the discussion elsewhere . 
We very much need to finally hear where Obama stands on many issues . 
That is something that has been lacking on the Obama side of the campaign since the beginning of the primaries . 
I don ` t like him because of this secretiveness . 
Howver , McCain put the nail in his coffin from this voters perspective when he selected Palin is his VP . 
No way will I vote for him now . 
Still up to Obama to convince me to vote for him though . 
Boy , do they know how to play you . 
I actually feel sorry for you . 
I really like McCain , but not now , not as President , not as Commander in Chief . 
Obama puts country first ? 
I 'm sure he called McCain because his campaign people , his in-house ad agency , said that if he did n't do it , he 'd look like a chump yet again . 
That was a good one about the liberal brown shirts , spreading propagada , whoever posted that . 
The Dems have become the new Goebels , with lies and mis-information to smear anyone else , as long as their phony candidate does n't have to actually iterate what `` change '' means . 
Sweet Jesus of Nazareth ! 
Can you believe this guy ? 
What a pussy willow ! 
Get a pair or just go home , McCain ! 
I thought we had to wait a week for October surprises . 
Now , we get two at the same time ... in September ! 
Regulator is the greatest act since Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde . 
I ca n't wait to see the next act when the poll numbers show him behind by double-digits . 
The ` so-called ' war hero has turned into our country 's greatest coward . 
The ` maverick ' has branded himself the biggest loser . 
Welcome to ` The Vagina Chronicles ' ... Part II . 
-LRB- He opposed it , Obama supported it and was in Washington to vote on it . -RRB- 
McCain also missed the votes for funding Iraq and Afghanistan -- and was missing in action for much of the 110th Congress . 
Then Bernanke announces the bailout last Friday . 
After mulling it over for 5 days -- and seeing his poll numbers sinking -- McCain leaps into action ! 
Someone get him a map of Washington so he can find the Capitol building ! 
Not only the newcomer -LRB- Obama -RRB- , but even old , corrupt Democrats , like Harry Reid . 
Yesterday , and which was fogotten by the this WaPo post , Harry Reid demanded Republicans and McCain get behind this proposal -LRB- funny how he did n't mention anything about Obama -RRB- : `` We now need Republicans to stand up ... We need the Republican nominee for president to say what he 's for . '' 
Now that McCain said he was going back to work on the bill , and trying to get Obama to do the same , which Obama refused to do -LRB- since he has only done what his Democratic elders tell him to do , and Reid did n't say anything about Obama yesterday -RRB- . 
So what does Reid do ? 
So Dinghy Harry demands McCain 's presence , without even mentioning Obama , then changes his mind ? 
And then Reid has the gall to say this : `` We need leadership ; not a campaign photo op . '' 
Obviously , leadership is a concept that Reid knows nothing about . 
So , Why is n't the WaPo reporting on any of this ? 
Do n't they have ... you know ... questions for Reid ? 
Like , what did he tell Obama ? 
Hey , why not push back the debate and that way we can cancel the vp debate and never show the world how desperate our last desperate play was . 
Oh and Chris , nice spin . 
Did Drudge tell you how to spin it ? 
Obama is gonna kick your a $ $ ! 
Did ` nt John McCain read the tea leaves four years ago . 
This so-called MAVERICK is handing over the WHITE HOUSE to that damn Democrat . 
This is why I voted for Bush . 
McCain is blundering idiot . 
Hello Independants here I come ! 
Obama is a lousy debater ... too many umm 's and ahhs . 
And he parses every word , afraid to slip up without his speeches prepared by Axelrod . 
Remember what happened at the Saddlebrook forum ? 
McCain is a leader , Obama a phony . 
Jimmy Carter pulled this debate ducking dodge in 1980 , using the Iranian hostage crisis as his excuse . 
Democrats ca n't hold a candle to republican and lying . 
MSNBC 's Keith Olberman aka . 
Obamaman critized McCain and praised Obama . 
Obaman always does that . 
Please tell me you do n't have a voter registration card . 
The President will be on @ 9:00 to make his sales pitch , McCain dodges the debate to create the illusion of crisis . 
They hope MIddle America , White Women , Working Class Whites , Rural un-educated Whites will be frightened enough to panic . 
And take this up the yazoo ! 
This tragedy belongs in Shakespeare or broadway ! 
Ya 'll are being had ! 
Country first my A$ $ ! 
Not bad at all . 
Do BOTH McCain AND Palin need more time to cram ?? This is just absurd ! 
And so very transparent . 
Apparently Palin did quite poorly tonight with Katie Couric . 
-LRB- per Politico -RRB- Just one thought - if McCain thinks it is SO critical to be in Washington WHY is he still in NYC ?? And why will he not return to DC until AFTER he appears with Bill Clinton at an event tomorrow in NYC ? 
Very obviously a political move . 
The debate is on again . 
I do n't know what happened to the Democratic party , but there seems to be this really awful , vindictive and hateful air permeating everything I hear in a discussion of the presidential race . 
The stuff on these comments on the news articles is the worst . 
I ca n't believe the paranoid lies and insinuations , it 's like the Democrats have become Richard Nixon or something . 
`` The issue of economics is not something I 've understood as well as I should , '' McCain said . 
`` I 've got Greenspan 's book . '' 
NOW , he thinks that Congress can not survive a few hours without his presence and wealth of knowledge ?? BTW , please leave Greenspan 's book at home ... any one of the seven homes . 
Four years ago , Greenspan suggested homeowner take out adjustable rate mortgages . 
AND they did ... about 2 years before the bottom fell out . 
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan said Monday that Americans ' preference for long-term , fixed-rate mortgages means many are paying more than necessary for their homes and suggested consumers would benefit if lenders offered more alternatives . 
Americans should have told Greenspan . . 
thanks , but no thanks . 
Why do n't you retire ? 
You 'll notice that Davis has been put on media lock-down as of this morning . 
The McCain campaign wanted to get the very damaging story out of the public eye . 
More than poll numbers -- it 's those revelations that have prompted the McCain campaign 's PR maneuver . 
I HOPE SENATOR OBAMA SHOWS NO MERCY ! 
AND FURTHER BLACKENS THE EYES OF YOUR FALTERING CAMPAIGN AND THIS WILL PROVE THAT THIS COUNTRY IS TRULY RESERVED FOR THE HOME OF THE BRAVE ! 
YOU CAN RUN FOR IT BUT YOU AI N'T GONNA SUCCEED BY MC HIDING FROM THESE DEBATES ! 
Since both of them are senators and have a vote , I would think that both of them would want to play an active part of the process and be there to cast their vote . 
McCain is willing to go back to Washington not knowing whether or not a vote will be taken while he is there . 
I guarantee you that Obama wo n't go anywhere near Washington when the agreement comes up for a vote . 
He has a record of dodging votes on important issues , and this issue is REALLY important . 
I hope the American people dont fall for another lie of the many lies by this guy . 
John McCain , a former pilot , is certainly taking a risk . 
This time however , events are beyond his control and the whole thing is too obviously political to work as well as he hopes . 
He 'll still have to show up on Friday night , and he knows it . 
It s not necessary for us to think that we can do only one thing , and suspend everything else . '' 
-LRB- obama -RRB- Posted by : dodo | September 24 , 2008 7:30 PM | Report abuse Who has put country first ? 
Obama called McCain this morning to invite him to issue a joint statement meant to put pressure on the government to come up with a better bailout plan for the country . 
Politically , this would be a stupid move for Obama -- he is now ahead in the polls and in public perceptions of economic leadership so he really did n't need to cast McCain as his equal on economic issues . 
But he put country first and give McCain a call . 
He waited hours before McCain got back and indicated his agreement . 
During the several hours he was waiting for McCain 's response , he did n't go public with his joint statement suggestion . 
He was obviously sincere about putting politics aside and solving the grave financial crisis . 
What did McCain do ? 
He got extended a `` country first '' branch and , instead of taking it to show unity , sincerity and seriousness , he went public with an announcement unilaterally suspending his campaign and pushing for postponement of the debate , all in the name of national interests . 
With this gimmick , he showed once again all he cares about is political gains . 
Shame on you , John McCain ! 
I hope he calls for the immediate investigation -LRB- jailing ? -RRB- 
of Schumer , Dodd , Barney Frank , and Franklin Raines for setting in motion the rape and pillage of Fannie and Freddie . 
This is a Democratic scandal and sewer and when the dust clears it will be traced back to 1999 and Clinton 's scheme to let inner city folks with no means to buy houses . 
And why has Obama become the third highest recepient of money from Fannie and Freddie in only 2 years ??? Let the investigations begin ! 
he is waaaaayyyyy too erratic to be president . 
he 's not thoughtful , but jumps before he knows all the facts . 
he was told `` not to come '' he was not needed . 
it frightens me to think that so many people believe that this guy has a country first attitude . 
the country needs him to do what he 's supposed to be doing , debating on Friday night with his opponent . 
If O `` mans-up '' and sticks to the Friday debate -LRB- i.e. , shows up even if Mac does n't -RRB- , this thing may be over . 
This is worse than a `` senior '' moment for Mac ; it is total brain lock . 
It 's admitting : I ca n't do more than one thing at a time . 
It 's admitting total panic . 
If O DOES N'T man-up and caves in to Mac 's juvenile stunt -LRB- by agreeing to a delay -RRB- it will cost O dearly . 
Hating all of this -LRB- because it helps Barack -RRB- are the Clintons . 
Maureen Dowd 's take on Bill 's camapigning against Obama the last two days is awesome and brillant . 
Dowd in NYT : `` Even if -LRB- Palin -RRB- blows off the First Amendment and lets McCain s Rove , Steve Schmidt , demonize the press even though she disdains women politicians who whine Bill Clinton is still a fan . 
Besides talking about what a great man John McCain is on The View and David Letterman , Bill praised Palin at his Clinton Global Initiative meeting in New York and will receive her there on Thursday . 
I come from Arkansas . 
I get why she is hot out there , he said authoritatively , adding : People look at her , and they say , All those kids . 
Something that happens in everybody s family . 
I m glad she loves her daughter and she s not ashamed of her . 
Glad that girl s going around with her boyfriend . 
Glad they re going to get married . 
He said voters would think : I like that little Down syndrome kid . 
One of them lives down the street . 
... And I like the idea that this guy does those long-distance races . 
Stayed in the race for 500 miles with a broken arm . 
My kind of guy . 
On The View , he said he understood that some women might vote for Palin on the basis of gender , even if it was against their economic interest . 
You can t tell someone else that the ground on which they make their voting decision is irrational , he said primly . 
Well , actually you could , if you weren t still sulking and plotting for 2012 . '' 
END of Dowd column Everyone in the Western World knows the Clintons are campaigning AGAINST O -LRB- who has n't reported that ? -RRB- 
, except O. But no one is telling O. Bill Clinton was rooting so hard against O on `` the View '' and later on Letterman , Chris Rock -LRB- on Letterman -RRB- turned it into a full comedy routine . 
It got sillier today : Bill said he was going to wait until the Jewish holidays are over before REALLY campaigning for O -- the problem is Bill is Baptist . 
WJC and his missus are clearly hatin ' and not appreciatin ' O. Part of their `` secret '' HRC 2012 strategy that has been exposed about 500 times in the Internet media . 
Note to David Axelrod : Get Mr. and Mrs. Wm. J. Clinton off the campaign trail and out of O 's life NOW , at least before COB tomorrow . 
I ca n't even watch the news anymore . 
McCain will do anything he can to win . 
All these tactics him and his party pull make me sick . 
How can anyone vote for McCain 's party after what they 've done these past eight years is beyond me . 
He 's trying to push back the VP debate so nobody gets an unfiltered look at Palin . 
I almost want to build her up so Biden can knock her down , but honestly the two soft-focus interviews she 's conducted to date with Gibson and Couric have been train wrecks . 
McCain 's ` maverick ' style is not what is needed for the people at this time in history . 
We have had enough of this type of behavior by the Bush administration . 
We need someone who uses intelligence and rational thinking at a time of crisis . 
McCain may be okay for the Senate but not for president . 
Troops would sure love that luxury . 
Unfortunately , though , insurgents in Iraq do n't stop shooting at us , or setting IEDs , because our Commander in Chief needs a breather to figure out Wall Street . 
Al Qaeda in the Afghanistan\/Pakistan border region do n't send our troops notes that read , `` Hey , I hear you guys are tied up with Wall Street . 
Your President needs to concentrate on other things , so we 'll give you a break . 
So , to make things easier on you , here 's our coordinates . '' 
Nor do our troops get a few days to figure out how to hold onto an area we 've secured , if there 's an unexpected attack . 
Sometimes we need to deal with multiple flare-ups at once in any warzone . 
We 'd sure love a time-out , but sadly , the world is n't such a nice place that it gives us that kind of pity . 
When you 're Commander in Chief , I do n't think there 'd be a worse signal to send to our troops in harm 's way than to say , `` Hey , hold on guys . 
I know you 're getting killed over there , but I have to get a time-out here to deal with Wall Street . '' 
If troops need to multi-task without a break , is it so wrong that we demand that a potential President-in-waiting prove that he can manage a financial crisis , and still address crises around the world for 90 minutes ? 
And , if a potential President-to-be ca n't manage that , is it wrong to think that maybe he ought not just suspend a debate and the campaign , but move aside and get out of the race ? 
Just something to think about . 
Does anyone find it strange that , true to form , the republicans are playing games with the american public . 
I read the e-mail and it called for republicans to increase their congressional numbers by crying foul on the bail out in order to appear to be the public champions - then McCain comes in and saves the day by appearing to bring both sides together - never mind those republicans crying foul is just a ruse . 
What a load of crap . 
If he felt the crisis was so important he could have suspended his campaign last week or Monday , Tuesday even Wednesday . 
They seem to consistently think the public is stupid . 
It 's not country first , it 's John McCain first and it 's always been John McCain first , party second , american gets what 's leftover . 
The crisis has existed since last year . 
If McCain cared so much , he would have postponed his campaign during the primaries . 
He is behind now and needs another rash move to change the dynamics of the race . 
It is also rather convenient that a postponed presidential debate would require the Wednesday VP debate to be postponed ... Based on what spin is the VP debate on Wednesday affected by all this ? 
How is a governor in Alaska involved in congressional hearings ? 
McCain is n't even a chairman of any of the committees drafting legislation on the bailout . 
What does he hope to accomplish by arriving late in the week after all the essentials players have been moving forward on reaching a compromise ? 
Presidential politics should not be infused in this crisis . 
McCain is using a crisis to fix his flailing campaign . 
These are exactly the qualities we do n't need right now . 
Suppose you get on a plane , whom will you prefer as your pilot ? 
I mean without taking into consideration McCain 's personal record . 
He does n't come off as the media darling , such as Obama . 
This may not make his campaign look very sexy , but in these uncertain times , I would much rather have a `` can-do '' man like McCain as President , than some phony , made-for-the-media do-nothing , like Obama . 
If we want a figurehead who can talk and who offers nothing else , then I would suppose that Obama might actually be the man for the job . 
I would tend to think that we actually need someone who can lead and get things done , in Washington , across the country and around the world . 
Hot air billowing from an empty shirt in a `` historic candidacy '' whose merits are skin color is not enough to get it done . 
I love how the minions of `` Dr. Goebbels '' Ploufe , those ubiquitous and nasty brown shirt trolls on the message and comment boards , out to wage a propaganda war for their boy , Obama , are working so tirelessly in service to their Fuehrer , Obama . 
I 'm a Democrat for McCain . 
`` I 've decided I will attend the Presidential debate because I have been informed that the deal being brokered is close at hand . '' 
Or something to that effect . 
He 's turned this into a sideshow just to score imaginary points . 
Like he 's the economic giant . 
The real giants are already there and working it out without John 's help . 
Let 's not forget that it was also an excellent way to bump up Sarah 's V.P. debate . 
ONly thing to do with their dysfunctional , foggy demented candidate is THROW THINGS UP IN THE AIR !!! SEE WHERE THINGS LAND . 
It 's called a Hail Mary pass , and you can get thrown to the ground pretty hard when it fails . 
What a lousey bunch of neocon rats McCain chose to run his presidential campaign . 
His judgement was just as keen with Palin . 
Eeeewwwuuu , nasty mess all around , lipstick or not . 
ORIN HAVE YOU EVER HEARD OF APRIL FOOLS ? 
AND MCFOOL TOOK THE BAIT ! 
IF MCCAIN WANTS TO RISK HIS PRESIDENCY BY GOING TO WASHINGTON . 
APRIL FOOLS MCCAIN YOUR WINNING THE RACE TO THE WHITE HOUSE ! 
I still need to be educated '' Now the same John McCain suspend his campaign two days before the first debate , the same John McCain who said he does n't understand the economy now wants to solve this crisis ? 
why two days before the debate and not at the beginnig of this week or the end of the last ? 
and for all of you who know claim that for mccain its `` country first '' : Of all Senators , John McCain has been the most absent . 
There have been 643 votes taken in the current Senate session : McCain has missed 412 of them . 
McCain has not voted in the Senate since April 8th . 
Since March , he has missed 109 of the last 110 votes . 
`` Hurry , Hurry , Stop Thinking , Just do what I say Now ! '' 
has always been the Bush administration 's way of doing things , ... . 
Why is it so imperative to act immediately ? 
This screw up has taken time to develop , so think about what it is and the long term effects of ALL of the solutions before jumping blindly into it like Bush and friends would have us do . 
His guidance has n't been exactly stellar so far has it ? 
But McCain 's already on the bus and honking the horn . 
Remember , ... If it smells like Bovine Feces , ... ... . 
He will lose the eventual -LRB- though certain -RRB- debate , and so will the `` pretty lil ' lady '' . 
THey are outmatched , and unfortunately , they think they are contenders . 
Wrong competition for a ` time-out ' , he 's developing Reaganic Senility , and she 's just eye candy ! 
Notice McCain looking over her goods as they deplaned last week together ! 
His wife is LIVID ! 
Wait until all the losers go home ... he 's gonna ' die broken hearted from losing the two loves of his life - `` wifey '' and the public 's interest ! 
Go home McPalin-it 's over !!! -LRB- Seriously -RRB- Suspend all you want , we 're still voting and you 're still doomed ! 
To quote my favorite politician , `` Is that the best he 's got ? '' 
- Barak Obama Posted by : Obama for President | September 24 , 2008 7:23 PM | Report abuse It 's noble of Sen. McCain to suspend his campaign and concede the race to Sen. Obama . 
His country thanks him for helping us avoid the disaster of another four years of Republican government . 
And why is his trailer trash VP in `` public relations protective custody '' ? 
Hey Mc Goo , do n't cut and run from the debate you agreed to . 
They really do n't need you in Washington that badly . 
Take a day and honor your commitments , even if it does mean you 'll get hammered in the polls when you come off like a clueless GOP hack . 
Why ca n't he handle a 90 minute debate ?? Give me a break . 
MSNBC 's Keith Olberman aka . 
Obamaman critized McCain and praised Obama . 
Obaman always does that . 
Just like his choice of Palin is an obvious scam . 
You ca n't be that stupid . 
Anyone who plans to be president better be able to handle more than one crisis simultaneously . 
McCain is showing us he 's not fit to lead . 
Not advertising could hurt him , but he cares more about this crisis . 
Whether i will agree with his solutions or not is to be seen . 
But one thing is for sure : I do appreciate his courage and boldness in stopping ads . 
The reason the MSM is attacking him is simple : no advertisement , no millions of dollars in ads for them . 
What does John McCain or Barack Obama have to do with the Banking Committee ? 
Will McCain stop running ads on Fox if they do n't charge him for the advertising ? 
What 's your response to those questions ? 
Stick to the rules , and to what 's your duty now : let the Americain built a real opinion of both candidates ' worth : do n't even try to escape from the debate . 
I think they should both multi-task by being United States Senators and running for President at the same time . 
In this situation however , making sure the deal happens is more important that running for president . 
If they focused on their current jobs for awhile , maybe that would allow the voters to better see how they would both perform as President . 
In other words , focusing on the debate about foreign policy , NOT the financial bail-out . 
The man is total B.S. ! 
He 's effectively admitting that he 's going to work on Bush 's behalf on their version of the bailout . 
The one that lets the CEO 's and Wall Street firms off the hook totally . 
YOU ARE NOT NEEDED ! 
STAY AWAY FROM WASHINGTON ... AGAIN . . 
YOU ARE NOT NEEDED . 
BUT REPUBLICANS ARE STILL BLOWING THAT HORN . 
LETS STAND DOWN AND HELP FIX OUR ECONOMY ... HAHAHAHAHAHAHHAHAHA FACE IT REPUBLICANS ... YOU ARE SOCIALIST ! 
This financial disaster happened a week ago . 
Why did n't he rush back then ? 
Is n't it interesting that this rush back to Washington happened just after it was proven that Rick Davis ' firm was still receiving money from either freddie mac or frannie mae -LRB- not sure which one -RRB- . '' 
Rick Davis gets $ 15,000 a month from Fannie May until last month for what ? 
Now the polls skyrocket for Obama and McCain wants to suspend his campaign and postpone the scheduled debate to `` focus '' on the financial crisis . 
I think that he is really focusing on the fact that his campaign is going down in flames ... Yesterday , the NyTimes reported that McCain 's top advisor , Rick Davis was on the Fannie May and Freddie Mac payroll up to a month ago although McCain and Davis had previously stated he had not been . 
THAT is the reason McCain has suspended his campaign . 
Let 's no tsuspend our common sense . 
You hit the nail on the head my friends . 
That was the top headline just a few hours ago . 
Now it 's been trumped by McSame 's next circus sideshow . 
And a moratorium on campaign ads is just a tactic to prevent Obama from running with this story . 
All of this after McHypocrite 's campaign tried to do the same thing by linking Obama to Fannie\/Freddie . 
This move by McCantMultiTask to rush back and fix the economy -LRB- something that he previously considered fundamentally strong which I guess you can think when you are an old rich white guy -RRB- is smoke and mirrors . 
It is not about being above politics or working for the good of the country , it 's about strategery , isn t it McBush ? 
Let 's declare victory and go straight to the election . 
McCain wo n't be there to interrupt the vote counting . 
Also , a good friend of mine has some of his retirement money in an annuity at AIG , and that friend is really worried . 
Everyone should be worried about their financial health . 
Since you favor the debate , you must not have any financial worries . 
If he merely holds his own , that will be enough for a lot of swing voters . 
What better strategy than to keep this from even happening ? 
McCain then calls a press conference and begins his game of one upmanship . 
Does McCain have any original ideas ? 
I do n't think so ! 
They just announced it on CNN and it makes perfect sense ! 
I mean if that 's the only criterion for the GOP someone whi is n't a liar , when his mouth moves , who has an idea of principle and can pick a vice president , of any gender who is n't a complete disaster . 
Obama is great at multi-tasking . 
While a senator in Illinois , he was able to find time to buy a mansion from Rezko under the table , he has been able to get every agency in this country to hide his records , all of them : birth certificate , Harvard records , masters thesis , etc , etc , etc. . 
While running for Illinois senate , he multi tasked to have every vote of his opponent picked and nulled . 
Really , multitasking is an Obama strength . 
My boy Anonymous keeps it real . 
Obama is a cheat . 
Not a cheat on your disfigured wife cheat , but a cheat nonetheless ... Check it out ... A little fodder for you smart guys of the Fix ... Seperate the Fact from Fiction ... Let me see if I have this straight ... - If you grow up in Hawaii , raised by your grandparents , you 're `` exotic , different . '' 
- Grow up in Alaska eating mooseburgers , a quintessential American story . 
- If your name is Barack you 're a radical , unpatriotic Muslim . 
- Name your kids Willow , Trig and Track , you 're a maverick . 
Graduate from Harvard law School and you are unstable . 
Attend 5 different small colleges before graduating , you 're well grounded . 
If you spend 3 years as a brilliant community organizer , become the first black President of the Harvard Law Review , create a voter registration drive that registers 150,000 new voters , spend 12 years as a Constitutional Law professor , spend 8 years as a State Senator representing a district with over 750,000 people , become chairman of the state Senate 's Health and Human Services committee , spend 4 years in the United States Senate representing a state of 13 million people while sponsoring 131 bills and serving on the Foreign Affairs , Environment and Public Works and Veteran 's Affairs committees , you do n't have any real leadership experience . 
If your total resume is : local weather girl , 4 years on the city council and 6 years as the mayor of a town with less than 7,000 people , 20 months as the governor of a state with only 650,000 people , then you 're qualified to become the country 's second highest ranking executive . 
If you have been married to the same woman for 19 years while raising 2 beautiful daughters , all within Protestant churches , you 're not a real Christian . 
If you cheated on your first wife with a rich heiress , and left your disfigured wife and married the heiress the next month , you 're a Christian . 
If you teach responsible , age appropriate sex education , including the proper use of birth control , you are eroding the fiber of society . 
If , while governor , you staunchly advocate abstinence only , with no other option in sex education in your state 's school system while your unwed teen daughter ends up pregnant , you 're very responsible . 
If your wife is a Harvard graduate lawyer who gave up a position in a prestigious law firm to work for the betterment of her inner city community , then gave that up to raise a family , your family 's values do n't represent America 's . 
If you 're husband is nicknamed `` First Dude '' , with at least one DWI conviction and no college education , who did n't register to vote until age 25 and once was a member of a group that advocated the secession of Alaska from the USA , your family is extremely admirable . 
OK , things are much clearer now . 
His campaign would not want to lose positive momentum . 
How does running a television ad prevent someone from working on a bill ??? Right now . . 
his campaign is going down almost as fast as those 5 planes did . 
McCain is trying to push back the debates so Palen can get some more study time in . 
I did see Obama response which was as mealy mouthed I 've seen . 
I had no idea what he was talking about , and he was giving a one-sided version of a conversation with McCain that sounded like a talk meant to be private . 
MSNBC 's Keith Olberman aka . 
Obamaman critized McCain and praised Obama . 
THE CHAMPION OF DEREGULATION HAS HAD TO PERFORM A 180 DEGREE TURNABOUT IN ONE WEEK AND I BELIEVE HE TWISTED SOMETHING IN THE PROCESS -LRB- Could it be his logic that got twisted -RRB- . 
IT S FRAUD - ITS FRAUD - ITS FRAUD - ITS FRAUD WHY DOES WALL STREET WANT THIS BAIL-OUT , NOT NOW , BUT RIGHT NOW ? 
IT S FRAUD , PLAIN AND SIMPLE . 
WHEN YOU SELL SOMETHING -LRB- Credit Default Swaps , etc. -RRB- AND YOU KNOW , AS A BANKER THAT THE VALUE OF THE ITEM YOU ARE SELLING IS WORTHLESS , YET YOU ASSURE AND CERTIFY TO THE BUYER THAT THE ITEM YOU ARE SELLING IS WORTH X DOLLARS YOU ARE ENGAGED IN FRAUD . 
HOW DO YOU GET OUT OF THIS MESS BEFORE A NEW ADMINISTRATION COMES IN AND STARTS SENDING EVERYONE INVOLVED TO JAIL . 
YOU GET THE GOVERNMENT TO BUY THESE WORTHLESS ITEMS , AND IN DOING SO THE GOVERNMENT PLACES A VALUE ON THE WORTHLESS ITEM IN QUESTION AND BECOMES A PARTNER IN THIS FRAUD UPON THE AMERICAN PEOPLE . 
THE LONGER CONGRESS TAKES IN EVALUATING THIS UN-HOLY CON-JOB AND THE COUNTRY DOESN T CRASH AND BURN , THE MORE PEOPLE WILL REALIZE THE QUALITY OF THE WOOL THAT IS BEING PULLED OVER THEIR EYES . 
ONE OTHER COMMENT , JOHN McCAIN HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH THIS BAIL-OUT BILL . 
HE IS NOT ON THE COMMITTEE , HE IS NOT REQUIRED OR NEEDED TO DO ANYTHING BUT VOTE , ONCE A DECISION AND THE LANGUAGE OF THE BILL HAS BEEN DECIDED . 
THERE IS SOMETHING ELSE GOING ON . 
DOES ANYONE ELSE NOTICE THAT THIS DOES NOT PASS THE `` SMELL '' TEST ? 
At least in the 21st century . 
This entire stunt has one purpose and one purpose only : to abort the VP debate . 
They just announced that they want to `` reschedule '' the Palin debate . 
She is going to sink him and they know it . 
McCain decided to STOP advertisements , to stop the political non sense in order to pay attention to what most American have being demanding from their `` representatives '' : to work together and find a solution . 
His Highness ca n't do that . 
He is too afraid of the consequences of him stopping for a moment to take care of the people . 
It takes galls to do what McCain is doing . 
Not advertising could hurt him , but he cares more about this crisis . 
Whether i will agree with his solutions or not is to be seen . 
But one thing is for sure : I do appreciate his courage and boldness in stopping ads . 
The reason the MSM is attacking him is simple : no advertisement , no millions of dollars in ads for them . 
An undergraduate degree in basket weaving and an JD in law are hardly economic credentials . 
But being chairman of the Commerce committee for years is ... Whoever wrote this is awesome . 
A JD in law , especially one from Harvard is cake . 
i 'm sure this poster could be Coif , Robe , Barrister 's , and EOC of the LR as well . 
McCain 's academic background is much more suited than Obama 's ! 
You do n't take any type of business law at that Mickey Mouse law school at Harvard anyway ! 
That poster is great ! 
HE WOULD SELL BAD STOCK TO HIS OWN GRANDMOTHER . 
It explained the reasoning behind McCain 's choice to go back to the senate to try and help out , and does an objective job of showing Obama 's reasons . 
Obviously the main subject matter of the article is on McCain going back to Congress , but a well written , objective article . 
The comments , however , are what I 've come to expect from people posting on politics online . 
Mainly democratic zealots posting , complaining about things that happened that have nothing to do with the article itself , or are only briefly acquainted with the subject matter . 
The occasional Republican that posts only does a little better , responding to the attack comments while defending McCain on what is arguably the better move . 
McCain is doing the right thing . 
The campaign is not as important as our economy , he just wins points for going there first . 
If Obama goes to Congress as well now , he loses some face to McCain . 
The debate can be rescheduled , but our economy can not be put on pause while we argue . 
Fix the problem , find a solution , then get down to business . 
We still have 39 days to argue this out , that should be more than enough time to debate everything that they could possibly be contested on . 
Let 's declare victory and go straight to the election . 
McCain wo n't be there to interrupt the vote counting . 
This would probably be a good thing . 
If they do not , they may then be characterized as `` too many cooks '' , adding baggage to the issue . 
If they make a joint statement but must work their caucuses , they should go back to DC and postpone the debate . 
McC is running behind , he needs the debate , and it will not go away if they postpone it . 
If there is no joint statement then many of us will think `` a pox on presidential campaigns '' . 
I do not know which nominee will look worse . 
To me , probably McC , but perhaps my view is not universally held . 
For example , McC could be in DC looking workmanlike and bipartisan while BHO is alone in Oxford , Mississippi , looking partisan . 
In any event , McC can go to the debate now having cleared the deck of his unwise statements of last week , an excellent political outcome for him , and his current position on the matter is reasonable . 
It never ceases to amaze me how much he preys on fear ! 
First dude say 's postpone your speech today baby . 
Millions of voters are waiting for the debate . 
The financial crisis aint going to be fix `` instantly '' just because John McCain , nor Obama showing up in Washington D.C. Get on with the debate ! 
And Be Like a Leader not a Runner . -RRB- 
The nation is fully aware of the situation provided by the spinners in the gop camp , , , we are not about to fall for this ploy , It is time for mcgirly boy to MC MAN - UP MC WEASEL Posted by : kray | September 24 , 2008 7:02 PM | Report abuse To anyone who actually buys McCain 's statement that this is `` suspending '' his campaign , I have a bridge -LRB- to nowhere -RRB- to sell you . 
When we stop hearing from Tucker Bounds , I 'll believe the campaign has been suspended . 
The fact is John McCain or Barack Obama are not involved in the negotiations for the bailout . 
Further , as the nominee 's of their respective parties they have a duty to tell the American people where they stand on the issues . 
The debate is the perfect opportunity to do this . 
McCain is engaging in a political stunt and it shows he does n't have the character to be president . 
He did n't say he did n't understand it more than Obama . 
Come to think of it , it 's not Obama 's strong suit either . 
An undergraduate degree in basket weaving and an JD in law are hardly economic credentials . 
But being chairman of the Commerce committee for years is ... Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 7:00 PM | Report abuse I think McCain should learn from Obama . 
Obama is great at multi-tasking . 
While a senator in Illinois , he was able to find time to buy a mansion from Rezko under the table , he has been able to get every agency in this country to hide his records , all of them : birth certificate , Harvard records , masters thesis , etc , etc , etc. . 
While running for Illinois senate , he multi tasked to have every vote of his opponent picked and nulled . 
Really , multitasking is an Obama strength . 
So is he not needed in Washington . 
It is a ploy to buy time for a self-centered campaign that is only filled with lies , radical views , that are not for the good of all but for a few , and negative attacks that Cindy McCain is on record as saying would not take place in her husband 's campaign . 
He picked Palin and does n't know what to do with her but use her to try to win . 
Every time she opens her mouth she makes ridiculous mistakes . 
Why would someone who does n't know how many homes he owns care about the economy ? 
This is about his campaign being well aware of it . 
This is about a nearly disabled man , mentally . 
Even at his best , which is long past , this man does not have the temperment or personality or stability to be president . 
His choice of Palin only part of that dysfunctional person . 
So his campaign mangers , liars and not committed to the man ... but to their neocon takeover of him ... let him look like the unable fool he is . 
They do n't care much , theyve . 
ost and they know it . 
If they postpone the VP debate to accomodate a rescheduled presidential debate , maybe the VP 's dont have to debate at all and we can spare Sarah from this terrible ordeal !!!!!! After all , we all know she is ready to lead this country and deal with complex issues like the financial debacle we are witnessing : why would we want to doubt her ? 
I HAVE TO GO POO-POO I 'M JOHN MCCAIN AND I ENDORSE THIS AD ! 
Dave even cut over to the live video of the interview , and said , `` Hey Senator , can I give you a ride home ? '' 
Earlier in the show , Dave kept saying , `` You do n't suspend your campaign . 
This does n't smell right . 
This is n't the way a tested hero behaves . '' 
And he joked : `` I think someone 's putting something in his metamucil . '' 
`` He ca n't run the campaign because the economy is cratering ? 
Fine , put in your second string quarterback , Sara Palin . 
Where is she ? '' 
`` What are you going to do if you 're elected and things get tough ? 
We 've got a guy like that now ! '' 
What are they afraid of ? 
He can not face the American people - because he has nothing to face them with . 
Obama can then go forward answering the questions that the American people have for him . 
At least one candidate is willing to put the country and the American people first - and it is n't McSame . 
Does the man have no idea how to delegate ? 
Besides , all he ever does in Senate meetings is lose his temper and flounce out of the room . 
The Republicans have picked the best of their bunch - and it ai n't much . 
From their postings here they do n't even know the meaning of the word `` accountable '' - far less how to actually practice it . 
Oh and puhlease , to those right wingers who now want civility - just remember how you cackled when your Veep used the F word to describe Democrats . 
We 're civil - but we 're justifiably furious . 
The Republican majority took a surplus and peacetime and landed us in a new depression and two endless wars in less than 8 years . 
Stop bleating about patriotism and practice it - this is no way to love your country . 
Guess you have already forgotten about Tom Daschle , LOL , I can understand why . 
To me this is just a political move . 
Do YOU know anything about the economy ? 
As much as John McCain ? 
Maybe YOU should go to Washington to help too ! 
Maybe we ALL should ! 
And we can ALL run for VP too like miss main street Palin ! 
The GOP had been in controll for eight years before 1929 . 
Clinton also cleaned up after the 12 years of Reagan and Bush . 
Then the assembled liberal pressies can make love to him on national television without the insult of having to entertain Senator McCain . 
Well , at least the Senator is consistent . 
He 's got a whole history of fiscal disasters he 's createdincluding the current one , What 's one more -LRB- and such a small one -RRB- ? . 
Instead they would help you and I the people of America . 
Set up a lottery giving people up to $ 200,000 to pay off or toward their home loans . 
Wait two years and then start making payments back to the US Government when things are better for everyone . 
This issue is not big enough that McCain has to continue to do the theatrics he has done thus far . 
Becoming President is NOT a Performance as John McCain said to Chris Wallace just before Palin 's introduction to the sharks of Politics . 
Pit Bull Palin should be put in the pound like all the rest of the Pit Bulls , and face Troopergate !!! Posted by : Joe Kubitschek | September 24 , 2008 6:55 PM | Report abuse The intent behind McCain 's `` surprise '' announcement peeked through a little while ago when his camp floated the trial balloon that the debate be made up on October 2nd , effectively kicking Palin 's debate with Biden to an as yet to be decided date . 
It is clear that with the republiCONS they want to hide Palin 's stupidity and lack of integrity from being shown to the great American public . 
Who really wants a criminally oriented whack job from Alaska a heartbeat from the presidency ? 
This might be as transparent as the McCain\/Palen ticket ever gets . 
McCain is a senate leader and is needed in Washington to push this legislation to passage . 
Obama is NOT a senate leader , and in fact has n't really ever been there , so his presence is n't really required . 
Therefore , they are BOTH RIGHT in the decision they each made . 
This is one of the most ridiculous concepts I have ever heard . 
The four most politicized individuals in the U.S. today are John McCain , Sarah Palin , Barack Obama , and Joe Biden . 
For any of these people to start mucking about with these negotiations politicizes the issue . 
McCain is acting recklessly , forcing campaign politics into a process that requires political cover so that legislators can , you know , legislate . 
His mere presence will turn the bailout into a political football , making it impossible for Congress and the White House to create an effective solution . 
If you want the big desk in the oval office you had better be able to multitask , Senator McCain , and you said it yourself , sir , you dont know much about economics . 
The GOP has been in the White House for 8 years ... and controlled the House and Senate for 12 of the past 14 years . 
You want to blame Putin ? 
Hopefully American voters are still intelligent enough to work out that after 8 long years of unfettered Republican rule , we simply ca n't afford more of the same . 
So , instead of working with his colleges in the senate to discuss a solution to this `` crisis '' , as McCain is doing , The messiah wants to continue with his campaign . 
His lame excuse , '' I do n't want to inject -LRB- ! -RRB- 
politics into the process '' , is not only laughable , but insulting to the intelligence of the few of us who still use it . 
He is still a senator . 
His job IS about politics . 
He is , simply , a wuss . 
Mc Cain like to avoid debate ; that is irresponsible with the voters . 
| September 24 , 2008 6:50 PM | Report abuse On second thought if Sarah Palin is ready to step in as president then she should be able to step in Friday night . 
Audacious but makes him look like a coward . 
Calling off the presidential debate can not possibly make sense -- when the candidates can just call off preparing for the debate and have it DC . 
There is much from the RNC that the rest of the country did not hear about or see . 
I live in the Twin Cities and the protests were n't the half of it !! The manipulation of what the media saw , the phony `` handmade '' signs passed out at the convention , the lobbyists in town , women walking around in $ 5G Chanel dresses treating the locals like riff raff . 
If things like this were happening in Denver I 'd want to know about that too , and I 'm sure both sides manipulate . 
I just had a front row seat so to speak and I was discusted by what I witnessed in my own town . 
I should have voted for Romney . 
But I did n't trust him beacause he 's a Mormon . 
If I was n't such a bigot ... Posted by : mitt | September 24 , 2008 6:48 PM | Report abuse mccain can run but he cant hide ... he canceled his campain to stop the debate because he is running scared ... its his own fault picking palin , he can only blame himself . . 
americans are not stupid . 
a new Washington Post-ABC News poll that showed Barack Obama leading John McCain 52 percent to 43 percent nationally Joe Lockhart , Democratic strategist , former Clinton White House : John McCain and his campaign obviously think the American people are not very smart . 
In fact he s betting his whole campaign on it . 
Here s what they re hoping no one figures out . 
The McCain ads are still up , so he is n't suspending his campaign . 
McCain again shows he 's a puppet to Rove . 
ALL EXCEPT FOR FOXNEWS ? '' 
McCain wants to cancel the first debate and move it to the Vice Presidential debate . 
Moving that debate into the future . 
Talk about killing two birds with one stone -- in addition to McCain 's avoiding his debate in the face of falling poll numbers , after Palin 's day of near-silent photo-ops at the U.N. , attempting to also give Palin more time to prepare . 
As suggested by Dana Milbank on CNN , there 's an easy solution -- just let Palin debate this Friday night ! 
The fundamentals of the debate are strong ! 
Next would be to POSTPONE the ELECTIONS and GIVE Bush an `` emergency '' extension . ' 
I wonder if he 'll be taking Phil Gramm with him ? 
I wonder if he 'll be taking Sarah Palin ? 
Ironic that so many will defend him in an online arena he does n't even know how to access . 
John McCain would n't know how to solve this country 's problems if the answers were emailed to him . 
, you say , `` He does n't NEED to know how to use the internet to run this country ! '' 
Well maybe he does n't need to know how to debate either ? 
In fact , maybe John McCain does n't need any credentials at all , maybe just enough uneducated people who are afraid of electing a colored guy to office , but too afraid to openly admit it . 
Today McCain and Bush are trying to do it all over again : they want to use the crisis on wall street to give our money away to corrupt bankers . 
Sound it similar ... that is the same No Leadership logic ... Posted by : dennis urbano | September 24 , 2008 6:42 PM | Report abuse SO MCCAIN IS GOING TO WASHINGTON FOR A DAY OR TWO TO GET HIS ECONOMIC EXPERIENCE AND CREDENTIALS , JUST LIKE HE SENT PALIN TO GO TO THE UN TO GET HER INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCE AND CREDENTIALS ... I GUESS SENILITY IS IN FULL BLOOM ... HE MUST HAVE FORGOTTEN HE SPENT 26 YEARS THERE AND VOTED FOR MOST OF THE THINGS THAT ARE THE PROBLEM TODAY ----- SILLY , SILLY , SILLY -- AND HE INSULTS THE AMERICAN PEOPLE WHO DESERVE TO HEAR SOLUTIONS , NOT HIS POSTURING !!! Posted by : benighse | September 24 , 2008 6:42 PM | Report abuse Granted McCain does n't have any economic policy expertise now ... but I know that after he takes that Kaplan test prep course he will be ready . 
In other words , he will have that `` readiness '' . 
It really makes McCain look foolish . 
She will print the answers to the questions on your cue cards . 
Nobody expects you to answer any of the questions all by yourself . 
This debate could not be any more difficult than sending an email . 
That is exactly what they did when -LRB- Presiden -RRB- McCain picked -LRB- Vice President -RRB- Palin as his running mate . 
The Dems will not go down without the most significant fight for the White House in in the last 100 years . 
They are hungry to be in a position of power despite majority congressional presence for the last 2 years . 
It is understandable but will not come to pass . 
When John McCain and Sarah Palin take the oath of office , only then , will reality set in for the Dems . 
Right now , they are reveling in their historic bid for the White House and I ca n't blame them . 
However , as record expenditures on campaigning are made apparent in the liberal media , they are somehow being viewed as a measure of bona fide success . 
This is not the case at all . 
It is a measure of the fund raising machine put forth by the Dems , not of Obama 's success . 
In fact , in terms of money raised , Obama has not garnered the success that he should have . 
He is running neck and neck with -LRB- President -RRB- McCain , not at all reflecting Obama 's private fund raising success . 
Well Mr. McCain , having said that I say , do n't bother showing up at the White House either . 
IF he simply pulled his TV ads now , you 'd report he was running out of money -- not unlike Hillary Clinton loaning her campaign money . 
It is not only a presidential election we have , it is Congress too -LRB- the entire House and 1\/3 of the Senate -RRB- . 
All of Congress should be in Washington this week and get to some resolution on this matter , even if it is a temporary one . 
If some want to be holed up in a hotel in Tampa to cram for a debate , then we know where their priorities are . 
Did everyone forget what this argument is about ? 
John McCain would rather run back to DC to help the GOP pass its version of a Bail out that is essentially a no oversight give away to the rich ! 
that ai n't what a real maverick would do ... Posted by : john | September 24 , 2008 6:38 PM | Report abuse Look at all these people who obviously would claim `` Obama is a true visionary '' , if he did the same . 
Yet when it the opposing party , its `` McCain only cares about himself . '' 
You idiots are the same people who got into risky loans forcing the sub-prime crisis , which is having a domino effect and the economy , yet are crying victim while pointing the finger at everyone but yourself . 
I worked in the loan industry . 
I saw how Democrats in my state refused to pass laws to safeguard the industry , while idiots like you would say `` Republicans are trying to control things by not allowing a free market . '' 
Yet now you still blame Republicans by saying `` This all happened under Bush '' , you ignore that under Clinton the economy was stealing profits from the future as credit was easy to come by . 
Now we are paying for it , now that your loan is resetting and you cant pay the extra $ 700 a month . 
Now that the bubble , creates by a lose credit market , reality is hitting and most leveraged investments are crashing . 
Yea thats right , instead of feeling your way through politics with idealism and ignorance , try learning learning the long-term effects of economic policy and tax manipulation . 
Look , your stupid , and I 'm going to prove it : Obama -LRB- who I will vote for -RRB- is going to win , but since the economy is likely going to suck for the next 2 years , you not going to blame Obama , your going to blame Bush . 
However , if the economy is good , your going to credit Obama . 
Do you feel stupid not ? 
Now you know how I take your money . 
Your brain dead and stupid and I can call your next move before you even make it . 
What will be next , not having an election so he wo n't lose the presidency . 
Sarah Palin , now this : not the reasoned actions of a mature , stable personality . 
We have had eight years of one-trick pony Bush . 
What , now we want a more versatile clown ? 
Palin looks like an ignoramus . 
We know Bush is an ignoramus . 
Please , Republican pattern of failed and failing leadership is getting hard to take . 
Mc Cain like to avoid debate ; that is irresponsible with the voters . 
Well Mr. McCain , having said that I say , do n't bother showing up at the White House either . 
Do you know what either candidate or party would do if they are elected , or do you just listen to right wing spin and recycle it like old sewage ? 
He 's scared to face Obama on Friday . 
obama calls mccain first thing this morning to suggest a joint news briefing re this crisis , and johnny boy does n't take his call . . 
and before you know it . . 
john `` the penguin '' mccain goes WADDLING to the camera making little quacking noises and saying , `` ME ME ME '' and then pretends obama never even called . 
mccain is such a friggin little worm it 's disgusting . 
maybe john boy should asks sarah what to do ... after all , she 's AWESOME ! 
It was a calculated political move from a guy who 's struggling . 
McCain has n't cast a Senate vote since April -- he 's not superman ; he 's not going to go flying back to DC to solve the problem ; he 'll just inject presidential politics into delicate negotiations . 
This is n't suspending the campaign ; it IS the campaign . 
canceling the debates will have NO effect on solving this economic problem . 
It WILL help us choose a leader . 
there is NO GOOD REASON to stop the debates or the campaigning . 
Leaders MUST juggles several crises at the same time . 
McCain simply can not handle the stress , and Repubs are desperate to find some explanation for his cowardice . 
Reminds me of what sophomores would do in high school to avoid a big test . 
Thank God we have a calm mature level-headed leader in Barack . 
He has just proven his true nature . 
Well Mr. McCain , having said that I say , do n't bother showing up at the White House either . 
McCain is trying to take credit for the work done by others . 
McCain is a know-nothing . 
How sickening that you assume those who dissagree with you are not students of history . 
You must be a genius . 
The election is only six weeks away . 
It 's important for the voters to figure out who they want to lead the country for the next four years . 
These debates are far more important than some political stunt designed to make one more `` presidential . '' 
Heaven forbid that people actually settle down and pay attention to what and who he represents . 
He has no policy other than a slight variation from the Bush policies -LRB- see his voting record , support for uber wealthy tax cuts , privatized social security , no health care -RRB- and is suddenly making noises as though he 's a populist reformer . 
He has a Freddie Mac lobbyist running his campaign , paid through last month , the Sen. Phil Gramm slimebag who helped cause this financial crisis by deregulating banks as his close friend and advisor . 
This guy does not want people to understand anything real about where he has been coming from for the past decades , so why not shock & awe and distract ? 
He aint the President yet . 
Or ... maybe he dont want nothing to do with in case the fix fails , then he can blame everyone else . 
One crisis is the making of McLame 's party president and the other is a crisis manufactured by Karl Rove to cancel the debate . 
Obama should go to the debate surrounded by the former chairmen of the Federal Reserve who back him and by Warren Buffett . 
Let McLame pretend he is needed in Washington where he has been absent the past year . 
Now Obama supporters are `` not americans '' ? 
That does not sound like the gop being bi-partisan . 
It sounds like more of the same old incomptence and bullying . 
Lets thrown these chumps out of office , yes ? 
I am prepared to tie McCain to all the dead squirrels and gunned down black children in the South Side of Chicago . 
I certainly want the enonomy to collapse . 
I am surrouned by all the former Clinton economic A-team who are 110 % behind globalization and free trade . 
I am just so confused as to who is saying what . 
I am so upset that no one reminded me that there are not 57 States plus Alaska and Hawaii in the U.S. I also truly believed 10,000 people died in the Kansas twisters in a single day -- too bad FoxNews taped my saying that and it ended up on YouTube . 
But I just have to do ahead and have it over with . 
The reason that I did n't write a single piece for the Harvard Law Review was my lack of logic . 
Hillary wo n't be there to answer all the questions first . 
I just have to go ahead . 
Besides , all my supporters in the media will kill their own wives to sleep with me , like Chris Matthews . 
Head , I win . 
Tail , McCain loses . '' 
the public will get a good idea as to their readiness to step in when needed . 
Obama desperately needed a Media infusion of worship to shore up his campaign in crash and dive mode . 
Please , please , PLEASE let Obama Lite show up alone for a debate ... `` It was not immediately clear what the fate of the debate will be if only Obama decides to show up on Friday night . '' 
RESPONSE : It would be undisputed -- OBAMA loses !! Posted by : JaxMax | September 24 , 2008 6:30 PM | Report abuse It would appear that McCain was just trying to put the country first if not for the fact that he was contacted by Obama FIRST to do a joint statement . 
NOT wanting to look like he was following Obama 's lead -LRB- ership -RRB- he went out and made it appear he was taking charge of the situation . 
Total Political maneuver !!!! Putting your country first would be contacting each other in private as Obama tried to do , getting a joint statement together and THEN making a joint NON-political public statement . 
It is all about making himself look good on the day of crisis for McCain . 
`` The Sky IS Falling , The Sky IS Falling '' Heard all this before . 
First we must `` Rush '' to approve a war to `` save us '' from real danger to our country and it 's safety . 
Now we must `` Rush '' to approve a 700 Billion bailout we know no details about , at our expense , to again `` Save us '' from total economic melt down . 
Obama shows so much more leadership by wanting to wait and get a good handle on what `` WE '' the American people want as well as what is really best for this country . 
NO ONE knows the answer to this mess and it is going to take more then a mere 4 days to figure this out . 
This is no time to rush into anything . 
I think we as Americans have evolved beyond the ride through the saloon door , guns a blazing era . 
The economy is not going to collapse any further then it would have regardless if they approve this thing by the weekend . 
Now he wants to ride back to Washington like a knight in shining armor to save the day ! 
What a total creep . 
This is so clearly yet another tawdry amoral Rovian political stunt ... God help our young people , who are being taught day by day that gross deception and flagrant lies are the way to succeed in public life . 
That is the true crime of the Rovian Republicans , the true debt that our children will pay and pay and pay . 
But thank God , also , that the majority of our young people are enlightened enough to see Rovian trash for precisely what it is . 
That 's exactly what this is : a cheap political stunt by a shameless politican . 
If anyone bothered to look at or track what has been going on , -LRB- Paulsen folds on the CEO pay issue , agrees to equity positions via warrents , agrees to mortage restructuring , agrees to oversight panel -RRB- a lot of the flaws in what Paulson wanted are being ironed out , and both the dems , the repubs and the administration are converging on a bill . 
Looks McCain will be riding into Dodge after most of the shooting is over and the smoke has begun clearing . 
That -LRB- of course . . 
will not prevent McCain from making grand pronouncements and trying to take credit for what already happened ... which is McCains real agenda . 
The assertion McCain could add much to the debate -LRB- mostly thoses of his fellow repubs -RRB- given his self-confessed weakness 's concerning economic matters was perposterous on its face anyway . 
Everyone knows the situation is serious ... what else is new . 
The fact is that McCain wants to RUSH the Bush bailout through congress without oversight . 
His own banker buddies will benefit and every american will have to pay 7,000 $ more in taxes . 
-LRB- answer ; no , you do not because you have no sense of historical perspective OR priorities -RRB- HOW COULD YOU NOT TAKE IT MORE SERIOUSLY ? 
ANSWER : because you do not really care about your country - you just want your rock star to get elected obamiden may win but America will pay a serious price for many generations IF he does WE ARE TALKING ABOUT 700 BILLION DOLLARS HERE WHEN WE ARE ALREADY IN DEBT - THIS COULD WELL BE A MAKE\/BREAK VOTE FOR THE FUTURE OF OUR NATION 'S VERY EXISTENCE AND ALL YOU demoCRITES WANT TO DO IS HAVE A DEBATE PARTY SO YOU CAN SMOKE SOME MORE WEED !!! -LRB- p.s. mccain was right when he said that aspects of the economy such as the employment rate are fundamentally strong - he KNEW he would get criticized for saying it but he said it anyway - because a true statesman has to say things like that from time to time to stave off a panic - so he 's already played a role in stabilizing the situation or the sell off could have brought everything down early last week just like way back when biden thought FDR was president -RRB- Posted by : tojoley | September 24 , 2008 6:26 PM | Report abuse I 'd love to see Sarah Palin do an actual press conference with real questions . 
It 's sad that it bears repeating . 
If the Dems were manipulating the press like this , with phony `` handmade '' signs and no candidate access you would cry foul all day and night . 
But these lies suit you nicely . 
We all need to stop the shouting and let our representative reach a quick agreement . 
Buying some gold is also a good idea if agreement is n't reached soon . 
Like previous `` bailouts '' over time , the govenment may get it 's money back ; lose a little or even make a profit . 
I wish the media would stick to the facts . 
He is not the first person I would want negotiating a quick solution proposed by GWB . 
Does each and every citizen want $ 2000 of their money spent bailing out these companies ... ask a family -LRB- that only owns one home -RRB- if that amount of money would be noticed ? 
... each citizen , not each family . 
Now Obama conveniently says the American people deserve a debate while McCain is bound by his principles . 
Political opportunism at its best . 
`` will you get off your lazy butt and stop voting `` present '' Mr. Obama !! '' Posted by : Billw | September 24 , 2008 6:25 PM | Report abuse what is all this talk about voting . 
everyone knows my response already : Posted by : snObama | September 24 , 2008 6:24 PM | Report abuse This is pure politics and attention getting . 
The patronizing repartee is getting annoying . 
This rush rush hurry hurry fear tactic GOP thing has only ever meant trouble . 
Rush rush , we do n't have time to recount the votes in Florida , the Supreme Court has to decide -LRB- betcha 9\/11 never would have happened if it was n't for another Bush in office -RRB- Rush , rush hurry hurry we do n't have time for the inspectors to determine if Sadam has weapons of mass destruction we need to invade right away . 
-LRB- no WMD -RRB- Rush rush the whole world is going to collapse if John MCCain does n't get to Washington this very weekend . 
It 's all Monica 's fault . 
Ha ha Strategy less the sincerity . 
What does a candidate do , someone who was almost last in his class in college , during a major personal crisis ? 
Roll up his sleeves and solve the problem ? 
No , he throws the dice and with a brazen step attempts to hit `` reset . '' 
McCain is absolutely not suspending his campaign ! 
This is pure fiction ! 
Choosing Palin was his first desperate move . 
His latest gambit , the so-called `` suspension '' of his campaign , is the second Hail Mary in just a few weeks . 
Would McCain have everyone believe that his entire campaign staff are stopping work , too ? 
McCain 's problem writ large is that the current environment puts him and all Republicans in an unfavorable light . 
They produced this mess with their wreckless laissez faire economic policiies . 
Bush has been in office 8 years and the Republicans ran Congress for 6 of those years . 
They own Wall St. Mark my words : Bush will be remembered as a Herbert Hoover president . 
Barack Obama will be rightly seen as the next Franklin Roosevelt and McCain will be a footnote . 
... and that he will debate Obama as scheduled . 
Nothing to see here , folks . 
Just move on , go on about your business , everythings ' taken care of . 
While being ` delayed ' is n't quite the same as ` called off ' it still gave me chills . 
John McCain is not playing any kind of games here , folks . 
This guy is on the level . 
He was on the housing commission a while back and in 2005 gave a speech to the Congress that said FNEMAE and FRDEMAC were in serious difficulty and that an oversight committee needed to be pulled together forthwith . 
There was so much scam going on with the leaders even back in 2005 . 
The Congress we have did n't do a thing despite repeated warnings from George Bush as well - 17 as a matter of fact . 
I guarantee they wo n't be in session . 
Members of Congress love their weekends . 
This is a blatant rouse to make it seem like McCain has some sort of power to do something , and perpetuate the lie that he reaches across the aisle more than Obama . 
They include , in part , that there be oversight , that the taxpayers get an actual stake in the companies , that regulations be put in place to prevent the banks from continuing to do the same thing that put us in this mess , that the people responsible not be rewarded for their negligence . 
This was issued before McCain ever came up with anything and should be enough to make his position known . 
Those who claim that Mr. Obama is negligent are just repeating talking points issued from the Rove undisclosed location and have no idea of what they are talking about . 
Given that Mr McCain has absolutely no credibility in economic matters , I should n't have to point out that for him to mess with this situation will only make matters worse . 
After all , it is his advisers who set the stage for this fiasco and he himself who has been voting to deregulate . 
Furthermore , he ca n't seem to make up his mind even now about whether or not there should be regulations . 
How long ago was it that he last said that the fundamentals of our economy are strong ? 
How can he blame Mr. Cox for not regulating when Mr. McCain himself did away with the regulations . 
And does anyone actually think that in a couple days he has all of a sudden learned enough about the situation to do any good ?! Anyone who believes that his action is not an attempt to flee from a confrontation with Mr. Obama believes that oil had nothing to do with the invasion of Iraq . 
Options - 1 -RRB- Obama agrees and it looks like McCain is the leader 2 -RRB- Obama does not agree and it makes McCain look like he puts the country ahead of the election -LRB- the Maverick -RRB- I say he says no thanks , we do not need to work with Bush and the party responsible for this disaster . 
I have my own plan to undo the damage the Republican Party did to America . 
Every working mom knows how to do that . 
A debate should be small potatoes that will barely cause a leader to break stride . 
Cancelling the debate is a pathetic ploy to avoid questions while trying to look like Gary Cooper , ironically fighting the very guys he has been cosy with for years . 
It has the reverse effect on me . 
It would have been SO funny !!! But McCain , being the Public Servant he has been all his life -LRB- which is more than can be said of Barack Obama -RRB- , is ONCE AGAIN BEING A LEADER INSTEAD OF playing movie-star for politics like Mr. Obama . 
geez - mccain keeps saying he going to `` fix '' washington ... for cripes sakes-he 's been in washington for over 25 years ! 
cut the crap john and have the balls to admit you have no idea what to do and are scared to death to face obama . 
There is no time out in the White House . 
Looks like to me we do n't have 40 days Posted by : knot4u | September 24 , 2008 6:22 PM | Report abuse McCain pushed hard and successfully for the very deregulation that caused the major part of the problem . 
Now he wants to ride back to Washington like a knight in shining armor to save the day ! 
What a total creep . 
This is so clearly yet another tawdry amoral Rovian political stunt ... God help our young people , who are being taught day by day that gross deception is the way to go ... Posted by : Glen Park | September 24 , 2008 6:22 PM | Report abuse McCain is not president yet and is not a leader of the Republicans in the Senate . 
By canceling the Presidential Debate , McCain is politicizing the financial crisis the country is facing . 
This is currently a battle by the Bush Administration and Congress . 
To date , Congress has handled this as a bipartisan issue . 
By McCain unilaterally injecting himself into the bargaining process , he is implying he does not have faith in President Bush 's team and the leadership of Congress to debate the issue and compromise on the features of the Bush plan . 
He is grandstanding in another `` maverick '' ploy to recover ground he has lost in the campaign this week . 
It 's McCain who betrayed himself and embraced the far-right , Rove and Bush...flip-flopping on torture , eavesdropping , regulation ... and the big betrayal : picking Palin . 
He has sold his soul . 
He is no longer the man he was in 2000 . 
And now , he runs in fear from the first debate ... using `` patriotism '' as his cover . 
The behavior of a true coward and traitor to this country . 
I do n't mind open debate , but I wonder how you can judge his experience and knowledge level on a topic based on sound bites and partial quotes . 
I can only hope you have at least an MBA and have spent a fair amount of time both studying our complex economy and discussing it with the senators . 
I think then you would be more credible when you say that one senator is more or less qualified than another to discuss the solutions to our current `` crisis '' . 
Options - 1 -RRB- Obama agrees and it looks like McCain is the leader 2 -RRB- Obama does not agree and it makes McCain look like he puts the country ahead of the election -LRB- the Maverick -RRB- I say he says no thanks , we do not need to work with Bush and the party responsible for this disaster . 
I have my own plan to undo the damage the Republican Party did to America . 
Options - 1 -RRB- Obama agrees and it looks like McCain is the leader 2 -RRB- Obama does not agree and it makes McCain look like he puts the country ahead of the election -LRB- the Maverick -RRB- I say he says no thanks , we do not need to work with Bush and the party responsible for this disaster . 
I have my own plan to undo the damage the Republican Party did to America . 
Watch and learn from the master ! 
Keep calling Congress ... go to their website and all are listed . 
They seem to have heard some of us `` regular '' Americans yesterday . 
The people are on a roll ... do n't stop now ! 
We can take this country back and they 're running scared ! 
Vote 'em all out ! 
Mr. McCain , if you decided to run for President , do it . 
You were in the system that created this mess for the last 25 years , or there abouts . 
So what difference can you make in two weeks by dealing with your participation for the last quarter of the century ? . 
If you do not want to debate , say so , but do not hide behind anybodies skirts . 
If only McCain could use a computer , then he would have to waste the fuel getting to Washington , and he could contribute via electronic communications . 
Send your kids to college but make sure the end up as someone to have a beer with -LRB- or in Cindy 's case , sell you the beer -RRB- rather than someone that can MAKE BEER . 
Yes , April 2008 . 
This has been coming for a LONG time . 
I for one learned in grade school that cramming at the last minute is never an effective way to solve a problem . 
McCain admits to knowing little about economics , so why in hell does he think voters will believe his presence is needed now . 
Just another McStunt from the McRove playbook . 
I can not wait to kick these ba%#&@ds out of office in November . 
Does he think that he will find his missing cajones in Washington ? 
I forgot he can t use a computer -RRB- ! 
He needs to be PHYSICALLY IN FRONT OF PEOPLE to get things done . 
Got to go to Washington and cancel the debate . 
We are starting to see what a John McCain Presidency really means . 
Unable to deal with more than one crisis at a time . 
His campaign needs to call Al-Qaida and ask them not to invade the United States of America when John has a busy schedule . 
John McCain hasn t placed a vote in the Senate since April . 
He can go to Washington and the debate . 
The debate can be changed to Washington if need be . 
This debate is EXACTLY what the voters want how do these guys operate under pressure ? 
He is just scared to a debate during a crisis . 
While Barack makes statements like , `` I will if I 'm needed ... '' OH MOHAMMED will you get off your lazy butt and stop voting `` present '' Mr. Obama !! Posted by : Deborah Harry | September 24 , 2008 6:18 PM | Report abuse Mccain accepts Obama 's plan to issue joint statement then claims it was his -LRB- Mccain 's -RRB- idea ! 
Then after realizing he is not ready to debate Obama on the economy after a one hour cram session in the library , he dares to pretend that he is delaying the debate for America !! Please media stop saying it was Mccain 's idea , Obama phoned Mccain six hours earlier to propose it . 
Then press the administration and your party to give in to some of the Democratic demands and get an agreement signed ASAP . 
Then you can walk into Friday 's debate and say , hey look this is all off the table because we agree . 
Because this issue is a real loser for the Republican 's . 
If you are Obama , you want for this debate to be about this bailout and nothing else . 
Do n't make any deals let the whole thing hang out there , and then go after McCain in the debate . 
McCain himself said that he does not understand economics . 
What earth shattering things is he going to accomplish ????? Posted by : JJ | September 24 , 2008 6:18 PM | Report abuse This is a campaign and Mr. McCain knows it and has been playing it brilliantly . 
He went all the way to Alaska to pluck the plucky soccer mom despite her absolutely mind-boggling lack of experience and knowledge but look what it did the day after Mr. Obama gave a stellar speech calling Mr. McCain on the carpet on issue after issue . 
The press dropped the speech and went with the bulldog . 
Now , he begins to slip in the polls . 
I 'm sure he 's been watching his bulldog Ms. Palin stumble around the heads of state and he 's thinking , I need something big ! 
And that 's just what he 's done . 
It 's a huge gamble and like picking Palin , it will turn out to be either brilliant or entirely stupid . 
So we wait ... Obama 's best bet is to continue on and do not engage McCain with this . 
The more Obama ignores and continues toward the debate , the less McCain will seem like he 's relevant . 
He wo n't chance Sarah talking to the press and anwering questions like anybody else , has changed a couple of gaffes this week , and is dropping in the polls . 
Chicken McCain and Palin . 
I gave John and Barack both credit for appearing on The View and O'Reilly . 
Obama brought the challenge on military issues , bring it on . 
I think his position was more in line with the commanders , which will win that debate . 
The surge certainly helped enhance the Anbar awakening and progress , but at the cost of losing to the Taliban in the other theater . 
Zadari seems to be taking a strong hand against the Taliban and we unfortunately have not held up our end . 
We do n't have secure areas , only bases and that has to change . 
We must win the people at the same time we destroy the Taliban and Al Qaeda . 
I see no reason for us to fight the Mahdi army , but I do see the need for triangle troops until the Sunni security forces become government forces . 
Hedge your hand and withdraw all else should be our strategy . 
I believe with the 12,000 already on stop loss the practice should be discontinued and drawdown from Germany , Korea , Japan and Taiwan should bolster the Afghan forces . 
I think it might have been on Barack 's MySpace page ? 
... Posted by : TypeOJoy | September 24 , 2008 6:17 PM | Report abuse `` McCain went on to compare the current crisis in the financial markets with the attacks of Sept. 11 and called on politicians to draw on the bipartisan spirit created during those times in order to solve the economic problems of the country today . '' 
Seems to me that the last time this happened we got such lovely pieces of legislation as the Patriot Act . 
Here 's hoping that terror on the economic front does n't suspend our good senators ' morals and intelligence this time around ... Posted by : JP | September 24 , 2008 6:17 PM | Report abuse So how is a debate on foreign policy supposed to shed light on the domestic economy ? 
McCain should stick to his guns and go to Washington - and send Sarah Palin to debate Obama . 
I 'd pay money to see that one . 
What is it , precisely , that Senator McCain would be `` brokering '' in Washington ? 
Do n't they pretty much have all the people they need on this thing ? 
Try a different tack , `` my friend '' . 
We need them to focus for the next few days on working together with Washington to get this plan in place ! 
McCain is doing what presidents have to do , make hard decisions on what is most important . 
What is in your best interest -LRB- continuing to campaign -RRB- or in the countries best intersted . 
-LRB- going to Washington and helping to work on a solution . 
My Vote goes to McCain , who has the strength of character to make hard choices and to put American first ! 
I agree with those who speak about how ridiculous it appears to have McCain say he knows little about the economy now try to be an important player -LRB- how political ! -RRB- . 
I agree with those who speak about how we should continue the campaign and debates ... that 's what is owed the American people ! 
McCain suggested to him to suspend the debate and Obama said NO. . 
Remember those two letter if God forbid he is elected . 
Obama will say NO to the American public over and over again . 
He cares about Obama first and nothing else . 
I think most Americans will see it in that light . 
I hope that Senator Obama joins in . 
The time for a bi-partisan solution is now , not in January . 
They and the leaders of congress need to work together on this one . 
If Obama is such a natural leader . 
If , this king of kings is indeed capable of bringing all people 's together , let him give us a sign . 
Here is an unparalleled opportunity for `` The Great One '' to show us his stuff . 
Instead of talking the talk , let 's see him walk the walk . 
Hey bigshot , lets see some of that `` reaching across the aisles '' . 
Try making government work on a real stage for a change . 
We already have one of those already . 
Does McCain really think that the election of the next president of the United States should take a back seat to a situation that 's being handled by dozens of experts who know a heck of lot more about economics than either one of them ? 
It 's not like a decision will be made by the end of Friday . 
Maybe McCain wants to just suspend the election for 6 months . 
Will McCain and Obama will be sitting at the head of the table making decisions ? 
Or will they be meandering around in the background taking news conferences and muttering under their breath to their colleagues and campaign advisers , looking like they know what 's going on ? 
You all know the answer . 
I THINK McCain SHOULD be there . . 
simply because IF HE IS going to be president HE WILL HAVE to be the one dealing with it . 
IT WOULD MAKE SENSE that he would try and get his two cents said about how this should go down . 
Obama 's just pissed cuz HE did n't think of it 1st LOL . 
And we , the taxpapers are paying dearly for these rushed decisions and mistake . 
If it takes a few more days to hammer out the details for this bailout plan , then fine . 
I rather have the details spelled out than pay dearly for Congress 's and the President 's rush into a another mistake . 
Besides , who sweating more , the taxpayers or the fat cats on Wall Street , afraid of losing their shirts . 
I think they should both multi-task by being United States Senators and running for President at the same time . 
In this situation however , making sure the deal happens is more important that running for president . 
If they focused on their current jobs for awhile , maybe that would allow the voters to better see how they would both perform as President . 
I 'm glad Obama call his bluff . 
I can just imagine the old geezer running around in the Senate looking for photo ops and trying to look like a leader . 
I could not agree more . 
Apparently his pay grade only includes trying to make himself a celebrity . 
Country First !! I agree with the commenters in favor of McCain . 
It is a great idea to put politics aside at this moment . 
Too bad Obama suggested the idea this morning to McCain , IN PRIVATE . 
To praise McCain 's announcement as anything but a completely political move is moronic , mind-bending sophistry . 
then we were treated to sighs and groans and three different personas . 
al never quite figured out who he was . 
this time you can expect a repeat performance of identity crisis . 
Obama has been on a search for himself all this time . 
I don ; t think he styill knows what his position on most things are . 
and that is not because he is smart and thoughtful . 
He is deceptive and shallow , which is obvious except to other deceptive and shallow fellow travelers . 
He has not stood up to one decision he has ever made - went back on the money promise , the FISA promise , the surge failure , funding the war , Iran is a threat , talk to dictators , the list goes on and on . 
the history of Obama 's debating skills show a naive doofus who lost every one he did . 
do n't expect anything different this time . 
He expects that platitudes and empty promises , which have gotten him this far , will take him across the finish line . 
Moreover , he has admitted that he is no good when it comes to understanding economics or the policies . 
So what is he going to contribute , other than ruin it further the moment he opens his mouth ... Mccain cant even run period -LRB- should he be chased by a ferocious dog -RRB- - be it for Janitor or president . 
He walks and talks more like a penguin . 
Throw the bums out as quickly as possible . 
How can any decision be made on a bailout brought to us by the people that have created this mess ? 
We 'll never know where the money is going . 
| September 24 , 2008 6:14 PM | Report abuse Calling for the debate to be rescheduled I think was more a tactical ploy to highlight the depths of this crisis and the time that should not be diverted to preparation than something he , McCain , thought would seriously come off . 
Meanwhile saying the President needs to do more than one thing at a time - and yet , Obama himself was holed up in Tampa , FL , not campaigning , but preparing for the damned debate on foreign policy . 
In other words , focusing on the debate about foreign policy , NOT the financial bail-out . 
The man is total B.S. ! 
Why is McCain so terrified of debating him ? 
We know why you are wanting to postpone Friday 's debate with Obama ... you really do not have anything of substance to relay to the American people . 
We would like to hear what your plans are for turning our country back around and going in the right direction . 
What does your plan for CHANGE entail ? 
I am voting for Obama but I would love to hear what you have to say . 
There is no need to postpone this debate ... BE THERE OR BE SQUARE ! 
This bit of theatrics will only bring the circus to Washington , where it is not needed . 
THAT is the reason McCain has suspended his campaign . 
Let 's no tsuspend our common sense . 
It 's a legit question . 
A week ago the fundamentals of the economy are strong tonight its I ca n't face a debate with Obama and have to rush back to Washington . 
Forget all the automated bs from Republican boiler rooms McCain is going to be in the mid thirties by the middle of next week . 
We must pass legislation to address this crisis . 
If we do not , credit will dry up , with devastating consequences for our economy . 
That 's right McCain , our country is in peril economically , just like it was under every Republican President , including Bush Sr. and Ronald Reagen . 
We will recover and be economically sound again when voters learn to STOP VOTING FOR REPUBLICANS like McCain . 
Typical Obame supporter response . 
Go somewhere and pull off , you 'll feel better . 
HE IS A HERO . 
This guy graduated at bottom of his class at # 5 out of 900 -LRB- that is 0.5 % of class , bottom of bottoms ! -RRB- . 
He is no patriotic , he is opportunistic . 
When he falls behind in polls and sees that white women are angry , he selects Palin as VP . 
When he falls behind in polls and sees that economy is a big issue , he says that he is going fix economy . 
Throw away the bum with bathwater . 
Debates and votes can wait until ALL elected Officials in Washington get this mess taken care of . 
If neither one of them goes to Washington to do their job what kind of president are they going to be . 
Oh you know I have this White House dinner that was scheduled months ago I will take care of that in the morning the American People can wait !!!!! I will need these people 's money and vote for my next term election . 
This is real we are headed for another depression that is the priority right now not a debate . 
In case you forgot , Obama is also , in theory , a Senator . 
What 's wrong with expecting BOTH of them to show up long enough to DO THEIR JOBS ? 
Obama does n't want to have to take a position , but that 's hardly news . 
Perhaps he needs his 300 advisers to tell him what to say . 
Do n't get too excited about the big poll today , Obamaphiles . 
If you read the internals , you 'll see why it favors Obama . 
It was designed to . 
Yet another instance in a long line of examples of the Washington Post 's total lack of credibility . 
If the current high-finance meltdown is the equivalent of 9\/11\/01 what civil rights will we be losing this time around ? 
To pass up the one opportunity he has , a debate , to turn around his poll numbers , shows that he genuinely is putting the country 's and your interests first . 
I 'd rather see McCain and Obama at work than listen to them spew the same crap they were saying a year ago . 
Obama decided to keep the campaign money he said he would reject and now that he looks good he is n't willing to risk his campaign and actually do the people 's work . 
Shame on you Obams . 
Nice move by the McCain campaign . 
Very smart and very tactical , actually . 
Now if only they truly had the best interest of the country at heart , that would be something to write home about . 
Let me see if I have this straight ... \* If you grow up in Hawaii , raised by your grandparents , you 're \* If your name is Barack you 're a radical , unpatriotic Muslim . 
\* Name your kids Willow , Trig and Track , you 're a maverick . 
\* Graduate from Harvard law school and you are unstable . 
\* Attend 5 different small colleges before graduating , you 're well If you spend 3 years as a brilliant community organizer , become the first black President of the Harvard Law Review , create a voter registration drive that registers 150,000 new voters , spend 12 years as a Constitutional Law professor , spend 8 years as a State Senator representing a district with over 750,000 people , become chairman of the state Senate 's Health and Human Services committee , spend 4 years in the United States Senate representing a state of 13 million people while sponsoring 131 bills and serving on the Foreign Affairs , Environment and Public Works and Veteran 's Affairs committees , you do n't have any real leadership \* If your total resume is : local weather girl , 4 years on the city council and 6 yea rs as the mayor of a town with less than 7,000 people , 20 months as the governor of a state with only 650,000 people , then you 're qualified to become the country 's second \* If you have been married to the same woman for 19 years while raising 2 beautiful daughters , all within Protestant churches , you 're not a real Christian . 
\* If you cheated on your first wife with a rich heiress , and left your disfigured wife and married the heiress the next month , you 're a Christian . 
\* If you teach responsible , age appropriate sex education , including the proper use of birth control , you are eroding the fiber of society . 
If , while governor , you staunchly advocate abstinence only , with no other option in sex education in your state 's school system while your unwed teen daughter ends up pregnant , you 're very \* If your wife is a Harvard graduate laywer who gave up a position in a prestigio us law firm to work for the betterment of her inner city community , then gave that up to raise a family , your family 's values do n't represent America 's . 
\* If you 're husband is nicknamed `` First Dude '' , with at least one DWI conviction and no college education , who did n't register to vote until age 25 and once was a member of a group that advocated the secession of Alaska from the USA , your family is extremely admirable . 
We need to hear both of them explain their vision . 
Then , they should go back to Congress and cast their votes . 
They 're full of lies anyway . 
What a pompous piece of work . 
The Friday debate is to be on national security -- his strength . 
In the current environment , half of Friday 's debate will become about economic issues anayway , so a large part of the scheduled debate in his stong suit , will migrate anyway into his weak suit . 
If McCain gets the debate delayed till the financial crisis cools down , then he gets to keep one whole debate on foreign policy . 
`` Hurry , Hurry , Stop Thinking , Just do what I say Now ! '' 
has always been the Bush administration 's way of doing things , ... . 
Why is it so imperative to act immediately ? 
This screw up has taken time to develop , so think about what it is and the long term effects of ALL of the solutions before jumping blindly into it like Bush and friends would have us do . 
His guidance has n't been exactly stellar so far has it ? 
But McCain 's already on the bus and honking the horn . 
Remember , ... If it smells like Bovine Feces , ... ... . 
In short , no one really knows or understands the dynamics of the 700 billion dollar bailout . . 
Therefore , the next President must deal with many issues . . 
and the American public deserve the right to know the metrics of each candidates knowledge pertaining to a wide range of issues , concerns and challenges . 
The show must go on ... Posted by : Overseas | September 24 , 2008 6:12 PM | Report abuse You McCain people are idiots . 
This is a cheap and tawdry P O L I T I C A L S T U N T. Nothing new here . 
This reeks of desperation on the part of the McCain campaign . 
Morons , I swear . 
are you ready for another GREATDEPRESSION . 
obama campaigns as rome burns . 
The man obviously ca n't think for himself . 
He is a walking , talking programmed machine by Hollywood no less . 
I thought it was the Republican , Senate House , President and Republican Appointed Supreme Court that allowed all of us to lose our cash , credit and homes . 
THANKS JOHN ... now that I know it was n't the absence of a Democratic opposition ... why should we change anything ! 
REPUBLICANS ... you lying again !! Posted by : Walter Binns | September 24 , 2008 6:12 PM | Report abuse `` I like McCain but this is just another sleazy move . '' 
No you do n't . 
That smell outta your rear end is so strong that no one is left in the building . 
You 're fortunate enough that on one is noticing half a dozen brother 's spunk ca n't help but leak outta that crevice where metabolic waste ought to be the more frequently discharged . 
We are glad you are NOT in the McCain camp . 
The fact is that McCain has fought many issues against popular opinion of the Republican party : 1 -RRB- immigration 2 -RRB- campaign finance reform 3 -RRB- more troops in Iraq ... just off the top of my head . 
Barack Obama has not opposed the Democratic base ever on a big issue . 
If he has it 's because his beliefs are to the left of the party . 
Regardless ... both candidates are lacking a consensus of good ideas . 
Neither candidate is going to be able to balance the budget based on their platforms . 
If Obama makes Universal Health Care a reality it is going to further put our country in the red . 
Yes tax cuts sound really nice but if we do n't cut spending we ca n't afford it right now . 
The US can not afford to be borrowing any more money from other countries it affects our national security as much as does our dependence on foreign oil . 
Energy independence is the key to solving a large portion of both of these problems because if we import less oil then our deficits will decrease significantly . 
Part of all the problems are that there is not a willingness to go across the isle ... McCain is more willing than Obama to do it . 
Balance the budget ASAP , corporate accountability , end dependence on Middle East oil -LRB- as a start then complete energy independence -RRB- . 
If they can do these things then we can start discussing decreasing taxes and\/or universal health care -LRB- which I think is a bad idea but now is not the time to be thinking about it for sure -RRB- Posted by : Andrew | September 24 , 2008 6:11 PM | Report abuse So if , God forbid , McSame were the next President and there were more than one crisis at a time - say a hurricane , two wars , and the Wall Street Billionaire Boy 's Club wanted to take more of our money - so he would just call a time out ? 
There is no time out in the White House . 
I 'm above politics so I 'll make a political maneuver . 
Sarah Palin is n't qualified but she 's a skirt so that makes me a feminist . 
THESE ARE THE PEOPLE THAT CREATED THE CRISIS . 
Looks like McCain has made a fool of himself . 
How in God 's name is he going to make anything better by injecting more politics into a bad situation ? 
No wonder McCain is sinking in the polls ! 
Cillizza is a McCain flak . 
Nowhere does he mention that it was Obama who reached out to McCain to issue a joint statement of principles at 8:30 am and after 6 hours of consulting with his handlers did McCain try to undermine Obama 's proposal with his stunt . 
Nowhere does Cillizza mention the snap SUSA poll showing voters oppose McCain 's stunt . 
Nowhere does Cillizza report the obvious , that if McCain is so concerned with the economy why is he still going to the Clinton Global Initiative on Thursday ? 
Chris Cillizza , well paid McCain flak . 
Cillizza is a McCain flak . 
Nowhere does he mention that it was Obama who reached out to McCain to issue a joint statement of principles at 8:30 am and after 6 hours of consulting with his handlers did McCain try to undermine Obama 's proposal with his stunt . 
Nowhere does Cillizza mention the snap SUSA poll showing voters oppose McCain 's stunt . 
Nowhere does Cillizza report the obvious , that if McCain is so concerned with the economy why is he still going to the Clinton Global Initiative on Thursday ? 
Chris Cillizza , well paid McCain flak . 
Had Obama suggested it , you would be bowing at his feet praising his patriotism . 
And for the illiterates who alleged Senator McCain does not want to debate the ecomony on Sept 26 , the first debate is on foreign policy . 
Senator McCain can outshine your spineless candidate on that topic any day . 
Pushing the debate until early next week would not hurt anyone , and it would be the right thing to do . 
They both need to be senators first . 
But I guess it does n't matter what Obama does . 
He only has the guts to vote `` present '' anyway . 
topic 6 - am I my brothers keeper topic 7 - what exactly is above my pay grade ? 
topic 8 - when is it OK to kill the baby Posted by : Billw | September 24 , 2008 6:11 PM | Report abuse Fine - time to put Palin up there . 
If she can be pres. if McCain ca n't , then she can debate if he ca n't . 
THIS was a war hero ? 
What happened in Hanoi ? 
I know they broke his arms ; did they CASTRATE him too ? 
The brown coats are out in full force it seems . 
Tell me , are you guys actually `` paid '' by the McCain camp to post Stazzi type propaganda in public places ? 
Government interference in the markets exacerbates problems in the marketplace and causes the free market to take longer to correct itself . 
Republican Party 2008 platform , passed just a few weeks ago . 
Do I hear McCain saying he 's going to Washington to \* stop \* government interference in the markets ? 
If i were Sen. Obama I would say no way to delay ! 
Besides mccain for the last three years has been excepting donations by both freddie and fannie ! 
So if he is so big wanting to help the nation at a time of crisis just return our money Mccain and we 'll call it even ! 
And if Sen. Mccain 's delay is agreed upon monitor his every movement and make sure its tied to this economic crisis and not helping himself repair the last weeks damages on his lackluster performance to sagging polling numbers ... You know what they say he 's come a running but it ai n't to help ! 
Another good reason to just stop this nonsense of delays and push him into the light of day for full exposure and no stopping on cuts or blood final ! 
if you are counting on the debates to tell you how you are going to vote , your stupidity should disqualify you from voting . 
But afraid that Palin is n't done with her ` studies ' yet . 
And for those fools that think McCain is ` rushing ' to congress to help solve the problem , how gullible are you . 
Mccain even says that the economy is not his strong point , but now somehow his great wisdom is going to solve the problem that top economist and all of congress are debating . 
But just like the SOP with Palin , hide when you can . 
What is the harm of going to do your job Mr. Obama ? 
So he announces he 's suspending his campaign and taking down his TV ads in a pathetic and cynical attempt to have voters belive he 's `` putting country first . '' 
Obama replies hold on a minute , no hiding from the voters 41 days from the election ; this is EXACTLY the time we should be debating economic policy . 
Obama should continue full speed ahead with his campaign while simultaneously working in the Senate to help solve the problem . 
Then Obama should show up at the first debate on Friday night with the stage and American voters all to himself . 
Thus proving to the American people that he , unlike McCain , can handle more than one important task at a time . 
The McCain campaign can play all the political games they want to . 
They 're STILL gonna lose !! Republicans are going to be out of power for a generation . 
McCain is doing a duck-dive . 
The next thing I expect to hear is that he 's kicked Dick Cheney out of his `` secret , secure location '' so he can hide from the media . 
Senator McCain has some explaining to do , for example : How does he explain his sudden conversion to being an advocate of regulation when he 's spent the last 25 years publicly championing the exact opposite -- as recently as last July ? 
How does he explain his weekend statement that his campaign manager was n't getting money from Freddie Mac when in fact said campaign manager 's company -LRB- in which he holds an equity share -RRB- has gotten $ 15,000 a month since 2005 for doing virtually nothing except staying close to John McCain ? 
He might also have to explain why he wo n't unleash Sarah Palin and let her meet the press and the people without a script ? 
What is he afraid she 's going to say ? 
-LRB- By the way , all you PUMAs , does n't it strike you as sort of sexist that McCain selects Sarah Palin and then surrounds her with ex-Bush administration operatives to keep her from saying something other than the 5 or 6 `` money lines '' from her convention speech ? -RRB- 
John McCain showed great honor and courage and tenacity -- 40 years ago when it really counted . 
It really counts now , too , but what do we see ? 
A man who will say anything , no matter how false , viciously attack the people who expose the truth about him and his campaign , and run for cover when the going gets tough . 
I thought people had to grow into the job of being President . 
It looks like McCain is trying to shrink into it . 
If anything , McCain feels like a fish out of water when not in his senate office surrounded by lobbyists telling him what 's in it for him . 
As I wrote a few weeks back , the European 's are more than a little angry at being burned -LRB- defrauded -RRB- by Wall Street , sold bogus mortgage packages , etc. . 
One lynch pin of the Bush-Bernacke-Paulson-McCain plan is to have foreign banks help buy up some of that bad debt . 
Well , news flash , they are n't ! 
In todays Der Spiegel - `` German banks are already sufficiently involved in the calamity , '' says Stefan Kooths of the German Institute for Economic Research -LRB- DIW -RRB- in Berlin . 
Either way , experts estimate that half of America 's bad loans were sold abroad -- and a large part of that was assumed by Germans . 
And now the money is gone . 
`` There 's no reason why Germany should have to bear even more burdens '' . 
Economic experts in India , China , every European capital , adocate letting us sink . 
The $ 700 billion bailout package does n't come anywhere near addressing the amount of bad debt , unrecoverable outright fraud , that is the result of our free trade folly ; that total amount is greater than 4 times our GNP . 
Our economy is going to collapse . 
There is nothing we can do about it . 
If this government blows $ 700 billion on Wall Street , it will not just be gone , it wont be available to aide American 's who are going to suffer as no one ever imagined . 
If the morons in Washington have any sense of self preservation left , much less patriotism and willingness to defend this country , they will set that money aside as a safety net for ordinary people . 
Then , they will set about ending this free trade nonsense once and for all , round up all of those Indian and Chinese guest workers and send them home , end tax breaks - heck add them ! 
- on goods and services produced by U.S. companies off shore . 
They will do this NOW and announce that they are going to bring our jobs back home , will \* require \* companies to hire American workers before foreign workers , and will end the McCain policy of using jobs as a bribe for foreign support of their idiotic policies . 
Not doing so , I fear will lead to social unrest , mass starvation and death , violence , and quite possibly a revolution . 
For those who are familiar with history , the last country that tried the very sport of economic nonsense we have been practicing was Pre-revolutionary France . 
And `` yes '' it 's very likely to get that bad here , too . 
If anything , McCain feels like a fish out of water when not in his senate office surrounded by lobbyists telling him what 's in it for him . 
However , I also think that both candidates should be ready to debate on Friday night . 
Its already late September , I should hope by now that both candidates would be able to speak about their policy view-points . 
If not ... then we might as well hold the election tomorrow . 
However , I also think that both candidates should be ready to debate on Friday night . 
Its already late September , I should hope by now that both candidates would be able to speak about their policy view-points . 
If not ... then we might as well hold the election tomorrow . 
However , I also think that both candidates should be ready to debate on Friday night . 
Its already late September , I should hope by now that both candidates would be able to speak about their policy view-points . 
If not ... then we might as well hold the election tomorrow . 
The brown coats are out in full force it seems . 
Tell me , are you guys actually `` paid '' by the McCain camp to post Stazzi type propaganda in public places ? 
If anything , McCain feels like a fish out of water when not in his senate office surrounded by lobbyists telling him what 's in it for him . 
Cillizza is a McCain flak . 
Nowhere does he mention that it was Obama who reached out to McCain to issue a joint statement of principles at 8:30 am and after 6 hours of consulting with his handlers did McCain try to undermine Obama 's proposal with his stunt . 
Nowhere does Cillizza mention the snap SUSA poll showing voters oppose McCain 's stunt . 
Nowhere does Cillizza report the obvious , that if McCain is so concerned with the economy why is he still going to the Clinton Global Initiative on Thursday ? 
Chris Cillizza , well paid McCain flak . 
Maybe he should call up the other members of the KEATING FIVE -LRB- of which he is one -RRB- and see if they ca n't figure out a way to cheat their way out of this one , too ! 
Mccain\/Palin are loosers that why he 's hiding her from the national media . 
McCain is a sexist if I ever seen one . 
He is the oldest LAIR ... he nose should be longer than pincho 's right now . 
If I had a $ 1.00 for every lie McCain told I 'll be rich probably close to $ 5million dollars . 
If McCain ca n't face the debate it 's because he 's scared to debate against Senator Obama he rather trade comments to the press back and forth . 
He wants Senator Obama to cather to his wants and needs when things do n't go right for him . 
I wish somone would tell Mccain who died and made him President already . 
McCain and Palin need to realize that this is the 21st century and this country is 40 days shy of electing a President the people deserve better than what McCain 's offering . 
No change , he admits he 's knows nothing about the ecomony . 
He has poor judgment , and uses his POW for excuse when he ca n't answer hard questions . 
Now , is this the kind of person we want as commander and chief ? 
No I do n't think so . . 
Enough of your below the belt tatics . 
Obama for President - 08 Posted by : jacie - Calif | September 24 , 2008 6:10 PM | Report abuse You McCain people are idiots . 
This is a cheap and tawdry P O L I T I C A L S T U N T. Nothing new here . 
This reeks of desperation on the part of the McCain campaign . 
Morons , I swear . 
McCain is not fit to be President , even he knows it and is trying to snow people , AGAIN . 
The man 's no maverick , he 's UNSTABLE . 
Since by his own admission he does not have a clue about economics , he merely interferes in the serious negotiations of the top economists trying hard to solve the crisis . 
The real reason seems to be to chicken out of the foreign relations debate on Friday . 
And McSame is the most stupid . 
So where has he been the last 6 days of this crises ? 
Why did n't he go back before ? 
Only after the polls come out does the cry baby whine and suspend his campaign . 
What about going back and working to end his war that him and Bush enjoy ! 
Republicans get a clue . 
You are stupid !!! Posted by : stlmanusa | September 24 , 2008 6:10 PM | Report abuse Have you ever seen so many stupid republicans in your life ? 
And McSame is the most stupid . 
So where has he been the last 6 days of this crises ? 
Why did n't he go back before ? 
Only after the polls come out does the cry baby whine and suspend his campaign . 
What about going back and working to end his war that him and Bush enjoy ! 
Republicans get a clue . 
You are stupid !!! Posted by : stlmanusa | September 24 , 2008 6:10 PM | Report abuse Have you ever seen so many stupid republicans in your life ? 
And McSame is the most stupid . 
So where has he been the last 6 days of this crises ? 
Why did n't he go back before ? 
Only after the polls come out does the cry baby whine and suspend his campaign . 
What about going back and working to end his war that him and Bush enjoy ! 
Republicans get a clue . 
You are stupid !!! Posted by : stlmanusa | September 24 , 2008 6:10 PM | Report abuse 4 more years of the same thing anyway !!! How about the time when McBooty went out and gave old GWBush that hideous hug ? 
-LRB- and a war hero , almost forgot to mention that again -RRB- Posted by : I Voted For Bush Twice | September 24 , 2008 6:10 PM | Report abuse 4 more years of the same thing anyway !!! How about the time when McBooty went out and gave old GWBush that hideous hug ? 
-LRB- and a war hero , almost forgot to mention that again -RRB- Posted by : I Voted For Bush Twice | September 24 , 2008 6:10 PM | Report abuse Not sure how much of a difference the decision makes since McCain `` Is n't going to lie , he does n't really understand the economy . '' 
Obama should get himself to DC and prove how well he knows economics . 
After the Charles Keating scandal , I do n't really trust John McCain ... sorry ! 
See this article , one of many by different authors , by Posted Friday , Feb. 18 , 2000 , at 2:35 PM ET The controversial George W. Bush-sponsored poll in South Carolina mentioned John McCain 's role in the so-called Keating Five scandal , and McCain says his involvement in the scandal `` will probably be on my tombstone . '' 
What exactly did McCain do ? 
In early 1987 , at the beginning of his first Senate term , McCain attended two meetings with federal banking regulators to discuss an investigation into Lincoln Savings and Loan , an Irvine , Calif. , thrift owned by Arizona developer Charles Keating . 
Federal auditors were investigating Keating 's banking practices , and Keating , fearful that the government would seize his S&L , sought intervention from a number of U.S. senators . 
At Keating 's behest , four senators -- McCain and Democrats Dennis DeConcini of Arizona , Alan Cranston of California , and John Glenn of Ohio -- met with Ed Gray , chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board , on April 2 . 
Those four senators and Sen. Don Riegle , D-Mich . 
, attended a second meeting at Keating 's behest on April 9 with bank regulators in San Francisco . 
Regulators did not seize Lincoln Savings and Loan until two years later . 
The Lincoln bailout cost taxpayers $ 2.6 billion , making it the biggest of the S&L scandals . 
In addition , 17,000 Lincoln investors lost $ 190 million . 
In November 1990 , the Senate Ethics Committee launched an investigation into the meetings between the senators and the regulators . 
McCain , Cranston , DeConcini , Glenn , and Riegle became known as the Keating Five . 
-LRB- Keating himself was convicted in January 1993 of 73 counts of wire and bankruptcy fraud and served more than four years in prison before his conviction was overturned . 
Last year , he pleaded guilty to four counts of fraud and was sentenced to time served . -RRB- 
McCain defended his attendance at the meetings by saying Keating was a constituent and that Keating 's development company , American Continental Corporation , was a major Arizona employer . 
McCain said he wanted to know only whether Keating was being treated fairly and that he had not tried to influence the regulators . 
At the second meeting , McCain told the regulators , `` I would n't want any special favors for them , '' and `` I do n't want any part of our conversation to be improper . '' 
But Keating was more than a constituent to McCain -- he was a longtime friend and associate . 
McCain met Keating in 1981 at a Navy League dinner in Arizona where McCain was the speaker . 
Keating was a former naval aviator himself , and the two men became friends . 
Keating raised money for McCain 's two congressional campaigns in 1982 and 1984 , and for McCain 's 1986 Senate bid . 
By 1987 , McCain campaigns had received $ 112,000 from Keating , his relatives , and his employees -- the most received by any of the Keating Five . 
-LRB- Keating raised a total of $ 300,000 for the five senators . -RRB- 
After McCain 's election to the House in 1982 , he and his family made at least nine trips at Keating 's expense , three of which were to Keating 's Bahamas retreat . 
McCain did not disclose the trips -LRB- as he was required to under House rules -RRB- until the scandal broke in 1989 . 
At that point , he paid Keating $ 13,433 for the flights . 
And in April 1986 , one year before the meeting with the regulators , McCain 's wife , Cindy , and her father invested $ 359,100 in a Keating strip mall . 
The Senate Ethics Committee probe of the Keating Five began in November 1990 , and committee Special Counsel Robert Bennett recommended that McCain and Glenn be dropped from the investigation . 
McCain believes Democrats on the committee blocked Bennett 's recommendation because he was the lone Keating Five Republican . 
In February 1991 , the Senate Ethics Committee found McCain and Glenn to be the least blameworthy of the five senators . 
-LRB- McCain and Glenn attended the meetings but did nothing else to influence the regulators . -RRB- 
McCain was guilty of nothing more than `` poor judgment , '' the committee said , and declared his actions were not `` improper nor attended with gross negligence . '' 
McCain considered the committee 's judgment to be `` full exoneration , '' and he contributed $ 112,000 -LRB- the amount raised for him by Keating -RRB- to the U.S. Treasury . 
McCain decides to look like he made the move first and made a statement on his own . 
If McCain is altruistic in his motives regarding the suspension of his campaign , then I applaud him . 
However , I think he should participate in the debate on Friday . 
Obama is right ; this is precisely the time the country needs to hear from the two candidates . 
If McCain is altruistic in his motives regarding the suspension of his campaign , then I applaud him . 
However , I think he should participate in the debate on Friday . 
Obama is right ; this is precisely the time the country needs to hear from the two candidates . 
The Republican party needs McCain leadership in this tough time . 
Therefore I think he should be in the middle of the battlefield instead of standing outside and looking in . 
Actions speak louder than words ! 
Good luck to the USA , and may God bless us all in this tough time . 
If McCain is altruistic in his motives regarding the suspension of his campaign , then I applaud him . 
However , I think he should participate in the debate on Friday . 
Obama is right ; this is precisely the time the country needs to hear from the two candidates . 
Obama should get himself to DC and prove how well he knows economics . 
At least your consistant on that behavior . 
This is not the leader America needs . 
Your a coward McCain . 
McCain decides to look like he made the move first and made a statement on his own . 
This move to avoid debating is about two things only . 
First is his slip in recent pulls . 
He needs a change of pace . 
Second and most important is the $ 15,000 per month his campaign manager has been getting from Fannie Mae . 
Even though the debate was\/is supposed to be about foreign policy I ca n't imagine Senator Obama letting that fact go unsaid . 
McCain , show up and lose like the man you fantasize that you are . 
Much of the resistance in congress seems to be coming from the Republicans . 
At this point McCain is about as toxic to their reelction campaigns as Bush . 
They might agree to something just to avoid appearing in the same picture with McCain . 
And of course this is nothing but a photo op anyway . 
What is the harm of going to do your job Mr. Obama ? 
What is the harm of going to do your job Mr. Obama ? 
This is twice now that the Rep. guy put HIS campaign on hold to take care of our country -LRB- once during the Rep. convention to see to the hurriance condidtions and today 's decision -RRB- . 
McCain believes what he preaches ... country before party ! 
A much better choice than the clearly opportunist Obama who has spent a year proving he cares mostly about Obama -LRB- and his presidential win -RRB- . 
He 's beaten up the Clintons -LRB- remember Bill had the HIGHEST approval rating of any president leaving the White House since WWII - Obama brought his legacy down for his OWN sake -RRB- and he could n't care less about the actual REPRESENTATION of Women and ignored us -LRB- the Dems . -RRB- 
when we said we wanted the `` Dream Ticket ! '' 
And let 's not forget that Obama is n't solid on debates at all ! 
He 's ignored McCain 's invitation to have `` townhall meetings '' together for months ! 
If anything , McCain is doing Obama a favor !! Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 6:05 PM | Report abuse NEWS NETWORK REPORT THAT BARACK OBAMA LEADS JOHN MCCAIN IN POLLS . 
AMERICAN AUDIENCE CONTINUES TO TRUST THEIR TV NEWS AND MSM . 
That mean old McCain wanting to actually do his job and have Obamie do his too . 
Imagine not letting Obamie play with his new Teleprompter . 
We need to know where our next possible leader stands and what he has to offer . 
McCain was last in Washington in April . 
His presence now is not going to change things . 
Besides Mississippi is a short plane ride away . 
He can do both if he wants ! 
We can not deprive the American people of a chance to hear where their candidates stand . 
It is too important . 
I find it hard to believe that McCain can pull these stunts and still have any credibility with the American voting public . 
They say it will seriously f -- k them up if the debate is canceled now ... Posted by : Sarah | September 24 , 2008 6:04 PM | Report abuse bwaaaaak , bwak , bwak , bwak , bwak , bwaaaaaaak ! 
We all know you 're scared to debate Obama . 
Stop hiding behind your `` experience '' and admit it ; you are not fit to run the country . 
Is this truly the man we would want representing our country ? 
The man who has backed these criminals -LRB- CEOs -RRB- for years by giving them tax breaks , incentives , and deregulation . 
People OPEN your eyes ! 
read the data behind the polls . . 
they polled a much larger percentage of Democrats and Blacks . . 
the detail in the data says so . . 
so , next time do n't just read the headline . . 
and then try to make everyone think you know something . 
Idiots coming out of the woodwork . . 
oh , look a blog . . 
let 's write something profound . 
It 's fine for him when he is making up lies and manipulating and spinning ... but when it comes time to face the music , he tries to high-tail it back to Washington and hide ... a place he has hidden for the last 26 years , doing nothing but blowing smoke and making deals with lobbyists . 
... ca n't face the questions about those members of your campaign and their association of Fannie Mae ? 
Ca n't face the questions regarding you stand for deregulation and blank checks for your friends and financial institutions ? 
If you want to be the President of this nation ... get yourself to the debate and face the American people . 
Wake up ... we are not all as easily fooled by your lies and manipulation and false attempts to be pious ... just looking out for us little ol' folks and our best interests . 
Now the people who are saying this are are the same people who are accusing Bush , who is obviously not an economic genius for the existing problem . 
I can just see him running away from Vladimir Putin Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 6:03 PM | Report abuse What I want to see is a true timeline of events . 
Sometime today the National Enquirer came out with a story that Sarah Palin had an affair with her husband 's former business partner . 
Now , I do n't read the Enquirer or believe most of what 's in there , but lots of people do . 
Could it be , that after McCain hung up with Obama who was askig for a joint statement of bipartisan concern for the current crisis , someone handed McCain the Enquirer , he said , OMG , I 've got to do something bold , now before this comes out ! 
And , he said he vetted her ? 
Even if this is totally untrue , the rumor has apparently been around Alaska for a long time , and if he 'd vetted her , that would have surfaced and might have given him pause about his selection , but no , he went with his `` gut '' and chose her . 
Have n't we had enough of Presidents who go with their gut ? 
And oh , by the way , does n't the current bailout plan remind anyone else but me of the way Bush went into Iraq `` we 've got to hurry before they attack us '' mentality ? 
Hmmmmmm , the plot thickens . 
This lates gimmick shows McCain 's weekness . 
Can t this guy McCain multi-task ? 
I forgot he can t use a computer -RRB- ! 
He needs to be PHYSICALLY IN FRONT OF PEOPLE to get things done . 
Got to go to Washington and cancel the debate . 
We are starting to see what a John McCain Presidency really means . 
Unable to deal with more than one crisis at a time . 
The debate is all of 90 minutes long . 
His campaign needs to call Al-Qaida and ask them not to invade the United States of America when John has a busy schedule . 
John McCain hasn t placed a vote in the Senate since April . 
He can go to Washington and the debate . 
The debate can be changed to Washington if need be . 
This debate is EXACTLY what the voters want how do these guys operate under pressure ? 
He is just scared to a debate during a crisis . 
This lates gimmick shows McCain 's weekness . 
Can t this guy McCain multi-task ? 
I forgot he can t use a computer -RRB- ! 
He needs to be PHYSICALLY IN FRONT OF PEOPLE to get things done . 
Got to go to Washington and cancel the debate . 
We are starting to see what a John McCain Presidency really means . 
Unable to deal with more than one crisis at a time . 
The debate is all of 90 minutes long . 
His campaign needs to call Al-Qaida and ask them not to invade the United States of America when John has a busy schedule . 
John McCain hasn t placed a vote in the Senate since April . 
He can go to Washington and the debate . 
The debate can be changed to Washington if need be . 
This debate is EXACTLY what the voters want how do these guys operate under pressure ? 
He is just scared to a debate during a crisis . 
This lates gimmick shows McCain 's weekness . 
Can t this guy McCain multi-task ? 
I forgot he can t use a computer -RRB- ! 
He needs to be PHYSICALLY IN FRONT OF PEOPLE to get things done . 
Got to go to Washington and cancel the debate . 
We are starting to see what a John McCain Presidency really means . 
Unable to deal with more than one crisis at a time . 
The debate is all of 90 minutes long . 
His campaign needs to call Al-Qaida and ask them not to invade the United States of America when John has a busy schedule . 
John McCain hasn t placed a vote in the Senate since April . 
He can go to Washington and the debate . 
The debate can be changed to Washington if need be . 
This debate is EXACTLY what the voters want how do these guys operate under pressure ? 
He is just scared to a debate during a crisis . 
Instead he pulled a dirty trick . 
Do we really want another president like that . 
No wonder he graduated in the bottom 5 % of his class at the Naval Academy . 
read the data behind the polls . . 
they polled a much larger percentage of Democrats and Blacks . . 
the detail in the data says so . . 
so , next time do n't just read the headline . . 
and then try to make everyone think you know something . 
Or do the senators exist to campaign ? 
I 'm sure the Terrorists will also give you a break so that you can concentrate on one thing at a time . 
How could he think otherwise ? 
You , who have missed the most amount of votes -LRB- excluding the ill Johnson -RRB- now wants to go back and do this ? 
I would say , with the two of you being the most visible faces of this government now , you need to debate Economy -LRB- instead of Foreign Policy -RRB- this Friday and assuage the voters ' fears . 
Not go running back - when the polls show bad news . 
Should some of us put the Chicken suit back on and come talk to you ? 
Reason - `` the crisis in Wallstreet is so severe that it would be dangerous to change president at this time '' . 
Obama is holed up in a Tampa Bay hotel all week to prepare for the debate . 
He has Biden going around telling people that he wants to sit at a table with NutJob from Iran . 
If Obama makes a trip to D.C. , does that mean he ca n't cram for his exam this Friday ? 
Is this truly the man we would want representing our country ? 
The man who has backed these criminals -LRB- CEOs -RRB- for years by giving them tax breaks , incentives , and deregulation . 
People OPEN your eyes ! 
Is this truly the man we would want representing our country ? 
The man who has backed these criminals -LRB- CEOs -RRB- for years by giving them tax breaks , incentives , and deregulation . 
People OPEN your eyes ! 
McCain is 1 of 535 members of congress . 
The effect he is likely to have working on the economic problems is minimal . 
He is , however , 1 of 2 people who are in a position to be the next president . 
He would serve the country much better by partaking in debates with Obama so the US public can make an informed decision about our next leader . 
I guess when he is grinning for the cameras in DC he will be not-campaigning . 
The negotiations are ongoing . 
The hearings are over . 
McCain is not even on the banking committee . 
And he wouldnt know an MBS if it were riding on his back , so what exactly is he going to do when he materializes in Washington ? 
McCain 's tactics are sooo phony and lame . 
Get out of this country - you do n't deserve it . 
What is the harm of going to do your job Mr. Obama ? 
Now I just want Obama to kick McCain 's ass so that I no longer have to see McCain 's shameless , depressing and irrersponsible stunts on my TV . 
I hope when McCain returns to the Senate he can regain at least a little of the dignity that he lost -LRB- and continues to lose daily -RRB- during this campaign Posted by : Los Angeles , CA | September 24 , 2008 5:59 PM | Report abuse This is just a chicken move . 
I want to hear McCain answer questions about his various opinions on the economy . 
It will help me make up my mind . 
We need to pick a good president this time . 
We need leadership that is well-thought ... not irrational and impetus . 
Obama is giving McCain a royal spanking and its gaining momentum . 
McCain 's NEO-CON Busho advisors see an opening ... but it is a cheap ploy . 
The flight from DC to the misissippi debate site is n't a long one , and both men have private campaign jets . 
Shut up , do your job , and then go debate . 
I really think it is far better if the candidates do n't have extra preparation time because they 'll be forced to answer the questions candidly instead of the coached\/canned answers Palin gives to questions ... when she even gives an answer ! 
DEBATE AND FACE THE PRESS OR WE 'LL START CALLING YOU `` CHICKEN -LRB- JOHN -RRB- MC-NUGGET ! '' 
since I have so many different views on so many topics , i will just have a debate with myself . 
topic 1 : campaign finance reform topic 6 - am I my brothers keeper topic 7 - what exactly is above my pay grade ? 
topic 8 - when is it OK to kill the baby I can offer many different views of all of these , as you know . 
for the most part , I just go along with the most liberal view . 
Unless I 'm running for office , which I always am . 
`` Part of the president 's job is to deal with more than one thing at once . '' 
The next president does not deal with this mess until January . 
Obama was not a very good constitutional law professor . 
I thought the Harvard grads were smarter . 
McCain should recognize that this is absolutely the wrong time to try and personally come up with an economic recovery plan . 
Not only is his decision to get intimately involved in the plan the wrong thing to do , he does n't really even know enough about the crisis to be in a position to know one way or the other what the right thing to do is . 
I think Obama recognized early on that if he or McCain became involved in the crisis it would politicise an issue that is likely to be pretty contentious anyway . 
Obviously the bottom line here is that McCain 's people have read the latest pole numbers and they know that the Palin VP choice is n't working . 
This is an `` I 've got nothing to lose '' moment for McCain . 
He either does something to really shake things up or he watches the pole numbers get worse and worse . 
He knows that by stopping campaigning he may make things worse , but there is a possibility that it will distract people from the real issues . 
If I were McCain , I would n't want to face any questions , either . 
They 're getting away with Palin not having to actually face the American public in a meaningful way , so why should n't he get away from it . 
Obama and Biden are intelligent and articulate . 
How can we expect two idiots to face off with them ? 
If we do , a nation of sheep will only accuse them of having the unfair advantage of being smart , and valuing the intelligence of the average American . 
We have n't had a leader like that for eight years , and it 's hardly bothered us , right ? 
You , who have missed the most amount of votes -LRB- excluding the ill Johnson -RRB- now wants to go back and do this ? 
I would say , with the two of you being the most visible faces of this government now , you need to debate Economy -LRB- instead of Foreign Policy -RRB- this Friday and assuage the voters ' fears . 
Not go running back - when the polls show bad news . 
Should some of us put the Chicken suit back on and come talk to you ? 
| September 24 , 2008 5:57 PM | Report abuse Yet another McCain mood swing ? 
More and more , he looks jittery , impetuous , and ... scared ? 
I think this decision was a bad gamble . 
For Pete 's sake , McCain has been needling him for weeks for not having the courage to debate him . 
I almost feel sorry for the guy , but I know he 'd shoot me in the face if I got in his way . 
Sympathy tends to melt away under those circumstances . 
You , who have missed the most amount of votes -LRB- excluding the ill Johnson -RRB- now wants to go back and do this ? 
I would say , with the two of you being the most visible faces of this government now , you need to debate Economy -LRB- instead of Foreign Policy -RRB- this Friday and assuage the voters ' fears . 
Not go running back - when the polls show bad news . 
Should some of us put the Chicken suit back on and come talk to you ? 
By his own admission a lackluster student and deficient in economics , Senator McCain is simply not ready for the `` final exam . '' 
Did n't you like those Styrofoam Greek columns ? 
Latest polls show Barack with a 9 % lead . 
Barack is raking in much more campaign money than McCain . 
Instead of maintaining his agreement to issue a joint , bipartisan statement with Barack , McCain has shown that he will go it alone and call it bipartisanship . 
The logic behind this latest McCain move is very questionable . 
To listen to the Republican spin on this is pathetic . 
It is like trying to make Bush look good when fully 70 % of the American public disgrees with his administration . 
What a sham for the McCain team . 
They know that they will lose the debate Friday night . 
Therefore , try to make it look like you are putting the `` country first . '' 
If this is the case , then he should have done this last week when the crisis manifested itself . 
It is a situation too close to the debates to look like anything other than what it really is : McCain is a loser . 
My guess is that his melanoma is back , is aggressive and this is the termination of his campaign . 
t McCain feeds his supporters they eat it with a smile ... '' Not all of us support McCain on all the issues . 
We certainly do NOT regard him as a savior to whose bed we will under ANY circumstance send our declothed wives , girlfriends , daughters and sons , and even ourselves after dropping our feigned manliness so that the Messiah can impregnate them females and still leave a little bit of his masculine essence for us men to taste like it 's truly better than whatever God himself could spare us . 
We care always MEN in the presence of any person , Hillary or McCain or your Messiah . 
Our knees are NOT weakened by anyone . 
You have every right to feel effeminate when the name of your Messiah is even whispered . 
But COUNT us MALE McCain supporters OUT . 
Americans for Obama 08 ! 
You sure you ca n't tell him apart from Bush ? 
McCain 's admitted he knows little if anything about the economy - but he 's needed in Washington to help fix things . 
The only thing he 's trying to fix is his standings in the polls . 
If it were n't so pathetic , it would also be amusing how many of his supporters want others to believe that this latest gambit has an merit and is in any way `` above politics '' . 
Gimme a break - it 's more of the same . 
It 's clever , I 'll give it that - but `` country first ? '' 
If this guy ca n't run a campaign \* and \* still perform his senatorial duties , then he should make the real call and chose one over the other . 
Go ahead , old feller , drop out of the race and save the country ... ha ha ha . 
I pity the truck that meets Obama on his road to white house . 
who in their right mind would want to be president anyway ? 
Look at the state Bush and the Republicans have left us in ? 
What 's McCain gonna say ? 
We 're gonna bail out wall Street and we 're not gonna raise taxes ? 
of course , Republicans will raise taxes on the poor , to keep more for their friends so all the debt can trickle down . 
Speaking of trickle down , how many times this week has McSame wet himself ? 
He 's not mentally equipped to be Pres. He 's just not very smart . 
`` I do n't know much about the Economy '' he said ... you think he might have picked up a book or two over the last 30 years to try to find out why he voted for Wall Street every time for the last 28 years in Washington . 
If you are rich and do n't understand the Economy , how did you make your money ... OH , That 's Right , the same way all Republicans earned their money ... From their Daddy 's Inheritance . 
A smart move of Obama to reach across the aile in hard times -- it shows leadership and it is the second time because Obama suggested the Sep 11 campaign suspension and join appearance . 
What 's more , Obama does it without pompousity -- no media leak . 
The fact is that Obama initiated the contact with McCain early today at 8:30 AM . 
McCain is a follower who clings to Omaba hand to avoid free fall . 
Yet I smell in McCain move a vile opportunism in annoucing the suspension of his campaign to work on the crisis -- `` an arsonits volunteering for firefighting '' ? 
What is more , he goes solo to the media trying to capitalize from Obama initiative and play politics . 
Posponing the 1st debate is also a political move . 
If McCain can not multitaks then he is not prepared to be president , right ? 
I understand that the risk of his arguably ` bigger-security-and-foreign-expertise ' message to fall in deaf ears due to the economic crisis was big and the GOP must be betting on changing the game with that debate . 
Therefore there is no reason for posponing the debate . 
It should go on . 
As I said , do not `` missunderestimate '' McCain . 
Obama should put politics aside , period . 
Personally , I 'm hoping he 'll mimic the snarky commentary here , refuse to join McCain , keep his ads going , go to the debate like an idiot and the people can see the real Obama -- if there is such a thing . 
The senate does not want McCain 's help on the economic crises now and he was never involved before today !! See Senator Chuck Schumer 's interview today on CNN . 
At least Obama had the brains to contact Harry Reid , Nancy Pelosi and others to offer his help if needed but did n't do something crazy like crash the party . 
WAKE UP , PEOPLE . 
McPain is a MAJOR FLAKE . 
There has been such a documentation of his serial lying , so many reports on his various votes opposing financial regulation , in spite of his lies to the contrary , that it is apparent his handlers watched him during his debate prep , decided there was no way his old feeble mind could memorize that many rationalizations and fabrications to explain away his dishonesty effectively , and they gambled it was better to dodge the debate rather than participate , and have his entire candidacy destroyed because his lies could no longer be juggled effectively . 
The campaign determined he was not up to the task . 
On that we can agree . 
Now the polls skyrocket for Obama and McCain wants to suspend his campaign and postpone the scheduled debate to `` focus '' on the financial crisis . 
I think that he is really focusing on the fact that his campaign is going down in flames ... Posted by : Cubetap | September 24 , 2008 5:54 PM | Report abuse FINE ! 
Then let 's get Palin and Biden out there on Friday , instead ! 
McCains attempt to reduce the election to a series of stunts to hood-wink the electorate . 
Attempt to dictate format of debates . 
Picking a annoying ` cocky wacko ' for VP to shock the American people . 
When campaign does n't work , call to ` suspend campaign ' , while keeping the vicious , lie-ful ads running !!!! . 
Mr McCain now claims he needs the Friday too ! 
What has he been doing in last 6 months in his so called ` straight-lies express ' ? 
Why was he not in Senate , if thats what he claims , he needs to be ? 
This is not time for cheap stunts . 
This will leave McCain appearing to be in a panic about not being prepared - or not having enough time to review the `` script '' . 
Remember all the Townhalls he deprived US . 
Get it `` US '' the United States . 
Thats right we need you to show what you are made of Obama do n't lie and tell US it is important to see you know ... Posted by : Anna | September 24 , 2008 5:54 PM | Report abuse 1 -RRB- If Palin is ready to be VP , let her come to Oxford and debate Obama ! 
Should be fun ... 2 -RRB- Lets not forget that the process of electing a president is \*\* just as essential to our system of government \*\* as the mechanics of legislation . 
To run for president while still holding lower office requires that one do both , not one thing at a time . 
Obama forgo a chance to talk on national television . 
Who are we kidding , folks ? 
I think the people already know if McCain is willing -LRB- or able -RRB- to work across party lines by now . 
He has been there for awhile . 
Palin is the one that needs the 101 course on this subject . 
It 's not too hard to get things approved in a red state with a majority Republican party in power . 
This financial disaster happened a week ago . 
Why did n't he rush back then ? 
Is n't it interesting that this rush back to Washington happened just after it was proven that Rick Davis ' firm was still receiving money from either freddie mac or frannie mae -LRB- not sure which one -RRB- . 
McCain wanted to appoint a non-partisan Presidential commission to investigate the whole thing . 
What happens during those 2 years we wait for the report ??? Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 5:53 PM | Report abuse You know you 're talking to a Republican when ... they blame the current economic crisis on londing money to minorities . 
This is where the GOP is placing the blame . 
That way it can be used to smear democrats and minorities . 
Because democrats opposed Jim Crow lending practices in the 1970s . 
It 's all over the conservative blogs . 
The GOP should just apologize for `` deregulating '' the financial industry . 
But , nope , they are busy blaming Democrats and black people . 
We need some answers . 
Why would anyone expect him to stop now ? 
McCain has proved he is the only one who knows how to work with both parties . 
Obama is politics as usual . 
A whole lot of people will know which way to vote even BETTER if McCain just suspends his whole campaign . 
In fact , he can concede right now and MAYBE pick up some votes ! 
The Debates will help us pick a new Preisident which is kinda necessary to have in the White House . 
I do n't know how many Congressmen it takes to figure out what they want to do . 
I do n't think the janitors and policemen guarding Congressional offices feel they have to work harder this week in order to help solve this crisis . 
We ALL ca n't decide what to do . 
McCain has that blackberry thing he invented and can keep in touch with all his little friends . 
Remember he admits he is weak on the Economy so he may not be the first they call for answers . 
If he wants to vote on a bill then no one would fault him for heading back for that . 
His judgement to suspend his campaign in another example of his weakness . 
Maybe a good leader but without good judgement he is questionable . 
He has running for office for 12 months now . 
Maybe he should try to focus on what everyone is expecting him to do . 
Why would you give him free credit for anything once this is resolved . 
He took the right approach . 
And the people on the fence now are less and less the poorly educated but mostly savvy voters . 
What is Mc Cain going to do now ... believe me , he gambled , and he lost . 
Obama feels that we should go on with the show despite the financial tsunami . 
Either he is desperate , careless about us , or does n't have anything to propose . 
It would have being a plus for Obama had McCain fall for the trap of aiding him look as if he could fill his empty suit . 
This financial disaster happened a week ago . 
Why did n't he rush back then ? 
Is n't it interesting that this rush back to Washington happened just after it was proven that Rick Davis ' firm was still receiving money from either freddie mac or frannie mae -LRB- not sure which one -RRB- . 
Just another smoke\/mirror distraction from the issues . 
I would rather John McCain and Barack Obama address the American people in a debate than rush behind closed doors to some plan crafted in secret without the taxpayers knowing what he was doing . 
This action reeks and shows John McCain to always put himself first , the country second , and the taxpayer and voters out of the loop . 
If he doent want debate Obama , lets have the VP debate Posted by : j | September 24 , 2008 5:50 PM | Report abuse NObama said `` Call me if you need me '' . 
Thats ' not leading . 
He is not a leader . 
There 's arrogance in him too . 
Obama only states the obvious about the state of the economy and makes promises that he does not even realize are impossible to bring to reality . 
Obama 's career is theatrics . 
He does not know much except how to speak eloquently between his studders and `` ahs '' . 
You scare no one . 
Were you born into it , or learn it from Mein Kampf ? 
Yes All it will do is solidify his `` country first '' position with his already loyal Republicans and make the Democratic supporters call him a coward for hiding behind this . 
In the end we 'll be right back where we started . 
The GOP 's camp is just despicable for treating this election like it 's theirs to manipulate however they wish . 
What are they going to do , hide McCain and Palin from everyone but those who go to their rallies until November ? 
Multi task and on with the debate ! 
He can multitask or he can go take a nap and wake up when the Democrats have cleaned up the mess him and his party have created . 
Mc Same and Palin can run but they cant hide . 
Crawl in a cocoon and you still have to come out and fight Mr. Mc Grumpy and oh by the way answer some questions . 
US Army 82nd Airborne | September 24 , 2008 5:50 PM | Report abuse '' At this moment nobody cares about that debate . '' 
I care very much about the debate . 
This is a chance for both candidates to detail what they will do as president to prevent them from happening again . 
Apparently , McCain has no plan at all . 
By Friday he will come out against the bailout and that will leave the Democrats on the same sideline holding the bag with Bush . 
And that includes Pelosi , Reid , Obama ... Posted by : Bob | September 24 , 2008 5:50 PM | Report abuse As a former Hillary supporter and current Obama supporter , I 'm confused . 
Sure , this can show leadership from McCain 's side . 
But I just ca n't believe he is doing this in order to restore confidence in independent voters worried about the financial crisis . 
This is too much like when Palin was picked to stir-up disgruntled female Clinton voters . 
Another political gimmick , courtesy of McCain . 
Just to show how DESPERATE he is to win the election . 
Whatever happened to `` Country First ? '' 
he needs a break to stop the Obama surge . 
What better way then stop all campaigning and look like an economic wonk rather than the confused old man he is . 
Beside , Michelle said no '' Posted by : The one | September 24 , 2008 5:43 PM To the Fu-khead who posted this . 
You obviously missed the point that McCain can only handle one crises at a time . 
Obama can show that he multitasks . 
But you have your head so far up your rectum that you probably ca n't see this . 
That is in his power . 
It is not within his power to tell the American people that his time is so precious that he will cancel a 90 minute presidential debate . 
We need exposure to the candidates to make an informed decision . 
If he wants to help the financial crisis , what better way than to change the topic to the economy and talk directly to 80 million viewers and all the members of congress ? 
Are you saying that Obama is at McCain 's birthday party ? 
That does n't make a lick of sense . 
Obama has been hammering at the economic problems in the US for months now . 
McCain has been at it for like ... 12 hours or something . 
It does not take all day to make a decision and\/or cast a vote . 
We all know he can be in Washington on Friday and catch a airplane and be in Oxford , Mississippi later on that evening . 
America please do n't be a fool and do n't be fooled . 
We are idiots and will deserve the mess Obama will lead us into . 
I mean do n't you guys pay taxes , have financial responsibilities . 
It was the Democrats that forced lending money for homebuyers that could n't afford them . 
Obama just said himself that may be he ca n't do all the give aways he has promised . 
McCain is experienced has seen it all with guts and grace . 
He would serve us very well if we gave him the chance to serve as President . 
He sees it as an opportunity to serve a noble country not as a resume builder that confirms that he is `` the one '' . 
Is n't the selfishness and lack of grasp and experience in Obama scary ?? Posted by : Lola Conrwell | September 24 , 2008 5:49 PM | Report abuse So let me get this right . 
The senate is dealing with one of the greatest financial crises since the great depression -LRB- Obama 's own words -RRB- . 
But we do n't want a senator who still is a part of that body to go there and help out . 
It would be more helpful for him to try and get to the white house ? 
While we are at it , why do n't we pose this test : `` Neither McCain nor Obama can change the course of what is happening on the hill right now by attending . '' 
to all the other senators . 
What is so special about Dick Durbin or Jack Reed or McCaskill ? 
Oh , I guess they have nothing better to do . 
On the other hand , becoming President is so much more important than getting back on the deck of a burning ship . 
Dude , who do you take your marching orders from ? 
It can not be the ship called USA . 
He needs to make sure Phil Gramm gets more influence over the bailout . 
Meanwhile , Obama says he can fix the country 's financial woes and talk at the same time . 
It 's a skill . 
I did n't hear Congress blowing the horn for McCaim - or was that Bu $ h sending out a rescue call ? 
Watch tonight when Bush and McCain will appear side by side = look at us , we want what 's best for the country . 
Do n't they know the country knows that they are the problem , not the solution ? 
And what is McCain going to do in November when Obama clearly leads in the polls - cancel the election ? 
This stunt is yet another one of those famous McCain gambles , but I have a feeling it will blow up in his face . 
The debate will go on as planned without him , and the bill will pass without any significant contribution from the Arizona senator . 
I am betting that the end result of this gambit is that McCain will simply look unpredictable , attention seeking , and -LRB- possibly -RRB- irrelevant . 
McCain is responsible for this mess , and he does n't want it to come up in the debates . 
PLUS , his entire `` Good Ol' Boy '' staff is already IN Washington holding out their cups and jingling . 
What do you want him to do ? 
Who 's gonna tell him what to say during the debate when his whole staff is in Washington scrounging for that yummy tax payer money ? 
Give me a break if McCain does n't think people can see through this lie he 's the oldest fool in this nation . 
McCain is loosing in the polls and he 's going to lose this election by his bad judgments calls and Big gaffes he made regarding the econmony people wo n't forget what he said `` he thinks the econmony is strong '' no matter how much he tries to back peddle on this statement it wo n't be forgotten . 
Obama do fall for Mccain 's lies and more lies go forward with the debate with or without McCain . 
NO MCCAIN\/PALIN - NO WAY NO HOW Posted by : Jacie - San Leandro , Ca | September 24 , 2008 5:47 PM | Report abuse McCain has officially lost his mind . 
A President ought to be able to walk and chew gum at the same time . 
Can the GOP officially declare him incompetent and have Palin as the nominee in his stead ? 
You know that 's what they want . 
By doing this , Barack Obama has no way to go ... to agree would mean he is following McCain 's lead , and to disagree would make the voters think that he does not care enough . 
The game is on !! Posted by : John P | September 24 , 2008 5:47 PM | Report abuse I remember another candidate who wanted to talk about economics ... But he was swiftboated ... so he never got his chance to crack down on Wall Street . 
I hope this latest GOP gimmick does n't have the same results as the ones used against Kerry . 
If Kerry had been elected , we probably would n't be in so much hot water right now . 
Will Obama at least cease his fundraising ? 
If he does not that is no doubt the reason for his desire to ignore our country when it is in crisis . 
This proves that `` Country First '' is not just a slogan . 
And anyone who would put Sarah Palin a heartbeat from the Presidency lives by `` Campaign First . 
Country , who cares ? 
I 'll be gone . '' 
McCain decides to look like he made the move first and made a statement on his own . 
HAHAHA McCrazy Posted by : KIMMO | September 24 , 2008 5:46 PM | Report abuse Can t this guy McCain multi-task ? 
I forgot he can t use a computer -RRB- ! 
He needs to be PHYSICALLY IN FRONT OF PEOPLE to get things done . 
We are starting to see what a John McCain Presidency really means . 
Unable to deal with more than one crisis at a time . 
His campaign needs to call Al-Qaida and ask them not to invade the United States of America when John has a busy schedule . 
John McCain hasn t placed a vote in the Senate since April . 
He can do both . 
He is just scared to a debate during a crisis . 
It looks like the WSJ is lauding McCains attempt to reduce the election to a series of stunts to hood-wink the electorate . 
Attempt to dictate format of debates . 
Picking a annoying ` cocky wacko ' for VP to shock the American people . 
When campaign does n't work , call to ` suspend campaign ' , while keeping the vicious , lie-ful ads running !!!! . 
Mr McCain now claims he needs the Friday too ! 
What has he been doing in last 6 months in his so called ` straight-lies express ' ? 
Why was he not in Senate , if thats what he claims , he needs to be ? 
This is not time for cheap stunts . 
me say no worry go fix economie then you win in lanslide specially with hottie you pick who wear welding goggles and have beehive hairdo from 60s super hottie and now she esperianced she went to un today and meet leaders . 
ha ha democracy party cant beet macaine . 
if you cant stand the heat get out of the oven . 
when palling win we bomb anyone who disagree and torture if we feel like it . 
dont mess with the usa foreners . 
i am so happy obama will lose i am planning big party and invite sara palling super hottie and give her moose head for wall . 
me love sara palling and macaine croak soon so no matter if he seenile or croaik soon she be great president and will get payback for enemies . 
palling o8 !!!!!!!!!!!! Posted by : dave miner | September 24 , 2008 5:45 PM | Report abuse Obama is acting like Bush during Katrina . 
Obama feels that we should go on with the show despite the financial tsunami . 
Either he is desperate , careless about us , or does n't have anything to propose . 
It would have being a plus for Obama had McCain fall for the trap of aiding him look as if he could fill his empty suit . 
Of course Obama needs the figure of McCain next to him ! 
What can he possibly offer to the people ? 
He has always used others shadow 'cause he ca n't even produce that . 
McCain and the Republicans need to be run out of power . 
As for McCain 's move , he is scared to death to debate on Friday . 
His numbers are moving down and , guess what , his VP choice is helping now that something important has come up . 
Do n't you have some babies to eat ? 
We already know that Washington insiders like him and his GOP cronies are responsible for this mess . 
This is another Hail Mary pass . 
By canceling the debate McCain is hoping to escape having the spotlight shine on the responsibility he so clearly owns in this fiasco . 
I do n't think so . 
Elect me first is more like it . 
McCain takes 6 hours to agree , but then immediately issues the statement of suspending the campaign ... Is he worried about political implications of public seeing that Obama initiated the action ? 
Is he unable to walk and chew gum at the same time ? 
Shouldnt he be if he wants to be president ? 
Why cant he work on the bill AND debate his opponent at 9:00 pm at the end of the week ? 
His opponent seems willing to do that ... why not McCain ? 
What if the legislation gets hammered out Friday afternoon ? 
Seems a bit early to cancel . 
Obama is set up for a slam dunk here ... He can simply say just that ... that if conditions on Friday warrant a cancellation , then by all means , but it is too early to call it off . . 
This will leave McCain appearing to be in a panic about not being prepared - or not having enough time to review the `` script '' . 
John McCain is going back to Washington ... Woo HOO !! They 're gonna git it now . 
Just like they did for the first 30 years he sat his rich butt in Washington and did nothing . 
Yay , here comes the reformer chameleon ! 
He 's missed more votes than anyone this year . 
Sarah Palin - Hail Mary Pass # 1 ... Suspend Campaign - Hail Mary Pass # 2 ... What 's next ??? Give me a break . 
First , he admits he does n't know economics . 
Then , he says the economy is strong . 
Now , three days later , it 's such a disaster that he -LRB- in all his infinite wisdom -RRB- must run off to singlehandedly save the day ? 
Either this move is purely political or he simply ca n't do two things at once - prepare for a debate and be a US senator - if that 's the case , how on earth can he handle being President ? 
Soccer mom can multitask better than that ! 
The straws that broke the Camel 's back were Obama 's surge in the polls and the reality that McCain 's campaign manager , Rick Davis may have to cooperate with an FBI investigation of Fannie\/Freddie use of lobbyists -LRB- Davis is one -RRB- to delay congressional oversight . 
Darling , you couldnt broker your way out of a paper bag , and you are SO in over your head at this point with the whole crisis , that you just want to take your toys and go home !!! LOL !! Just go home and take a nap , and let Obama LEAD ... Posted by : Larry | September 24 , 2008 5:44 PM | Report abuse The man reeks of desperation . 
POW stories can only get you so far . 
McCain is spiraling down and does n't want to debate . 
Neither he nor Palin want to get in front of the cameras . 
What a pathetic bunch of crap . 
We already know that Washington insiders like him and his GOP cronies are responsible for this mess . 
This is another Hail Mary pass . 
By canceling the debate McCain is hoping to escape having the spotlight shine on the responsibility he so clearly owns in this fiasco . 
Country first my arse . 
Elect me first is more like it . 
Beside , Michelle said no '' Posted by : The one | September 24 , 2008 5:43 PM | Report abuse I am an independent undecided voter . 
Today 's verdict : I believe Senator Obama made the right call . 
Neither are on the banking committee so there is no point in rushing back to Washington . 
The debates are key for people like me . 
Obama is thinking about fund raising . 
Money is behind his stand . 
Miss a chance to talk ? 
The best these candidates can do is to help the country understand what they will do beyond this mess to run the country , what they will do to recover from it and prevent this from ever happening again . 
Not having the debate and god forbid the election for that matter is a copout . 
It is unfair to all the people -LRB- A vast majority -RRB- who desperately want to turn a chapter on the mess the Bush administration and congress left us in . 
There is increasing information to suggest that the market -LRB- Banking particularly -RRB- has enough liquidity to buyout the good parts of failed institutions and let the losses for the bad parts fall on the stakeholders rather than the tax payers . 
The idea that we have to act this quickly looks more and more like a ransom attempt by wall street : If you don t give it to us we will make you sorry . 
George Bush is a weakling and does not deserve the time he gets to pretend that he even remotely knows what the answer is . 
He is just listening to the advice of investment bankers that have never had any but their own interests in mind . 
If you ask an investment banker to solve the problem he will save the investment banking system . 
What we need is for Obama and McCain to finish the election so that we can move on and fix the economy for the people and not for the few rich fat cat wall street bankers . 
A real opportunity for bipartisanship , turned into a crude political stunt . 
There is nothing McCain wo n't try . 
I would like to trace their IP addresses . 
I would n't be surprised if they are located in Iraq or the Afghanistan\/Pakistan border . 
What they are saying is some of the most unpatriotic , craven , treasonous things I have ever heard . 
I just can not believe a US citizen at this time of crises would rather that leading Presidential candidates spend time tearing each other up . 
t McCain feeds his supporters they eat it with a smile ... You have to give them that Posted by : erik | September 24 , 2008 5:41 PM | Report abuse `` What a sad , sad day for John McCain . 
I just ca n't believe it ! 
Why would he do something so laughable ? 
Independent voters do n't care about all this political manuevering , they want the debate ! 
But now he 's just going to make himself look like a coward unless he shows up . 
So , in effect , he has to go to the debate now . 
What a dumb , dumb , move ... '' Dumb politically , you mean ? 
Of course , you could have said the same for his support of `` the surge '' -LRB- and many did -RRB- . 
But perhaps -- and I realize that it is difficult for those of us hardened by the cynicism of politics to be open-minded about such things -- just perhaps , John McCain is worried more about his country that his campaign . 
Perhaps he is really more concerned about all Americans than about the subset that is independent voters , or their desire for a debate . 
Perhaps he is too busy leading to worry about whether or not he looks like a coward . 
Maybe he 'd actually rather see his country succeed than find personal success politically . 
I 'll admit that I 'm a cynic as well . 
So , this kind of commitment to serving one 's country seems too good to be true . 
I 'd certainly never believe it of Obama , but sometimes McCain makes me wonder . 
The kind of guy that would turn down getting an early release as a POW because it was an obvious propaganda ploy -- that kind of guy tends to put a few cracks in my cynicism . 
He made an exception for the religious forum on Saturday at Saddleback Church in Southern California ... It occurs to me that John McCain is as intellectually shallow as our current president . 
When asked what his Christian faith means to him , his answer was a one-liner . 
`` It means I 'm saved and forgiven . '' 
Great scholars have wrestled with the meaning of faith for centuries . 
McCain then retold a story we 've all heard a hundred times about a guard in Vietnam drawing a cross in the sand . 
Asked about his greatest moral failure , he cited his first marriage , which ended in divorce . 
While saying it was his greatest moral failing , he offered nothing in the way of explanation . 
Throughout the evening , McCain chose to recite portions of his stump speech as answers to the questions he was being asked . 
He has lived 71 years . 
Surely he has some thoughts on what it all means that go beyond canned answers culled from the same speech he delivers every day . 
He was asked `` if evil exists . '' 
His response was to repeat for the umpteenth time that Osama bin Laden is a bad man and he will pursue him to `` the gates of h \*\*\* . '' 
That was it ... One after another , McCain 's answers were shallow , simplistic , and trite . 
He showed the same intellectual curiosity that George Bush has -- virtually none . 
Where are John McCain 's writings exploring the vexing moral issues of our time ? 
Where are his position papers setting forth his careful consideration of foreign policy , the welfare state , education , America 's moral responsibility in the world , etc. , etc. , etc. ? 
John McCain graduated 894th in a class of 899 at the Naval Academy at Annapolis . 
His father and grandfather were four star admirals in the Navy . 
Some have suggested that might have played a role in McCain being admitted . 
His academic record was awful . 
And it shows over and over again whenever McCain is called upon to think on his feet . 
He no longer allows reporters unfettered access to him aboard the `` Straight Talk Express '' for a reason . 
He simply makes too many mistakes . 
Unless he 's reciting talking points or reading from notes or a TelePrompTer , John McCain is lost . 
He can drop bon mots at a bowling alley or diner -- short glib responses that get a chuckle , but beyond that McCain gets in over his head very quickly . 
I am sick and tired of the president of the United States embarrassing me ... George Bush 's record as a student , military man , businessman and leader of the free world is one of constant failure . 
And the part that troubles me most is he seems content with himself . 
He will leave office with the country $ 10 trillion in debt , fighting two wars , our international reputation in shambles , our government cloaked in secrecy and suspicion that his entire presidency has been a litany of broken laws and promises , our citizens ' faith in our own country ripped to shreds . 
Yet Bush goes bumbling along , grinning and spewing moronic one-liners , as though nobody understands what a colossal failure he has been . 
I fear to the depth of my being that John McCain is just like him . 
I think they are getting edgy because of the FBI . 
My guess is they sold the same mortgage to multiple banks . '' 
hmmm ... I 'm still thinking about that , Bill . 
Latest McCain stunt is anathor attempt by McCain to `` introduce Presidential politics in the delicate negotiations over the bail out '' . 
Mr McCain is a total THUG . 
He 's nearly 80 years old and campaigning takes a toll on these folks . 
Maybe he just needs a break , and the debates are not going to help him anyway . 
Let Obama stand there by himself and answer all the questions while our Hero Johnny Mac is in Washington bailing out the poor Wall Street Billionaires . 
Did I mention I 'm a freaking idiot ? 
As such , both of them should report to `` work '' at their current jobs . 
It 's not about multitasking . 
It 's not about politics . 
It is about providing ideas , insight , and approval to obtain the best possible solution . 
Furthermore , whoever wins the election will have to live with this solution , so they should make sure their views are part of the congressional debate . 
When was the last time either of them was `` present '' for Senate business ? 
What is he going to do there ? 
If anybody believed , including his republican colleagues , that his ` insight ' on economics is needed they would have say so . 
Obviously they did not . 
Obama is clearly acting like the leader . 
Who is the senator with a Plan ? 
Senator Dodd , the closest Obama partner in the Senate . 
Harry Reid and Nancy Pelosi are Obama 's campaign spokespersons in this Crisis . 
Mc Cain knows that the mediator of the debate will have a large focus on the subject and Mc Cain is scared that he will have to take a position , that he would n't understand . 
Maybe McSame saved a list of all the Federal financial-industry regulatory safeguards he helped to vote out of existence during his laissez-faire career , especially during the carefree Dubya Years ... Posted by : 4Obama B4 it was cool | September 24 , 2008 5:40 PM | Report abuse Senate in a gridlock over legislation that involves -LRB- by the reckoning of even the Obama camp -RRB- one of the worst crises ever . 
One senator decides to go back to the senate . 
The other decides it stay on the road to White House . 
He knows the polls are trending against him . 
He does n't want to face questions about his campaign advisor 's lobbying and payments from Freddie Mac and the questions about deregulation that he promoted . 
So he 's trying to look like a leader . 
In fact , he just looks like a coward . 
I am reminded of 9\/11 and him sitting there reading the childrens book while being told that a plane flew into the towers . . 
know what I mean ... McCain is doing this all for show . 
Obama reached first to have them both jointly support this plan , and move forward , the right thing to do , with neither of them getting the advantage and here this guy goes and pulls that , this shows his bad character once again ... Posted by : Kelly | September 24 , 2008 5:40 PM | Report abuse You forgot that Harry Reid asked for McCains help . 
He ask for him to tell the dems what they need to do . 
Listen to the audio . 
He wants him to get the dems some republican votes . 
LOL Posted by : kevin | September 24 , 2008 5:40 PM | Report abuse If you did your research properly , you would have discovered this , via an email release from the Obama campaign : `` At 8:30 this morning , Senator Obama called Senator McCain to ask him if he would join in issuing a joint statement outlining their shared principles and conditions for the Treasury proposal and urging Congress and the White House to act in a bipartisan manner to pass such a proposal . 
At 2:30 this afternoon , Senator McCain returned Senator Obama s call and agreed to join him in issuing such a statement . '' 
- Thus , McCain 's `` statement '' , SIX hours later....back-handed and bogus . 
He 's a plagiarist Posted by : artandseoul | September 24 , 2008 5:39 PM | Report abuse If Obama falls for this , he does n't deserve to win . 
A reminder to his campaign : HE IS RUNNING TO BE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES TO FIX THESE PROBLEMS ONCE-AND-FOR-ALL . 
another effort to dodge facing the American public . 
I hate to lose . 
When I was a kid I used to quit -LRB- games -RRB- when it looked like i was going to lose . 
if i didnt quit , i used some other tactic\/distraction . 
I was probably 8 years old , so it is funny to me that McShame would use such an elementary ploy . 
Obama is on a roll and he will not let anything push him off the podium , not even a national financial crisis the likes of which I have never seen in my lifetime . 
His campaign has always been always been all about him and today it still is . 
At this moment nobody cares about that debate , we are scared to death we may be losing everything . 
He is putting Obama first as usual . 
As such , both of them should report to `` work '' at their current jobs . 
It 's not about multitasking . 
It 's not about politics . 
It is about providing ideas , insight , and approval to obtain the best possible solution . 
Furthermore , whoever wins the election will have to live with this solution , so they should make sure their views are part of the congressional debate . 
When was the last time either of them was `` present '' for Senate business ? 
... the fundamentals of our economy are sound . . 
-LRB- what 's that ? 
... -RRB- um , I mean the American people are sound ... ummmmmmmmm sorry I nodded off for a moment . 
Can I have my Dollie ? 
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz Posted by : Messagero | September 24 , 2008 5:38 PM | Report abuse McCain to Obama : Country first ? 
Obama to McCain : What ?! Country who ?! Country be d@mned . 
Me and my supporters and my cherished oval office curtains first . 
Other TrueMajority members have already started 75 rallies in their towns , will you join them ? 
ATTEND AN EMERGENCY RALLY AGAINST THE BAILOUT Thanks to the thousands of you who participated in the Million Doors for Peace weekend ! 
Reports are still flooding in , but here 's a typical one : `` Thanks for organizing this event and giving me the opportunity to participate ! 
I enjoyed the experience -LRB- and -RRB- I appreciate the simplicity and organization of the event . 
Thanks for your hard work ! '' 
This video from our partners at Connecticut Opposes the War gives the flavor of the day . 
If you were n't able to join us this time , be sure to sign the petition online , below : Senator Feingold Says Thank You Thank you for all your work to stop the Democrats from caving in on telecom immunity . 
Last week , we won yet another improbable victory . 
Members like you sent over 29,000 emails and made over 15,000 calls to your Senators opposing immunity for phone companies that spied on Americans . 
Senator Feingold has recorded a special thank you message to TrueMajority members for all your work . 
Send a message to your Senator in support of Senator Feingold 's efforts to strip telecom immunity from the final FISA legislation . 
I just read an article entitled `` Revisiting the Keaton 5 '' dated September 4 , 2008 that was published in the Seattle Times . 
McCain has been one dishonest , crooked man . 
McCain is not leading on ANY Kerry states , not even by a small margin . 
Obama needs to take away 18 . 
He is good for 21 at the moment . 
According to RCP , none of the tossup states are currently changing color from 2004 . 
However , McCain is threatening Minnesota , Michigan , Wisconsin , New Hampshire , and Pennyslvania . 
Of those , McCain is closest to taking New Hampshire which Obama is leading by 2 . 
Obama is threatening in Ohio , Florida , Nevada , Virginia , and Indiana . 
Of those states , Obama is the FARTHEST away from Indiana by 2.3 points . 
If the tossup states stay where they were in 2004 , then Obama wins . 
If McCain takes one of the tossup states and does n't lose any , then McCain wins . 
McCain 's margins to take a blue state are a lot worse than Obama 's margins to take another red state . 
McCain simply ca n't afford to be seen in a debate with Obama . 
One more bounce for the darkie ends the race . 
It was a calculated political move from a guy who 's struggling . 
McCain has n't cast a Senate vote since April -- he 's not superman ; he 's not going to go flying back to DC to solve the problem ; he 'll just inject presidential politics into delicate negotiations . 
This is n't suspending the campaign ; it IS the campaign . 
McCain explained it a few weeks ago , when asked about all the lies in his campaign ads . 
But I do n't think Obama is going to take him up on it . 
Nevertheless , he is showing leadership . 
You can , of course , question his motives but he will get traction from this . 
You ca n't blame Obama for refusing to look small in response . 
However , what he should have said was that he would suspend his campaign and the debate if Bush WOULD in fact call a substantive meeting at the White House for Friday involving bipartisan congressional leadership and the candidates . 
Tomorrow the staffs can narrow the agenda . 
If he had done this Obama would have not only shown leadership but also would have forced Bush 's hand going into his speech . 
He has no role in the Banking Committee and no knowledge of economics , by his own admission . 
What a desperate gambit to avoid looking like a fool in the economics debate . 
Leadership , my a \*\* . 
He 's running away from Obama as fast as he can . 
He has criticized Obama for not debating him and now he runs and hide under his mother 's skirt . 
On with the debate | !!! Posted by : Kimmo | September 24 , 2008 5:36 PM | Report abuse Reading the comments from Obama supporters I have to say I do n't think they are Americans . 
I would like to trace their IP addresses . 
I would n't be surprised if they are located in Iraq or the Afghanistan\/Pakistan border . 
What they are saying is some of the most unpatriotic , craven , treasonous things I have ever heard . 
I just can not believe a US citizen at this time of crises would rather that leading Presidential candidates spend time tearing each other up . 
He 's decided to put the interests of the country first by gong to Washington and throwing screaming fits until Congress votes a no-strings bailout . 
How DARE you ??!!? Do n't you know that he studied advanced derivatives during the 5.5 years he was a captive ? 
McCain also studied advanced quantum physical during his captivity . 
Why , there is n't anything that John McCain did n't do to improve himself during his captivity ... except take anger management classes . 
We need Sarah Palin to come to Capitol Hill and distract all those nasty Democrats by wearing a short skirt and high heels so that McCain can get the no-strings bail out that Wall Street wants . 
Every male member of my family has served his nation with honor and we love John McCain . 
That said , what in the he11 is he talking about ? 
If he wanted to put his country first , he should be calling them fools in washington as the theives they are . 
If you ask me , congress should do what they do best : Nothing . 
I 'll be damned if MY money is gonna go to some elite bankers who dont give two cents about the working poor of our great nation . 
McCain should stop running from that boy Obama , or he 's gonna get it handed to him . 
McCain aint waht he used to be , that 's for sure . 
he 's got Bush Itis , another reason I may be voting Democrat forthe first time in my life . 
This is twice now that the Rep. guy put HIS campaign on hold to take care of our country -LRB- once during the Rep. convention to see to the hurriance condidtions and today 's decision -RRB- . 
McCain believes what he preaches ... country before party ! 
Hey ya stupid Bozo . 
It 's McCain 's job now to run for office . 
The other 98 senators can do just fine without either candidate . 
Since we are down to just two candidates and have to pick one soon then it is most important we get as much exposure to each of them during the next few weeks so we can make a good choice . 
Get it ?? McCain chose to run and knws what his job is now . 
The debate will help pick the next president . 
Like the one who will oversee the several wars we are in , the economy , health care , etc. . 
Are you getting a clue as to what the election process is about ? 
I do n't think Bush and Paulson are sitting around and fretting that McCain is MIA from Washington . 
If he would remain on the campaign trail it would be possible to speak to the broad principles without making the deliberations more partisan and undermining Bush 's ability to broker a deal . 
Also , the idea that we have to halt the campaign only adds to the panic . 
As George Will and others have pointed out , there is no need to rush into this . 
Once the campaign is stopped and democracy is on hold the pressure to pass something\/anything will be even greater . 
Let 's slow down and take a breath . 
The last one worked for a little while , until people began to come to their senses . 
This one is DOA . 
what is even more disturbing is that mask you wear is really not concealing you as a matter of fact it exposes you more because everyone can see that you are willing to cut off your nose to spite your face ... . 
you biggots know who i 'm talking to . 
Nobody said , `` John , we ca n't do this without you !! '' John says , `` Here I come to save the day ! '' 
He really is Mr. Magoo . 
McCains attempt to reduce the election to a series of stunts to hood-wink the electorate . 
Attempt to dictate format of debates . 
Picking a annoying ` cocky wacko ' for VP to shock the American people . 
When campaign does n't work , call to ` suspend campaign ' , while keeping the vicious , lie-ful ads running !!!! . 
Mr McCain now claims he needs the Friday too ! 
What has he been doing in last 6 months is his ` straight-lie express ' ? 
Why was he not in Senate , if thats what he claims he needs to be there ? 
This is not time for cheap stunts . 
At 8:30 this morning , Senator Obama called Senator McCain to ask him if he would join in issuing a joint statement outlining their shared principles and conditions for the Treasury proposal and urging Congress and the White House to act in a bipartisan manner to pass such a proposal , said Bill Burton , the spokesman for the Obama campaign . 
At 2:30 this afternoon , he added , Senator McCain returned Senator Obama s call and agreed to join him in issuing such a statement . 
The two campaigns are currently working together on the details . 
If McCain wants to devote some time to the bail-out negotiations , fine . 
In fact , Obama called McCain this morning to suggest that they join forces to help solve the problem . 
That kind of action does n't require suspending the campaign . 
Suspending the campaign is what candidates do when they drop out of the race . 
What 's McCain really up to , besides the obvious attempt to appear `` above politics ? '' 
And if they are saying he looks like Bush , I agree . 
Desperate , out of touch , and unwilling to be held accountable for his own policies . 
Very `` Presidential . '' 
-LRB- You know , presidential used to have positive connotations ... like 8 years ago -RRB- . 
I think they are getting edgy because of the FBI . 
My guess is they sold the same mortgage to multiple banks . 
Democratic vice presidential candidate Sen. Joe Biden campaigns in Washington on Tuesday . 
Democratic vice presidential candidate Sen. Joe Biden campaigns in Washington on Tuesday . 
Both Biden and Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama voted to kill a Senate amendment that would have diverted federal funding for the bridge to repair a Louisiana span badly damaged by Hurricane Katrina , Senate records show . 
And both voted for the final transportation bill that included the $ 223 million earmark for the Alaska project . 
An amendment offered by Sen. Tom Coburn , R-Oklahoma , would have stripped the money appropriated to connect the Alaskan coastal city of Ketchikan to its airport on sparsely populated Gravina Island and diverted the money to Louisiana . 
But Biden andObama and 80 of their colleagues rejected the measure , an amendment to a massive 2005 transportation bill that funded thousands of projects across the country . 
Video Watch how Biden has blasted Palin `` That is probably the most disturbing element of this and the campaigning on the Bridge to Nowhere , '' said Bill Allison of the Sunlight Foundation , a taxpayer watchdog group . 
`` Because , yes , they had a chance to vote specifically against the Bridge to Nowhere in Alaska to redirect the money to people , to bridges and infrastructure damaged by Hurricane Katrina going in to New Orleans , and they chose not to . '' 
Palin , whom McCain chose as his running mate in August , has regaled crowds at the Republican convention and on the campaign trail with her declaration of `` Thanks , but no thanks '' for the bridge . 
But her conversion came after she became Alaska 's governor in 2006 and after the bridge became a national symbol of congressional waste . 
The record shows that she supported the bridge as a gubernatorial candidate , and Democrats have seized on the flip-flop , perhaps no one with as much relish as Biden . 
`` I got also a bridge I got to sell you here , and guess what , it 's in Alaska , and it goes nowhere , '' Biden mocked Palin on the campaign trail last week in Maumee , Ohio . 
And in Canton , Ohio , he tied it to McCain . 
`` If you look at it John McCain 's answers for the economy , and we 're in such desperate shape , is the ultimate bridge to nowhere . 
It 's nowhere , '' Biden said . 
`` It takes you nowhere . '' 
But while the applause line appealed to the Democratic faithful , it could come back to bite the Delaware senator . 
This year , Delaware has requested 116 congressional earmarks through Biden , its longtime senator , at a cost to taxpayers of $ 342 million . 
In an appearance on CNN 's `` American Morning '' with anchor John Roberts , Biden said that he had been open about those requests and that they all can be justified . 
`` Everyone has seen them , and we have no Lawrence Welk Museums and have no bridges to nowhere in Delaware . 
It 's all straight up , '' Biden said . 
Among his requests : $ 1 million for renovation of an opera house in Wilmington , another million for the construction of a children 's museum and thousands of dollars for a water park renovation in Lewes . 
`` I think opera patrons generally can afford to -- you can raise money for an opera house ; you can refurbish things a lot of different ways , '' Allison said . 
`` To have federal taxpaying dollars -- which is coming from people all over the country ; low-income , middle-income people , as well as the wealthy -- to go to pay for the renovation of something that is really a luxury for Wilmington ... There are far more vital projects that anyone could think of that needs money . 
You got health care . 
You got all other types of things . 
Instead , we are redirecting money to refurbish an opera house in Wilmington or to build a children 's museum . '' 
And Biden 's request includes a bridge that even the head of the Rehoboth Beach-Dewey Beach Chamber of Commerce says is not crucial at this juncture . 
The Indian River Inlet Bridge is a vital link between two popular beachfront towns : Dewey and Bethany . 
Without it , the estimated 30,000 summer visitors would have to travel an additional 35 minutes to get to the towns . 
`` We need a new bridge , and we are fortunate to be at a place where it is finally going to happen , '' said Carol Everhart , the chief of the Chamber of Commerce . 
The existing bridge has some erosion problems , and if it ever collapsed , Everhart said , it would cause an economic disaster in the community . 
But it 's safe for now . 
`` The bridge , as it is , is perfectly safe , '' she said . 
Still , Biden asked for $ 13 million to help shore up the existing bridge and begin construction of a new one . 
And that 's what troubles the Sunlight Foundation 's Allison . 
`` This bridge is not in any danger of collapse , and essentially what Sen. Biden is doing is saying , ` My state bridge gets the priority dollar even though it is not a priority project , ' '' Allison said . 
He said the Department of Transportation , rather than U.S. senators , should be deciding which bridges get priority funding in the country . 
That way , the bridges in the U.S. that need immediate repair would be first in line for the dollars needed to do the work . 
As he embarked on his presidential bid in 2007 , Obama said he would no longer ask for earmark projects . 
McCain , who has been a longtime critic of the process , does not seek any for his home state of Arizona . 
CNN asked Biden 's campaign whether it could ask the senator about his earmark requests and his votes on the Bridge to Nowhere . 
In response , a staffer e-mailed , `` You 've interviewed Gov. Palin re : her completely made up position on the Bridge to Nowhere right ? '' 
What 's McSenile going to do if he 's president and he has more than one problem at a time ? 
But now the people must see him in a bebate ? 
During this crisis Obama is clearly more interested in his own fund raising . 
Like Obama said when he left the press conference `` I 'm doing great ! '' 
Amercia has woken up and now are starting to see the real thing . 
What happened to the Sarah Palin mania , ooops , its over , why , Amercians have seen the real thing . 
Dewey and FDR never suspended their campaigns in the middle of WWII , nor did Hoover and FDR during the Great Depression . 
McCain would be doing nothing between now and Friday but debate prep , and that can be done anywhere - Miami , Washington , Iowa . 
So he loses nothing by coming off the trail and going back to D.C. And I doubt Palin and his surrogates are canceling events on his behalf . 
McCain saves money for ads later by pulling his ads down now , and its a safe bet that his money people are quietly working the phones so that the same amount of dollars will flow in once overt fundraising resumes . 
In sum , it 's a P.R. stunt . 
Does n't anyone realize the absurdity of McCain 's `` run to the rescue '' ? 
Democratic vice presidential candidate Sen. Joe Biden campaigns in Washington on Tuesday . 
Democratic vice presidential candidate Sen. Joe Biden campaigns in Washington on Tuesday . 
Both Biden and Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama voted to kill a Senate amendment that would have diverted federal funding for the bridge to repair a Louisiana span badly damaged by Hurricane Katrina , Senate records show . 
And both voted for the final transportation bill that included the $ 223 million earmark for the Alaska project . 
An amendment offered by Sen. Tom Coburn , R-Oklahoma , would have stripped the money appropriated to connect the Alaskan coastal city of Ketchikan to its airport on sparsely populated Gravina Island and diverted the money to Louisiana . 
But Biden andObama and 80 of their colleagues rejected the measure , an amendment to a massive 2005 transportation bill that funded thousands of projects across the country . 
Video Watch how Biden has blasted Palin `` That is probably the most disturbing element of this and the campaigning on the Bridge to Nowhere , '' said Bill Allison of the Sunlight Foundation , a taxpayer watchdog group . 
`` Because , yes , they had a chance to vote specifically against the Bridge to Nowhere in Alaska to redirect the money to people , to bridges and infrastructure damaged by Hurricane Katrina going in to New Orleans , and they chose not to . '' 
Palin , whom McCain chose as his running mate in August , has regaled crowds at the Republican convention and on the campaign trail with her declaration of `` Thanks , but no thanks '' for the bridge . 
But her conversion came after she became Alaska 's governor in 2006 and after the bridge became a national symbol of congressional waste . 
The record shows that she supported the bridge as a gubernatorial candidate , and Democrats have seized on the flip-flop , perhaps no one with as much relish as Biden . 
`` I got also a bridge I got to sell you here , and guess what , it 's in Alaska , and it goes nowhere , '' Biden mocked Palin on the campaign trail last week in Maumee , Ohio . 
And in Canton , Ohio , he tied it to McCain . 
`` If you look at it John McCain 's answers for the economy , and we 're in such desperate shape , is the ultimate bridge to nowhere . 
It 's nowhere , '' Biden said . 
`` It takes you nowhere . '' 
But while the applause line appealed to the Democratic faithful , it could come back to bite the Delaware senator . 
This year , Delaware has requested 116 congressional earmarks through Biden , its longtime senator , at a cost to taxpayers of $ 342 million . 
In an appearance on CNN 's `` American Morning '' with anchor John Roberts , Biden said that he had been open about those requests and that they all can be justified . 
`` Everyone has seen them , and we have no Lawrence Welk Museums and have no bridges to nowhere in Delaware . 
It 's all straight up , '' Biden said . 
Among his requests : $ 1 million for renovation of an opera house in Wilmington , another million for the construction of a children 's museum and thousands of dollars for a water park renovation in Lewes . 
`` I think opera patrons generally can afford to -- you can raise money for an opera house ; you can refurbish things a lot of different ways , '' Allison said . 
`` To have federal taxpaying dollars -- which is coming from people all over the country ; low-income , middle-income people , as well as the wealthy -- to go to pay for the renovation of something that is really a luxury for Wilmington ... There are far more vital projects that anyone could think of that needs money . 
You got health care . 
You got all other types of things . 
Instead , we are redirecting money to refurbish an opera house in Wilmington or to build a children 's museum . '' 
And Biden 's request includes a bridge that even the head of the Rehoboth Beach-Dewey Beach Chamber of Commerce says is not crucial at this juncture . 
The Indian River Inlet Bridge is a vital link between two popular beachfront towns : Dewey and Bethany . 
Without it , the estimated 30,000 summer visitors would have to travel an additional 35 minutes to get to the towns . 
`` We need a new bridge , and we are fortunate to be at a place where it is finally going to happen , '' said Carol Everhart , the chief of the Chamber of Commerce . 
The existing bridge has some erosion problems , and if it ever collapsed , Everhart said , it would cause an economic disaster in the community . 
But it 's safe for now . 
`` The bridge , as it is , is perfectly safe , '' she said . 
Still , Biden asked for $ 13 million to help shore up the existing bridge and begin construction of a new one . 
And that 's what troubles the Sunlight Foundation 's Allison . 
`` This bridge is not in any danger of collapse , and essentially what Sen. Biden is doing is saying , ` My state bridge gets the priority dollar even though it is not a priority project , ' '' Allison said . 
He said the Department of Transportation , rather than U.S. senators , should be deciding which bridges get priority funding in the country . 
That way , the bridges in the U.S. that need immediate repair would be first in line for the dollars needed to do the work . 
As he embarked on his presidential bid in 2007 , Obama said he would no longer ask for earmark projects . 
McCain , who has been a longtime critic of the process , does not seek any for his home state of Arizona . 
CNN asked Biden 's campaign whether it could ask the senator about his earmark requests and his votes on the Bridge to Nowhere . 
In response , a staffer e-mailed , `` You 've interviewed Gov. Palin re : her completely made up position on the Bridge to Nowhere right ? '' 
They have been sweating the housing market for a year or more now , poor John only has to worry how many he has . 
Biden could easily hold his own aganst McCain . 
Face it , if she 's not ready and does n't step up , McCain-Palin does n't have a chance at winning . 
No reform , no substance , no chance . 
Should n't he be able to do more than one thing at a time ? 
Does he not have staff who can help him ? 
It looks like most Dems here are laughing at McCain , not crying . 
This race was competitive until now . 
The only people dumb enough to admire this `` plan '' are the dopes who suck down a steady diet of Rush and Hannity , and they are already in the bag for McCain . 
Independents , who McCain needs to win , will see through this ruse as an admission that McBush is n't ready for Obama , and\/or a grandstanding act of political theater . 
McBush has nothing to add to the economic debate , and all his presence is going to do is pi $ $ off the adults who are genuinely trying to come up with a solution . 
All McSame is going to accomplish is to ensure that Cindy 's investments are taken care of . 
Did this guy learn how to pretend doing something from the ex-communsit leaders ? 
His slogan empty-content speaches and his low-key ignorant low-key porn star running mate are just boring and ridiculous . 
Just go home McCain and suspend your campaign for good - it would be better for America ! 
It would be funnier if there were n't so many idiots out there who actually fall for this BS . 
Thank goodness we have The Washington Post to expose McCain 's duplicity and protect Barack Obama 's campaign ! 
As if the debates during the primaries proved anything . 
These men were elected to represnet their states in Congress and all THREE of them have the duty to return and do their jobs . 
But I guess there are some more concerned about winning elections than taking care of the country . 
The candidates do not need to spend all week in DC in order to lead bill building efforts . 
Oh and as a FYI ... currently it is the REPULICAN caucus blocking the bill , they do not want to be blamed for the largest increase in gov ' t spending in American history . 
Interesting if you consider that 8 year 's of Bush non-action and neo-con philosophy put us in this mess . 
No one is giving him the benefit of the doubt on this ; everyone is questioning his motives and basically making him sound like a coward . 
The old axiom in public relations is that you should never pick a fight with someone who buys ink by the barrel , and the McCain campaign 's been poisoning their own relationship with the press for the last two weeks . 
They 're going to get hammered for this by the talking heads . 
sorry to be so late in responding . 
I have a lot of things to memorize before Friday . 
As you know I reneged on my earlier promise to debate anytime , anywhere . 
I just hope I can get through this thing without my teleprompter . 
now does anyone out there remember my positions on guns ? 
my couch says I 'm for them but I think I 'm agin them . 
how about campaign finance reform . 
I want as much money as I kin git , where does that leave me ? 
Does anyone know if Iran has grown in size since I declared it a small country of no import ? 
I am also wondering if Jurusalem is in one of our 57 states still . 
I am considering awarding it to my Palestein fundraisers as an election gift . 
He can Sarah Palin to debate Senator Obama on Friday night . 
Sarah Palin is a Governor not a US Senator and need not be on Capitol hill to work out a well thought out solution to this financial crisis . 
It is in Obama 's interest , he feels , to continue the crisis and hope for it to worsen until November 5 then he knows the media who have been talking down the economy for seven years to prepare his way will suddenly become cheerleaders of the economy and suddenly proclaim `` Wow our economic future is bright Americans please start buying again . '' 
-LRB- answer ; no , you do not because you have no sense of historical perspective OR priorities -RRB- HOW COULD YOU NOT TAKE IT MORE SERIOUSLY ? 
ANSWER : because you do not really care about your country - you just want your rock star to get elected obamiden may win but America will pay a serious price for many generations IF he does WE ARE TALKING ABOUT 700 BILLION DOLLARS HERE WHEN WE ARE ALREADY IN DEBT - THIS COULD WELL BE A MAKE\/BREAK VOTE FOR THE FUTURE OF OUR NATION 'S VERY EXISTENCE AND ALL YOU demoCRITES WANT TO DO IS HAVE A DEBATE PARTY SO YOU CAN SMOKE SOME MORE WEED !!! -LRB- p.s. mccain was right when he said that aspects of the economy such as the employment rate are fundamentally strong - he KNEW he would get criticized for saying it but he said it anyway - because a true statesman has to say things like that from time to time to stave off a panic - so he 's already played a role in stabilizing the situation or the sell off could have brought everything down early last week just like way back when biden thought FDR was president -RRB- Posted by : tojoley | September 24 , 2008 5:29 PM | Report abuse Why is noone talking about what role McCain will even play in these negoatiations . 
To my knowledge he doesn ; t sit on any of these committees that are negotiating these plans and he has admitted that he does n't know that much about the eocnomy . 
He is all action and no theory unless you want to say his theory is to use this `` crisis '' as a political ploy . 
He has hit bottom with nowhere else to go . 
What a grandstanding move . 
As if he John McCain can solve the crisis . 
Give me a break ! 
He know the debate will be a loss for him and is running . 
What is he going to do in November when Obama is clearly ahead in the polls - cancel the election ? 
An elected United States Senator announcing that he will put off campaigning for now to go to Washington , in the midst of a major financial crisis , to DO THE JOB HE , ALONG WITH ALL OTHER SENATORS , WAS ELECTED TO DO is a stunt ? 
Are you people freaking serious ? 
Not everyone views their position as US Senator as nothing more than an impressive title to have while seeking an even higher title like some Senators we know . 
Some Senators actually recognize that their primary job is to try work to solve problems and not to simply use the title of Senator to further personal goals . 
For those of you not paying attention , the one doing his job is McCain , the one ignoring his job yet using his title to further his ambitions is Obama . 
McCain is running away from the debate and all his frenzied fans are calling it a great act of leadership . 
Ya 'll need to find Bagdad Bob and hire him to be McCain 's press secretary . 
Then we would have the Mother of All Circus 's to watch between now and election day . 
`` Bagdad Bob , tell us why McCain 's staff is so closely tied to the the lobbyists and especially ones receing money from Freddie Mac and Fannie May '' `` Well you people , you stupid American 's , you are again looking through the wrong end of the telescope . 
This has always been Sen. McCain 's genius Mother of All Plan 's to keep track of the flow of money so they could map out a solution to why and how all this money disappeared . 
He is putting America First , once again , in order to do what is best for for all the ignorant taxpayers . '' 
I 'm a die hard democratic fan . . 
Even though all news articles are writing that he has to do more ground work in some of the safe bet republican states in addition to battleground , decided to put the country first and decided to go back to washington to fix up . . 
Great man & great call . . 
I will definetly vote for him . 
Debate is actually now necessary to see how both candidates plan to fix this crisis . 
McCain is just afraid to debate knowing that he will loose . 
he is afraid to show Amrica that he clearly does n't have a clue nor the capacity to help the American people . 
Debate must go on Friday . 
Nice try McCain but you ai n't fooling us this time . 
GOP , send us someone who can handle the pressure . 
Unless McCain is going to get me a lower rate on my ARM , he better show up ... after all , he should n't even need to prep for a debate on FOREIGN POLICY . 
This ongoing disaster happened on the Republican watch and republicans are actually the ones really opposed to the bailout . 
$ 700 million is not nearly enough and Obama is wise to keep arm-lenghth away from this ` dare-we-say-it ' tarbaby . 
By mid-October it will be clear that many more shoes are to fall . 
Let McCain grandstand and grab hold with both hands , then his feet , his head is already gone though . 
According to McCain 's campaign adviser this election is n't about issues . 
When people begin campaigning for 2010 house elections I 'll return to bring more insightful nuggets of truth to the dirty lib WaPo boards . 
This is twice now that the Rep. guy put HIS campaign on hold to take care of our country -LRB- once during the Rep. convention to see to the hurriance condidtions and today 's decision -RRB- . 
McCain believes what he preaches ... country before party ! 
A much better choice than the clearly opportunist Obama who has spent a year proving he cares mostly about Obama -LRB- and his presidential win -RRB- . 
He 's beaten up the Clintons -LRB- remember Bill had the HIGHEST approval rating of any president leaving the White House since WWII - Obama brought his legacy down for his OWN sake -RRB- and he could n't care less about the actual REPRESENTATION of Women and ignored us -LRB- the Dems . -RRB- 
when we said we wanted the `` Dream Ticket ! '' 
!!! Posted by : gaypastor | September 24 , 2008 5:25 PM | Report abuse So In time of CRISIS we should expect McCain to be in hiding is that it ? 
Enough BS we are NOT STUPID ! 
Their poster boy for early senility has already come out on national media and said he does n't understand economics . 
So how the heck is he supposed to do anything to help ? 
Besides being an obvious political tactic I think he 's really worried about getting faced during the debates by Obama truth be told . 
One can not just change life and the position one finds oneself so easily . 
Why can not Mr. McCain just go do what he needs to do in Washington , and then show up for the debate that night ? 
-LRB- The debate should last about 2 hours -RRB- . 
This is the last breath of a losing candidate . 
Goodbye , Mr. McCain ... thanks for your service , and see you next year on the senate floor . 
One man will be the most powerful man in the world . 
I have to agree with Obama that it is more important to see how they will handle the job in a few months , not their current jobs as two of 500 lawmakers that will fashion an economic bailout . 
Obama tried to reach out to the McCain camp , and McCain decided to act unilaterally . 
That 's not bipartisanship or statesmanship . 
Its just political posturing . 
If Sarah is n't ready to do this now , how can anyone believe she 'll be in 6 weeks -- and , Obama would n't be nearly as tough as Putin . 
C'mon , let 's see the VP 's stuff . 
Your insane endorsement for outsourcing , your Soviet style fuzzy minded one world globalization schemes , your idiotic invasion of Iraq , your lack of oversight of Wall Street , your failure to enforce existing laws , all led to this mess . 
Now we are likely to participate in the single most disasterous DEPRESSION in modern history ... all of it caused by you fanatical idiots . 
What we need is an old fashioned witch hunt to track you guys down and punish you for your part in this mess . 
All of this was preventable , except for the TREASON of people just like you . 
But as of Friday morning , he will be suspending his campagin . 
John McCain looks like a President today . 
In his announcement to temporarily suspend his Presidential campaign to return to Washington D.C. to work toward a bipartisan solution to the nation 's economic situation , Sen. McCain is demonstrating what real leadership is . 
John McCain is putting our country first and politics second . 
It 's the right thing to do . 
Sen. Barack Obama should follow Sen. McCain 's lead Posted by : k | September 24 , 2008 5:24 PM | Report abuse It 's so sad that you liberals can not see the forest for the trees , Obama talks real good , he just never says anything specific or does anything -LRB- remember those big 143 days of actual work he put in out of his experience -RRB- ; of course , most of you are n't smart enough to realize that ... yeah , he 'll bring change , but it wo n't be the good kind . 
Can not believe the U.S. people are so stupid these days . 
FIRST , McCain and Obama agree on a joint announcement , then the PR hacks at the McCain camp decide to jump and release it first . 
Make no mistake , this was advised and rammed through by McCain 's PR hacks , in an effort to take the political high-ground - at least in appearance . 
Understand this people , in the private sector these so called `` consultants '' -LRB- read public policy PR hacks -RRB- , would be RUN out of town and black listed from EVERY agency . 
You simply CAN NOT behave this way in the private sector . 
It is mind boggling for those of us in the profession that these hacks actually have a job . 
They give the profession a BAD NAME . 
Saying that its an attempt to boost poll numbers . 
At least hes trying to do something about it . 
Maybe you guys can send Biden over and he can say some more gaffs about our past presidents and when television was invented . 
Im from illinois and can tell you that obama has not done anything for this state , except put us in a huge debt . 
He has never written any good piece of legislation that has done any good for the state . 
Obama is nothing but a charlatan that uses his race to get where he wants . 
Also the polling that the article refers to is a sad excuse for the fact that Mccain is really winning in the polls . 
When the Post interviews 70 percent liberal and 30 percent concervative what do you expect the polls to say . 
LOL why dont you do a 50 50 and see what the people say . 
John McCain looks like a President today . 
In his announcement to temporarily suspend his Presidential campaign to return to Washington D.C. to work toward a bipartisan solution to the nation 's economic situation , Sen. McCain is demonstrating what real leadership is . 
John McCain is putting our country first and politics second . 
It 's the right thing to do . 
Sen. Barack Obama should follow Sen. McCain 's lead Posted by : k | September 24 , 2008 5:23 PM | Report abuse DO YOU demoCRITES really NOT REALIZE THAT THIS VOTE WILL PROBABLY BE THE BIGGEST SINGLE VOTE IN THE CAREER OF EITHER SENATOR ? 
-LRB- answer ; no , you do not because you have no sense of historical perspective OR priorities -RRB- HOW COULD YOU NOT TAKE IT MORE SERIOUSLY ? 
ANSWER : because you do not really care about your country - you just want your rock star to get elected obamiden may win but America will pay a serious price for many generations IF he does WE ARE TALKING ABOUT 700 BILLION DOLLARS HERE WHEN WE ARE ALREADY IN DEBT - THIS COULD WELL BE A MAKE\/BREAK VOTE FOR THE FUTURE OF OUR NATION 'S VERY EXISTENCE AND ALL YOU demoCRITES WANT TO DO IS HAVE A DEBATE PARTY SO YOU CAN SMOKE SOME MORE WEED !!! -LRB- p.s. mccain was right when he said that aspects of the economy such as the employment rate are fundamentally strong - he KNEW he would get criticized for saying it but he said it anyway - because a true statesman has to say things like that from time to time to stave off a panic - so he 's already played a role in stabilizing the situation or the sell off could have brought everything down early last week just like way back when biden thought FDR was president -RRB- Posted by : tojoley | September 24 , 2008 5:23 PM | Report abuse OBAMA-McBUSH ON THE SAME NWO TEAM ? 
Nice recovery on the tube , Barack , but you 're still a capitulater . 
We all knew McCain would go with the national socialist bailout , but by your willingness to accede to the blackmail of the new world order , you have squandered an opportunity to show real leadership and courage . 
Who will be the people 's champion now ? 
Obama should make this a HOMEOWNERS ' BAILOUT first , and a Wall Street bailout second . 
This proves that `` Country First '' is not just a slogan . 
By the way , I am still trying to figure out what the hell `` Change We Can Believe In '' means . 
The fact that they only decided to pretend to put `` country first '' about 3 weeks ago does indeed make it just a slogan ... Posted by : Correction ... | September 24 , 2008 5:22 PM | Report abuse Can anybody imagine Palin value-adding to Paulsons and Bernakes analysis of the crisis . 
Mum is the word ! 
If I ever have to actually act on something , my wife takes care of it for me . 
No moderator worth their salt would pass up this historic opportunity to hear both candidate 's views on the economic crisis we find ourselves in . '' 
Did they change the format of the debate ? 
Because the first debate was supposed to be on Foreign Policy . 
Americans for Obama 08 . 
They are arranged by the campaigns , and controlled completely by the campaigns . 
McCain has panicked because of the polls . 
He pulled the Sarah Palin thing and that backfired . 
Now this cancellation of the debate . 
I could care less about the debate . 
But McCain is just using another tactic to try and show he 's something he 's not . 
He 's missed far more votes this year than Obama and he wants very much to look the part of White Knight riding to the country 's rescue . 
Forget for the moment that his zeal for deregulation is part of the reason we 're in this mess , and that he 's been incoherent as the crisis mushroomed . 
Forget that his chief economic advisor was the Godfather of deregulation . 
NOW he wants to appear that his previous statements notwithstanding , he 's ready to bless the hard work otghers have done . 
It 's a real pity he chose to miss the vote on the new GI Bill , badmouthing its benefits and using the laughable excuse that it woud encourage servicemen to leave , thus weakening the armed forces . 
He talks a great game about supporting the troops , but has voted on 15 separate occasions against expansion of veterans healthcare facilities , veterans benefits , VA funding increases , and matching lengths of stateside service and deployments . 
This is just another grandstand play by the faux maverick . 
He should change his campaign slogan to , `` More Pandering , Less Leadership , No programs '' ; at least then we 'd have truth in advertising . 
the fundamentals are strong , oh no , we 're in a crisis ... back and forth , dude . 
look at what he has actually been saying for the last several weeks , instead of slinging garbage out there . 
Here are Biden 's opening remarks : My Americans fellow . 
Even you semi-literate , smelly folks with the wobbly heads . 
I want all you crippled folks to stand up and recognize what my good friend Abraham Lincoln said on Johnny Carson last week and I remember this as if it were the day after tomorrow , ask not what you can do to your country , but what has your country done lately . 
Palin : My fellow Americans . 
I hope you paid attention to my opponents remarks , because I believe he sums up the race eloquently . 
Why not wait and see if some of these people who want to be bailed out have n't engaged in fraud ? 
Once we give them the money we ca n't take it back . 
Let the investigations show if any of these companies deserve to be helped . 
Investigation first , not last . 
-LRB- i do n't think any of them do anyway . -RRB- 
Or did I miss something the GOP all 3 that 's T-H-R-E-E , Senate , House of Rep and the White House for 6 years , what did they do to ? 
DERUGLATE , I guess the GOP wanted the DEMO to take control so they can cry about 2 years of DEMO having a slim lead in the SENATE and the HOUSE . 
Remember my friend what you great leader one said , '' . 
`` Government is the problem with that on statement the country went to hell in a hand basket . 
No John , it is the wheels of your campaign that are starting to fall off . 
You are suspending your campaign so your wheels dont fall off ! 
I just ca n't believe it ! 
Why would he do something so laughable ? 
Independent voters do n't care about all this political manuevering , they want the debate ! 
But now he 's just going to make himself look like a coward unless he shows up . 
So , in effect , he has to go to the debate now . 
What a dumb , dumb , move - and he wants to be President of the United States ?! With Minnie Moose at his side ?! WHAT DOES HE TAKE US FOR ? 
TOTAL IDIOTS ?! Posted by : Dan Rains | September 24 , 2008 5:19 PM | Report abuse Maybe he feels he will look more presidential strutting around the Senate floor rather than debating Obama ? 
What a bizarre scene if Obama shows up Friday night and the camera is on while everyone looks at an emty podium . 
This is what we need in a President . 
Sure , let Obama do what he does best , campaign . 
Does he even know how to get to Capitol Hill ? 
No moderator worth their salt would pass up this historic opportunity to hear both candidate 's views on the economic crisis we find ourselves in . 
Bringing `` patriotism '' into this grave issue tantamounts to corrupting it . 
John McCain is proving quite undeniably that he himself is the dirty politician -LRB- George W. Bush and\/or Karl Rove -RRB- that he condemned when trying to gain the Republican ticket in 2000 . 
Beware of how this corrupt Bush administration will a -RRB- thrust McCain into the spotlight as the champion of economic reform and b -RRB- give him MANY GOVERNMENT PLATFORMS to speak from pushing his candidacy . 
Barack Obama needs to be more vocal NOW . 
If anything , NOW is the time to be more vocal . 
This bailout is an UNTESTED economic policy and it 's consequences unpredictable . 
Is John McCain going to give up his many houses and cars to people who got loans which they could not afford from greedy banks ? 
-LRB- answer ; no , you do not because you have no sense of historical perspective OR priorities -RRB- HOW COULD YOU NOT TAKE IT MORE SERIOUSLY ? 
ANSWER : because you do not really care about your country - you just want your rock star to get elected obamiden may win but America will pay a serious price for many generations IF he does WE ARE TALKING ABOUT 700 BILLION DOLLARS HERE WHEN WE ARE ALREADY IN DEBT - THIS COULD WELL BE A MAKE\/BREAK VOTE FOR THE FUTURE OF OUR NATION 'S VERY EXISTENCE AND ALL YOU demoCRITES WANT TO DO IS HAVE A DEBATE PARTY SO YOU CAN SMOKE SOME MORE WEED !!! -LRB- p.s. mccain was right when he said that aspects of the economy such as the employment rate are fundamentally strong - he KNEW he be would get criticized for saying it but said it anyway - because a true statesman has to say things like that from time to time to stave off a panic - so he 's already played a role in stabilizing the situation or the sell off could have brought everything down last week just like way back when biden thought FDR was president -RRB- Posted by : tojoley | September 24 , 2008 5:18 PM | Report abuse Senator McCain has made it sufficiently obvious that he does n't know anything about the economy except that the `` fundamentals are sound . '' 
What does he think he can do in Washington to solve the crisis ? 
This is nothing more than a lame political ploy . 
He knows that if the debate turns to the economy he 'll get his lunch handed to him by Senator Obama . 
We have seen he has no any magic bullet solution to the economy . 
Do n't get fooled folks . 
The economy is already one of the big issues on the debate . 
Lets listen to his economic remedy , then we the people will follow and that is what ultimately will bring the economy back on track . 
The congress has no it 's own money , and if it does , then that only brings temporary solutions . 
This is a major recession , which the administration and congress has already failed to detect and do something about it before it was to late . 
Now only the people have the power to turn things around and if McCain has the solutions , then let him bring it on to the debate where we the people are listening . 
Besides , he knows that he is going to be chewed up and spit out by Obama 's debate . 
McCain is an out of touch , bad-tempered , old man who only knows what others tell him . 
Although he 's the perfect candidate for the neocon Republican machine , he 's the worst candidate for the future of our democracy . 
So unless the Senate happens to be voting on the bailout package on Friday and McCain and Obama need to be there to vote on it , I see no need to delay . 
They should change the focus of the debate to the economy instead of Foreign affairs , though this will benefit Obama as it 's the republican policies over the last 8 years that got us into this mess . 
Is n't this like giving a credit card to a gambling addict ? 
They seem so desperate to get more money and they promise they will do better with it this time . 
No thanks ... it 's time to cut bait . 
Let the Market do what it is supposed to do ... correct itself . 
did they believe me ? 
ohhh cr@p ... I 'm going to have to do the debate !? well try to think of something else . . 
maybe something about my health , I 'm sick thats it ... You say thats a bad Idea ? 
... OK your right ... How about free HBO ... What if I say today free HBO for everybody on Friday do you think people will still watch the debates ? 
... lets roll with it steve '' -- John McCain Posted by : erik | September 24 , 2008 5:18 PM | Report abuse Can John McCain look more none Professional then this ? 
If this man does ` nt in up in the hospital before November , he will soon after that ! 
wake up , look at McCain\/Palin she has ` nt even done a real interview , being shielded by the g.o.p the same people that used to dislike McCain is now doing everything in their power to prop him up and make excuses for the guy , sometimes before he even gives one , republicans want there to be a system where no questions are asked , fiction is truth , knowledge is frowned upon , and evangelicals are closer to almighty god than anyone else on this earth , including jews , look at everything thats been done by republicans , they get one drum beat , pass it around , get everyones fears up , keep beating the drums , until , your an idiot somehow if you dont believe or vote along with them , we have had enough lies people , please . 
| September 24 , 2008 5:17 PM | Report abuse McChiken is scared of the Cock fight . 
I am asking Osama bin Laden to suspend terrorist operations for the weekend , so I can nap . 
Apparently you have never prepared for a debate . 
If you think they just fly in , talk for two hours , and leave , with no other time involved ... '' Well , he kind of has been preparing for over a year now ... Posted by : DDAWD | September 24 , 2008 5:17 PM | Report abuse McCain 's chances of winning the presidency are eroding , and the public is beginning to recognize that is running mate is an abject incompetent . 
With this in mind , should anyone be surprise that McCain wants to stop campaigning ? 
The man who once prided himself on being a straight talker no longer talks to the press at all , deigning largely to lie to them through his mouthpieces . 
Considering his poll numbers are lower than ever , a scandal brewing about his campaign manager , Rick Davis , whose firm was receiving $ 15,000 a month from Fannie Mae , and all the other lies and deceptions , no wonder he is chickening out . 
What is he going to do in November when the polls show Obama the clear frontrunner - cancel the election ? 
He comes out and says if they need me in Washington they can let me know . 
`` I feel a YOUTUBE MOMENT COMING ON ! 
Run Run As fast as you can you ca n't catch me i 'm the McCain man , I Will run away from you , I can I can . 
He is beginning to sound like the McGingerbread Man Posted by : Mick | September 24 , 2008 5:17 PM | Report abuse Hey i am in junior high school and we learned in class to dat that id you type with all caps that means you are shouting . 
What is your age , sex and location before respond to you ? 
And do n't ask me if i want to meet you in the park because you have a free bag of candy . 
I 'm stupid but not THAT stupid . 
Is he the head of the Senate Banking Committee ? 
Is he the Secretary of the Treasury ? 
Is he the President ? 
George Bush is still the President , not John McCain , and it is George Bush 's job to work with the appropriate Congressional committees to forge an agreement . 
John McCain should stop interfering with the President and the Congress . 
Let John McCain join the discussion in his appropriate role - one Senator with one vote . 
HE IS NOT VERSED IN THE ECONOMY OF THIS COUNTRY , AND ONE COULD SAY THAT THE MESS THAT THE COUNTRY IS NOW IS CAUSED BY THE MISHANDLING BY THE REPUBLICS POOR HANDLEING OF THE SITUATION . 
AMERICANS , LISTEN TO ALL THE ARGUMENTS ON CNN2 AND YOU WILL LEARN A LOT OF WHAT IS TAKING PLACE , AND THAT IS WHY THE REPUBLICANS ARE SO EAGER TO GET A BLANK CHECQUE TO BAIL OUT THE BIG BANKS . 
| September 24 , 2008 5:16 PM | Report abuse Governor Palin should look vice-presidential and fill-in at the debate for the preoccupied McCain . 
The debate should not be canceled . 
We need the chance to see how our next leader will behave when challenged . 
The difference here is that the disaster is US-made , and only a US-based solution will do . 
2 -RRB- However , with $ 700bn taxpayers ' money at stake -LRB- to be committed in the following days -RRB- , voters have the right to know both candidates ' positions on the matter . 
3 -RRB- Candidates to become US Presidents must be prepared to face several crisis at once and not to crumble under pressure . 
4 -RRB- Thus , propose to change the topic of the debate to `` The US Economy '' instead of `` Foreign Affairs '' . 
To accomodate Mr McCain , propose to change the venue of this seminal debate to Washington . 
5 -RRB- If Mr. McCain is unwilling to address the population on this important issue , or unable to debate , the Obama campaign should suggest to switch the same debate to the Vice-Presidential candidates . 
They should be ready to step into their bosses ' shoes at a moment 's notice . 
Get Palin to debate Biden on the Economy . 
Second , Obama is making a mistake not realizing how stupid it is to have a debate while we are in the midst of a $ 700 billion financial collapse . 
It 's stupid to talk about the issues in the middle of a giant crisis caused ? 
Would n't that be the right time to point out what you would do different ? 
About time someone made sense . 
Honey , you do n't have the slightest idea what sense even is ! 
The same war that McCaine voted for . 
We should all look at this bailout very carefully and not give in to scare tactics . 
What 's he going to do ? 
Crap his depends and have a stroke ? 
I believe he is just trying to get public sympathy behind him , as well as find a way out of getting his ass handed to him in the Friday night debates . 
did they believe me ? 
ohhh cr@p ... I 'm going to have to do the debate !? well try to think of something else . . 
maybe something about my health , I 'm sick thats it ... You say thats a bad Idea ? 
... OK your right ... How about free HBO ... What if I say today free HBO for everybody on Friday do you think people will still watch the debates ? 
... lets roll with it steve '' -- John McCain Posted by : Just In | September 24 , 2008 5:15 PM | Report abuse Mccain is a pussy , Why do n't he debate ? 
This is his fault and the American people know it . 
All that name calling and anger show that they 're just immature little kids playing adult and pretending they know everything better . 
... Posted by : hankomatic | September 24 , 2008 5:15 PM | Report abuse A McCain senior adviser said that Obama called McCain early Wednesday morning to asking a joint statement of `` shared principles and conditions '' for the bailout proposal . 
An Obama campaign source confirmed the call and said that McCain returned his call six hours later , and accepted the concept and suggested the two of them return to Washington to join the negotiations . 
The source says that Obama told him that he would do that only if negotiators saw it as useful . 
According to the Obama source , soon after they ended the call , McCain announced he was suspending his campaign and returning to Washington . 
Apparently you have never prepared for a debate . 
If you think they just fly in , talk for two hours , and leave , with no other time involved ... As for the `` obvious '' ploy , yeah . 
People wo n't believe that Bill Ayers or CEO 's of Fannie Mae\/Freddie Mac or Tony Rezko have anything to do with Obama even though he interacts with them face to face , and yet McCain wanting to fulfill his Senatorial role is an obvious ploy ? 
Great unbiased research there . 
Talking about Palin 's pregnant daughter more in 2 weeks than associations with terrorists , extremist and political activist preachers , and corrupt CEO 's in 19 months -LRB- or whatever -RRB- of Obama 's campaigning . 
I do n't necessarily agree with Washington 's plan for this financial problem . 
But at least McCain has a history and present commitment , apparently , to actually try to do what he thinks is right in the Senate . 
As opposed to Obama voting for what , 50 % of his two years in the Senate , going to Hawaii and saying that `` we need to take the right and informed action '' -LRB- i.e. , I have no clue what that is -RRB- during the Russia-Georgia conflict , etc. . 
I disagree A LOT with McCain and would n't have voted for him given another real conservative , but Obama vs. McCain is a nobrainer . 
As someone before mentioned , Obama talked about it , McCain acted ; who gets taken shots at by the media ? 
McCain , because he is delaying the all-important presidential debate because he has a JOB that the was VOTED to do . 
But Obama , who just talks about it , is somehow doing the right thing ? 
Senator Schummer said McCain has done nothing about the economic crisis up to this point except say UNHELPFUL THINGS ! 
Funny how McCain had to propose the idea of BOTH he and Obama delaying the debate in PUBLIC , to make Obama look bad if he says NO ! 
Well , he said NO , but he looks fine , NOT BAD ! 
What else ya ' got ROVE ? 
McCAIN : `` THE SKY IS FALLING , THE SKY IS FALLING ... ! '' 
Weapons of MASS DISTRACTION , BUSH , ROVE , McCAIN : BUSINESS AS USUAL ! 
If McCain is supposed MAVERICK , then he is SHOOTING BLANKS !! Posted by : Haviva | September 24 , 2008 5:14 PM | Report abuse `` He is running TO the sound of gunfire `` Not away - in Obama 's direction . '' 
Am I the only one who chuckles , noting that this was posted by `` anonymous '' ? 
But it was Obama who called first to suggest they put politics aside . 
That 's sleazy , McCain ! 
Too dumb and old to multitask ... He just do n't get it . 
I mean , as president there will be multiple projects and crisis ' to be dealt with everyday . 
You want the job -- you might as well show us how well you can do that job . 
such a wimp . . 
it is so abvious he wants more time before the debate because he has no clue . 
come on 2 days before the debate : S Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 5:13 PM | Report abuse Palin ca n't speak without severe coaching and babysitting , and McCain runs away from every obstacle . 
Do I believe he has the country 's best interest at heart ? 
The country is facing one of the most important presidential elections in its history and the PEOPLE deserve to see our two candidates debating and telling us what they would do for US . 
Delaying , canceling , running away , deprives the masses of the information they need to vote intelligently . 
A stunt , pure and simple . 
My respect for John McCain is long gone . 
What 's he going to do ? 
Crap his depends and have a stroke ? 
I believe he is just trying to get public sympathy behind him , as well as find a way out of getting his ass handed to him in the Friday night debates . 
The Democrats votes will determine the outcome - fail or pass and at this crucial time he wo n't be present to vote present ... So you 're saying it 's better for Obama to stay at the resort he 's holed up at and practice for the debate re not saying uh , uh , uh , uh , every other word . 
Most of us have seen enough from both candidates to have made up our minds weeks ago . . 
Obama bails whenever there 's a crisis - he 's not going to put country first and reach across the isle . 
He has no answers - that 's why he voted present 130 times . 
Hey folks , Obama and Biden did in fact vote for the Bridge to Nowhere - not once but twice - Anderson Cooper verified that after a team was sent to Washington to look at who voted how . . 
Sorry ass fool ... Posted by : MccAi n't | September 24 , 2008 5:12 PM | Report abuse Where was McCain when the GI bill needed his vote ? 
His excuse was that he was campaigning and yet he claims to be concerned about veterans !! Now that bog corporations that have failed american consumers are looking for bailouts from the fed , McCain is at the forefront ready to suspend his campaign for this . 
What happened to multi-tasking capabilities . 
If elected president -LRB- God forbid -RRB- would he be able to multitask and handle crisis effectively ? 
Once again another red flag to voters on the deficiencies of McCain . 
Panick and fear end up in poor judgment . 
Obama must not back out from the debate whatever . 
I did n't see McCain call off his campaigns when the Hurricane Ike hit TX to help the victims . 
Looks more like tactical campaign diversion than a plan . 
Seeing as how the Commander-in-Chief is the preeminent multitasking job of the entire world , America deserves to see how this guy thinks on his feet when confronted with problems that he himself acknowledges little expertise over . 
It 's the right thing to do . 
Mom , Chevrolet , and Apple Pie !!! Let 's all stand up and sing `` America The Beautiful '' And maybe if we wish real hard with out eyes closed that maybe , just maybe , all our economic woes will just disappear ! 
God Bless John McCain . 
God bless her lucrative Budweiser franchise . 
God Bless the Naval Academy for giving us such a fine politician . 
And God Bless Alaska for sharing their wonderfully inexperienced governor so she can be the next president after Sen. McCain blows out a major arterty . 
And God Bless Karl Rove , Scooter Libby , Dick Cheney , John Ashcroft -LRB- who said Pentecostalist do n't make good politicians ?? -RRB- All those wonderful Neo-cons who are still hot on Bin Laden trail as we chase him from Timbucktoo to the caves of Bora Bora . 
God Bless All Republican 's . 
And all TV Evangelists . 
And god Bless all the money they have so lovingly and religiously separated from their mindless flocks . 
Yes God , deliver us from the evil Barry Hussein guy , whatever his name is . 
He is not like us and you have obviously marked him so we will know . 
Thank you for NASCAR -LRB- and do n't forget to bless the engines -RRB- and every thing we love and cherish that is American or sold in Wal-Mart . 
God Bless Sen. McSurge . 
Yes he has made millions but he did it serving our country and putting America First !!!! Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 5:12 PM | Report abuse Our country has managed to continue holding campaigns and elections through many wars and economic crisis . 
This situation should be no different . 
Remember Bush 's Presidential Directive # 51 , and a slew of Executive Orders granting himself some wide-ranging powers in time of emergency ? 
Powers such as canceling elections ? 
Yes , maybe I am paranoid . 
But hearing McCain calling this a time of national emergency is just giving me the willies . 
Run Run As fast as you can you ca n't catch me i 'm the McCain man , I Will run away from you , I can I can . 
He is beginning to sound like the McGinger Man : -RRB- Posted by : CJ | September 24 , 2008 5:11 PM | Report abuse Televise the debates over this bailout bill in the Senate and Congress . 
Then we 'll know where everyone stands . 
No closed door meetings - make it a national town meeting . 
When McCain pulls out of the campaign - grandstanding , pure and simple . 
I want to hear him speak with someone who does n't agree with him . 
I want to hear Obama speak to someone who does n't agree with him . 
We all need to see and hear that . 
The governance of this country is more important than pushing through an ill concieved plan to give our money away to Wall Street so they can stay in business while we lose our jobs . 
It took years for this mess to cook to a boil , it can take a few weeks to figure out a workable solution . 
BECAUSE THE ONLY PLAYERS OF THIS MONOPOLY SYSTEM ARE THE RICHES AND ALL THE COMMERCE IS IN VAIN ALL THE PRODUCTS IS IN VAIN AND ALL THE GOODS AND SERVICES ARE IN VAIN FOR ALL OF US BECAUSE WE 'RE IN SLAVERY PURE AND SIMPLE . 
AND WE 'RE WORJKING FOR THIS FEW PEOPLE WHO PLAYS IN WALL STREET WITH GREED Posted by : V_1618 | September 24 , 2008 5:10 PM | Report abuse I intend to offer all my adversaries the same choice . 
for example , if I ever get the notion to attack Iran , I will first call them in the morning and ask them if they want to participate . 
I will inform them about the locations of our helos and SEALS and then ask nicely if they will give in . 
I learned this approach from rockeefeller - you know they guy who warned Saddam about the invasion and just in time to get the WMds out to syria . 
Obama wants to debate and multi task , McCain cant multi task , perhaps it is an age factor with MCain . 
This 72 year old pitbull with four bouts of cancer and one foot in the grave has lived a lie all his life and for the political end to the means along with Bush megalomania , compulsive-obsessive , sociopath mentality , his divine religious mandate and being the messenger of his god are not with deliberation starting the economic terror propaganda of , more hate , fear and republican patriotic feeding frenzy to control the hearts and minds of the misled and gullible nations . 
They are not putting the country first , but using , abusing and exploiting it to keep on employing the same BS that has been the Status quo for the last eight years . 
Plus with their fiscal and foreign policy incompetency reduced the value of the USD to its lowest level ever . 
All these aspects are no coincidences . 
McCain knows not anything about economic then his a \*\* to a hole in the ground . 
His nomination of Madam Governor Palin the pentecostal evangelical religious control freak is an insult to women and the credibility of this country . 
the motive of this running mate are clear as per the editorial in the Anchorage Daily News the Alaska TOP News paper www.adn.com\/opinion\/story\/531723.html There is nothing McCain can do in the Senate other then cast his one vote . 
The Senate as a Government body is the worst , dysfunctional , inefficient , unrepresentative and wasteful institution pull of old geezers like McCain , Ted Kennedy , Lieberman , Bryd , Warner , Stevens the one who his felony corruption trail in progress . 
The US Public has 14 % confidence in the Congress and less then 20 % for the megalomaniac in the White House who wants to bail out the greed creed flawed investment banking system and their SOB CEO 's with their self interests and self righteousness while leaving the public in the usual nose around its neck at the taxpayers expense . 
The SOB McCain is a hoax , fake war hero with a marred military record that he and his Cohorts at the Pentagon do not to release . 
The good people of this country should review the following This man has used , abused and exploited his country for personal gain all his life and now is doing the same . 
A week ago he did n't appear to think the economy had any problems . 
Neither McCain or Obama is on the Senate Finance Committee . 
Let those who are , do their job and let the candidates do theirs ! 
McCain is n't urgently needed anywhere , nor is Obama . 
This is all fake posturing . 
First off John Mccain scared to debate obama on nat . 
security you all ca n't be serious , he will or would crush Obama in that debate . 
If Obama did this you will all be like look he is so for all of us , he knows how we all feel !!! Obama IS THE JOKE OF THIS ELECTION !!! He always changes his mind in to what the polls say all the time . 
John again putting his country first knowing its not time to run ads or debate anything its time to unite and come together not fight on stage . '' 
First , John McCain has been running ads all last week and this week attacking Obama and trying to directly blame Obama for the financial crisis , especially as it involves Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
Second , John McCain has been all over the map on where he stands on a resolution of this financial crisis . 
John McCain ca n't decide whether the country is economically sound or not , whether he 's for or against deregulation , and what we should do about shoring up our financial institutions vs. protecting the taxpayers . 
McCain 's disarming lack of understanding regarding this financial crisis should be more than enough to make anyone vote against McCain ! 
And , yes , John McCain is terribly frightened of this first debate , even though it does deal with the one issue where McCain leads Obama in the polls : national security . 
Currently , most Americans are more worried about the economy than they are about national security , but even so , the economy is directly tied to national security . 
After all , how willing are Americans going to be to continue to pay for an outrageously expensive war that is not putting us in better standing in the world ? 
So John McCain 's refusal to support timelines for the withdrawal of troops and his stated intention of keeping us in Iraq for 100 years , if necessary , will not resonate with Americans who understand that something has got to give . 
We can not continue to throw good money after bad if we hope to right our failing economy ! 
This is a purely cynical move by the candidate who 's behind in the polls . 
McCain is losing , so he wants to change the rules . 
Not this time , Republicans ! 
You 'll play by the rules the rest of us have to follow . 
Americans can walk and chew gum at the same time . 
If McCain ca n't both focus on a crisis and -LRB- God forbid -RRB- explain his policy positions regarding that crisis , he does n't deserve to be president . 
Next thing you know , Republicans will want to suspend the election . 
This is a line in the sand . 
Obama offered to agree to McCain 's terms but they were supposed to make a joint announcement detailing both of their economic plans and McCain went to the press sans Obama and then suggested Obama do the same thing when he already agreed to a joint announcement . 
This applies to both candidates . 
As Americans voting in yet another close election , we deserve to hear first-hand debates as well as media interviews with all presidential and vice-presidential candidates . 
Lets stop playing games . 
With so much at stake , we deserve straight talk . 
Obama suggested they work together and figure out their positions in a private and personal phone call . . 
McCain runs to the press and `` Calls for Obama to Join Him '' ... I smell BS and so does the rest of America . 
I believe that the debate should continue but that the topic should be changed to discuss the economy and this situation so that the American people can really see who believes what . 
This election will be the most important decision we make ! 
He is beginning to sound like the McGinger Man : -RRB- Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 5:08 PM | Report abuse McCain is such a con artist . 
He knows the debate will make clear that for decades he 's been pushing the kind of obsessive deregulation that got us into this mess . 
Only thing to do now is go hide . 
So let me understand : My friends , we now we have no McCain and no Palin , five weeks before a national election . 
I guess they figure if they avoid accountability for a few more weeks , everyone will just forget and vote for them , and then they 'll be in power . 
So , when did campaigns start being about NOT showing up ? 
He is running TO the sound of gunfire Not away - in Obama 's direction . 
The election is 6 or so weeks away and the American ought to know what the candidates stand for . 
Lets have the candidates go to DC to lend their support and have Palin debate Biden on Friday . 
This is the best of both worlds , the top of the ticket can be witness to the going on in DC and the vice presidents can take over in the a time of crisis ... that is after what we expect of them in times of disaster . 
I vote for a Palin vs Biden debate on Friday . 
Who is with me ? 
This is dry run for one of the main criteria for a VP right . 
Sounds like McCain is trying to expand his Palin Handling Policy to his entire campaign . 
I 'd suggest he go even farther and PERMANENTLY suspend his campaign . 
It 's high time we have a vice president who is edible ! 
In short , the more a person is afraid of mice and spiders , the more likely he is to vote for Republicans . 
McCain is running out excuses for this ban and this is his solution . 
Btw : Palin is only good looking by politian standards . 
It 's not like she could be a model . 
Everyone needs to get a grip ... Posted by : meme | September 24 , 2008 5:07 PM | Report abuse It would seem Obama offered up bipartisan words and McCain responded by offering up bipartisan action . 
Apparently the concept has Obama quite confused . 
McCain will go to Washington and wage war with the ignorant Harry Reid and Obama will do what he always does when he wants to evade doing the right thing ... he 'll go to the gym and shoot hoops . 
Of course later Obama will hold a news conference to bash McCain for postponing the debate ... I mean after all putting `` Country First '' is just a campaign slogan ... right ? 
Forget the lack of foreign policy , can anyone imagine Palin taking questions on economy crisis . 
Now that would indeed be a crisis for Mccain . 
And in July , on television she told the nation she had no clue what the Vice President 's actual job is and has no idea what a VP does all day -LRB- ... besides shred documents perform acts of treason in outing Covert Nuclear Proliferation agents in the CIA . -RRB- 
Today , a group of GOP loud women ranted that McCain 's hiding -LRB- flat-earth bible thumping s bigot with boobs -RCB- running mate from the press ... `` that if Palin is such a delicate little flower who 's afraid of the press , how is she supposed to suspend her VP duties and take on the administration 's duties in times of peril ? '' 
Who in hell does he think he 's kidding ? 
Face it , Grandpa McCain is old , tired , and in bad health , so he 's skipping out . 
He is 72 years old , going on 100 . 
6 hours later , McCain drops this nonsense to the media without even talking with Obama . 
This was obviously a politically desperate act by McCain to keep from being overshadowed by Obama 's sincere attempt at bipartisanship . 
Obama should be at the debate . 
If McCain is too much of a coward to face him , Obama can debate a real conservative like Ron Paul or Bob Barr . 
Hardly bi-partisian behavior , McCain . 
So what -- Congress ca n't work over the weekend ? 
| September 24 , 2008 5:06 PM | Report abuse it would be strategically wrong for the debates to be postphoned . 
most people know that this is about politics not country first . 
the voters would be served best by the debates going on as planned we have a congress that can negotiate quite well without the two candidates there . 
if they need there advice there is always the blackberry that mccain invented Posted by : straightalk | September 24 , 2008 5:06 PM | Report abuse I wanted to quote one republican response `` John McCain is brilliant !!!! Go John Go !!! Your country needs you again !! You are brilliant ! 
CHECKMATE !! - KT '' We do not need to put presidential politics into this decision . 
McCain is trying to score political points again !! Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 5:05 PM | Report abuse The entire GOP likes to go down on Dick Cheney . 
I do n't think it will work because I believe the public will expect McCain to come up with something . 
He is setting himself up for another fall . 
If he plans to go to Washington to endorse Chris Dodd 's plan then I am certain Obama will second the motion and we can be done . 
Otherwise , I 'm not sure what McCain can seriously add . 
With regard to the debate , I just do n't think the public is going to be buying this `` equivalency to 9\/11 '' routine . 
They ca n't take time to let the public compare their positions on foreign policy ? 
You stay where you are and let us get together on Friday . 
McCain feels that this additional trick of his will help him bridge the gap . 
No wonder he 's backing out . 
If McCain becomes president -LRB- God forbid -RRB- , is he going to be able to tell Putin or some other world leader to put the foreign policy discussion on hold because 's got another crisis brewing ? 
NO !!! The ordinary American has to be able to multitask , so why ca n't McCain ? 
Say no to Wallstreet wellfare ! 
I 'm just asking because that 's what I want to say . 
As if I would n't think he were postponing the debate in order to avoid having to suffer the slings and arrows of a 50 year younger , East Coast intellectual African American with his head screwed on correctly and a clue as to what the freak is going on . 
McCain is a putz . 
Someone seriously needs to just conclude this whole mess and yank Gibs McBush out of office before he can f \* ck anything ELSE up . 
You know what ghetto people do when their administration loses the White House to foreclosure , do n't you ? 
They take a sledgehammer to the place . 
uestion | September 24 , 2008 5:05 PM | Report abuse You got it wrong , right now the right represents failure ... Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 5:05 PM | Report abuse Congress is the source of these messes . 
That means Obama , Biden and McCain . 
McCain is going to act like he is going to do something useful . 
Obama gives up all pretense that does anything useful . 
Anyway , go look up Warren Buffett the Google . 
This guy is awesome and he does n't want McCain to be president . 
I think this cowardly decision by McCain has more to do with Warren Buffett than with anything else . 
And they 're cheering hard that it 'll get worse so the electorate , they think , will go in their favor come election time . 
Well , that 's what they 've been doing the past two years while they are the majority . 
Doing nothing so they can blame the Bush and the Republicans for this crisis . 
And so they think the American people are dumb and numb ? 
I 'm sorry Dems , I am bitter and I cling to guns and religion . 
Go ahead , insult my American pride and intelligence . 
See ya on Nov. 4 . 
He will destroy HIMSELF in a foreign policy debate . 
| September 24 , 2008 5:04 PM | Report abuse McCain or Obama showing up in Washington would just be a distraction . 
The fact is , no matter how noble their intentions , there is no escaping the reality that there is a Presidential Campaign going on . 
Anything McCain -LRB- or Obama -RRB- does between now and the election will only be seen as posturing by the voters . 
It seems arrogant and naive of McCain to think that he can just show up and Save the Day and that all the parties involved will just forget there is a Presidential Election coming up . 
The Pres. Candidates should keep away . 
Let the others keep working without the distractions . 
The American People deserve to see the Pres. Debate . 
`` Senator McCain 's entire life is a testimony to putting his country first and that 's what he is doing right now , '' said Pfotenhauer . '' 
by saying that if Senator McCain 's entire life has been putting country first he would have picked a more qualified person to be first in line to the Presidency if he was else elected . 
However , as noted earlier , Senator McCain has missed numerous votes over the past several years of campaigning for the Presidency , and this is an issue that took several years to develp , and ca n't be resolved overnight ; the next administration will be responsible for following through on whatever is decided -LRB- be it a bailout or not -RRB- . 
It 's important to know what the candidates for the Presidency think , believe , and propose . 
Unless it 's important enough an issue to not hold the election until the situation is resolved . 
I would rather know about the candidates before the election than vote without as much information about them as possible . 
What kind of expertise do you now think you have that you must rush to Washington to provide ? 
Do you think you are ready to write up a solution but not ready to present it in a debate to the American people ? 
This sounds as if you have a sound bite solution that has been prepared for you but do not wish to have to defend it in a debate . 
Oh wait you already do ! . 
They 've given him $ 105K in campaign contributions : Posted by : WylieD | September 24 , 2008 5:04 PM | Report abuse Hey , why not substitute the Obama\/Mccain debate with the veeps debate ? 
She is supposed to be ready on day 1 right ? 
Are you ready Sarah ? 
THESE DUDE ARE ROBBING US RIGHT IN FRONT OF US ... CAN YOU BELIEVE THIS ? 
ATLEAST NIXON DID IT WITH A LITTLE SLYNESS . 
BUT DAMN REPUBLICANS HOW DUMB ARE WE ? 
IF THIS BILL PASSES AND WE DO NOTHING . . 
THAN WE ARE DUMB HUH ? 
How many conservatives are in the democrat party ? 
Unlike you lefty , socialist pukes - the right represents diversity . 
That 'll be good for at least two more weeks of not having to answer those pesky little questions from reporters and the public . 
STOP THE GAME , THIS MONOPOLY SH T IS A CRAP SYSTEM . 
WITH THIS SUPPORT WILL MAKE THE THINGS WORSE . . 
AND THE RICHES WILL WIN AGAIN AND AGAIN AND AGAIN AND THE POVERTY WILL BE MORE AND MORE AND MORE AND THE MARKETS WILL GO DOWN AND DOWN AND DOWN AGAIN AND AGAIN . 
AND THE JOB WILL BE LESS AND LESS AND LESS IN ALL THE WORLD WORLD WORLD SO . 
STOP THE GAME OR PLEASE KILL ME KILL ME KILL ME . . 
AGAIN AND AGAIN AND AGAIN Posted by : V_1618 | September 24 , 2008 5:03 PM | Report abuse Now you should see some shamefuls who are SO smart , SO intellegent , SO wisdomful . 
And you know what ? 
It is those who did not say anything . 
Do not even bother to say they did anything . 
I 'm reposting this comment from someone else in another section yesterday : An open letter to the Obama Presidential Campaign : We are very concerned with the response Obama gave to the reporter , who asked him if he will go to D.C. and vote on the bale out bill when and if it comes up for a vote . 
In effect , he said no in that he conditioned his attendance on whether or not his vote might be needed . 
That s an answer not worthy of one who would be President . 
To begin with , on such an important occasion , were it to come about , no Senator should be absent . 
In Obama s case , he should forthwith take a leadership position , stake out and state clearly his position on the issue and stick with it and vote on it , win or lose in the Senate . 
This is not the time to give his detractors ammo adding to their claims that he seeks to avoid tough decision-making and tough votes by voting present . 
His present plans to , in effect , vote absent will send the wrong message and aid McCain . 
Please , somebody , who is closer to him , please do him a favor and tell him . 
Out here in the west , we are wondering , where are his advisors ? 
Another case in point , the Palin situation caught the Obama s campaign asleep . 
Did they do no what if scenarios ? 
With McCain s -LRB- women -RRB- background , ties to that female campaign worker , unauthorized use of Paris Hilton and Brittney Spears in an attack ad , where were the thinkers on the Obama staff ? 
Be careful that McCain suddenly shows up and vote when the time comes leaving Obama , absent and sucking wind all over again as he found himself doing on the Palin news . 
Is anyone on his staff doing any forward thinking , at all ? 
Repeatedly , McCain is , at 72 , getting off his shots first , leaving Obama , in all his youth , continuously on the defensive . 
If this doesn t change in a hurry , we see Obama joining Gore , Kerry and a host of other woulda , shoulda and couldas . '' 
Today , McCain did just that : it 's called `` a coup '' . 
The popular saying comes to mind , `` the devil is wiser because he is old , not because he is the devil . '' 
This smacks of political opportunism and showboating in all the wrong ways . 
If he was serious about this , he would have suspended his campaign days ago to make sure tomorrow 's deadline is met . 
McCain has pulled this straight out of the Bush playbook for starting the war in Iraq , and passing the Patriot Act before that . 
This is disgusting , vile , naked political ambition contrary to patriotic ideals . 
Bush 's men , and McCain 's actions today are nothing short of treason . 
A week ago there was no economic crisis according to them . 
Now there is , and it needs to be handled their way , right now , or America is doomed . 
That is tripe , and we Americans know it . 
Bush and McCain = Traitors to America . 
The debate is the opportunity for the American people to see these guys outside of their political adds . 
They can take a few hours out of one day of the week to handle that ; even relocating the debate to DC . 
McCain is dodging the debate , and exacerbating the crisis that he refused to acknowledge as recently as this week . 
He is a complete fraud . 
Millions of voters were hurt by this over the last year as their mortgages crushed them , and their jobs were shipped overseas . 
McCain clearly only cares now because Cindy 's vast fortune , and the fortunes of his top aids\/lobbyists took a hit this week . 
It took John McSame 's campaign 6 hours to come up with a response to Senator Obama , and this obvious gimmick . 
Once again , McSame has proven that Country First - is just 2 words hung togehter that sound good , but mean nothing . 
He 'll try to use any situation to his advantage . 
Where was his `` Country First '' cry when the Repuublican Convention was going on during the horrible hurricane Gustav ?? What a desperate old fart he has become ! 
As a Republican , I am trully ashamed . 
Now he does n't want to debate !!! This is like Bush\/Cheney never being seen at the RNC because of Gustav which ended on Monday . 
While the economy has gone down , getting distracted from choosing a president is the worst thing that could happen to this country . 
seriously be strong and face Obama . 
I do n't know who is advising this guy . 
He continues to show us ! 
Now he is unable to Multi-task . 
`` Right '' , and he thinks we are dumb enough to not see what he is doing . 
That is called defeat ! 
Mr. Obama in his thoughts and comments did present a more intelligent and academic approach to this problem , which based upon recent actions by the FED may be exactly what this country actually needs in order to get through this crisis period ... which may last months and even years . 
Mr. Obama actually reflected upon the actionof the FEd during the 80 's when the S&L Crisis was occurring , and as a former thrift examiner in the State of Texas , his comments and thoughts are actually valid and thoughtful ideas and not idle rhetoric as seemed to have been presented by McCain . 
Second , Obama is making a mistake not realizing how stupid it is to have a debate while we are in the midst of a $ 700 billion financial collapse . 
About time someone made sense . 
Warren is only the second-richest guy in America , and he just helped bail out Goldman-Sachs with a FIVE BILLION $ infusion ... instead of waiting for the US gov ' t to do it . 
This move by Buffet temporarily , if shakily helped shore up Wall Street . 
So , Obama is friends with Warren , a GREAT PATRIOT who knows more about financial markets than all of congress combined . 
Buffett has been predicting this finanical meltdown for a LONG LONG LONG TIME . 
And would n't you know , but Buffet has endorsed Obama . 
Buffet is one of Obama 's economic advisers . 
Buffett believes that filthy rich Americans -LRB- remember , Buffett IS filthy rich -RRB- , Buffet believes those rich people SHOULD BE PATRIOTIC and pay more taxes . 
If you were McCain , you probably would n't want to talk to Obama about Warren Buffet on National TV right now either !! McCain is fried . 
He 's like an abusive husband who beats his wife half to death , and then gets scared and turns himself into the police . 
He helped abuse Wall Street to the point of near collapse , now he 's trying to put a bandaid on it . 
After the last 2 months of how his campaign has been run , do you honestly believe that he realizes anything ? 
He 's missed 109 of the last 110 Senate votes . 
Why the sudden interest now ? 
The economists do n't need McCain 's help ; as he 's said , he 's lame on economics anyway . 
No , what this is -- as someone said on another blog -- is a guy who 's losing at chess who accidentally-on-purpose manages to upset the board and knock the pieces on the ground . 
It can not be allowed to happen . 
Debates AS SCHEDULED !! Posted by : JimBob | September 24 , 2008 5:00 PM | Report abuse You obviously did n't read my post . 
My point was that for those who are NOT in the top tax bracket will get a bigger tax CUT under Obama than McCain . 
For someone making around $ 40k per year it is about a $ 600 difference . 
I like the way when you 're presented with facts that contradict your position , instead of accepting it , you instead threaten violence against the one who gave you the facts . 
That is a sad commentary on where we are in this country right now . 
If McCain goes to Washington and starts trying to manage things , the fact that he is a candidate for president will inevitably cause this effort to split up along party lines , thus defeating his announced purpose . 
Surely McCain realizes this , and the fact that he intends to go ahead with such an ill-considered idea reflects very badly on him . 
But the non-partisan MSM only concentrates on McCain wanting to delay THIS debate . 
And why does McCain want to delay the debate ? 
Because he is a fccking US Senator and his job is in the senate . 
Something Obama has yet to grasp . 
For the Chicago race hustler , being a senator meant nothing more than a way to scam federal money to run for president . 
His total lack of legislation and scant 143 days in office back that up in spades . 
Remember when Obama pledged to serve all 6 years ? 
You fell for his slime then and you are lapping it up now . 
Haggard , Larry Craig , Mark Foley , McCain 's Chief of Staff . 
Are all of you guys secret bone smokers ? 
Well McSurge will be MIA come Friday night . 
After he `` leads '' the retreat back to Washington . 
In his announcement to temporarily suspend his Presidential campaign to return to Washington D.C. to work toward a bipartisan solution to the nation 's economic situation , Sen. McCain is demonstrating what real leadership is . 
John McCain is putting our country first and politics second . 
It 's the right thing to do . 
Sen. Barack Obama should follow Sen. McCain 's lead . 
I am still trying to find myself . 
Instead of my usual method of voting PRESENT , I think this time I will give a major speech . 
where did I put those Greek columns ? 
I have perfected the art of talking for hours without saying anything . 
I must admit I admire Biden for this skill too . 
The focus of the debate should be solving the country 's economic crisis . 
The moderator should ensure Zero rhetoric and propaganda , thus forcing the candidates to come up with sound solutions that hopefully the voting members of congress could use to help them decide on this $ 7 billion bailout . 
That 's is leadership . 
McCain 's stunt is pure desperation , it was only last week that he 's was calling for a commission to address the nations financial crisis . 
IT 'S THE ECONOMY STUPID and McCAIN needs to read economics for dummies . 
He just does n't get it ! 
As for Obama , enough of the dumming down of politics . 
Now is the time to deliver on your message of CHANGE or shut up ! 
I bet most of them avoid the subject . 
I 'm sure you think your 401k is protected by the government right ? 
McCain throwing his weight behind the need for a `` compromise '' is much more than a cheap political ploy . 
It is an attempt to force congress to rubber stamping an unacceptable selling out of resources we desperately need to invest in health-care and domestic programs of social uplift . 
My hope is to see more and more people critically question the sweeping proposals that are trying to be rammed through a scared congress and we will fight this power grab . 
Obama can counter this by leading opposition to this economic bailout for the rich . 
As the Straight Talker said in July , `` The fact is we need a gas tax holiday . 
We need it , we need it , we need it very badly . 
The Americans that are hurt the most are low income Americans that are driving the oldest automobiles , '' he said . '' 
Surely the candidate of experience was n't just blowing smoke on this one , right ? 
And there you have it ladies and gentleman . 
The country is hurtling toward a depression , and this is this person 's comment . 
I guess he just thought of it ! 
Did you read the article ? 
It was Obama 's Idea ! 
The way things are spiraling out of control Mccain may just have a health issue at stake . 
Palin just recently had heard of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and what they actually do . 
Forget the lack of foreign policy , can anyone imagine Palin taking questions on economy crisis . 
Now that would indeed be a crisis for Mccain . 
A presidential debate with only one presidential candidate ? '' 
Let Obama debate himself . 
After all , he 's used to taking both sides on every issue . 
Any actual concern remaining about what the Fast Eddies and Slicked-Back Willies are up to ? 
Or is snarking all we care about any more ? 
Write your representatives , read about this bill , maybe worry a little about Section 8 that makes executive action to steal our tax money and spend it free from judicial or administrative review or challenge . 
And the other pieces of arbitrary Imperial Executive power that the non-governmental Fed and Secretary of the Treasury are reaching for , behind their shouts that the building is on fire . 
Quite a display of chutzpah , for the arsonist to demand the absolute power to decide how , or whether , to put out the blaze . 
Maybe Paulson and Bernacke would deign to walk over and piss on the rest of us , at least . 
And has anybody seen much of Dick Cheney in a while , and would n't HE like to be Vice-President-For-Life ? 
Look out for a REAL October surprise . 
This is sticking politics into it front and center and McCain knows it . 
It 's a ploy and it will turn into the McCain\/Palin sideshow and that 's what the GOP really wants . 
Shows how much they really care about the problem . 
It 's just another photo-op just like their UN visit . 
If I were Obama , this would be my response ... Lets just wait and see if the House can pass a version and if the comittees in the Senate can reach a compromise . 
If they can , then it is my duty to go to DC and vote on the Senate compromise and eventually the compromise with the House version that will need to be reconciled . 
Doing anything before that point will only be a distraction and most likely lead to a longer delay . 
Do we have to explain everything to you ? 
How did you find this website anyways ? 
Next time try `` MY DOG ATE MY NOTES '' . 
no more lame than suspending your presidental camaign so you can help craft the mother of all bail outs . 
to want to cancel a debate , when the people need and demand answers ! 
Do n't runaway McCain ! 
Yikes we need some damn leadership ! 
He continues to show us ! 
Now he is unable to Multi-task . 
`` Right '' , and he thinks we are dumb enough to not see what he is doing . 
Strange You know-it 's the same one whose death got him out of the pre-calc test 2 weeks before . 
That he happening to go to prison turned a wuss ito a hero . 
Actually he got a secret message from his fther that if he wussed out he would be disinherited . 
The one thing McCain values more than his lifei , is the ` good '' life - thats why he dumped his loyal wife for Beeris McMoneybags . 
Alas , Karma is n't a mother who bakes cookies , doncha ' know ? 
So , so many base voters have helium in their heels when flat-backing GOP and FOX talking points and the bigots are out en mass ignoring the root of this choreographed debacle ... the 60 percent of America 's homeowners who refinanced while blaming new home owners for being talked into `` ownership society '' Presidential campaign rhetoric . 
It seems rather odd that no one is noticing the fact that it was Wall Street who was pushing for Privatizing Social Security due to the billions that would have been heading their way ... they new back then they need a cash influx ... and this administration `` hid behind '' great economy propaganda while giving cronies tax breaks and subsidies in the wingnut welfare programs . 
They seem to forget it was GW himself who vetoed State Rights to police predatory lenders in 2003 and even made a personal appearance replete with empty platitudes to defeat regulatory policies ... and HE did nothing to regulate predatory lending ... it would have defeated another of this talking points : `` ownership society '' promises to the rubes . 
he is trying to make a Politcal touchdown ... And for those people that Have know clue why they want McCain and Just Hate Obama cause he is black ... All I have to say is SIT DOWN AN SHUT UP ... Posted by : Jazz | September 24 , 2008 4:56 PM | Report abuse what a coward . . 
mcaint hiding behind congress a place youve never done any good , and on a topic you have no clue on ... economics , please dont suspend your campaigne , save yourself the humiliation and forfiet your campaigne america clearly sees through you , and wants nothing too do with you , and your little dumb barbie doll Posted by : kevin | September 24 , 2008 4:56 PM | Report abuse McCain likes surprises , he surprised us with Palin . 
She is unfit to command . 
No clue about the current crisis . 
She is a hookey mom ! 
She is busy nursing her baby ! 
Does she care about the country 's future ? 
McCain like abraka-dabra campaign , he is a gutter politician . 
Resembles more like Bush . 
He own 9 houses & 13 cars . 
Does he really care about this country ? 
Except he wants to fulfill his dream with Cindy to sell bear at White house ? 
Lets have a debate , we need to hear what McCain has to say about economy , what his plan . 
American people want to hear McCain 's proposal . 
Obama contacted McCain first about 8:30 a.m. but McCain was smart and made an announcement before Obama can . 
Smart move on McCain 's part . 
Just shows he will do anything to get elected . 
To me it is a Karl Rove way of running the clock down . 
We do n't really know the true Sarah Palin because she does n't interview - the press is n't allowed near her , except a negotiated and homogenized 3 parter with Charlie Gibson . 
And now McCain is using `` his country first '' approach to suspending the debates . 
Are we supposed to determine who we will elect as our next president based on their press releases and ad campaigns . 
McCain likens this to another 9\/11 . 
This economic crisis has nothing to do with 9\/11 . 
-LRB- BTW - both times this administration had prior knowledge and did NOTHING -RRB- . 
Did McCain stop what he was doing to fly to DC and huddle about how to help the Katrina Victims ? 
McCain was an identified participant in the Charles Keating\/Lincoln Savings and Loan downfall - where was his concern for his `` country '' then ? 
Okay - let 's move the debates to Washington . 
McCain can multi-task from there , like he would have to if he is president . 
I 'm certain , no one in the Senate will begrudge these two candidates 90 minutes off to debate . 
STICK AND JAB , STICK AND JAB ... MCCAIN STAFF BUNCH OF FOOLS . . 
OBAMA IS A VERY SMART DUDE ! 
I just listened to Obama 's answer a question as to when the vote is taken , will he and McCain go back to vote . 
His answer , `` Because of the delicate nature of negotiations that it may be necessary for both of us to be present to send a strong message that we need to get something done . '' 
He did not say that he plans to cast a vote . 
I think he will not be there for the vote unless he is pressured into it . 
Obama 's private response : `` Why did n't we think of this first ? '' 
We know the dog ate your homework . 
Let the debates continue . 
We need to see how candidates respond in a crisis . 
The sky wo n't fall . 
Cancelling the debate is only the latest excuse for rushing initiatives through the legislative process . 
-- The last great giveaway for GOP friends , lobbyists , etc. . 
Now is the time for thoughtful Obama-style consultation and deliberation . 
What 's next on the McCain menu ? 
-- postponing the election ... ? 
McCain was acting like a deer caught in the headlights of truth . 
Let 's see how they answer the questions about the economic wisdom and unintended results of the $ 700 billion being offered without preconditions to Wall Street . 
Country first , is a damn joke ! 
He became a maverick to poke his wrinkled finger in GW Bush 's eye for defeating him in 2000 with the nasty politics he has embraced . 
-LRB- Bush said he was unstable mentally and this is very true -RRB- . 
What gave him his `` maverick '' title was his bitter attitude toward the Republican Party and its rejection of him . 
After he won the primaries , he flipped again , from maverick to ass-kisser of the RNC and now he looks and acts just like Bush . 
There is absolutely no difference in his policies and Bush 's . 
He flipped on running a respectful campaign when it suited him because he will do anything to get elected . 
No honorable man does the things that John McBush does . 
He 's in it for himself -- country be damned !! And if you do n't realize that , you 're a damned fool . 
| September 24 , 2008 4:54 PM | Report abuse Rash , reckless , half-cocked . 
Are these the qualities we want in our president ? 
Which party had clear majorities in both houses ? 
The REPUBLICAN Congress killed the bill . 
And who did the NYT single out as lobbying against it ? 
The National Association of Home Builders , a major REPUBLICAN contributor . 
There you have it . 
PROOF that the REPUBLICANS killed the bill . 
What about Lincoln during the Civil War ? 
Oh , that 's right , McCain has special knowledge of failing savings and loan institutions that he needs to share . 
I heard him answering ; trying to answer a reporter on the economy question this morning and he sounded just this side of dementia . 
He said `` we need to use the economy to grow the economy ; I mean use the economy to grow the government ; no I mean use the government to make the economy ... '' It was so out there that I may be off a few words because it made no sense that I can not even remember it correctly . 
Lord help us if this man and Shotgun Sally get elected . 
Makes me ashamed to be Scottish American with the bad press and his McSameness . 
If anyone has actually heard Obama free from a teleprompter , you would know how funny that is . 
The fact is their JOB they have already been elected to do is first and foremost be voting members of the Senate . 
They have critical decisions to make and what job is waiting in the wings should be irrelevant . 
They should NOT be campaigning . 
Our country is in crisis and debates will only allow us to hear what we should already know about the candidates stance on issues . 
There are many people who are great debaters , that by itself DOES NOT make them good leaders . 
I applaud Senator McCain for making the decision to do his job . 
Senator Obama should follow his lead ! 
Had Obama been the first to suspend the campaign , the praises to him would have instantly crown him THE MESSIAH , with mandorla and all . 
Eat Sarah 's p-u-s-s-y . 
Debate Obama , oops , no. . 
Eat Sarah 's p-u-s-s-y . 
Go to DC and put on a `` country first '' facade . 
| September 24 , 2008 4:53 PM | Report abuse McCain is doing the exact same thing as he did after 9-11 , he 's lining up behind Bush to push through an ill-advised course of action where the American people do n't have the facts or any credible information as to who will benefit from this . 
The best thing for Obama to do right now is point out that fact ... Posted by : russ99 | September 24 , 2008 4:53 PM | Report abuse I pull the strings and McCain dances a jig . 
We are now fitting our Palinbot with hooks and strings -LRB- first female AI robot running mate with suky suky power for casting Senate tiebreaking votes and firing pigs she does not dig -RRB- . 
Sarah Suckbot will blow any undecided voters . 
That 's how she became mayor of Wasilla , Nowhere ... I , nelly boy Rove , will be the happiest queen at the McCain Inagural Ball -LRB- centerpieces by Haliburton -RRB- . 
Orgy to follow with cocaine and high price male hookers on loan from Tom Cruise . 
World War III to follow as McCain `` Nukes the Gooks '' ... BEDEEE BEDEEE ... That 's All Folks ! 
I need time for MSDNC to edit my responses to look intelligent . 
How 's that for deceitful and cunning ? 
Is that what we want in our next president when we 've just had it for 8 years with Bush ? 
Plus the new polls show McCain losing ground big time to Obama and he needs time to regroup so stalls with this idea . 
It 's like the kid in school he is constantly making up excuses not to take the test . 
And sadly , there are plenty of Americans who will fail to see this for what it is ... the coward 's way out . 
I say , ignore the SOB and have the debate as planned . 
Suspend ads and attacks , but go ahead with the debate . 
This close to the election , the American people need to hear from the candidates as promised , especially since only one person on the Republican ticket is talking . 
This is n't a situation like the hurricanes where it would be disrespectful to focus on the campaign when so many lives were at risk . 
It would be arrogant for McCain to assume that if he were to take a couple hours out for the debate he would put the financial health of the nation at risk . 
It is , in fact , a joke . 
Putting the country before politics ? 
After picking Sarah Palin ? 
You must be kidding . 
When our country needs answers the most , McCain is wimping out . 
The guy is dangerous . 
What happens in an international crisis . 
McCain : Whiskey , tango , foxtrot ! 
Get me the football ! 
Mcc trying to extend it . 
He was part of the problem now trying to look good infront of The american people . 
THIS IS OLD POLETICAL TACTICS . 
The american peole are woken up too late MeccAIN Posted by : nuru | September 24 , 2008 4:51 PM | Report abuse Obviously , little can be done by these two Senators returning to washington to help push this bill . 
The senators and house members who will play the most important role in this are already attempting to pass the bailout . 
McCain should not be canceling the debate , if he wants to return to work on this fine , but why cancel the debate , i assure you for four hours on Friday night , McCain will not be able to impact the negotiations on the bailout . 
Think of who he is ? 
Not an economic wizard , not respected on those issues , and frankly neither is obama , their presence just wo n't matter . 
So , have the debate , that 's all the country can logically expect from these two candidates . 
Warren Buffett and Alan Greenspans of Congress they are not Posted by : brandon | September 24 , 2008 4:51 PM | Report abuse Obama is the best candidate to represent the people who source from selfishness and not selflessness ... The problem is where we have already changed to : `` There is no God and man is basically good '' Posted by : HateTheTruth | September 24 , 2008 4:51 PM | Report abuse McCain got up earlier than Obama , that 's all . 
Had Obama been the first to suspend the campaign , the praises to him would have instantly crown him THE MESSIAH , with mandorla and all . 
How do you republicans feel about your party 's tax and give to the rich ? 
What a load of hypocrites ! 
| September 24 , 2008 4:51 PM | Report abuse The economy was fundamentally strong 10 days ago but is so depressed now that McChikin could n't even find 90 minutes for a debate ? 
MCCAIN CAN ONLY DO ONE THING AT A TIME . 
I blogged in depth about it here ... We 've got to get past this crap ... PS - Chris , thanks for your blogs and great stuff , too ! 
Probably will never come up in the conversation . 
They are always good about sticking to the rules . 
You have a keen insight and awareness ! 
Having said this , Obama can return to DC and ask to debate there . 
Then the ball is back in McBush 's court . 
Gooo-bama Posted by : NO way no how no McCain and Palin ! 
| September 24 , 2008 4:50 PM | Report abuse Congratulations to John McCain . 
The mess that stares America in the face trancends the politics of either party . 
Quite frankly , if the financial disaster that stare America in the face is not addressed soon , there will be little left for either McCain or Obama to oversee . 
By the way , these are serious times . 
For the children on this blog who ca n't quite figure it out , I recommend spending less tiime on the blogs an more watching cartoon on TV . 
You have two people who claim to be above the frey , yet , one party , Democrats , whose own President passed the deregulation banking act , -LRB- Oh how we want to forget that -RRB- or the person who took the most money in the least amount of time from Freddie Mae and Fannie Mac -LRB- Barack Obama -RRB- who wants to just keep going . 
Nancy Pelosi wanted to just go home , it will work itself out by January . 
No , NOW IS THE TIME FOR CONGRESS TO GET TO WORK AND DO SOMETHING ! 
My 401K has lost over $ 1,200 in one week . 
While congress fiddles , my earnings are dwindling faster than I care to imagine . 
Of course , this would mean the Barack Obama has to -LRB- 1 -RRB- show up , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- vote something other than present . 
Get your ASS in the Debate . 
We want some answers . 
Give the country atleast that ! 
Dissolve every mortgage in the US . 
Banks get to take it off their books and we all get a place to live . 
People who have more than 1 home only get to dissolve their primary mortgage . 
If you re in foreclosure your home goes back to the bank , if they want it . 
This will give us an 8 trillion dollar economic stimulus package without printing or borrowing one more dollar . 
Now , lets debate . 
How can he `` broker a deal '' across party lines when he knows nothing about the subject ? 
OH yes , tO THE mIDDLE the polls say Posted by : osama binbiden | September 24 , 2008 4:49 PM | Report abuse Usually the losing candidate does n't throw in the towel until after the election , even if he 's behind in the polls . 
I 'm sorry that because my grammar is sub par for you that you feel as though you have the upper hand . 
With that said what does your quote mean ? 
Not crap to me . 
You are taught by the establishment and you follow that same juggernaut line of thinking . 
I do n't follow the masses did n't vote for Bush and think Obama is another idiot as well . 
We keep voting for idiots and wondering why nothing changes you could n't vote off the ticket if your life depended on it it 's just way outside your scope Hey was that finally the right use of the word ? 
You are an idiot period -LRB- -- did that work for you ? 
This morning Obama spoke to McCain and asked if he woud join in sharing their quite similar views in a Joint Statement . 
But , minutes later McCain reneged and opted for the photo opportunity route . 
Obama needs to shove this gambit back up McCain 's backside which is where this cynical move came from . 
The American public deserves a good solution to the economic crisis . 
It also needs to hear from the candidates directly about their views on this issues and other issues important public policy issues . 
This is accomplish by debates and meeting with and talking to folks on the ground at rallies and other meetings . 
Mc Cain is nothing more than an opportunist seeking the Presidency for himself rather than for us . 
The modern presidency is a highly demanding job . 
It requires a president to deal with more than one crisis at a time . 
Senator McCain is clearly too old , too frail , and too confused to be president . 
It is time for him to withdraw from the contest for the presidency , and ask his party to find someone else to run . 
Senator Obama should announce that he will be at the site of the debate to answer the moderators ' questions . 
If Grandpa McCain chooses to stay home , Obama should have his campaign deliver a plate of cookies , a glass of buttermilk , an electric blanket , and a sleeping pill . 
If you fall for this one , this country is toast . 
This is the same man who challenged Obama to a dozen townhall style debates . 
A challenge that Obama accepted then backed off of after advice from his advisors . 
McCain is not afraid , to say he is proves your ignorance . 
Nobody can know for sure if it is a political ploy or not , it may be , but he is not suspending the debate to hide from Obama . 
After the way Hillary and even Biden owned Obama in the debates , I really doubt McCain is scared . 
Wow , are they stupid -LRB- and boy is it funny to see them run ! -RRB- 
None of the 4 are qualified . 
McCain at least had had leadership experience . 
The World is laughing at the other 3 and saying yes yes yes . 
good luck for the next 4 years but it ca n't be any worse than the past four . 
Gas will be 10 . 
Why do n't they have an extemporaneous debate on the floor of the Senate and let the electorate decide who 's more qualified to be president . 
Gee , how about they have the debate and talk about the economy ? 
Oh wait , the Bush admin wants their 700 billion NOW - this week or our whole economy will collapse - so we 'd better hurry back to Washington and do Sec . 
What a load of manure !! The debate should go on . 
The panicked funding of 700 billion for Wall Street should be delayed . 
Tough questions need to be asked - and answered - about the whole thing . 
The media should get tough with Palin and not let the McCain camp spoon feed them staged photo ops . 
Good grief , McCain wants us to believe she 's ready to be President but wo n't let her speak without a script . 
Now yank the debate for the good of the country . 
What a bunch of hooey . 
It 's been one stunt after another from the McCain campaign , because if the issues are really discussed McCain will lose . 
He knows it and he is running a campaign of distraction . 
If he keeps the American people focused on lipstick and pigs , Palin photo ops and a steady stream of similar hogwash , he can win . 
And we , the American people , will get another 4 years of the same garbage that has placed our country on the brink of disaster . 
I am so tired of his ranting and making himself like he is a gift from God . 
This guy is a joke . 
I 'm beginning to wonder if there is n't something wrong upstairs with this guy . 
Listen to him NOT ANSWER questions . 
He seems to take this entire presidency run as a game or a joke . 
The American have had enough games McCain . 
He had plenty of time to resolve this issue in a bipartisan way , but where was he ? 
No where to be found . 
And Palin is the ultimate INSULT to a woman running ANY office . 
No where near a Hillary Clinton . 
She ca n't touch those 18 mil because if she does the woman are yielding to agree with how WEAK she appears and how the republicans do n't trust her alone . 
Do n't compare her to another man please . 
The point is to break away from the old sexism she needs to be let loose and stumble , fall , and get back up again just like a man . 
The republicans are showing they have NO CONFIDENCE in women . 
In 2003 , the Bush administration wanted to regulate Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac ... and the Democrats refused ! 
See this New York Times article from September 11 , 2003 ... The Democrats DID NOT WANT to regulate Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac . 
It was the Democrats who pushed for deregulation . 
A vote for the Democrats is a vote for continued disaster . 
Well , hate to tell you , I need someone who can lead , not give a speech . 
... and yes , I would just as soon let it all fall as continue to live under the current system , which both McCain and Palin want to change while Obama just wants to institute more socialist , left wing policies . 
If Obama , Kennedy , Streisand , Soros , Buffet all want to tax the rich , let them start with themselves first . 
Heaven above , I would have never thought that Hillary would look as good to me right now as she does , LOL . 
Wonders continue in this life ... at least the laughs keep coming . 
And I want to see both of you , side by side debate these issues NOW ! 
Not when John McCain thinks the time is more to his liking . 
Work with your colleagues on the bailout -LRB- which I had assumed you were doing from your various campaign stops -RRB- then honor your commitment to the American people and get yourself to Mississippi Friday night . 
What 's he going to do , serve coffee and doughnuts ? 
This smacks of political opportunism and showboating in all the wrong ways . 
If he was serious about this , he would have suspended his campaign days ago to make sure tomorrow 's deadline is met . 
McCain has pulled this straight out of the Bush playbook for starting the war in Iraq , and passing the Patriot Act before that . 
This is disgusting , vile , naked political ambition contrary to patriotic ideals . 
Bush 's men , and McCain 's actions today are nothing short of treason . 
A week ago there was no economic crisis according to them . 
Now there is , and it needs to be handled their way , right now , or America is doomed . 
That is tripe , and we Americans know it . 
Bush and McCain = Traitors to America . 
The debate is the opportunity for the American people to see these guys outside of their political adds . 
They can take a few hours out of one day of the week to handle that ; even relocating the debate to DC . 
McCain is dodging the debate , and exacerbating the crisis that he refused to acknowledge as recently as this week . 
He is a complete fraud . 
Millions of voters were hurt by this over the last year as their mortgages crushed them , and their jobs were shipped overseas . 
McCain clearly only cares now because Cindy 's vast fortune , and the fortunes of his top aids\/lobbyists took a hit this week . 
You are all a bunch of idiots . 
This election is going to be about big issues . 
Do n't rob me of the chance to hear the debates . 
How rash IS this guy ? 
First , the dreadful Palin . 
Then he goes off half-cocked about firing the SEC chairman . 
George Will , of all people , nailed it : McCain is acting like `` a flustered rookie playing in a league too high . '' 
His penchant for rashness has been a subtext throughout . 
Now , we 're seeing why . 
Do n't chicken out now when the country really needs to hear some REAL answers ! 
Or wants to go and get educated by Paulson and Bernarke and do n't know how else to say it . 
The man can not be trusted , he is a selfish old man . 
He will do anything to not have to discuss real issues . 
My advice for McCain : Give up on politics and audition for American Idol - you 'll get more votes . 
Time to distract again , McCain 's favorite political move ! 
In 2003 , the Bush administration wanted to regulate Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac ... and the Democrats refused ! 
See this New York Times article from September 11 , 2003 ... The Democrats DID NOT WANT to regulate Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac . 
It was the Democrats who pushed for deregulation . 
A vote for the Democrats is a vote for continued disaster . 
Now he wants to postpone the debate . 
Must everything that this guy does be so done so transparently as to score political points ? 
Sarah Palin , now the bailout . 
How on earth would Friday 's debate get in the way of the bailout issue ? 
If anything , it would give them both a chance to speak out either for or against it to the American people . 
I 'm sure Obama sees through this . 
I hope that he presses on with the debate . 
I can not wait until this election is OVER ! 
The biggest accomplishment of McCain 's emergency-brake freak-out might be to throw the stock-market into a nose dive of panic . 
-LRB- Anyone notice how they waited until after the markets closed to announce this ? -RRB- 
Way to put Country First , senator . 
Talk about being out of touch with the economy . 
Is that not more important than the financial `` crisis '' ? 
You idiots all knew that America was in shambles . 
A recession has been looming even before 9\/11 . 
Now all the concealing and denying has run out and the market will now have to correct itself . 
HOLD ON FOR YOUR DEAR LIFE COWBOYS !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Posted by : Tom Brady | September 24 , 2008 4:46 PM | Report abuse Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 4:46 PM | Report abuse My company lives on credit and it is tightening up on me as I write this . 
This is a real crisis that we all face . 
Like it or not , we have to come together as a country on getting liquidity back into the market so banks can start lending again . 
Obama and McCain need to get to DC and help lead us out of this this or we will see something the likes we 've never seen since the Great Depression . 
When businesses start freezing up because they ca n't borrow , employees lose their jobs and a death spiral begins . 
Both of you get back to DC and do something for all the rest of us , dammit ! 
Why should the nation call a halt to the most important question before us , picking a president for the next four years ? 
Why should we stop debating about the essential issues of our times including the economic meltdown and the war in Iraq ? 
McCain wants to call a temporary halt to campaigning because he is out of ideas , out of breath , and dropping like a stone in the polls . 
Only the most dim-witted will fail to see this ploy for the politically motivated stunt that it is . 
McCain is unprepared to debate Obama on Friday or anytime . 
Obama should debate an empty chair in Mississsippi as a symbol of McCain 's having backed down like a coward from his responsibilities to the American people . 
Now he wants to suspend it for bad news . 
Every time things start looking bad for him he runs for cover . 
What exactly does Mr. McCain think he is going to do in Washington ? 
He wanted to be president so let 's get it on and quit playing games . 
Way to much for Mr. Deregulator to pass on . 
I imagine he 's actually foaming at the mouth just thnking about it . 
The generalizations on both sides here are ridiculous . 
These two candidates who claim to bring people together really seem to have driven this country apart to a level I have never seen in any other election . 
Oh no , wait , this is the same guy who hail-maryed a pass our way called Sarah `` Caribou Barbie '' Palin . 
Is this really happening ? 
It feels like a campy movie . 
Obama needs to find a way to call this joker on his cheap ploy . 
And you know what , Obama will . 
There 's no reason two presidential candidates ca n't have a debate while the financial crisis gets addressed . 
McCain is doing a Bushy , plowing ahead on his plan , what suits him . 
If he really believed in this idea , he would have negotiated it with Obama -- and not pulled this cheap trick . 
Now he 's going to pay . 
He knew he was going to get whupped so he turned and ran . 
How stupid does he think the American people are ? 
If Obama has pulled this , the right would have him drawn and quartered ! 
But they should have a debate on Friday with a special focus on the economy . 
That sounds like the most appropriate response . 
You Wo n't Believe These Results ! 
They even include a write-in for Ron Paul ! 
Where did you learn to speak or write English , Con-boy ? 
You conservatives never did a thing for this country except drive it into the ground with your fear of progress , of conservation , of others . 
In your post you sound terrified . 
That 's because ignorance begets fear . 
You 're not an idiot . 
You 're an imbecile . 
For someone reason I 'm not looking towards McCain or Obama as real leaders but to BIDEN at the helm , go figure . 
Obama 's new campaign slogan - Obama First . . 
It 's all About Me . 
And how come there is n't a BILLION dollar settlement plan for families who are losing their homes . 
BUSH would save WALL STREET but forget about families . 
for the RICH and not the POOR Posted by : damak | September 24 , 2008 4:45 PM | Report abuse Let McCain go to Washington ... have Palin debate Obama Friday . 
It 'll give her a chance to meet another world leader . 
The debate Friday night is about FOREIGN AFFAIRS , not about economics . 
ALL our politicians should be there -LRB- yes , that means the God Mr. Obama , too -RRB- . 
McCain wanted Obama at 10 Town Hall Meetings , which Obama would not do . 
Obama has failed miserably at every type of gathering where he has n't had teleprompters , so it is obvious that Obama just wants to use McCain 's decent decision to show that McCain is scared to debate -LRB- which is foolish considering all of McCain 's invitation and Obama 's flubs -RRB- . 
As for polls , anyone who reads this paper is left of center and apparently does n't care that Democrats and Blacks were polled in a 3-2 ratio ! 
And remember the polls for the 2004 election ; the papers had their headlines for Kerry already written ! 
NOBODY should listen to polls ; just get out and vote ! 
NOW , he wants to finally work after taking 3\/4s of the year off ? 
The President has to multi-task . 
I do n't understand why McCain ca n't run his campaign and deal with the crisis at the same time ? 
THAT WAY WE CAN DECIDE WHICH CANDIDATE IS BETTER AT MULTI-TASKING !!! Posted by : MOVE THE DEBATE TO WASHINGTON | September 24 , 2008 4:44 PM | Report abuse There are some terribly disgusting posts . 
Too bad this newspaper does not have the moral rectitude to kick these people out , and you know who you are . 
You are disgusting and offensive . 
Dirt on the ground has more class and decency . 
If it is MCain he has sworn to put strict constructionist -LRB- conservative -RRB- judges on the bench . 
That means Roe V. Wade could easily be overturned as his base plans to do . 
There are other issues regarding privacy , tort laws , and various freedoms the conservatives hate . 
Will McCain try to prevent OSHA and the EPA from doing their jobs as they are charged by Congress to perform ? 
Bush wanted to get rid of both organizations . 
I do n't want any more Republican politicians telling scientists working for the government how to skew their reports in attempt to convince the American people that maybe Global Warming is n't such a bad thing after all . 
That maybe losing more animal species is really better for everyone in the long run . 
That the Moon really is made of green cheese . 
How about a little truth and honesty in governemnt for awhile . 
How about protecting the Constitution rather than using the attorney General 's office to shread the document at every opportunity . 
Otherwise I do n't mind Republican 's . 
They play a good game of golf after church on Sunday 's . 
THREATS ARE WELL TAKING MR. REDNECK AND AS THE SAY AT NASA ... WHAT COMES UP ... MUST COME DOWN ! 
Just because she is pretty and appears to have nice knockers , you should n't call her such crass names . 
this crisis is not like 9\/11 . 
it started long before . 
if you want to solve this crisis , tell people what u want to do . 
your silence or ignorance wont be the best solution . 
IT WAS OBAMA 'S IDEA AND MCCAIN HAD NO OTHER OPTION THAN TO LIE AND SAY IT WAS HIS IDEA TO JOIN FORCES . 
, , , , HE NEEDS TO EXPOSED BY THE PRESS NOWWWWW !!!!!!! Posted by : RAY | September 24 , 2008 4:43 PM | Report abuse I hereby suspend my car payments ! 
I therefore will be suspending my job at the moment to until this crisis is solved ! 
... Does this work because I really have to give it a try . 
This could be the next big thing ... Suspended Animation is what McCain is ... and its getting funnier by the moment with or without his time machine ... too funny everyone should give it a try Posted by : erik | September 24 , 2008 4:43 PM | Report abuse Duke , you need to learn some english . 
At least try using spell check before posting . 
` Am not surprised though , that 's why we still have so many morons in Washington , and we 're so tired of your likes ! 
Get a life ... and do something profitable for once ! 
Do n't I remember that he has experience in banking ? 
Was n't he one of the Keating Five that destroyed the Savings and Loan industry and put them all out of business ? 
Yes , he has the experience on the destroying end now he wants to gets some on the `` pick up the pieces end '' . 
Therefore it also seems fair that the V\/p on the ticket keeps the obligation for Mr. McCain and debates Mr. Obama . 
How about we just `` stay apart '' on this one ? 
That would address ths issue , lower McCain 's stature vis-a-vis what level he is dealing with as an equal , and highlight the inadequacy of McCain 's choice of VP . 
There is another rumor . 
There has been discussion that John McCain , while a prisoner of war , was subjected to brain altering drugs and is really a mole for the Communist Chinese . 
A real `` Manchurian Candidate '' . 
Now , I do n't believe it , but his conduct is so erratic and he is trying so hard to destroy the electoral process that it gives one pause . 
Again , just a rumor . 
John McCain , ever the patriot , recognizes this and will fufill his duty to his country regardless of the cost to himself . 
Will Obama do the same ? 
Or will he simply vote ABSENT this time ? 
that 's all that needs to be said . 
TOTALLY a political move . 
Man misses 80 % of his senate votes and here he comes to rescue an economy that is `` fundamentally sound '' Bugs Bunny said it best . 
he is a joke and palin is a joke . 
Whats he going to call timeout whenever he faces a crisis ? 
No thanks gramps and no thanks piggy . 
After reading some of these comments I discovered I am an undereducated redneck hick who hates my country ... all because I am a republican . '' 
And I have learned that I am a marxist-supporting anti-American Democrat . 
Is n't it amazing how pleasant people are when it comes to politics ? 
He is always going back to His home to rest . 
He has been making one gaff after another almost everyday . 
At the 9\/11 ceremony his wife had to help him up the ramp looking like she was walking arm in arm with him while he leaned on her . 
They are just milking Mccain trying to make it through the election without him collapsing on them . 
Whether this debate gos off on schedule or not , everyone sees through the ploy that Mccain is afraid of the debate or may not even be up to it . 
Mccain is more and more showing he may not be up to the task or one of the hardest jobs in the world as president . 
This last play may be the deal breaker with the American people and John Mccain . 
They are not as stupid as Mccain may wish . 
Oh I ca n't , said the little boy , ... my dog ate my homework ! 
Senator McCain just lost my vote ! 
McCain says he ca n't go on campaigning in such an atmosphere and must go legislate ! 
World War Two did n't stop the election . 
Nor the Civil War - a good deal more catastrophic than this economic crisis . 
And surprisingly , elections were held in 1932 during The Depression . 
But John McCain says this is so important he must suspend his campaigning ! 
Would he like to suspend the Constitution too ? 
This is McCain 's home field , and he 's not afraid of it . 
However , he surely does n't want to be beating up Obama over these matters while the financial crisis goes unresolved . 
Joint statements are nice , but the real work of a Senator is in the Senate . 
redvette1 - You misunderstand the '95 Clinton\/Dodd\/Schumer amendments to the CRA . 
You said : \* To those claiming Clinton is the start of this : The Community Reinvestment Act was changed by Clinton in 1995 , which allowed the loans of a bank to be made based on three factors instead of twelve . 
These three were a lending test , a service test and an investment test . 
Hallmarks to making good loans . 
\* These `` tests '' were for the banks , not for the borrowers . 
They were designed to check whether a bank was making enough bad loans in poor areas to satisfy the Democrats . 
Senator Obama gave quite a knowledgeable speech on this subject on March 27 , 2008 , in New York . 
Presidents ' have to be able to do that you know . 
A debate on Foreign policy while the country is dealing with the biggest economic crisis does n't make much sense . 
Push it back a week and get this resolved . 
Thanks for having priorities . 
This election is going to be about the economy . 
We may have a fast 24 hour news cycle , but no amount of stalling is going to prevent you from answering for the last 8 years of failed leadership . 
When I first heard his suggestion , it sounded like a good idea . 
And I am a Democrat . 
McCain has no business being in this race and no business representing the republicans after his campaign had imploded last year . 
And yet he is . 
Do not under estimate this man . 
If it helps , lets do it in DC -- it will only take an hour of our time . '' 
`` I know I can do both . 
Ca n't you ? '' 
The man is nothing if not sanctimonious . 
It 's especially hard to take coming from a guy who ditched a sick wife who 'd waited for him all those years , in favor of a trophy wife ... one of the Keating five , who tried to recover his insufferable sense of self-righteousness by limiting freedom of political speech in McCain-Feingold . 
Thank heaven he did n't choose Lieberman for his veep , or we 'd have a truly nauseating dose of sanctimony on a single ticket . 
This is the kind of man who once in power would suspend an election in the face of a crisis because when all is said and done he sees the electoral process as somehow immoral . 
Coming from him , I 'd like a few antacid tablets before reading his fine print . 
I am an Independent and an Obama supporter . 
However , this was a smart move on behalf of his campaign . 
Only wish Obama had done it first . 
To come onto blogs and try to spin it as a bad move , looks purely partisan . 
If it were reversed , the Republicans would be spinning it as well . 
Both sides seems to have no objectivity . 
Come on , it was a good move . 
Still , the thought of having a `` shoot from the hip '' rather than thoughtful leader scares the hell out of me . 
Geesh ... now that REALLY scares me . 
I will still be voting Obama but I for one am not going to try to spin the obvious . 
And folks , it IS obvious . 
Stop it wo n't you ? 
I guess I understand temporarily suspending the campaign , but not canceling the debate . 
The election is less than six weeks away , and we voters need every chance to see the candidates debate face-to-face . 
This just seems weird . 
Besides , I thought the `` economy is fundamentally strong . '' 
After reading some of these comments I discovered I am an undereducated redneck hick who hates my country ... all because I am a republican . 
he wants to be as a non-partisan mover and shaker . 
after eight years of 90 % backing for the most vicious , brain dead , corrupt , partisan regime this country has ever known . 
he 'd be more likely to go back to his first wife than convincing me . 
Progress can be made if people shut up and these two guys actually put their heads together . 
Giving 700 billion to Herman Munster is the stupidest thing I 've ever heard . 
In other words they do n't want McCain to use it as a political chip , as he always does with every other issue . 
Bi-partisan McCain , my foot !!! Posted by : Guy from LA | September 24 , 2008 4:41 PM | Report abuse McCain is trying to politicize the country 's problems for his own personal benefit - some `` hero '' huh ? 
This is how he handled his POW experience too - in his own mind , he came home a `` hero '' - so much so - that he dumped his wife and shacked up with a stripper and began to consider himself above everyone else . 
Democrats - do n't get too excited - Obama is a clown too . 
I have more experience than he does and I 'm a nobody ! 
If I were black I might have a chance , but I 'm a white male . 
Obama can give lovely speeches and talk about `` change '' all day long but he still has n't said what he 's going to do because he does n't know what he 's doing now let alone what he 'd do as President . 
Whatever happened to that Romney guy ? 
When he talked economics , it actually sounded like he knew what he was saying . 
Also , Ron Paul is making some sense these days . 
We 've gone broke warring in foreign lands . 
Why do n't we take care of our own problems first and then work with the rest of the world ? 
This is what McCain has done for 30 years and has helped unite the two parties with fair compromise and solving issues . 
Harry Reed would rather make a political fight out of it , as he does n't like to bend and be flexible with the Republican party . 
Our government will never end the gridlock until the partisan politicans put America first and above the fray of self-promotion and grandstanding to feed their inflated ego 's . 
McCain has shown true statesmanship as an effective leader for the American people . 
What better way for her to prove that she understands all the important issues and is truly ready to become the president if McCain should win and then die in office . 
Why do n't these posters understand that -LRB- 1 -RRB- it makes them appear unintelligent , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- that , even if it were true , being called a `` socialist '' is n't nearly so bad as being called a mindless minion of the greedy old white-guys party ? 
Do n't people know that America has never had a socialist government ? 
I hope that these people study up on American government BEFORE they head to the polls !!!!! This is just the sort of skewed , empty-headed thinking that has gotten us the worst president in the history of America two terms in a row ! 
McCain has always worked across party lines , since he started in the senate . 
He has done so more than Biden who has been in the senate since 1973 ! 
I would rather see a presidential candidate who puts the people first . 
Obama is too selfish for that , as usual . 
Let him debate an empty lecturn . 
McCain and all the senators need to be in Washington RIGHT NOW !!! Posted by : Adrian | September 24 , 2008 4:41 PM | Report abuse `` Obama will say whatever they tell him to say and he does a good job of convincing idiots '' Funny how Obama leads among college educated voters while McCain leads among the less educated then ... Posted by : lipreader | September 24 , 2008 4:41 PM | Report abuse I hereby suspend my car payments ! 
I therefore will be suspending my job at the moment to until this crisis is solved ! 
... Does this work because I really have to give it a try . 
This could be the next big thing ... Suspended Animation is what McCain is ... and its getting funnier by the moment with or without his time machine Posted by : New and oh so Cool | September 24 , 2008 4:41 PM | Report abuse Bush who has no credibility with American people will speak tonight ... McCain suspends campaign ... stalling for time until they decide what to do next ... fishy ! 
`` Of course , McCain has been in Congress for decades , giving him all kinds of opportunities to protect the American people from what 's happened to them in recent weeks . '' 
Hence the desperate decision to postpone a debate which he was totally unprepared for . 
I do not believe that McCain could helped us get out of this Morass that he and his `` derugulate at any cost '' buddies got us into . 
Captain hook is just around the corner !! Posted by : Russell Schokman | September 24 , 2008 4:40 PM | Report abuse Crafty move by John Mc , but he is sure starting to look like a gimmick in a suit ... my first trick , gimmick VP pick , second trick , pass lies off as truth gimmick , third trick hide VP pick under the sleeve and buy time for her to learn something , final trick - misdirection gimmick , hey folks I really care about this stuff I know nothing about . 
Now with teh delay , I will demand that Sarah not have a debate at all , since I will go back to DC and delay this thing just long enough to make it moot for her to even speak . 
SUWEET ... walla the Great Johnny Posted by : Yoink | September 24 , 2008 4:40 PM | Report abuse So explain to me why you ca n't have the debate AND play big man on campus , McCain ? 
And does anyone feel like too many cooks are going to spoil this already cruddy soup ?! Unless you 're asked , Keep your nose out of it , McCain ! 
However , as a still Clinton supporter , I 'm interested in seeing Obama 's response . 
I 've never been impressed with how he reacts when his feet are put to the fire . 
I might lean a little more to Obama if he responds like he should : call McCain out for the sham he is , pull no punches , lay it all out for those who are prone to reduce everything to the lowest common denominator to understand . 
He 's responding now ... let 's see how he does trying to earn my vote . 
Worked good until they asked for a note from my parents ! 
Republicans , what has become of the party ? 
This is very embarassing . 
Were you even alive in 2004 ? 
Did you stand up for the real vet in that race , John Kerry ? 
Did you show your outrage then ? 
Are you kidding me Mr. McCain . 
Everything you do is political and this move takes the cake . 
Your doing this for the country . 
Are you kidding me . 
Barack , do not accept this from the McCain camp Posted by : Joe Dee | September 24 , 2008 4:39 PM | Report abuse Peach wrote : McCain looks like a LEADER , Obama still acts stunned by the developments . 
Or , we can look at what George Will and the Wall Street Journal -LRB- conservatives by the way -RRB- said about his performance the past week -- George Will : `` It is arguable that McCain , because of his boiling moralism and bottomless reservoir of certitudes , is not suited to the presidency . '' 
Wall Street Journal : McCain made a `` false and deeply unfair '' attack on Cox that was `` unpresidential . '' 
Do n't let a campaign stunt distort what the man himself is doing . 
He 's reacting to Washinngton Post and Fox polls that give Obama 6-9 points lead . 
Even a child will tell that he is putting his election interest first ! 
This is just an election strategy ! 
Do n't you notice how relaxed Repubs are about this election ? 
Win or loss it 's not the end of the world . 
Obama should just give up . 
He does n't have a prayer . 
yes osama & biden pray . 
He is just trying to buy some time because the economy issue is making him look like the fraud he is . 
I 'm sure he 's like more time to have his commission come back and tell him what 's happening and how he can spin it to his own benefit . 
I 'm sure he 's also like to give Palin more face-to-face time with world leaders too . 
That way she can say that not only has she `` seen '' Russia from Alaska , but she has also talked to the president of Afghanistan about his kids ! 
We CAN NOT allow him to back out . 
We have the right to see what our leaders are all about and allowing him to back out of the debate is doing a disservice to the American people ! 
First off John Mccain scared to debate obama on nat . 
security you all ca n't be serious , he will or would crush Obama in that debate . 
If Obama did this you will all be like look he is so for all of us , he knows how we all feel !!! Obama IS THE JOKE OF THIS ELECTION !!! He always changes his mind in to what the polls say all the time . 
John again putting his country first knowing its not time to run ads or debate anything its time to unite and come together not fight on stage . 
So neither canidate should be pretending to be American . 
I am going to vote against every incumbent in office ; as they are not doing the job they were elected to and do n't have the best interest of America represented . 
Daddy McCain has no guts and no running mate . 
HAHAHAHAHAHA this is some very funny stuff . 
Daffy Duck called you a SOCIALIST PARTY is that true ALLEN ? 
Are you now a SOCIALIST ? 
He is always going back to His home to rest . 
He has been making one gaff after another almost everyday . 
At the 9\/11 ceremony his wife had to help him up the ramp looking like she was walking arm in arm with him while he leaned on her . 
They are just milking Mccain trying to make it through the election without him collapsing on them . 
Whether this debate gos off on schedule or not , everyone sees through the ploy that Mccain is afraid of the debate or may not even be up to it . 
Mccain is more and more showing he may not be up to the task or one of the hardest jobs in the world as president . 
This last play may be the deal breaker with the American people and John Mccain . 
They are not as stupid as Mccain may wish . 
This is their job folks . 
The debates , presidential campaigning is all secondary and fluff . 
The debates are for the media anyway and for jokers who do n't know the difference between left or right . '' 
A voice of reason ? 
What are you doing reading the Washington Post ? 
: -RRB- Posted by : Finally | September 24 , 2008 4:39 PM | Report abuse Before this election I had the greatest respect for John McCain . 
I still respect his service in Vietnam but he has changed . 
He has diminished his legacy in his obsession with the presidency . 
His campaign lies , names a novice as second in command and when the tide turns on him and it starts to look bad for him , he calls a time out to regroup . 
where did it go ? 
Really , could this smell any more like a ploy than it is ? 
This kind of posturing even makes Romney look smart . 
At least he understands what happens when you lend money to people who ca n't pay it back . 
Enven in a 3 aginst one in eithe venue , if McCain 's teamates were Shame Hannity , Fat Boy Limb $ Posted by : lux lumina | September 24 , 2008 4:38 PM | Report abuse CaliforniaMonkey well I 'm not in that bracket but I still work my ass off . 
Obama will say whatever they tell him to say and he does a good job of convincing idiots . 
We are fixing to go into a depression screw the recession we never came out of that . 
I loaded and ready for you liberals it 's going to get real bad over the next couple of years I agree with the revolution statement earlier Country is screwed beyond repair , I 'm going to pick you idiots of like jockeys on the lawn when the crap jumps off Posted by : You are all idiots | September 24 , 2008 4:38 PM | Report abuse All stunt ... as if McCain going to DC is going to solve this problem in a jiffy or they can think through this in fewer days if he is there ... Do n't try to railroad us again into a resolution ... this thing needs to be thought through and through . 
I do n't want to fall from the frying pan into the fire and definitely not line , er bulge the pockets of folks earning zillions already at my expense . 
I would rather pay this to the very mortgage owner who has to pay this back into the system . 
That way those instruments become more valuable , credit worthy and people have some security to improve the economy . 
John `` Deregulation -- Keating 5 '' McCain is they MAJOR reason we are in this situation from the start ! 
How can McCain and\/or Palin answer `` WORLD QUESTIONS OR ISSUES '' if Americans and the American media ca n't even get them to answer a darn question ??? They `` hide '' behind every excuse , alibi and\/or LIE ! 
McCain is at the `` CORE '' of America 's economic decline -- EXCEPT FOR THE OIL RICH ! 
4 MORE YEARS OUGHT TO DO IT ! 
BYE , BYE AMERICA ! 
Go McCain\/Palin -LRB- even Laura says she does n't have the experience . 
I think these jokers getting back to work is a great idea . 
Besides Friday 's debate was on foreign policy anyway not economics . 
We 're still paying these two clowns to participate in passing legislation in the senate not regurgitate the same old boring rhetoric we 've been hearing for a year at some silly debate . 
I 'm still undecided but if either of these a-holes wants my vote to be the leader of the free world now is the most important moment in my lifetime to demonstrate some leadership on this issue and not just repeat some worthless partisan talking points . 
Frankly , up until now I do n't think either of them have been worth a damn !!! Posted by : clyde | September 24 , 2008 4:37 PM | Report abuse McCain rises above politics ? 
Yeah sure , and the tooth fairy is bringing sacks of cash to fix the problem . 
The real question , though , is : How is it that whatever Puddinhead Bush touches turns to sh ! 
And how come everytime a Republikan gets into the white house the treasury is looted and the wealthy grow even richer ? 
And John `` Keating 5 '' McPsycho is going to fix everything and rise above politics while he 's doing it ? 
Not likely , but it sure sweetens the right wing koolade . 
You guys are becoming a big joke Posted by : Matt | September 24 , 2008 4:37 PM | Report abuse There is nothing more important in this country than electing the next President . 
To argue that McCain and Obama are indispensable men in the deliberations over the economy is another example of McCain 's impulsive illogical behavior . 
Under the pressure of the campaign , every day brings another earth shattering crisis to the guy who has grown too old for the job . 
Crush him , Obama , crush him NOW ! 
The debates are set by law , you ca n't just postpone them or move them willy-nilly , they 're required and we will have them as scheduled even if there 's an empty podium for McCain 's side . 
Besides , all that ad space is already sold ! 
McCain has gone from being the media 's friend to being its worst nightmare , constantly screwing up their juicy content , first making them scramble to fill a day they had scheduled for watching Palin meet UN leaders , now trying to postpone the debate ! 
They may be biased , but they mostly care about their pocketbooks , like any other entertainment group . 
If this is n't a political move , which is what it reeks of , then why not move the Vice Presidential debate forward and switch the two ? 
Surely Palin does n't have anything better to do . 
Oh wait , she does n't talk to reporters without prepared speeches now , does she . 
There should be no reason why both candidates can not continue their campaign and participate in the debate this Friday . 
If they ca n't juggle all their responsibilities now , how will they do it if\/when they become President ? 
What 's next , you 're going to call us another name for going off on McCrusty and his old age ? 
Look , go have your breakdown , get a few drinks , and come back to reality 'cause I GURANTEE that in two weeks , your boy is going to be down more than 10 points in the polls and will never make a comback . 
Palin would have to strip for a nice magazine to even have a shot of getting back some attention . 
What 's up with McCain 's Chief of Staff ? 
John McCain has announced that America is finally confronting a crisis that he does n't feel he can be absent for . 
Some fun facts about John McCain : Of all Senators , John McCain has been the most absent . 
There have been 643 votes taken in the current Senate session : McCain has missed 412 of them . 
McCain has not voted in the Senate since April 8th . 
Since March , he has missed 109 of the last 110 votes . 
He missed votes on the GI Bill , energy policy , and in 2007 he missed `` all 15 critical environmental votes in the Senate '' -- giving him a 2007 rating of 0 % from the League of Conservation Voters . 
I do n't think that 's fair . 
I think they should have given him an `` incomplete '' , and told him that he had to stay for summer session if he wants to graduate from the Senate . 
So welcome back , John McCain . 
If I were the Senate Democrats , I would now completely rejigger the Senate schedule in order to put things up that America would really , really like to see John McCain cast a vote on . 
It seems the least we could do . 
Haaa !! that 's good , wishful thinking by the GOP who now realize they really blew it by picking an inept crazy woman from one of the most out of touch states in the union . 
Debate baby , Debate !!! Posted by : Ron Sampson | September 24 , 2008 4:36 PM | Report abuse You leftists are so angry it is so exhausting . 
Do n't you notice how relaxed Repubs are about this election ? 
Win or loss it 's not the end of the world . 
Obama should just give up . 
He does n't have a prayer . 
this crap is his making to begin with . 
One of them will be President and will have to deal with this . 
The Obalma people should not leave it alone . 
They should publicize Obama has the leadership qualities and was the one who initiated the whole thing . 
Dont give the public the impression that this old coot is the leader and Obama is follwing his suggestion . 
McCain may also be shaking in his pants about the polls showing Obama 's lead . 
Anyone else see a problem here ? 
Obama called him -LRB- like a fool -RRB- to suggest a joint bipartisan effort on a consensus . 
And McCain claims that he is `` asking senator Obama to join him . '' 
You ca n't trust a Republican , Democrats will never learn . 
Anyway , I never voted for a Bush , so how am I part of the problem ? 
It appears to be a classic anxiety attack prior to having to perform . 
McCain is a good man , good senator , but he has to be able to handle the heat . 
We need someone to lead with a calm voice and clear head to think through America 's problems and then take action . 
Cple of months ago at a Baghdad market he already got a load of flyin carpets to furnish these new homes with . 
Now he just keeps on buying new homes to keep all the carpets in . 
That 's why he need to go to Washington to get some of that money . 
Only last week he said the economy was fundamentally strong ... now he wants to work on so-called solutions . 
We all know the McCain recipe for solutions : Bomb Bomb Bomb Iran !!! I 'm sorry , but this hoax smells worse than French cheese . 
No surprise that he calls for time out . 
Obama should n't accept that . 
If McCain wants to put country first , he can simply remove the lobbyists from this campaign and get people the that look out for the country . 
That 's country first . 
Now that he 's loosing ground with the American people , he wants a break . 
Maybe he needs to go back to school . 
HA ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha McCain is afraid to debate Obama on foreign policy ?????? ha ha ha ha . 
You have got to be kidding . 
McCain will stomp all over Obama ! 
Lets talk after the debate ! 
was saddle back the debate and mcbush won ? 
REPUBLICANS are now the SOCIALIST PARTY ! 
I am tried of the games let the debates begin . 
Obama\/Biden08 Posted by : Joanne , WI | September 24 , 2008 4:35 PM | Report abuse The election is too close to delay the debates . 
We deserve the right to make an informed decision . 
Sounds like `` weapons of mass destruction '' all over again from the Republicans . 
Ca n't Mccain do 2 things at the same time ???? Posted by : richardr | September 24 , 2008 4:34 PM | Report abuse Hey , I just figured out why John McCain suspended the debates ! 
After reading the latest polls , he realized he was going to need a bigger supply of colostomy bags ! 
Maybe he 'll agree to stick to the schedule if Obama allows him to debate while standing in kitty litter ! 
If he ca n't compete by the rules agreed to by both parties , Congress should just declare Obama the president by acclamation . 
This is another desperate move , just like the Palin pick . 
And to equate the financial fiasco with 9\/11 just shows his willingness to put the interests of investors above country ! 
McCain : Investors first , Americans last . 
This is their job folks . 
The debates , presidential campaigning is all secondary and fluff . 
The debates are for the media anyway and for jokers who do n't know the difference between left or right . 
The Republicans in Congress are the ones stalling this bill . 
But to get the handle on this then Obama needs to up the stake on this proposal and have the debate with John McCain - the `` champion of deregulation '' on the Economy . 
Reckless , impulsive and unhelpful . 
Just what congress needs is a grandstanding dog and pony show when they 're trying to actually fix the mess that the Republicans extreme anti-government ideology has got the country into . 
What happened , did McCain just realize that he would have to answer questions in public ? 
January 20th , 2009 . 
The End of an Error ! 
bob | September 24 , 2008 4:33 PM | Report abuse When they do debate , McCain will eat Obama alive . 
Obama is the one who stutters if he does n't have a prepared speech . 
I bet the Demogods do n't want him in an unscripted debate . 
Did Franklin Roosevelt suspend his relection campaign in the middle of World War II ? 
Did either of them run unopposed ? 
Did Nixon suspend his campaign in the midst of Vietnam or other `` issues '' ? 
I 'm sorry but it smacks so much of politics - despite comments to the contrary ... and spare me the `` country first '' argument ... it 's sounds as if it 's McCain first - but what else can we suspect from one who talks one thing and looks to do whatever it takes to win on the other ... shame on John McCain Posted by : big mallard | September 24 , 2008 4:33 PM | Report abuse McCain is pathetic , thats why he wo n't win . 
Obama extends an olive branch to issue a joint statement this morning . 
Instead , McCain this afternoon comes up with this mess about putting his campaign on hold . 
He meets a week later with his economic advisers this morning and the best they could do is to tell him suspend his compaign and go to washington , dc . 
pretty easy to check , Chris . 
The original Maverick was a dude who did n't want to brand -LRB- torture -RRB- his cattle . 
that just does n't make sense . 
There is no reason to suspend discussion of foreign policy . 
Besides , as McCain 's forte , should n't he be eager to shift discussion to something other than the economy . 
Further , it 's underhanded for McCain to campaign all week , skimping on preparation , while his opponent foregoes campaigning to prepare for the debate . 
Obama gave up some of the spotlight while McCain benefited . 
Now he wants to benefit from his opponent 's sacrifice ? 
McCheater ... Posted by : JTS | September 24 , 2008 4:33 PM | Report abuse Mccain -LRB- or his handlers -RRB- are being absolutely ridiculous . 
How much time does the debate take ? 
A 2 hour plane ride in his wife 's private jet , an hour of makeup and prep , an hour of two of debate & he 's done . 
What kind of help can he be in D.C. ? 
Most of his fellow senators ca n't stand him . 
Nothing will get passed this week anyhow - it 's become obvious that we 're dealing with a carefully timed and articulated crisis . 
Common sense shows that it is extremely unlikely for AIG , Lehman , et al to each face insolvency simultaneously . 
No , the GOP election subcommittees charted this , the oil crisis with drilling resolution , & almost certainly have another crisis or two to spring upon us before November 4th . 
To the republicans , the end justifies the means , & keeping a dictator in the white house is the end they covet most . 
Let 's deny them , & while we 're at it , vote for good democrats to clear more of the republican thieves off of the Hill . 
Vision off today because of diabetic reaction . 
Grandson will be blogging for me . 
Mc Cain would have won Friday . 
As for the mess we are in , do your homework , it started with Carter and continued with Clinton . 
But you Obama freaks only think the Messiah has returned . 
There is NO floor to this clown 's stupidity and cynicism . 
I 'm starting to think that Palin might in fact make a better president than him . 
We are doomed to a future of diminishing returns -LRB- pun intended -RRB- based on 48 % of the electorate holding steady on the dial at stupid . 
He even lost out on one day of the RNC by choice , because of the threatening hurricane situation . 
Rumor has it that Biden is stepping down days after this first debate -LRB- to make room for Hilary for VP -RRB- , something about a brain aneurism . 
Maybe that is why Obama does not want to cancel the debate . 
Oh , but that is just a rumor ... Posted by : Just me | September 24 , 2008 4:32 PM | Report abuse Mcsame should suspend his campaign altogether . 
What is he going to offer ? 
Republicans have been in charge for the past 8 yrs . 
They controlled both Congress and the White house for 5 yrs . 
Changing bunkruptcy to make it tougher on consumers to discharge debt ... now they want us to bail out their big fat wall street friends . 
WE `` RE NOT BUYING THIS GRANDSTANDING ... MCSAME IS VOLATILE , UNPREDICTABLE , ANGRY AND A LITTLE OFF . 
He has even stated in the past that is his ambition to be president . 
He desperately wants it , that is obvious . 
He does n't have to suspend his campaign to show leadership on the economic issue . 
He can campaign and show leadership , unless he 's unable to multitask , which he would have to do if he became president . 
It is n't coincidence that he is suggesting this when he is not showing well in the polls , and he knows that , if this crisis continues , he will almost certainly not become the next president . 
Were you even alive when the 2004 election occurred ? 
I 've never seen a veteran so disparaged as Kerry was in that election . 
No he was afraid to face voter questions . 
Announce GW Bush has violated the public trust and McCain would fire him and is presenting articles of impeachment . 
John McCain is getting away with murder if he gets away with this . 
Your part of the big problem Posted by : You are all idiots | September 24 , 2008 4:32 PM | Report abuse Time to multi-task Johnny Mac , go back to Washington , work all day and then still do the debates ... yeah , lets see the tough , lets see the vigor , lets see the ready on day one because I can work with teh best of em . 
The topics and a few hours at night for teh debates , no problem . 
ELts get it done . 
Do any of you really think that he , and Obama for that matter at really needed to go back and handle this with the other 98 . 
Heres a thought , send Biden and Palin back to act as proxies for each to provide input to teh decisions ... hmmmm . 
That would be interesting . 
Obama should not take the bait , the debate goes on - but with a new topic . 
Domestic Finance and how would you solve this problem . 
Nothing like a current crisis to challenge and interview the next chief ! 
Especially you Obama supporters ! '' 
Wow , since WHEN did the Republicans come up with such compassion for the starving and dying ? 
About the same time they became feminists , I suppose ... Let 's face hard facts here , kids . 
McCain 's furious dash to Washington is a POLITICAL move , granted , maybe a smart one , but still reeking of the now - typical , cynical way McCain 's campaign is run . 
His poll numbers are plummeting , this is a stopgap move , less to do with his `` deep concern for Americans '' than it is to bolster his flagging polling numbers . 
It is almost TOO obvious . 
Anyway , go to Washington , John , and make sure and drag your 100-plus financial lobbyists on staff with you . 
Maybe they can help fix this mess and even save the butts of some of their cronies who are stealing $ 2500 from every man , woman and child in this country when-and if this looting of the American financial system is completed . 
Then back to business as usual , I am sure . 
Let 's declare Obama POTUS by acclamation and save BILLIONS that way . 
CHECKMATE !! Posted by : kt | September 24 , 2008 4:31 PM | Report abuse Has this sort of thing ever happened in the past ? 
Let me think ??? Oh yes , just a few weeks ago when the GOP convention was interrupted for a day because of Hurricane Gustav . 
When all the delegates to the Republican convention put down all their elephant hats and little American flags and all got on those 747 's the RNC chartered and they all went down to New Orleans and helped fill sand bags and saved the levee 's from collapsing again . 
Remeber when they did that because after all it 's `` America First . '' 
You got to respect Republicans for always thinking of the little guy . 
Come to think of it , I have n't seen Sarah today . 
Have you read what the non-partisan tax policy center said ? 
Obama will give a larger tax cut to the `` people who work their ass off in this country '' than McCain . 
25 % of McCain 's tax cut goes to those in the top 0.1 % , thats people making over $ 2.8 million per year ... hardly the ones who have to work their asses off . 
HAHAHAHHAHAHAHAHA WHATS WORSE THE BAIL OUT OR BEING CALLED SOCIALIST ? 
HAHAHAHAHAHAHA LIKE BUGS BUNNY SAY 'S ... IF YOU CA N'T BEAT THEM , JOIN THEM ! 
Ca n't chew gum and debate at the same time , Grandpa ? 
What a feckless piece of crap . 
Is `` I 'm suspending my campaign '' politspeak for `` the damn dawg et mah homework ? '' 
I hear Century Village has an opening on Nov 5th - I implore McPalin to check in . 
Seriously its two politicians who will say and do anything to get elected its really not the end of the world . 
I know all the Obama supporters will flame me for what I have said . 
But in all honesty will one man make a difference to your life by becoming the President ? 
The rich will always be rich and there is not much more to it than that . 
He cant force laws to be passed or make laws etc. . 
I just do n't get the need for all of the venom . 
Say `` hi '' to Tony Rezko for me -LRB- and your son , too -RRB- ! 
Everything is not 9\/11 . 
Further , are you kidding with this ? 
You make this grand decision on WEDNESDAY AFTERNOON ? 
Not enough on the schedule for the rest of the week ? 
If anyone is dumb enough to buy this ... Posted by : squintz | September 24 , 2008 4:30 PM | Report abuse What a waste of time . 
Is the Congress not intelligent enough to debate this issue without the presence of either McCain or Obama ? 
Neither of them may even be needed for the a vote on the legislation unless it 's close . 
Of course , they would have to be on the same side or they cancel each other 's vote out anyway . 
Does no one think about the poor little town in Mississippi that was supposed to host the debate . 
How many people turned their lives upside down to help with this event ? 
And how much money was spent for nothing ? 
Truly either McCain is afraid of what he might be asked , or he wants to politicize a national crisis while stating just the opposite . 
There is no reason why either of these candidates should be sticking their noses in this matter . 
Their presence can only make it harder for others to compromise , and make any final outcome more suspicious in the eyes of the public . 
Surely the thousands of people connected with the House , Senate , White House and Bush administration can sort this out by themselves . 
Then the candidates can weigh in - from a respectful distance . 
1 -RRB- Calling your opponent privately , to try to agree to a joint statement - meaning both candidates speak with the same message at the same time . 
2 -RRB- Holding a presser to immediately challenge your opponent to follow-your lead or show that you do not put country first ? 
Hint : One tries to gain political advantage , whitle the other does not . 
If you are running for President of the United States of America you have some very pubic questions you have to answer . 
John McCain is a copout looking for a gimmic that is going to make him President . 
It 's not going to work ! 
There are always several sides to the story . 
There is n't anything he can do because his felon buddy tony rezco is locked up and ca n't bail him out ! '' 
yeah , ok buddy . 
Go crack another beer then take a snooze wil you ? 
But it is n't going to get you elected . 
OBAMA : All you have to do is assure the country that your staff in DC and your colleagues are going to keep you up to date on the goings on in DC and will make sure that the country does not get fleeced again by the Republicans . 
KEEP CAMAIGNING and drive it home that McCain and the GOP are the REASON for this crisis . 
The GOP dereg of the financial industry is the PRIMARY cause of all of this . 
HAMMER it home that the policies of Bush\/McCain and the Republicans have created this mess . 
THEN SHOW UP FOR THE DEBATE and hammer it some more . 
This is a prime opportunity , not to politicize , but to inform and accurately place blame where it belongs . 
And that four more years of this kind of leadership will leave us in the dustbin of history . 
Did you see Saddleback ? 
Obama looked like a fool compared to McCain , even MSNBC Obama sucked . 
What 's that sound ? 
That 's the sound of inevitability , Mr. McCain . 
He should just send Sarah . 
LOL !! Posted by : Skeptic | September 24 , 2008 4:30 PM | Report abuse Necessary and great idea , regardless of the motivation . 
The economy is in a crises and I 'd rather see my elected officials and presidential candidates working on the issue instead of talking about what they would do if elected ... it will be too late in January 09 to steer this crises . 
Leadership is needed now . 
This is a smart move for McCain and I respect his decision . 
And his running mate has decided we may be headed for a depression . 
Unfortunately , the problem is significantly larger and more complex than the Senator stated last week . 
In that period of time he has proven to be less knowledgeable about economics and finance than his original comment seemed to demonstrate . 
And Gov Palin 's answer to the problem is to reform Wall St , whatever that means . 
As so many others have pointed out , an inability to multi task , combined with a need to invoke fear in the American public while demonstrating a total lack of credibility , and a dearth of any expertise on the subject make me feel warm and fuzzy . 
If McCain wants to be a good American , he should let the democratic process roll on , not try to suspend it for his own political gain . 
Senator , please , stop before all the respect and honor you earned is squandered and you have not a shred of dignity left Posted by : ml | September 24 , 2008 4:29 PM | Report abuse This is a stunt . 
John `` Country First '' McCain 's campaign continues -- his TV ads still flood the airwaves after this phony announcement , and Gov. Palin will continue to campaign . 
If Sen Obama took the bait on this , his running mate Joe Biden , would be pressured to follow since they are BOTH Senators . 
This puts the Obama ticket at a disadvantage . 
That 's the idea . 
As serious as the economic crisis is , the real threat is the rumored `` October Surprise '' from the Bush administration to propose suspension of our national elections , which Secretary Paulson already hinted at by saying this crises was more important . 
Our elections were not suspended for the Civil War , or either World Wars . 
THAT MUST NOT BE ALLOWED TO HAPPEN . 
He 's going to visit the problem ? 
Rob L , McCain went `` MAD '' about eight years ago when Rove trashed his kid as `` ILLEGITIMATE BLACK '' and the Coward from Arizona just took it !!! Posted by : Harried | September 24 , 2008 4:29 PM | Report abuse Fools ! 
Do n't you know how many houses I have -LRB- I sure do n't -RRB- ? 
If there is a housing crisis , I have more at stake than any candidate ! 
I must be on Wall Street ! 
My lobbyist advisers will be too busy ensuring their Wall Street clients keep their salaries . 
You ca n't possibly expect them to waste time on a foreign policy debate ! 
This is bullsquat wrapped in a flag . 
His campaign is tanking , he 's having another bad week . 
Cancel the debates , too . 
And let 's do the same for the VP while we 're at it . 
Now he wants to run and hide . 
Cut and Run John , Cut and Run ! 
McBush would not for a second suggest this if he was the one leading in the polls right now . 
A great opportunity for Obama though to put the leadership question to rest . 
I hope he capitalizes on it . 
It 's a sad day for republicans . 
Do n't give the money back , just stop paying these people for this stuff . 
It is the same on every political blog and the only way THE FIX can actually be fixed is if Chris requires an identity to a poster . 
Until then this is ... well ... cynical anonymous pab . 
Obama got his photo-op with the people who suffered on the day that `` the chickens came home to roost . '' 
Now , we 're faced with a crisis of a different kind . 
Of course , both campaigns should be suspended , and both these guys should go to Capitol Hill . 
They 're still both US Senators . 
SMELLS LIKE ROVE IN THE MORNING !! USING FEAR , SPINNING THE FACTS , INTIMIDATION ! 
McCain wants to look so Presidential , and stall for time ! 
He ACTUALLY looks terrible , Obama is ahead , Palin is losing her `` sparkle , '' Rove is scrambling for every possible opportunity to give his guy a boost ! 
I must admit , he EARNS his MONEY ! 
AMERICANS ARE N'T FOOLED BY HIM ANYMORE , BUT HE DOES TRY ! 
Come on Republicans , if you ca n't give us a decent steak , please do n't just give us the sizzle , because we know it is only fizzle ! 
They have at least 10 commercials running on TV . 
I have gotten this far without ever doing any work in the Senate . 
no one will be surprised when they call for votes and instead of my usual PRESENT I am absent . 
this will be my new method . 
do n't even show up in the first place . 
He can solve the crisis ! 
and it will forget everything else to come in the next four years , if 2008 is a footnote , of a crisis that destroyed the american economy . 
which is our true strength . 
Clearly , the right move is going to Washington to hop into the backroom dealing rather than discussing it in front of the American people . 
Chicken John wo n't debate . 
It 's that simple . 
Obama trusts his fellow Senators , McCain has a weak bench and does n't trust his . 
Is n't that a bit of a problem ? 
This debate should not be such a burden to someone who plans on running the most powerful country in the world . 
Headline should read , `` McCain Forfeits run for Presidency '' McCain just lost the election with this move . 
As his process seems to be proceding at warp speed , his return will only INTERFERE with the deliberations of the expert , experienced and honest men-of both parties -- who are laboring to resolve this very difficult situation . 
If heeally wants to help with bi-partinsanship , he might reject Newt Gingrich 's advise that he completely POLITICIZE the process . 
Let 's have the economic discussion between the two candidates put before the American people . 
Frankly , I do n't think this puts Obama in a bad spot at all . 
Will McCain actually lead the senate in coming up with a resolution to this ? 
Given his thin economic resume -- I think not . 
This will be seen as a HUGE political move when McCain was sinking in the polls -- not as putting `` Country First . '' 
Fixing this bailout may take weeks -- what then , will McCain suspend his campaign until November ? 
Not noble , not honorable . 
Perhaps it 's a ploy . 
But if its not ... Posted by : Jeff | September 24 , 2008 4:27 PM | Report abuse Was n't it McCain just in June who asked Obama for more debates and town hall meetings ? 
So what , now that Obama called his bluff he 's running scared using the excuse of being `` needed '' back in Washington ? 
Right whatever ... he 's just going to sit there with a glazed eyes as Paulson and Bernanke talk shop not knowing junk about what the problem -LRB- or solution -RRB- is . 
A recent study done just came out and showed the psychology of what makes people support certain political parties and positions . 
Guess what the results were : Conservatives and Republicans tend to be BIOLOGICALLY THREE TIMES more FEARFUL of everything than liberals and Democrats . 
Maybe that is why you neo-cons make ridiculous arguments : you are reacting to your FEAR rather than your COMMON SENSE . 
Maybe McCain had a stroke . 
He is not ready for the debate and all his people have been saying it . 
He will not even practice for it . 
Now he see what he thinks may be a way of getting out of it . 
I 'm sure he 'll find running for President of Shady Groves to be a bit less taxing . 
They can both be there -- though it certainly is not necessary -- to weigh in on the details of the bailout . 
Take an hour and go debate . 
If McCain ca n't handle a crunch between negotiations in Congress and a debate , perhaps he does n't have the kind of multi-tasking skills the next president needs . 
There is n't anything he can do because his felon buddy tony rezco is locked up and ca n't bail him out ! 
Obama ought to agree to suspend ads which mention McCain or the Republicans and spend the time running `` personal story '' ads about himself . 
That way he is neither sniping during a crisis , nor handicapping the race in McCain 's favor . 
Hopefully the Democrats will understand that McCain 's need to be the peace broker on this issue effectively gives all the cards to them . 
Go for the long odds : exec pay caps , profit equity , increased regulation ... heck , throw in a week in the pillory for departing CEOs so we can all actually throw rotten fruit at them . 
That way the Democrats will be able to `` give up '' all sorts of things they do n't really want and get a final bill that has everything they want , but the Republicans can say is `` better than it was '' - just as they pulled on us for all those years . 
The judicial filibuster bill was a total capitulation by the Democrats masked as a McCain-brokered `` compromise '' , it 's time we returned the favor . 
The American people will thank us for it . 
What would suspending the debate solve in the ECONOMY CRISIS . 
Graham and all the REPUBLICANS are just plain ignorant to think us DEMOCRATS believe what he `` GRAHAM '' is trying to convince us of . 
Its called `` STONE WALLING '' AND `` MCBUSH NO SUBSTANCE '' `` DID I SAY STONE WALLING ? '' 
BS for good ... Posted by : edsbowlingshoe | September 24 , 2008 4:26 PM | Report abuse I ca n't walk and chew gum at the same time Posted by : McPussy | September 24 , 2008 4:26 PM | Report abuse either way , on November 4th , there 's going to be an election . 
mccain ca n't hide or change that fact . 
every day his ads do n't run and everyday he 's hunkered down in DC is another day he 's not out there wooing supporters -LRB- those who remain -RRB- . 
i find it interesting that this only became important after palin finished her NY meetings . 
why was n't this so important yesteray or the day before ? 
politics , that 's why . 
This smacks of political opportunism and showboating in all the wrong ways . 
If he was serious about this , he would have suspended his campaign days ago to make sure tomorrow 's deadline is met . 
McCain has pulled this straight out of the Bush playbook for starting the war in Iraq , and passing the Patriot Act before that . 
This is disgusting , vile , naked political ambition contrary to patriotic ideals . 
Bush 's men , and McCain 's actions today are nothing short of treason . 
A week ago there was no economic crisis according to them . 
Now there is , and it needs to be handled their way , right now , or America is doomed . 
That is tripe , and we Americans know it . 
Bush and McCain = Traitors to America . 
The debate is the opportunity for the American people to see these guys outside of their political adds . 
They can take a few hours out of one day of the week to handle that ; even relocating the debate to DC . 
McCain is dodging the debate , and exacerbating the crisis that he refused to acknowledge as recently as this week . 
He is a complete fraud . 
Millions of voters were hurt by this over the last year as their mortgages crushed them , and their jobs were shipped overseas . 
McCain clearly only cares now because Cindy 's vast fortune , and the fortunes of his top aids\/lobbyists took a hit this week . 
Also , I for one am not buying the emergency blah , blah , blah ... this is just another CYNICAL attempt -LRB- eg . 
Gov. Palin -RRB- to steal the limelight away from the upswing for Obama . 
The polls are down for him so what does he do ? 
He calls a timeout to try and STEAL Obama 's momentum . 
Why did he not think of doing this last week when the markets were in free fall ? 
If we vote this bunch in , we ARE THE BIGGEST LOSERS ON THIS PLANET ... Oh wait , we already are with them having had the WH for the last 8 years . 
I sincerely hope we are not the stupid enough to fall for these scare tactics and naked politicization of such an important issue . 
What about the next debate ? 
It was on foreign policy of which Obama has to be locked up for days in a plosh hotel getting brieded on what to say , while the jerk Biden campaigns and keeps putting his foot in his mouth . 
I do n't agree with pushing back the debates so close to the election . 
As a President you need to multi-task . 
Sounds like McCain ca n't do that then I ca n't do McCain . 
Walk out on us voters who want this debate along with the others that are too come is unfair and is not putting country first ! 
This is INSANE this trick of MCCAIN 'S Posted by : Nyte | September 24 , 2008 4:25 PM | Report abuse And Obama 's answer is to tax the people who work thier a $ $ of in this country . 
He has n't given one viable solution to this problem . 
There needs to be an overhaul in this country . 
I for one am tired of helping people who ca n't help themselves or wo n't because they know someone else will Posted by : Your all idiots | September 24 , 2008 4:25 PM | Report abuse Remember this was the great maverick who was at the heart of the Savings & Loan scandal of the eighties . 
He and the other Keating Five took bribes to help the no longer existing Savings and Loan institutions . 
His son resigned from the board of one of these failing banks when he saw the `` ship '' was sinking . 
He fought , successfully , any regulation of his Wall Street buddies for 26 years . 
And now he wants to dodge a public debate and run back to Washington and hide in the crowd . 
And this is the guy who wants to be president . 
And just in case the 73 year old man , who had three bouts with cancer , should die in office he picks Sarah Palin as the best available Republican to replace him . 
He knows he is trailing in the polls . 
He knows he wo n't do well in the debate . 
Hey , when I was n't prepared for an exam in school I would pretend to get sick . 
Nobody should let him off the hook . 
This is n't about the economy . 
It 's all about politics - dirty politics - McCain 's style . 
I do n't recall their wishing to give the other fellow a break when Bill Clinton was on the ropes because of a stain on a dress . 
Or when they had the votes in Congress to ram anything they wanted down the throats of Americans . 
John McCain is a chicken-livered coward who seeks to buy time by calling for bipartisanship now . 
McCain knows he will lose a debate with Barack Obama , as he knows he is losing the election . 
This is an ideal time for Americans to see McCain and Obama debate the causes of the present crisis under fire and in the heat of the moment . 
McCain should not be permitted to crawl away from Friday 's scheduled debate . 
He obviously does n't have the stomach for a real debate . 
This is such a disgustingly McCainish political ploy that that it should be greeted by voters with nothing less than complete derision and contempt . 
Are we to believe that someone who did n't even see a problem with the economy a week ago has something constructive to add to the congressional dialogue ? 
Give me a break . 
This stunt is beyond PATHETIC ! 
No he was afraid to face voter questions . 
Besides , people have been saying that Palin and Obama have the exact amount of experience , this will allow us to see for ourselves . 
Or maybe grandpa just needs a nap for a few days . 
Generalizations like this is why our country is so divided . 
Is n't one of the roles of the vice-president to fill in for the Commander in Chief ? 
Let 's see how prepared Palin is to step in when the country needs her ! 
The Senators are stressed and require some of her patented oral ` relief ' . 
Word is that Sarah can take most men to the root . 
Whether heading back to Washington is a good idea or not -LRB- and to me it 's questionable what McCain 's presence on the hill would actually do -RRB- to try and say this is n't a blatant attempt to score some political points is overlooking the obvious . 
This smacks of political opportunism and showboating in all the wrong ways . 
If he was serious about this , he would have suspended his campaign days ago to make sure tomorrow 's deadline is met . 
McCain has pulled this straight out of the Bush playbook for starting the war in Iraq , and passing the Patriot Act before that . 
This is disgusting , vile , naked political ambition contrary to patriotic ideals . 
Bush 's men , and McCain 's actions today are nothing short of treason . 
A week ago there was no economic crisis according to them . 
Now there is , and it needs to be handled their way , right now , or America is doomed . 
That is tripe , and we Americans know it . 
Bush and McCain = Traitors to America . 
The debate is the opportunity for the American people to see these guys outside of their political adds . 
They can take a few hours out of one day of the week to handle that ; even relocating the debate to DC . 
McCain is dodging the debate , and exacerbating the crisis that he refused to acknowledge as recently as this week . 
He is a complete fraud . 
Millions of voters were hurt by this over the last year as their mortgages crushed them , and their jobs were shipped overseas . 
McCain clearly only cares now because Cindy 's vast fortune , and the fortunes of his top aids\/lobbyists took a hit this week . 
McCain is , as Palin would put it a yellow bellied coward . 
He has no honor for the electoral process . 
If he wants to be above it all , he should cancel his campaign altogether and become an elder statesman and remain a Senator . 
Generalizations like this is why this country is so divided . 
He 's going to visit the problem ? 
There are people starving and dying in this country and all you can think of is putting other human beings down . 
Especially you Obama supporters ! 
You are ruthless and have no feelings and yet you talk about high moral ground - do n't you have any shame talking like this and saying nasty things on this blog and then claiming to support a `` non-partisan , above politics candidate '' ? 
Why should I believe you after reading your hateful comments ? 
After reading all these hateful comments from either side , all I feel is miserable and sad for this country . 
What hope is there when everybody is so uncivilized ? 
He has n't looked good on this issue and with the revelations about his campaign staff filling up their piggy banks with lobbyists money it is only going to get worse . 
McCain is pulling a King 's X move as they do in chess . 
Kinda like the Hack-A-shack attack . 
Foul them on every inbound pass . 
Pick your sports cliche . 
He needs to break the downward spiral . 
Why would he want to debate Obama this week ??? And as one writer said , is the Senate waiting for either of these two to explain to them what to do ? 
They all know McCain is n't their go to guy for economic solutions . 
Unless McCain is going to sit on the Senate floor with 20 of his advisors crowded around him whispering into his ear . 
The McCain Fast Talk Express was put together in a hurry with bailing wire , chewing gum and out of date Duct Tape and hijacked by unscrupulous party hatchet men . 
Low life 's at best . 
The machine is beginning to break up on re-entry to the Earth 's reality zone . 
Where is Palin now Sen. McSurge ? 
Is she through being schooled in her 16 hour crash course in `` Resovling World Conflicts '' ? 
Is she being graded or was it a pass , no-pass class ? 
Steady as she goes Barry . 
Keep your eye on the prize . 
All ahead at flank speed . 
It wo n't be long now the monkey said after the train ran over it 's til . 
Sad that the alternative ca n't find his way out of a paper sack . 
There will be others running for president not just these two , but hey we already know you people ca n't think outside the box that 's why the majority of you who are bashing the GOP voted Bush in for his second term Posted by : your all idiots | September 24 , 2008 4:22 PM | Report abuse I guess John McCain will be bringing his trusty time machine to the white house just in case there 's an emergency and needs to stop time ... boy I feel safer already Posted by : erik | September 24 , 2008 4:22 PM | Report abuse Our country has been beset with events of critical importance . 
Has a presidential candidate ever suspended a debate to address them ? 
He ca n't weigh in on the issue and debate as well ? 
I would n't cal a maverick a coward but this guy is n't a maverick . 
Trouble is , the majority WILL be fooled . 
McCain is hoping to avoid them , because it will lay bare his many shortcomings and his lack of qualification to be president . 
He wants people to vote based on his `` character '' demonstrated as a POW 30 years ago . 
He does n't want them to see his REAL character , better exemplified by his membership in the Keating 5 , and his 26 year history of championing the corporations and the wealthy over regular working people and the poor . 
The debates will show McCain 's utter lack of understanding of the nuances of compicated issues . 
No wonder he is trying to avoid the debates . 
I wonder what excuse they 'll cook up for why Sarah ca n't debate Biden . 
Hard to convince myself that it 's not a political gimmick . 
A politician who would rather lose an election than lose a war ? 
FOR THE FIRST TIME , I 'M PROUD TO BE AN AMERICAN ... hehe Posted by : TK | September 24 , 2008 4:21 PM | Report abuse Dubya 's going to address the nation tonight . 
I wonder if he 'll use the `` mushroom cloud , '' again to help scare us into the bailout . 
Bush is trying to shove a socialist proposal down the throats of congress , and the democrats are the evil socialists ?! Posted by : CaliforniaMonkey | September 24 , 2008 4:21 PM | Report abuse Mc Cain is scared to death to debate Obama . 
He also wants all the negative focus on his campaign to go away . 
The economic crisis is a great excuse ! 
but as President he will have to handle MANY things at once . 
Thanks but I would not trust a president who can not deal with several things at once ! . 
The Republican ploys again at play ! 
Frankly I am sick of it !!!!! Face it Mc Cain you are not a leader . 
And do n't you -LRB- Republicans -RRB- ever forget it ! 
What a leader McCain will make ! 
So , this was n't McCain 's idea . 
We should have known right ? 
After all its Schmidt and Rove who gave us the two Bush Terms running McCain 's campaign . 
This supplies an easy opening for Obama since if there ever was a time and a need for a debate about the future , it is now . 
Obama should propose that the topic for the debate be switched to the economy and that the debate go forward . 
There needs to be a debate about where we go from here . 
Ducking such a debate would be political suicide . 
WILL HE BE AN `` FDR '' OR A `` DUKASIS '' ? 
Obama 's got the opportunity to say , in some many words , that American CAN `` walk and chew gum at the same time . '' 
There 's no reason we ca n't roll up our sleeves and solve the market mess -- without resorting to corporate socialism -- and hold a 90-minute presidential debate at the same time . 
Obama can look strong , presidential , to McCain 's Chicken Little ... But Obama 's a classic vacillator , so I do n't hold out much hope . 
Barack , show us you 've got a pair ... Posted by : Hillraiser | September 24 , 2008 4:20 PM | Report abuse `` mccain needs to just quit the bs political crap that we can see right through . 
I 'm sorry , and there 's no democrat who would really argue , but McCain has a HISTORY of working with the other party to get things done . 
Both men say they want to get things done , including being bipartisan in order to achieve a goal . 
But only 1 man has a clear history of it . 
That 's John McCain . 
If anyone disagrees , please show how Obama has a longer record of working with non-democrats in order to achieve a goal , pass legislation etc. . 
I 've been reading up on both men for about two years . 
If you can prove me wrong , I 'll be quite surprised . 
So the day that news breaks that McCain 's campaign manager was taking money from Freddie Mac until the bailout last month which they tried to cover-up and McCain is tanking in the polls - he wants to suspend his campaign , postpone the debate so that he -LRB- the guy who knows nothing about the Economy -RRB- can go to Washington and do what ? 
Why ca n't they have the debate ? 
McCain is trying to change the subject and is playing politics with this crisis . 
I dont ' believe Paulson & Bush anyway - they always lie and exaggerate . 
Last month Paulson said the Economy was fine and nothing wrong with Capital Markets and we should listen to him ? 
Give me a break ! 
They do n't need 700 billion today and they sure as hell do n't need it without any oversight . 
So do n't spin as usual , what McCain lacks in Youth and charisma he more than makes up in guts and patriotism . 
They were only honest once in their lives when they said they 'd only allow McCain one term if he ever made it into the raped and pillaged White House . . 
by undermining any and all policies McCain would hope to push through . 
Such patriots , no ? 
Obama is issuing a very powerful right now saying a president needs to be able to multitask and all that has changed in the last day is the polls . 
I am glad Obama is pointing to sh & t calling it that . 
Presidents have to be able to deal with multiple crises simultaneously . 
I see no reason why they ca n't participate in the bailout discussion\/vote and still campaign and have debates . 
Ordinary Americans have to multi-task every day . 
Why ca n't presidential candidates do the same ? 
It 's probably more like Obama by 3 . 
We expect a president to be able to handle these kind of situations . 
Can a president also suspend his presidency to deal with an emergency ? 
If anything , it makes McCain look like he cracks under pressure and is decidedly unpresidential Posted by : CB | September 24 , 2008 4:00 PM CB , That Senator McCain would like to return to Washington to act in his capacity as Senator -- I have no problem with that . 
However , for Senator McCain to casually chuck the upcoming debate when I am really trying to get an issues related conversation going between who would be our President ? 
It smacks of political manuvering - not what is the best interest of the country . 
CB ... we have a President sitting in office . 
It 's HIS job to take on this crisis . 
Senator McCain 's job is to convince us why he is the better choice . 
No better way to do this but to go candidate vs. candidate on the issues . 
We had enough leaders running when the storms come out . 
Its a time for leaders to step forward and solve the problem . 
That is what John McCain is doing , and what Barack Oboma is trying to do also . 
Watching the senate hearing yesterday and try to figure out who is to blame , its everyone . 
Get over the blame game and solve the problem , your running out the clock . 
And here we are quibbling about a debate , poll numbers , wake up america , this blog is designed and run by liberals for the benefit of your self gratification Posted by : EmilyP | September 24 , 2008 4:19 PM | Report abuse The `` straight talk express '' seems to be NO talk , no Palin , no debate , no guts . 
This is EXACTLY the time for a debate , to see how these men perform under pressure . 
Obama should not give McCain any cover on this debate issue . 
the War on Terror -RRB- to give this 100 % of his attention . 
Is not the electoral process the foundation of America ? 
Is he above his duty as a candidate ? 
Does he think he is Mussolini coming to power to save Italy ? 
The man is a selfish coward . 
It only means he 's giving the presence of suspending his campaign . 
Just like all Republicans he says one thing and does another . 
He has n't even bothered to take questions from reporters in over 41 days , so what 's does it matter ? 
Also with Palin being so carefully kept at arm s length from the media as well , whose going to miss them or even notice they are MIA ? 
A temporary , albeit scary financial situation that neither man has much control over beyond their vote -LRB- Which does n't require a campaign suspension to cast -RRB- or the choosing of our next president ? 
One affects a year or two and the other determines our entire future ! 
McCain has his priorities all wrong ! 
Presidential candidates can have more effect on this issue , and all the others , by continuing to campaign and prepare for the debate ! 
That is where presidential nominees have the most leverage to make things happen , not sitting on their behinds listening to others talk ! 
By being distracted and letting go of the most effective forum he has , McCain shows he is not a good leader and is just manuevering to try and convince the non thinking citizens that this is somehow `` leadership ! '' 
I say they should stay on the trail and break off just long enough to vote if it looks like it will be close ! 
Also when did the phones break ? 
I hope nobody thinks that a properly timed phone call to other senators would not steer things in the right direction when the call is placed by the potential next president . 
McCain once again shows his craven methods and love of theater as well as his lack of wisdom . 
Just two weeks ago McCain said the US economy was fundamentally strong !!!! What good is he in Congress debating this Bill ? 
Weve got Paulson and Bernanke who already know more about the Financial Markets then anyone in Congress . 
Congress is just listening to these two guys who are the ones calling the shots . 
Remember Paulson was the ex CEO of Goldman Sachs . 
McCain is an ex military that knows nothing about the economy . 
Note to McCain : Dont try to politicise the financial Crisis and let Paulson and Bernarke work and stay with your campaign . 
Whose gonna run your campaign now , Palin ? 
Guess he could n't stand the heat of all the criticisms regarding his connections to Fannie and Freddie , and he certainly is not ready to show in the debates how his abilities are slipping . 
While you are wearing your sellout red shirts backing McCain\/Palin ask yourselves why he does n't have the fortitude to stand up to Obama on Friday night ? 
It 's because he does n't understand the economy stupid . 
He and the rest of the Republicans would destroy your livelihood and have you working for nothing like Rural Metro . 
Really the man 's ego is bigger than the universe ! 
The old-timer knows his days are numbered and will use any crisis to get out of a mano-y-mano policy battle with Obama . 
This is n't clever , its called stalling !!!!!!!!!!!! Posted by : indytucker | September 24 , 2008 4:17 PM | Report abuse Like he could rescue the financial market ... yeah right ! 
John McSame will do anything to get out of a debate . 
They are trying so disparately to keep Palin hidden so she ca n't open her ignorant mouth and John too . 
LOSERS !!! Posted by : Willard | September 24 , 2008 4:17 PM | Report abuse Now McLame says he wants to suspend the campaign and delay the debates , and wants Obama to join him to address the economic crisis . 
Options - 1 -RRB- Obama agrees and it looks like McCain is the leader 2 -RRB- Obama does not agree and it makes McCain look like he puts the country ahead of the election -LRB- the Maverick ! -RRB- 
This is just another election ploy , we do n't need him . 
I say he says no thanks , we do not need to work with Bush and the party responsible for this disaster . 
I have my own plan to undo the damage the Republican Party did to America . 
John McCain also did the same thing with the GOP convention and switched the focus on fund raising for the familes affected by the hurricanes . 
The debates can be postponed until next week , the bail out plan -LRB- whatever it turns out to be -RRB- needs to be handled now . 
What is more important , seeing two candidates debate this Friday or losing the value of your 401K and stocks , stop being reactionary and think about what is really important . 
McCain is becoming more and more insulting as this campaign moves on . 
Let the debate commence . 
you can do both ... he is behind 9 points in the polls as of today ! 
Multitask that 's what we all do ? 
Sorry , Mac ... you ca n't start a fight and then ask the ref for a break in the middle of the 10th round just because you 're getting your butt kicked ! 
Do n't fall for this political BS ! 
| September 24 , 2008 4:16 PM | Report abuse Mercy !! So unprecedented ? 
Does n't know his lines for Friday ? 
Does n't have his sincerity in place ? 
What 's he going to do with Palin while he goes back to work ? 
Troopergate answers are due October 10 . 
He better debate and keep rolling . 
Unless the Republicans are planning to cancel the election . 
Would n't put it past them . 
Are we protected from them ? 
However , McCain has run such an insincere campaign thus far that I can not help but to believe this to be yet another bit of gamesmanship on his part . 
I really do hope that both men are putting our country -- as opposed to their political careers -- first . 
But somehow I doubt that , especially on John McCain 's part . 
It works perfectly for John McCain to suspend his campaign for a few days , especially since he has made so many tactical blunders in the past week or so . 
McCain wants to suspend his campaign until , say , Sunday or Monday , so it gives him an opportunity to step back from all the misstatements , blunders and lack of judgment he has exhibited recently . 
Then , when McCain steps back into campaigning mode , he can get a fresh start and take up the economic issue from a new vantage point . 
At least , that 's what McCain is hoping for . 
So what I say is , why should Obama let McCain have a do-over at this point ? 
Just because McCain takes a few days off , does n't mean that McCain cares any more about this country or the financial crisis facing us than does Obama . 
Obama should stay on the trail and hammer away at John McCain for all the mistakes he has made this past week . 
Obama is n't going to get any credit for following McCain 's lead , so Obama should stick to his game plan . 
I feel that this election is far too important for people to play games . 
We need a real change in government in this country . 
And while I do n't think that Obama is offering radical change , I do believe that he offers something far better than what we have had these last 8 years . 
I do not feel that we are going to get any appreciative change if McCain is elected . 
Make sure you remind us of 9\/11 . 
Will someone please throw a bucket of water on McCain ? 
Make this guy ... the latest GOP\/National Nightmare ... just melt away Posted by : TruthWalksOnWater | September 24 , 2008 4:16 PM | Report abuse This is for Emily , What is McCains plan ? 
and if the republicans plan is so good why are we in this condition . 
Let me guess it is the dem fault Posted by : Kyle | September 24 , 2008 4:16 PM | Report abuse mccain is lame and so is his campaign . 
obama needs to win the election Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 4:16 PM | Report abuse AND THE BAND PLAYED ON ... I leave it to you Posted by : We The People | September 24 , 2008 4:16 PM | Report abuse WHAT A JOKE , MCCAIN HAS N'T VOTED IN CONGRESS SINCE APRIL ... THIS IS PURE POLITICS FROM McCAIN !!! Posted by : WVUWEIRTON | September 24 , 2008 4:16 PM | Report abuse `` Sarah Palin is needed in Washington . 
The Senators are stressed and require some of her patented oral ` relief ' . 
Word is that Sarah can take most men to the root . 
McCain did that because he holds that vote . 
Having lost significant ground to Obama on the issue of the economy , and facing a potentially defining and withering debate on Friday where he would be confronted on his statements on the economy that have led to this sharp decline , McCain has attempted to change the rules of the game , to erase many past errors through a putatively `` unpolitical '' move -- something we have seen before . 
A simple question : Under the same economic conditions , if McCain had been leading , does anyone believe that McCain would have `` suspended '' his campaign ? 
This is the ultimate in cynicism -- using the current conditions in order to attempt to blunt a sharp decline and try to control the media dialogue , through a political act designed to avoid a potential political debacle . 
He is continuing his campaign -- which was leading to loss in all directions -- by `` suspending '' it . 
It is an attempt to silence media criticism and questions -- and to prevent a debate on these issues that for him is sharply unfavorable . 
McCain is attempting to avoid the debate in the face of this decline , through the type of evasion and lack of press access and communication that has characterized his campaign . 
Do n't be cowed . 
Hank Paulson , Barney Frank , Chuck Schumer and serious legislators are handling this crisis . 
It too shall pass . 
Rumor has it that the votes are already there . 
What McCain is doing is trying to take credit for being instrumental in getting something passed which he has no meaningful comprehension of . 
The Maverick is a Fraud . 
McCain is a morally and intellectually bankrupt man who has sold his soul to the NEOCONSERVATIVES who see their power slipping away . 
While McCain is trying to seize the spotlight , THE REPUBLICAN MACHINE all across America is working to disenfranchise legally registered voters in many states . 
There is a quiet SECOND AMERICAN REVOLUTION going on , all Americans must join the fight to discredit and destroy the corruption of the NEOCONSERVATIVE AGENDA . 
Well his Presient initiated the Administrative Policy and Deregulated everything so this kind of situation could occur . 
Now he wants to act as if he has the answer to the problem . 
well , Where was he several years ago when all the Coffee was brewing in the first place . 
You mean to tell me John McCain had no idea that this was going on . 
That he was unaware that American Economic Policy was on the skids ? 
Give me a break . 
What he does not want to do is answer the American people as to how such a Senior Official whos been in Washington all these years had no clue that we were in a mess . 
Let the debates go on ... Let the campaign go on as well . 
Although it has been said that my running mate is a just as qualified as Hilary Clinton to be President if not a little less qualified . 
Perhaps I should retract that last statement . 
McCain is either ; Stupid , senile or contemptuous . 
But having him anywhere near economic policy is like asking a crack addict to be a dealer . 
It does n't work . 
These three were a lending test , a service test and an investment test . 
Hallmarks to making good loans . 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Financial Services Modernization Act , Pub . 
L. No. 106-102 , 113 Stat . 
1338 -LRB- November 12 , 1999 -RRB- , repealed part of the Glass-Steagall Act , opening up competition among banks , securities companies and insurance companies . 
It allowed the opening of lending to move banks from organizations to receive deposits and make loans to multi-functioning organizations . 
It is these corporations who worked with mortgage origination companies to write loans to people without proper collateral or even credit worthy . 
These same institutions then sold the loans as paper to investors . 
The real problem is the loosening of regulations on commercial banks , investment companies and insurance services . 
It was this law , not the Community Reinvestment Act , which is the culprit behind the current investment problem . 
Unlike Mc Cain , Mr. Obama can handle many problems at once . 
Obama has youth , stamina , smarts , and a calm disposition . 
I 'm glad he 's ahead ! 
Obama , without fanfare , tries to call McCain this morning , reach across the partisan divide , and agree on a set of joint principles to address the crisis . 
With work on that going on behind the scenes we then get the McCain approach . 
Instead of workout out something substantive and useful beyond the glare of politics , McCain opts for the political limelight and announces that he ll suspend his distressed campaign and head back to Washington to take charge . 
Well , this one-time McCain supporter isn t fooled not after the summer of low-road politicking we ve seen from McCain . 
This is an obvious tactical stunt to put Obama in a bad light . 
If McCain had genuinely wanted to put the country first he might have continued working with the Obama campaign s unannounced effort to agree on some joint principles . 
Instead , this turns the debates in D.C. about the bailout into a big political circus . 
Yeah , that s really helpful . 
Why not just work on the crisis ? 
Proud WASP -LRB- Women Against Sarah Palin -RRB- Posted by : Lucy | September 24 , 2008 4:15 PM | Report abuse First McCain wo n't speak to the press , now he wo n't even speak directly to the people . 
Shame on him for pulling such a blatantly political stunt ! 
Good way to steal the other team 's momentum . 
McCain will do anything to become president . 
McCain prides himself on having graduated 5TH FROM LAST in the Annapolis class he got into by connections . 
He 's an intellectual lightweight , and Sarah is equally stupid . 
What a pathetic excuse for a presidential ticket . 
Why are there so many citizens who seem to prefer less intelligent , less capable candidates to superior ones -LRB- they flat out admit they 're not very smart , and they ridicule getting a top-flight education -RRB- ? 
We just went through 8 years being `` led '' by an imbecile . 
Why elect someone who 's just as dumb , maybe dumber ? 
Why would n't we elect someone who thoroughly understands all of the facets of our government , and who knows and believes in the constitution -LRB- all of it -RRB- . 
Someone who can bring respectability back to this country , which has been badly defiled for 8 years . 
This smacks of political opportunism and showboating in all the wrong ways . 
If he was serious about this , he would have suspended his campaign days ago to make sure tomorrow 's deadline is met . 
McCain has pulled this straight out of the Bush playbook for starting the war in Iraq , and passing the Patriot Act before that . 
This is disgusting , vile , naked political ambition contrary to patriotic ideals . 
Bush 's men , and McCain 's actions today are nothing short of treason . 
A week ago there was no economic crisis according to them . 
Now there is , and it needs to be handled their way , right now , or America is doomed . 
That is tripe , and we Americans know it . 
Bush and McCain = Traitors to America . 
If McCain was doing what Obama is , you all would throw a tantrum . 
The debates are not important right now . 
we all know where the candidates stand . 
Right now this economic mess is critical . 
You all complain about the bailout and McCain is trying to get both sides together to work it out and you still complain . 
This is exactly why the democrat party needs to be abolished . 
you liberals are a bunch of do-nothing cry-babies . 
run and hide McCain ! 
John McCain also did the same thing with the GOP convention and switched the focus on fund raising for the familes affected by the hurricanes . 
The debates can be postponed until next week , the bail out plan -LRB- whatever it turns out to be -RRB- needs to be handled now . 
What is more important , seeing two candidates debate this Friday or losing the value of your 401K and stocks , stop being reactionary and think about what is really important . 
Hes attempting to steal the show so to speak and heading to DC ? 
I guess Schmit showed McCain anther poll that says go to DC McCain 2 percentage points awaits you there ? 
McCain has been avoiding the media and will continue avoiding them as long as he can . 
He will head to DC and hide out for a week . 
Ben and Paul need him to force the real conservatives in the Senate to back this bailout . 
With McCain seemingly way behind and having little chance of actually winning this election , we have the perfect setup for Bush to abuse his power yet again . 
This WILL be declared a national emergency , and the elections WILL be postponed . 
McCain already suspended his campaign ... the PERFECT excuse for this to happen . 
I hear it now : `` We had to focus on the crisis and we just ca n't allow the American people to vote for a president when such important debates and campaigning had to be postponed '' . 
What a sad day this is for our country . 
Just wait until Friday when nothing has been passed -LRB- which they obviously knew would happen when they put out their joke of a 3 page proposal -RRB- and when Congress leaves without passing a bail out plan a national emergency will be declared . 
I smell a revolution coming ... Posted by : Nick | September 24 , 2008 4:11 PM Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 4:14 PM | Report abuse ignore him . 
keep hammering the war monger Posted by : isome | September 24 , 2008 4:14 PM | Report abuse This is a lame blog Posted by : new guy | September 24 , 2008 4:14 PM | Report abuse Senator McCain , it 's called MULTITASKING . 
You should probably look into it if you want to be president . 
This is a total stunt and everybody knows it . 
Does he want to suspend the election too ? 
My mind is now 100 % made up . 
McCain requested weekly town halls with questions taken from citizens . 
Hillary also took questions for hours during the primaries . 
He ca n't debate either . 
Likes to give speeches , can not think on his feet . 
If McCain and Obama are busy with the bailout , McCain should agree that Palin debates Biden . 
His party holds majorities in the House and Senate so as the leader of the party he has the opportunity to show some Presidential timber in this crisis . 
He can in effect suspend the `` campaign '' in order to return to Washington where he can look Presidential -LRB- assuming he can get the Dems to agree on a single plan containing some ownership goodies for the tax-payers and assigning penalties for the executives who ran the financial sector into the ground -RRB- . 
It 's a good test for him , one I think he will have little trouble passing -LRB- since it will move him into opposition to Bush , not McCain -RRB- . 
It seems that he 'd rather run against Bush anyway , if he takes Sen McCains offer , he will be the opposition `` President '' during the arguments over the economy . 
Now as far as skating on the debates ... I do n't support that as a citizen or as an Obama supporter -LRB- which is to say I would n't support Obama trying to skate past a debate either -RRB- . 
This is one of our few chances to listen to these guys unscripted , I would be loathe to give it up . 
This is obviously another cynical political ploy , to show Sen McCain play-acting as President . 
The thing is , he 's just a Senator . 
What can he do , especially , being as clueless on the intricacies of this financial mess , as he is ? 
There is one President ... and that 's George Bush . 
And canceling the debate ?? Now is the time for a debate . 
I could see if he asked to change the topic of the debate to the economy ... but , he 'd never do that . 
Can you imagine McCain debating Friday night , without a week of preparation . 
If Obama 's smart , rather than submitting to McCain 's ploy , he 's suggest changing the debate 's topic to the economy . 
Recent polling , the blush-off-bud of his Veep candidate and oh yes a trillion dollar -LRB- and counting -RRB- bail out of his financial backers and soulmates . 
MCCAIN DOES A GREAT DISSERVICE TO THE PEOPLE OF THIS COUNTRY BY TRYING TO DELAY THE DEBATE . 
THAT 'S NOT COUNTRY FIRST . 
WHAT CAN TWO SENATORS DO THAT THE REST OF THE SENATE CA N'T . 
OBAMA NEEDS TO CALL THIS BULLSH ! 
T !!!! Posted by : pissed off | September 24 , 2008 4:13 PM | Report abuse The last time John McCain felt voting in the Senate was worthy of his time was April 10 . 
Just yesterday his campaign claimed taht he was n't going to decide on his position on the bail out until he sees the full and final package . 
Plenty of time to wait and see then . 
Now today , he wants to suspend campaigning and delay -LRB- cancel ? -RRB- 
What has changed since yesterday ? 
This is Palin Surprise II , when slipping into a losing position McCain jumps out with something wild and unpredictable , to throw the race in turmoil . 
If this does n't turn his poll numbers around , or if it does , and he slips down again , I am actually a little bit afraid of what stunt he will pull next . 
Should n't we be concerned about a presidential candidate who is exhibiting reckless and unpredictable behavior ? 
BEST ARTICLE BELOW !!! BRAVO COL. A.M. Khajawall -LRB- Ret -RRB- GOD BLESS ! 
Dear concerned citizens of America and Mass Media of the U.S.A. . 
As a concerned registered independent voter , forensic psychiatrist , disabled American I made my decision to vote after taking into consideration following joint tickets attributes and characteristics . 
Has the ticket shown adequate calmness , coolness , and connectedness 's under pressure to lead our nation -LRB- Presidential Temperament -RRB- ? 
Has the ticket shown sustained sound `` Judgment and Caliber '' ? 
Has the ticket shown adequate understanding of depth and degree to address the crucial challenges in their their purpose , policies , and positions -LRB- Honesty , integrity and sincerity -RRB- ? 
Has the ticket sufficient `` understanding and knowledge '' of inside Washington workings -LRB- Experience -RRB- '' ? 
Has the ticket reservoir resilience , wisdom , and vigor to address the present and future f our beloved `` Great-grand Nation '' ? 
Has the ticket enough joint foreign policy experience and exposure based on '' Values , Virtues , Vastness , and '' -LRB- American moral soul -RRB- '' ? 
Has their campaign talk , slogans , ads , plans , and programs based on facts and are they free of fear , fiction , frivolous labels , unfair attacks , negativity , and impulsively ? 
-LRB- No `` imminent danger to national 8 . 
Has the ticket genuinely kept on message of country first and politics last and avoided copying -LRB- Message change '' -RRB- ? 
Has the ticket message stayed away from Culture divide and war -LRB- Disaster prevention -RRB- ? 
Has the ticket resisted being surrounded , supported and surrogate 's by divisiveness , distortion 's , and destructive characters , -LRB- Real patriotism VS shiftiness and shameless parrot-ism -RRB- ? 
Has the ticket thoughtful , real non-partisan , & non-impulsive plans to address our current economic crisis or political tactics and temperamental statements . 
I have personally and professionally concluded that OBAMA-BIDEN ticket will lift and inspire our greatgrand nation back to its greatness within and restore our global standing with the use of maximum , firm international diplomacy and minimal force if and when indicated -LCB- '' Peace thru Strenght '' -RCB- . 
The era of responsibility has to replace irresponsibilty and unaccountability will change to accountability and transparancy . 
The Wall Street greed will change to Main Street need . 
Grass roots California leader per Senator McCain 's mailings . 
PS : Protect U.S.A from McCain-palin 's reactive and knee-jerk reactions . 
McCain is hurriedly out there now rearranging the deck chairs . 
The propaganda just does n't seem to stop . 
Your second sentence unequivocally negated your first sentence . 
You were never undecided . 
On that note . . 
given how propaganda tends to flow freely from the right , in all its forms . 
McCain 's statement has a wonderful ring to it , but , the sincerity of it is questionable . 
Especially given it seems to have come pre-emptively , following an agreement between the campaigns to issue a joint statement . 
Instead , they resort to juvenile name calling and other tactics like debating the lack of experience of a VP candidate , when Obama has none himself ... I find it hilarious when pots call kettles black . 
tee-hee ... Posted by : Emily is on a warpath and will be holding her breath | September 24 , 2008 4:12 PM | Report abuse You have to wonder who McBush and his advisors think is dumber , the press or the public . 
This smacks of political opportunism and showboating in all the wrong ways . 
If he was serious about this , he would have suspended his campaign days ago to make sure tomorrow 's deadline is met . 
McCain has pulled this straight out of the Bush playbook for starting the war in Iraq , and passing the Patriot Act before that . 
This is disgusting , vile , naked political ambition contrary to patriotic ideals . 
Bush 's men , and McCain 's actions today are nothing short of treason . 
A week ago there was no economic crisis according to them . 
Now there is , and it needs to be handled their way , right now , or America is doomed . 
That is tripe , and we Americans know it . 
Bush and McCain = Traitors to America . 
I was wondering which would do it first . 
It does put Obama is a tough spot . 
I certainly would n't stop running ads . 
You can be working in the Senate and still show ads slamming McCain . 
That , Emily , is simple , Obama spoke for himself yesterday on his proposed fix -LRB- es -RRB- . 
Some Americans , unlike you and your ilk , actually let people think and speak for themselves without scripted GOP talking points . 
Quit wearing your intellectual constipation like it 's a badge of honor , the world is watching and reading . . 
and laughing their butts off knowing people like you are allowed out in public . 
With McCain seemingly way behind and having little chance of actually winning this election , we have the perfect setup for Bush to abuse his power yet again . 
This WILL be declared a national emergency , and the elections WILL be postponed . 
McCain already suspended his campaign ... the PERFECT excuse for this to happen . 
I hear it now : `` We had to focus on the crisis and we just ca n't allow the American people to vote for a president when such important debates and campaigning had to be postponed '' . 
What a sad day this is for our country . 
Just wait until Friday when nothing has been passed -LRB- which they obviously knew would happen when they put out their joke of a 3 page proposal -RRB- and when Congress leaves without passing a bail out plan a national emergency will be declared . 
I smell a revolution coming ... Posted by : Nick | September 24 , 2008 4:11 PM | Report abuse Cmon , even you McCain supporters ca n't even buy this bull -LRB- or can you ? -RRB- 
If you do , please contact me for an excellent opportunity to buy oceanfront property in Nevada - low price , good terms . 
A fine investment to help our country 's financial crisis . 
This will not be an option when North Korea restarts it reactors , Estonia insults Russia , and a school shooting occurs in a hurricane-ravaged corner of the country . 
If you ca n't multitask to handle a debate and a congressional issue , can you claim to be qualified to lead ? 
They should contribute to the efforts to mitigate the financial crisis while also continuing to campaign . 
Let the debate continue as scheduled , whether in DC or elsewhere . 
The polls are sliding for McCain . 
Suspending the campaign saves campaign money for McCain . 
He can go to Washington as still run his ads . 
All this is is a stalling tactic . 
McCain will flounder with economic questions . 
He can t do an economic debate on the fly . 
The BANKING committees in the congress will be solving this problem not John McCain , who admits the economy is not his strong suit . 
Ca n't he multi task like most of us . 
He has been away from Washington for over 1 and a half years campaining for president . 
How many committee meetings and votes has he missed and now he needs to stay in Washington ? 
is it because he his losing the race or afraid to debate Obama ? 
Could he run his campaign out of Washington ? 
Is the country going to fall apart if ol John is not in Washington ? 
Obama stopped doing his shortly after he got it , and it is a problem , believe me . 
I think it is excellent that we can actually see them in action , at work , being responsible , and forced to take a position and make a decision . 
This is hard for Hamlet Obama , I know . 
But it will be revealing of both . 
McCain , who has professed on occasion and more recently demonstrated his ignorance of economic matters reassures us by telling us he 's going to work on the economy ? 
He 's close to last on the list of people I want touching the economy . 
Below him are Sarah Palin and George W. Bush . 
John McCain is using a veneer of bipartisanship to try to use this crisis to his advantage , but Obama wo n't be bullied . 
Keep running the campaign ads , but also go fight for a fair solution to this crisis . 
now macaine no have palling give interview she busi helping fix economie to . 
vote palling super hottie she have goggles and beehive and now has forin polocie experience from un visit . 
when palling win we bom countrys who no do what we say . 
look out france iran irak russia and everbody else you dummies . 
repubilcan party for ever !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Posted by : dminer | September 24 , 2008 4:10 PM | Report abuse McCain is the king of gimmicks and window dressing . 
His real reason for this maneuver is to put off having to debate Obama , hopefully permanently from McCain 's point of view . 
A week ago the economy was sound now he has to stop the campaign , go hide in Washington D.C. and figure out what the Rovians will want to do to save his campaign . 
He is confused and does not have a plan . 
It 's completely changed my opinion on the shameless political objectives of the Washington Post and restored my faith in the integrity of the profession of journalism . 
It is my greatest hope that Chris Cillizza will become the editor in chief , whenever he manages to pull his head out of corpulent partisan keister in which it is currently buried . 
If McCain wo n't take questions , you can be sure she never will . 
He 's 72 now , , probably needs a wipe every hour ! 
He 's senile , arrogant , and ANGRY !!! Posted by : Harried | September 24 , 2008 4:09 PM | Report abuse Most of this blogs are Funny ; You can see all the Liberal , Socialist and Demo-gods `` Democrat 's '' , scream hateful and degrading comments My God There running scared , Obama asked McCain for something and he said yes - too Obama s request , Show s that he s willing to put aside Politics , then he puts a request out back to Obama , Let work on this Economy disaster and the only things the Liberal , Socialist and Demo-gods `` Democrat 's '' can scream no-fair , no playing politics this can t happen ; McCain said let work together him and Obama with the current administration to get the best possible package deal , sound reasonable . 
But I guess the entire Liberal , Socialist and Demo-gods `` Democrat 's '' don t want Obama to prove , if he s able to cross party line s to work with all to get a compromise and complete working deal ? 
hummmm From the 18 % of voters in this Election that are Independents and un-decided . 
John to the rescue . 
Where was he for 27 years of deregulation ? 
Oh , yea he was voting to deregulate . 
John McCain 's plan : give your social security to Wall St. Privatize it and let those trusty folks have your retirement money . 
And Daddy Warbucks at the Treasury , Gee the CEO of GoldmanSachs until 2006 during the heyday of this money making scam , yip lets give him a free hand to run the clean up -LRB- all these company CEOs were making over $ 40 million per year -RRB- . 
The worst is yet to come . 
Why , you ask ? 
What happened this week is really nothing more than wipping out all laws established after 1929 . 
and Daddy Warbucks wants to insure it says that way . 
That is why he wants unbridled control . 
Frankly , I could use a break from the non-stop sniping . 
However , I do think that the debate should go on . 
Our economy is in crisis , and I think that this is exactly the time that the American public should have the opportunity to hear what its presidential candidates have to say . 
It offers a very real chance for us to get a better fix on both the temperament and policy views of the candidates . 
Not a bad thing , in my opinion . 
Now McCain wants us to believe he ca n't think about the economy unless he 's in Washington ? 
If the votes are already there , Bush would n't have to go on prime time to sell it . 
McCain should kill the bailout . 
That would swing the vast majority of voters behind him Posted by : Bob | September 24 , 2008 4:09 PM | Report abuse Does this remind anyone of that kid in college who used every excuse to get another couple days for his paper ? 
Let the debates be held close to DC on Friday night . 
There are more then enough universities to be able to host . '' 
I think these stupid stunts have actually been helping McCain . 
The celebrity ads , the Palin pick , the use of Hillary and Biden in ads . 
The Senators are stressed and require some of her patented oral ` relief ' . 
Word is that Sarah can take most men to the root . 
What would you call a man who has risen to the situation to take the leadership role-unconventional but as his usual self ? 
A Maverick.Yes-thats John McCain . 
Impulsive , undeceive , ca n't be trusted to do anything with thought . 
It is just Mccain shooting from the hip shadows when he does n't know what to do . 
Which seemed logical , since McCain 's plan was basically what Obama had said the day before . 
But McCain decided he 'd rather play politics instead . 
Hence , the `` bold decision '' to suspend the campaign -LRB- poll plummets had nothing to do with that , I 'm sure -RRB- . 
Its just the most recent desperate stunt in a long line of desperate stunts -LRB- exhibit A : Palin -RRB- that are about making McCain LOOK `` mavericky '' for the news . 
America will see right through it . 
Also : this reminds me a little of when Guiliani used 9-11 to try to suspend the elections in NYC and stay in office . 
Like Giuliani , McCain is someone that would govern over a crisis by grandstanding and power-grabs . 
Is that a leader we can trust ? 
It 's the right thing to do . 
McCain is putting his country first and politics second . 
That 's leadership in action . 
McCain looks very Presidential today . 
What say you Sen. Obama to Sen. McCain 's calls for you to join him ??? Posted by : K | September 24 , 2008 4:08 PM | Report abuse mccain needs to just quit the bs political crap that we can see right through . 
Like Mccain is some kind of financial `` deal maker '' . 
Give me a break . 
He needs to just try to stick to the campaign trail . 
... and do n't touch that computer !!! Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 4:08 PM | Report abuse McCain would rather lose an election than have his country lose a war . 
Perhapes he would rather lose an election than watch a global economic meltdown Now that I think about it , if there 's going to be a global economic meltdown , this might be a great election to LOSE . 
The winner is n't going to have an easy time of it ! 
Having a debate this weekend would be the perfect way to focus public attention on the economic crisis and see how our candidates might respond and what their views are . 
The McCain camp should reconsider their move or be seen as weak and unable to debate tough economic issues . 
he is not ignoring the polls . 
Instead , they resort to juvenile name calling and other tactics like debating the lack of experience of a VP candidate , when Obama has none himself ... Posted by : EmilyP | September 24 , 2008 4:07 PM | Report abuse Another ` Hail Mary Pass ' from team McCain . 
Stinks of desperation to me . 
Maybe when McCain takes those economics classes he can take one on multitasking ! 
Hurray for free markets & the biggest socialist bailout in history . 
Modern day Fascism meets Socialism as in the Third Reich . 
Heil McCain und Palin !!! Posted by : crossroads | September 24 , 2008 4:07 PM | Report abuse Posted by : heh | September 24 , 2008 4:07 PM | Report abuse At the drop of a hat , McCain will do any Sunday AM talk show in DC . 
There is no reason they cant have this debate on Friday night in DC . 
It 's a 90 minute affair , it 's been negotiated and arranged long in advance and it can fit into any agenda he might propose . 
Sure , McCain wants to trump Obama with a political move to look leadership oriented , but there is absolutely no reason to kill the debate . 
McCain 's aged mind is becoming more and more of a liability as it makes him look more and more out of touch with all reality . 
Time management is the essence of being president and if McCain can not do both , he needs to bow out of the election NOW . 
We 've had eight years already of a part-time president and now McCain is telling us he can only do one thing at a time ? 
Perhaps this is PALIN-mccain ticket after all . 
Can we ever believe him ? 
McBush -- I say no way , no how . 
This is not Sept the 11th . 
Suspending the debate is unacceptable . 
That just tells me McCain ca n't handle more than one thing at a time . 
The next president is inheriting a complicated mess and needs to be able to think about multiple things at once . 
what better time to introduce sarah palin to a role she admits she does n't understand by having her stand in for him at the debate . 
we 'd love to see that . 
but then , mccain would have to set her free . 
Why ca n't they debate there ? 
Does this retard really think he can get the presidency when neither he nor Palin will debate unscripted ? 
Has the ticket shown adequate calmness , coolness , and connectedness 's under pressure to lead our nation -LRB- Presidential Temperament -RRB- ? 
Has the ticket shown sustained sound `` Judgment and Caliber '' ? 
Has the ticket shown adequate understanding of depth and degree to address the crucial challenges in their their purpose , policies , and positions -LRB- Honesty , integrity and sincerity -RRB- ? 
Has the ticket sufficient `` understanding and knowledge '' of inside Washington workings -LRB- Experience -RRB- '' ? 
Has the ticket reservoir resilience , wisdom , and vigor to address the present and future f our beloved `` Great-grand Nation '' ? 
Has the ticket enough joint foreign policy experience and exposure based on '' Values , Virtues , Vastness , and '' -LRB- American moral soul -RRB- '' ? 
Has their campaign talk , slogans , ads , plans , and programs based on facts and are they free of fear , fiction , frivolous labels , unfair attacks , negativity , and impulsively ? 
-LRB- No `` imminent danger to national 8 . 
Has the ticket genuinely kept on message of country first and politics last and avoided copying -LRB- Message change '' -RRB- ? 
Has the ticket message stayed away from Culture divide and war -LRB- Disaster prevention -RRB- ? 
Has the ticket resisted being surrounded , supported and surrogate 's by divisiveness , distortion 's , and destructive characters , -LRB- Real patriotism VS shiftiness and shameless parrot-ism -RRB- ? 
Has the ticket thoughtful , real non-partisan , & non-impulsive plans to address our current economic crisis or political tactics and temperamental statements . 
I have personally and professionally concluded that OBAMA-BIDEN ticket will lift and inspire our greatgrand nation back to its greatness within and restore our global standing with the use of maximum , firm international diplomacy and minimal force if and when indicated -LCB- '' Peace thru Strenght '' -RCB- . 
The era of responsibility has to replace irresponsibilty and unaccountability will change to accountability and transparancy . 
The Wall Street greed will change to Main Street need . 
Grass roots California leader per Senator McCain 's mailings . 
PS : Protect U.S.A from McCain-palin 's reactive and knee-jerk reactions . 
It 's just strange . 
That said , I 'm all for meetings in DC with all the parties - maybe they could move the debates there , or just fly to the debate location afterwards - it 's only a couple hour flight or less I think . 
Why ca n't they do both debates and discuss crisis ? 
Today I worked , got a call my daughter was sick , picked her up , worked from home , and am now blogging right before I get my son from the busstop . 
I know , I know - silly argument . 
But we all do lots of things at once and my point is that you just ca n't stop things when so much is at stake . 
I expect a lot from my potential Presidents , not the least is which is the ability to do a bunch of things at once . 
I 'd be happy if they both agreed to stop all the retarded ads from now until November though - and not because of the crisis - just because it is making me not watch TV anymore . 
McCain is a shrewed politician and Obama should not get side tracked by McCains call for silence with the American people . 
Why would we want a deregulator turned regulator only this past week to solve or contribute to anything ? 
... his basic Republican theories are what caused this crisis to begin with ... plus a war that has gone on too long and too expensive ... McCain is a fool ... do n't let him fool you too . 
I 'm voting Obama , McCain has turned into a serious joke that can be dangerous to this country Posted by : brad | September 24 , 2008 4:05 PM | Report abuse The Obama camp should not bend on delaying the debate . 
Rather , Obama should come back and say that the debate this Friday should be devoted entirely on the economy and the financial crisis . 
Scratch all of the other topics since it is deemed necessary to work this out . 
Each candidate will have the opportunity to spell out their plan and from this exchange , it is certain that some `` helpful advise '' will come of it . 
Make it a debate on the economy !!! Posted by : Thanos | September 24 , 2008 4:05 PM | Report abuse Funny , McCain does n't sit on the Senate Banking Committee , which is ground zero in this current situation . 
All we need is McCain flitting around the edges of the scene , pontificating and getting in the way . 
If McCain insists on doing it this way , I think Obama should remain in debate preparations , but make it clear that it 's his economic people - NOT McCain 's - who are running things with the leadership in Congress . 
And he should also stipulate that he 's ready to return to Washington to vote on anything that requires a vote of the full Senate -LRB- Obama 's not on Banking either -RRB- . 
That way , Obama can return to Washington later without being seen to parrot McCain . 
McCain was quaking in his boots at the prospect of a debate . 
His surrogates have been downplaying expectations all week . 
This current ` crisis ' simply is a convenient excuse for a debate that McCain was bound to lose anyway . 
McCain will not be the one crafting the legislation . 
He 's already laid out his position . 
If he was a little more technically savvy and knew how to use a computer or a PDA , he could provide his input via e-mail , or a conference call and a VPN session , and not have to fly back to Washington to pull out the Underwood . 
I realize that some will buy into this ploy but I think the majority of voters will see through it . 
One would think that a potential Presidential candidate should be capable of a little multitasking . 
However , one must have a mastery of modern tools to achieve that level of productivity . 
The Senators are stressed and require some of her patented oral ` relief ' . 
Word is that Sarah can take most men to the root . 
First question : so what 's this about the Keating Five ? 
The American people deserve the right to hold an election to select our next leader , even if John McCain does n't like their decision . 
And I can exploit 9\/11 as well as Rudy can . 
`` Following September 11th , our national leaders came together at a time of crisis , '' McCain said . 
`` We must show that kind of patriotism now . 
Americans across our country lament the fact that partisan divisions in Washington have prevented us from addressing our national challenges . 
Now is our chance to come together to prove that Washington is once again capable of leading this country . '' 
Meaning : In this moment of crisis , you need to believe a president and party that have been repeatedly caught lying , mollycoddling its rich friends , flouting the Constitution , and creating systems that have undermined our economy and our worldwide standing . 
We must now act hastily and without any regard to unintended consequences by giving Hank and Ben $ 700bil to bail out bankers . 
Any opposition -LRB- or even sensible alternative -RRB- will be cast as unpatriotic , even if it means ripping off the `` average '' taxpayer . 
Not this time , Senator . 
We wo n't be fooled again . 
This is nothing but an attempt to stem the bleeding in the poll numbers . 
McCain 's role in `` solving '' this `` problem '' is minimal at best . 
And he 's clearly trying to duck the debate . 
Nice try , but no thanks . 
when they 're down in the polls . 
A smart move of Obama to reach across the aile in hard times -- it shows leadership . 
-LRB- Obama called first to McCain this morning -RRB- What 's more , he does it without pompousity . 
McCain is a follower who clings to Omaba hand to avoid free fall . 
Yet I smell in McCain an opportunist tick in annoucing the suspension of his campaign to work on the crisis -- `` an arsonits volunteering for firefighting '' ? 
Posponing the 1st debate is also a political move . 
The risk of his ` security ' message to fall in deaf ears due to the economic crisis was big and the GOP must be betting on changing the game with that debate . 
As I said , do not `` missunderestimate '' McCain . 
If McCain is really `` above politics '' why does he try so desperately to appear that way ? 
And on the day the polls show he needs to do something dramatic if he 's not above politics ! 
We know where the candidates stand . 
Oh , yeah - McCain likes to have his weekends off . 
What the hell can McCain contribute to the bailout panic ? 
He 's ignorant of the issues and what is at stake , and his only experience in the field is being on the take from crooked bankers 20 years ago . 
The Straight Talk Express has jumped the track . 
McShame is throwing in the towel with 6 weeks to go , and some deft footwork from the Obama camp is all that is needed to not look foolish for demanding that McShame show up on Friday night . 
Ca n't Joe Lieberman fill in , since all McShame does is parrot his views ? 
Putin continues to regale the Krelim with his favorite McCain jokes ... He likes the one about McCains FAKE WAR HERO stories . 
What a joke this man is . 
All McCain is trying to do is avoid a debate that will make him look even more silly than he has for the past 10 days . 
That man is so out of touch and he 's trying to avoid going on national television at this time because of what a fool he looks like right now . 
Personally , I think this is the perfect time for a debate - I want to hear what both candidates plan on doing or try doing for this economy and Wall Street . 
McCain 's just a chicken and if he thinks America is going to fall for this crap , he 's sorely mistaken . 
Grow a pair McCain and face the nation ! 
The ball is now firmly in Obama 's court . 
We 'll stay on top of this issue as the day continues . '' 
It did n't show that to me . 
It showed me just another in a long line of politicizing the financial crisis , and avoiding real leadership in the face of adversity on McCain 's part . 
Calling of a campaign is a a campaign strategy . 
Do n't let doublethink overpower rationality , and Chris Cillizza could you please stop the brown nosing and put Country First . 
He wishes to turn the national conversation away from the great issues of the financial melt-down and economic collapse because he sees that he is dropping in the polls . 
Obama should reject this move . 
He should say that the best way for the nation to address these grave issues is to hear directly from the two candidates in Mississippi on Friday evening . 
He should suggest that the debate topic be turned from foreign policy to domestic issues . 
Obama can beat McCain like a rug on this . 
You have to say it looks incredibly suspect . 
Lie , manipulate , buy time , wheel-out the 1st available pair of breasts whilst repeating `` country first '' . 
Sorry Johnny , but you 're not blowing my skirt up brother ! 
He is a cheater and a liar who wants to be president at almost any cost - he acts out of desperation all the time . 
He makes a lot of sudden impulsive , implosive political short term decisions that appear and feel very very reckless . 
He is a time bomb . 
We do n't need that kind of character in a president . 
Todays world needs a fresh young thoughtful leader who cares about OUR future in a non-partisan way . 
McCain 's only future is retirement . 
He is tired and does n't like details . 
My vote is for Obama Posted by : Jim T | September 24 , 2008 4:02 PM | Report abuse Thank you , Sen. McCain , for your selfless service . 
| September 24 , 2008 4:02 PM | Report abuse Has anyone else noticed that Republicans ca n't spell very well ? 
I do n't know a single intelligent person who is voting for McCain . 
I 'm not even joking . 
I know some close-minded rednecks and racists , but not any actual smart people . 
Hank Paulson , Barney Frank , Chuck Schumer and serious legislators are handling this crisis . 
It too shall pass . 
Rumor has it that the votes are already there . 
What McCain is doing is trying to take credit for being instrumental in getting something passed which he has no meaningful comprehension of . 
The Maverick is a Fraud . 
Wow Posted by : DDAWD | September 24 , 2008 4:01 PM | Report abuse I have been undecided but made my decision . 
McCain loves and cares about this country and is willing to put country first - just look at his concerned facial expression . 
We expect a president to be able to handle these kind of situations . 
Can a president also suspend his presidency to deal with an emergency ? 
If anything , it makes McCain look like he cracks under pressure and is decidedly unpresidential Posted by : CB | September 24 , 2008 4:00 PM | Report abuse Since he does n't know much about the economy , it might be better for him to stay on the campaign trail . 
Maybe he does n't know much about debating either . 
It 's dumb , if you think seriously about it . 
Not even the economic crises . 
It is the basis of our country and Obama and Mccain can easily do their jobs as well as campaign and have the debate . 
This show must go on . 
Maybe you 're right . 
Maybe it 's a political strategy . 
Maybe it 's a diversion . 
Maybe it 's smart campaigning . 
But , maybe , just maybe , politicians actually do care about this country . 
Of course it is a political gambit . 
Obama is starting to move ahead in the polls . 
McCain could work with Congress in Washington , then fly out for the debate Friday evening . 
Instead , he is trying to create some political theater . 
Let the debates be held close to DC on Friday night . 
There are more then enough universities to be able to host . 
Now is the time , very critical time , that we need to hear from the candidates . 
To see these men and how they operate under non optimal conditions . 
McCain and Obama should continue to campaign as much as they are able , given the constraints of their senate jobs . 
Time 's running out . 
The voters need maximal access to both men . 
I 'm not happy that McCain is using campaigning as a weapon . 
It 's dumb , if you think seriously about it . 
I mean really , ROFLMAO !!! It seems a bit obvious that he 's more afraid of the debate having been busted as Mr Big in the Savings and Loan debacle : The Keating Five Mr. Biggest beneficiary of them all costing the nation 's population billions of their life savings all the while no one went to jail , including The Bush family members who were part and parcel to those billions magically going missing . 
Do you think the Japanese Co buying Lehman 's will keep their letterhead employee , Jeb Bush in the ranks of those other 10,000 employees they promised to keep ? 
This does n't change my mind on who and what McKeating5 stands for , the rich , the very rich and the filthy rich ! 
As a presidential candidate it makes good sense to take advantage of that role since his pool numbers are dropping . 
What WISE politician with 30 years of political battles backing them up would n't take advantage of these circumstances ? 
I believe the two gentlemen should have the ability to do both -LRB- debate and deal with the crisis -RRB- ... do not postpone the debate . 
Somehow McCain will try to engineer an advantage out of this . 
The person who wins the White House will have to handle many crises at the same time . 
Should Obama agree ... then set the debate for Saturday to see his response . 
There is no need to `` reach across party lines '' . 
Both parties are equally outraged by the Bush attempt to grab more power and money . 
Bush has already caved to some of the Dems demands for taxpayer protections and will most likely cave to more . 
I would like to hear both candidates discuss the economy -LRB- instead of foreign policy -RRB- this Friday , as scheduled . 
Do it Washington DC if you must , but just do it !! Posted by : alice | September 24 , 2008 3:58 PM | Report abuse It 's so wonderful you can write this and keep a straight face ! 
Obama needs to go on with the campaign , demand a debate with McCain on Friday and call McCain on his clear political move . 
I think people will see this for what it is - not a caring about America but a desperate political move from a desperate man . 
But at the same time they can take a break for a few hours to participate in the debate . 
The economy is n't her strong suit so she can probably be spared the meetings General McCain will be attending . 
Here 's an idea . 
Withdraw from the race , give your campaign funds to the Treasury to help with the bail out and get the heck off the stage . 
Problems do n't take a number so you can deal with them one at a time . 
Debate and get it over with . 
They can work on the hill and do the debate . 
We have these things now called airplanes . 
This chicken little `` the sky is falling fix it now or else '' routine will not work with me . 
McCain proved this was complete lie when he tried to link this to 9-11 . 
This is a blatant attempt by the Republicans to rob money straight of the pockets of taxpayers for their friends and personal interests , AGAIN . 
Do not be fooled . 
McCain loves and cares about this country and is willing to put country first - just look at his concerned facial expression . 
Obama is trying to live a personal dream of becoming president of the United States . 
Althoug I admire Obama for his sheer guts and determination and how far he has gone with relatively no experience , we ca n't sacrifice our status of living and security so he can have his dream . 
There are other qualified African Americans who would have been a better choice for King 's dream . 
Obama would be a good Secretary of State and maybe after some time on the job he would qualify for president . 
At 2:30 this afternoon , he added , Senator McCain returned Senator Obama s call and agreed to join him in issuing such a statement . 
The two campaigns are currently working together on the details . 
Uh , unfortunately my candidate looks less presidential than Obama . 
Man , I need a drink . 
au contraire ; the avg white knucklehead wont see it like that . 
Wake up y ' all ; when ya gonna smell the coffee ? 
YOu are getting screwed again . 
courtesy of the Bush\/Mcain political octopus . 
If John McCain can not do this , he has determined my vote !!! Also John , please demonstrate `` country first '' by firing the lobbiests who run your campaign . 
McCain steals another idea , just like the Obama 's `` change '' idea , to try to score political points . 
McCain is such a phony it is outrageous and on top of it , he steals others ideas and takes full credit . 
There needs to be a poll asking the American people what they think ... I bet most want the debate to go on . 
And there was much rejoicing . 
Have n't they technically been Senators the entire time ? 
So , theoretically , should they not be able to be Senators and campaign ? 
Will McCain 's campaign fall into shambles if he leaves it to go to DC for a few days ? 
-LRB- Arguably , the campaign may be better off if McCain leaves for a few days -RRB- . 
It 's not like the campaign staff needs to go to DC to legislate . 
They should be able to chug right along while McCain takes care of business . 
Either he 's a control freak or unable to multitask - or both - neither of which bodes well for his ability to run the nation . 
It sounds to me like Obama started a dialog and passed the ball to McCain at 8:30 am in private to actually encourage bi-partisan action , McCain accepted it , and then at 2:30 pm realized the political opportunity he could gain by frantically throwing the ball back at Obama , as if they 're earlier conversation never happened . 
Real great `` leadership '' . 
Nothing like claiming someone else 's idea as your own and then deriding them for not coming up with it first to encourage unity ... Posted by : grr | September 24 , 2008 3:55 PM | Report abuse McCain is managing to politicize the bailout at precisely the wrong time . 
He knows NOTHING about the economy and would not be a major player in any plan . 
This transparent attempt should be called what it is and not put off the debate . 
He was willing to sit in New York , meeting Bono and taping the David Letterman show so why NOW the urgency ? 
Are you kidding me ???? LIARS ... Posted by : Did I mention I 'm a LIAR ??? | September 24 , 2008 3:55 PM | Report abuse McCain is running scared , doing whatever he can to appear as if he cares . 
He does n't want to debate Obama because he knows Obama will look more knowledgeable and Presidential . 
Just like the GOP pretended that they cared about the Gustavo hurricane victims so they scaled down the RNC . 
Are Americans really this stupid ??? Gosh , I ca n't stand McCain !!! There is n't a sincere bone in his old body . 
Today is also the day that polls came out showing Obama leading by almost 10 points . 
I am sure these two events are completely unrelated . 
Americans know who 's responsible for this mess , and the Republicans will pay a heavy price in November . 
Because one banking de-regulation comment or mention of the Keating 5 would knock you down into the 20 % range . 
And Chris is exactly right that there are obvious campaign-related motives for McCain and about the tough spot it puts Obama in . 
But that does n't mean it 's not the right thing to do . 
With the consensus being pretty clear that the economy is REALLY important right now , and we may or may not be teetering on the edge of financial ruin if massively important and controversial legislation is n't worked out THIS WEEK , it makes sense to me that the candidates who are actual current members of Congress -LRB- McCain , Obama , Biden -RRB- are needed THIS WEEK in DC to participate . 
What is the harm in moving the foreign policy debate to , say , Monday ? 
Nobody wants to talk about foreign policy this week anyway . 
What about the last 25 years ? 
He 's not even on the committee considering the legislation , so why is he suddenly needed to broker the deal ? 
Obama is being way to gracious offering McCain the opportunity to look intelligent and bipartisan -- each candidate needs to let us know what he thinks about the issues of the day so we can assess his position . 
What falls ould n't be much worst than nine -LRB- 9 -RRB- points . 
A Hail Mary pass . 
If ever there were one . 
Only problem , McCain is dim , nearly unintelligable this morning . 
Terrified , sputtering to his aides . . 
Whether he can even function in the halls of congress , hidden by them , is a question . 
Poor america , it 's elections , it 's democracy are are banana republic . 
This proves that `` Country First '' is not just a slogan . 
By the way , I am still trying to figure out what the hell `` Change We Can Believe In '' means . 
Of course , it 's worked so well that our little Drama Queen has to pull this little stunt for attention . 
Not my fault he ca n't talk and chew gum at the same time . 
| September 24 , 2008 3:55 PM | Report abuse BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN would call this McCain-Bush extortion move a `` last-chance power drive . '' 
He was NOT `` born to run , '' apparently . 
He was born to run AWAY and cry Chicken Little . 
The sky is not falling . 
This is an attempt at political BLACKMAIL -- sign the paper or you lose the farm . 
Who 's going to stand up to Snidely Whiplash ? 
Who 's going to stand up and say the American economy is strong enough to repair itself AND sustain a free and unfettered election ? 
Is this just the latest permutation in a SILENT COUP that 's overtaking the nation ? 
And the mainstream media -- Rick Sanchez at CNN is a prime example -- fall for it every time , hook , line and sinker . 
Remember the Reichstag fire ? 
This is the American equivalent . 
What 's next -- suspend the election and declare martial law ?? Posted by : Outside the Box | September 24 , 2008 3:54 PM | Report abuse At first this looked like a bold move by McCain , but stupid because for the good of the country , he should have tried to privately agree with Obama on a joint statement , showing a united , bipartisan front . 
In fact , I wondered why he had not done that , as this seemed so blatantly partisan . 
Then we learned that Obama had taken the initiative first thing this morning to suggest a joint statement and had waited a reasonable time in good faith -- without jumping out front by himself -- in order to act together and speak with one voice . 
So it turns out this was a back-stabbing stunt by McCain . 
There truly is a temperament problem here . 
This all seems kinda conincidental does n't it ? 
McCain already stated he knows nothing about economics , so what will he say in Congress , `` duhhh '' . 
McCain is realizing that he has no credibility , and is trying to take away from Obama . 
The people SHOULD see through this . 
McCain would have to erase his name from the bills that let this happen by de-regulating the industry , before he can attempt to `` fix '' the problem Posted by : Steve | September 24 , 2008 3:54 PM | Report abuse Presidential candidate Sen. John McCain demonstrated real leadership today in suspending his campaign to return to Washington D.C. to work toward a bipartisan solution to our current economic crisis . 
It 's the right thing to do . 
McCain is putting his country first and politics second . 
That 's leadership in action . 
McCain looks very Presidential today . 
What say you Sen. Obama to Sen. McCain 's calls for you to join him ??? Posted by : K | September 24 , 2008 3:54 PM | Report abuse warren wrote : Perhaps Sarah Palin could sit in for McCain on Friday : - -RRB- Warren , I just had to thank you for my laugh of the week . 
Obama called john mcCain first . 
why do people hear and see what they want . 
Obama called first not the other way around . 
Please look at it for what it is worth . 
John McCain trying to steal something else . 
And by the way What happen to the real John McCain . 
The one people use to like . 
McCain is abdicating his responsibility to provide us the opportunity to see , listen , and judge between him and Obama as to who would make a better President . 
This is a critical decision , as we determine , who will meet the challenges left by the Bush Administration . 
A debate provides a transparent view , or at least the closest our political system comes to , of comparing and assessing the candidates . 
Instead of pursuing this critical responsibility , John McCain wants to hide behind closed doors denying us the ability to decide . 
Is that what it means to put your country first ? 
It seems to me that he is putting his political campaign first ! 
It makes me very angry . 
McCain seems like he can not handle two important issues at the same time -- will he be able to do so as President ? 
Also , seems to me to be entirely unnecessary to cancel the debate . 
The economic situation is something that neither McCain nor Obama can add to by being in DC in person -LRB- except to vote , which both probably want to avoid -RRB- -- neither have any leadership credentials on this issue -LRB- especially not McCain -RRB- , they can only add their voices which they can do AND , guess what , debate . 
McCain 's impulsive announcement is like everything else he does impulsively -- did you read George Will this morning ? 
There is no real good reason behind it , but it is certainly done with what looks like a good bit of impassioned conviction . 
Or maybe it was his pig ... Posted by : Edd | September 24 , 2008 3:53 PM | Report abuse Broker a Deal ? 
Look ... here 's the DEAL : 2 ... Being Shareholders we get to vote on CEO salaries and compensation ! 
3 ... No way we buy $ 700,000,000,000 of your JUNK ! 
I think that is what the public would like to hear both potential presidents discuss . 
Surely both candidates can spare 90 minutes of their time to give us their thoughts ; it is n't as if they 've been in DC during the crisis to date . 
Surely , the Senator can show up for a 2 hour debate . 
Al Qaeda wo n't grant you delays , Mr. McCain . 
Here 's an idea : switch the topic of the debate to economic policy ! 
He is resorting to grandstanding in the face of declining voter support . 
If he wants suspend his campaign and spend time in Washington doing uh , er ... ... ... he can . 
He does not have to be in Washington to talk to his colleagues about finding a crisis solution . 
He can do it by phone , video conference etc. . 
Oh , I forgot , McCain is not only not good on economis he is not good on modern communications . 
There are only 3 debates scheduled and time to the election is short . 
This Friday 's debate should not be postponed . 
Another cheap and cynical shot from McCain . 
It demonstrates that he cares only about himself and not the rest of us . 
He suspends his campaign , so he saves some cash and gets some free PR for `` doing the right thing '' . 
He then uses that cash on even more ad-buys in the run up to the election . 
I honestly do n't see much of a downside for his campaign with this move ... It 's purely a stunt , through and through , but the average American probably wo n't see it like that . 
He has always shown a deep commitment to America . 
Obama would be wasting both his and our time as he has never done anything in elective office that amounts to anything , unless voting to let babies die counts . 
At the same time , does anyone feel better that John `` The issue of economics is not something I 've understood as well as I should , '' McCain is going to solve the problem ? 
Postponing the election , maybe ? 
Or perhaps even canceling it and rule by some sort of presidential or corporate decree ? 
McCain obviously has zero understanding of this crisis . 
All he can do by going to the hill is get in the way of a solution . 
Plus , as a TV pundit has observed , a president must be able to multi-task , and there is a lot going on in U.S. foreign policy right now . 
McCain put forward his `` plan '' last week , and is probably going to the hill to make sure he can claim whatever emerges as a result of the vague formulations of his `` plan . '' 
That said , this puts Obama in a difficult spot , given the McCain campaign 's mastery of propaganda . 
Obama will probably have to go to the hill . 
But he should ask that his economic advisory team come with him to testify before the relevant committees . 
The real panic , and subsequent fallout , is owned and should stay owned by the institutions that led themselves down this road . 
Does it impact our economy ? 
But our free market economy has been `` over the top '' in value from lack of regulation for a long time .700 Billion , or what ever the amount winds up to be , is just a pay down for bad performance . 
McCain Pandering for attention by making this move is weak , What a pile of junk . 
Backing down from an hour and a half in the spot light at 800 in the evening , what a weak response Posted by : mullett | September 24 , 2008 3:49 PM | Report abuse Why does not McCain drop out altogether ? 
McCain has n't cast a vote since the spring and now all of a sudden his Senatorial duties are too important to ignore ? 
I 'm thinking that it 's best for all involved to keep John McCain far , far , far away from the solution finding process ... Posted by : WTF ??? | September 24 , 2008 3:49 PM | Report abuse Amazing the reaction to this ! 
If Obama had announced he was suspending his campaign to return to Washington and DO HIS JOB the Obamaniacs and the media would be praising him - `` He really does care ! 
McCain does n't ! '' 
The old man ca n't do his job . 
Which means being able to multi-task . 
What he has n't been in the senate for months and all of a sudden ? 
Please , we need a pres that can cut the mustard . 
Debating the economy would be a step in the right direction . 
This is really embarrassing for all GOPs with half a brain . 
The Republican credo is no regulation of business . 
So we want to put the fox back into the henhouse ? 
Obama wins if he articulates that . 
WTF - the debate will take 2 hours out of his week . 
3 -RRB- McCain getting involved in negotiations at this late date does n't seem helpful in the least . 
Instead of avoiding politics , McCain will inject more politics in an already dicey situation Posted by : Marc Edward | September 24 , 2008 3:48 PM | Report abuse OLD Adulterer McCorrupt has nothing good to do in DC . 
OLD McBush just wants to bailout his rich Wall Street buddies . 
If you are rich , you will get a Moron Con Communist Bailout for your reckless unfettered gambling on the financial markets , middle class mortgage fraud schemes , exorbitant debt loads , business incompetence and fraudulent business practices ; but if you are a mere member of the bourgeois , you have the great opportunity to pay for the Multi-Trillion Dollar Illegal Invasions , Mass Murders and Bailouts of the Rich whose giant business bets have gone sour . 
Moron Con Communist Frauds practice Blind Faith in the Unknown , are mermerized by Fairy Tales , Abstinence in the Brain and believe Science to be worthless , but they are the first in line to use any medical or scientific advances if it could provide any benefits to them . 
Does anyone really believe it will only cost $ 700 billion ? 
Did n't the Born Again Faith Based Pro Life Lying Mass Murderer Serial Killer in Chief War Criminal Terrorist Mission Accomplished Axis of Evil say his Illegal Invasions would only cost $ 50 billion and that was supposedly on the high end ? 
Americans are too busy with their make believe movies , stupid sports , shooting innocent , defenseless creatures for pure pleasure , ignorance and laziness to be able to exercise their neurons . 
That is why Abstinence in Thinking rings so soundly with these fools . 
| September 24 , 2008 3:48 PM | Report abuse Perhaps Sarah Palin could sit in for McCain on Friday : - -RRB- Posted by : warren | September 24 , 2008 3:48 PM | Report abuse This pisses me off - Obama reaches out to McCain and McCain end arounds him and once again trys to take Obama 's idea as him own . 
Obama called McCain at 8:30 this morning - not the other way around . 
It 's just another example that McCain 's campaign , devoid of original ideas of his own , just parrots the Obama campaign . 
It 's sickening really . 
Ca n't they just fly into DC for the vote , and then back to the debate locale ??? Whatever !!! Posted by : LMAO | September 24 , 2008 3:48 PM | Report abuse REPLACE THE DEBATE WITH THE V.P. STANDIN . 
THE DEBATE IS VERY IMPORTANT TO THE COUNTRY WITH THE TIME REMAINING . 
TO BE FAIR SETIT BACK TO SUNDAY . 
I 've realized I 'm too dumb to vote . 
He has an illogical approach to issues ! 
For example , does the President get to stop worrying about foreign policy because there is an economic crisis ? 
I personally , would like to see who is more up to the multi-tasking . 
2 -RRB- Which is more important , McCain 's speech on some global initiative thing or debates ? 
Since the answer is obviously debates , how can he possibly find time for this global initiative thing in the middle of this , but then ca n't fit in debates ? 
3 -RRB- The debate is Friday night . 
Are n't the markets closed then anyhow ? 
4 -RRB- It took 10 years to make this crisis - why do we have to suspend everything to fix it in 3 days . 
Any if this was so important , why have n't we heard from McCain until now -LRB- oh wait , he was too busy doing photo ops at the UN with Palin -RRB- . 
5 -RRB- Please wake me when it 's over . 
Postponing the election , maybe ? 
Or perhaps even canceling it and rule by some sort of presidential or corporate decree ? 
How McCain can say the electoral process is less important than fixing the economy is beyond me . 
This also gives him a handy excuse to avoid his part of the responsibility for causing this crisis in the first place . 
McCain is losing this race and the issues are not playing his way . 
He 's thus looking for yet another `` game changer '' but this latest move leaves him looking a little bit desperate . 
I mean , what can he actually do about this crisis ? 
I realize that he owns seven homes and thirteen cars , but I do n't think he has $ 700 billion in loose change to aid with the bailout . 
Now he stops campaigning to focus on events in Washington . 
He IS different , I 'll give him that . 
McCain is in New York right now meeting with the Fed , Treasury , and finacial and congressional leaders to resolve this crisis . 
Obama is holed up in FL prepping for a debate that is 2 days away . 
McCain is proving time and again that he puts Country First , and Obama is just playing politics if he does not also suspend his campaign . 
McCain should do the same . 
Neither Obama nor McCain is on the Finance or Banking committees - so neither of them is directly involved with the bailout . 
Also , both have staff on the Hill -LRB- who in any event would be doing most of the work -RRB- keeping tabs on what 's going on and advancing the candidates ' positions . 
There are also 533 other members of Congress already working on the bailout , so it 's hard to imagine how having McCain and Obama there actually helps anything . 
From a political perspective , I think it 's a mixed bag . 
I do n't see how Obama avoids agreeing to this ... McCain could beat him over the head with `` I 'd rather lose an election than crash the economy '' for the rest of the race , and more importantly would be seen as `` doing something '' about the crisis while Obama `` played politics '' even if McCain 's contributions were negligible . 
On the plus side for Obama , I 'm not sure how putting the race in stasis for some amount of time benefits McCain . 
With only 5 weeks left , and Obama reasserting a lead in national and battleground polls , McCain needs every opportunity , particularly the debates , to change the direction of the race . 
If McCain were ahead , I 'd say this was a genius move ... at almost 4 points behind in the RCP average , maybe not so much . 
Now maybe this move is the very game-changer that McCain is looking for - heightening his `` selflessness '' and `` service '' and trying to bring up his poll numbers on handling the economy . 
A lot depends on what Obama does , and whether the media decides this is a cynical ploy . 
On that end , it would have worked a lot better if McCain had n't completely blown his credibility with the press . 
The world has not stopped so why should Obama be duped . 
This will show he is intimidated by this slug Mccain . 
Yhe debate is not avout the economy . 
Lets get on with it . 
Nothing is going to happen in the next fwe days in Washington . 
Tomorrow is Friday and it is debate night . 
Be there Mccain and do n't be late . 
If McCain ca n't juggle a campaign and a piece of legislation -LRB- does n't he have a Senate staff , and are n't there things like BlackBerries , phones , computers -- oops , ca n't do that -- to communicate with ? -RRB- 
then how the heck can we expect him to be able to deal with more than one thing at a time as president ? 
If he has such little energy and mental power , he should just hang it up right now , forfeit the game . 
That 's what he 's in the process of doing . 
After all those years of Republican ruination coming to this , that 's all the more reason why Obama NEEDS to stay out there campaigning so we can flush the GOP era down the toilet where it belongs . 
What a demonstration of leadership ! 
John McCain is actually going to show up and pretend to perform the job for which he is collecting a paycheck ! 
Way to show steely resolve ! 
I am busy , busy , busy . 
My campaign is all about me , me , me . 
what else could there possibly be ? 
If the Democrats have a substitute bill for the Administration 's , they should make sure that Obama is listed as one of the two top sponsors . 
They both happened with republiCONS in charge . 
Obama agreed to five . 
He clearly was not interested in debating Obama . 
This proves that `` Country First '' is not just a slogan . 
By the way , I am still trying to figure out what the hell `` Change We Can Believe In '' means . 
Agree with McCain 's call to suspend the campaign and Obama looks like a follower , not a leader . 
Reject the move and Obama runs the risk of losing the high ground on post-partisanship and the need to change the way Washington does business . '' 
Or ... McCain goes back to Washington and succeeds in bollixing up the compromises the Senate and House seem well on their way to brokering on their own . 
Maybe you 're right . 
Maybe it 's a political strategy . 
Maybe it 's a diversion . 
Maybe it 's smart campaigning . 
But , maybe , just maybe , politicians actually do care about this country . 
It is to move the foreign policy debate to a time that is more advantageous for him . 
So ... the McCain campaign 's call to set aside politics and suspend campaigning includes a politcal stab at Barack Obama ?!? Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 3:40 PM | Report abuse Obama should propose moving the debate to Washington , DC and discuss the economic crisis . 
Tell voters that the next president is going to have to deal with this , so it 's incredibly important that the voters have ample time to weigh the two candidates against each other . 
There is `` NO '' reason for it to be postponed . 
They can do both . 
Mccain is not ready for the debate , that is clear . 
His handlers have quietly said it . 
Mccain has not practiced once for the debate and his people are really nervous he will screw up . 
He just wants out of the debate , nothing else . 
If Obama had announced he was suspending his campaign to return to Washington and DO HIS JOB the Obamaniacs and the media would be praising him - `` He really does care ! 
McCain does n't ! '' 
This also ignores the fact that , by McCain 's own estimate , they should be able to hammer out a deal by Monday . 
Unless McCain has some secret plan to become the great debater by Monday in between Senate sessions , it will make no appreciable difference . 
I also have no doubt that if Obama takes McCain up on his offer , there will be those amoung McCain 's supporters who will try to paint Obama as a ` follower ' . 
I will not be one of them . 
If Sen. Obama takes McCain up on his offer , he will deserve every bit as much credit as McCain for putting his nation ahead of his political aspirations . 
Both men have a rare opportunity to put aside the stupid , corrosive partisan rancor that has poisoned public discourse and show their selflessness , patriotism , and leadership ! 
After the gov ' t sorts this out to the best of their ability , and hopefully to the benefit of all citizens of all political stripes , they can go back to rolling around in the mud and lying about each other ! 
Being a WaPo poll , it is hard to believe it ! 
HE 'S A GREAT AMERICA ! 
RIGHT , rush debate obama for your party Stand up like a Man Rush , we told you God is on our side , it just keep getting better com ` on a fat blowhard and be a real Man , just to bad your chickenAzz will make up Posted by : redeemer | September 24 , 2008 3:37 PM | Report abuse It 's more likely that the financial meltdown has McCain and his staff frightened half to death . 
The news releases that several of his top advisors and staff had their noses in Wall Street 's trough is inconvenient , to say the least . 
Beyond that , McCain 's insistance on free trade and fuzzy minded one world globalization and deregulation is the root cause of our troubles . 
I expect his crew got wind that Obama was going to tear him apart on this and this is the most convenient way they can find to get out of Dodge ! 
This proves that `` Country First '' is not just a slogan . 
By the way , I am still trying to figure out what the hell `` Change We Can Believe In '' means . 
It 's not that I really can do a thing that would matter , but I have to at least give the perception being pro-active , and not clueless like I really am in the matter . 
Maybe this move will succeed in changing one or two people 's minds about me . 
Unfortunately , Obama will fall for it due to his own hubris . 
Obama better get his act together before the makeup debate or McCain will squeeze by with a victory . 
Obama already has shown his spinelessness by agreeing to a `` joint statement . '' 
The world is not ending , people . 
What 's happening is that the forces of National Socialism and the Wall Street crowd are holding a gun to the American electorate and its political `` leaders . '' 
Where is FDR when we need him ? 
`` The only thing we have to fear is fear itself . '' 
How can the SOLUTION work when you do n't know the real CAUSE ? 
TARGETING OF AMERICANS BY GOV ' T AGENCIES A ROOT CAUSE OF WALL STREET MELTDOWN ? 
Once again , Congress is being asked to rush through emergency legislation -- to cede effective control of the economy to the government . 
Officials continue to blame lax lending policies on the part of the mortgage industry for spawning this crisis . 
But were lenders ORDERED to offer `` easy credit '' to people `` targeted '' by government agencies ? 
Is government `` targeting '' of American citizens a root cause of the mortgage meltdown that spawned the broader financial crisis ? 
Why the sudden interest in legislating now ? 
-LRB- Could it be that he is sinking fast in the polls ? -RRB- 
A reminder to his campaign : HE IS RUNNING TO BE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES TO FIX THESE PROBLEMS ONCE-AND-FOR-ALL . 
More games from dodging and weaving McCain . 
The debate should go on -- as should Obama and McCain 's involvements with Creating an Economic solution for America . 
Mc Cain says `` no consensus '' has developed -- that in itself was yesterdays news . 
Already , Obama 's 4 guiding principles have been embraced by bipartisan supporters of the Bailout\/Rescue . 
As usual , McCain is a day late , a dollar short -- and hiding in plain sight ! 
By someone who has quit the campaign and will refuse to debate so he can go back to Warshington for the first time in a year ? 
McCain is a diva who realizes that nobody ... nobody is listening to him . 
He needed to make a big show . 
Boise State used trick play after trick play to offset the obvious fundamental advantage of OU . 
I do n't think it 'll work this time . 
