The Bush administration sent some of its most powerful figures to Capitol Hill yesterday to rally support for a $ 700 billion plan to revive the U.S. financial system , but they encountered stiff resistance from lawmakers who are deeply skeptical of the proposal and angered by the administration 's push for its speedy approval . 
The issue transcended party lines . 
Democrats voiced doubts , and many Republicans , particularly in the House , balked at the entreaties from Cheney , Bolten and other officials . 
`` Just because God created the world in seven days does n't mean we have to pass this bill in seven days , '' Rep. Joe Barton -LRB- R-Tex . -RRB- 
said after exiting a two-hour meeting with Cheney . 
Democratic leaders warned that they would not approve the biggest government intervention in the private markets since the Great Depression without significant Republican support . 
`` It 's their problem . 
It 's their bill . 
And they 're going to have to figure out if they can support it , '' said House Speaker Nancy Pelosi -LRB- D-Calif . -RRB- . 
Paulson and Bernanke , meanwhile , defended themselves before the Senate Banking , Housing and Urban Affairs Committee , where senators fumed that the administration had abetted the meltdown in the markets by failing to halt the spread of exotic home loans that are now falling into foreclosure at a record pace . 
A wide array of firms bought complicated financial instruments backed by those mortgages ; the administration is proposing to purchase those troubled assets to help those firms stay afloat . 
At times yesterday , Paulson and Bernanke almost seemed to echo the outrage from their questioners . 
`` I 'm not only concerned , I 'm angry about the things that got us here , '' Paulson said . 
`` It makes me angry , and it makes you angry . 
You talk about taxpayers being on the hook ? 
They 're already on the hook . 
If the system is n't stabilized , they 're going to bear the cost . '' 
The vice president got a warmer reception during a luncheon with Senate Republicans . 
But afterward , key GOP senators announced that they now agree with Democratic demands that the bailout package set limits on executive salaries at financial institutions that participate in the program . 
Democrats have argued that chief executives whose companies accept taxpayer money should not be permitted to pocket millions of dollars in bonuses or big severance packages known as `` golden parachutes . '' 
Paulson and the White House have objected to limits on executive compensation , saying limits would discourage successful firms from participating in the bailout . 
`` These are not all weak or troubled firms that own mortgage-backed securities , '' said White House spokesman Tony Fratto . 
`` They were not necessarily irresponsible players , and so you have to be careful about how you deal with them . '' 
But Republican senators , many of whom face voters in six weeks , have concluded otherwise . 
`` I think executive compensation ought to be part of this , '' Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell -LRB- R-Ky . -RRB- 
`` I think the taxpayers should expect no less than strict limits on what kind of executive compensation might be possible for those involved in these partially government-controlled enterprises . '' 
