Thoughts , comments , suggestions or criticisms about The Post 's Live Q&A s ? 
Send us an e-mail . 
Wednesday , September 24 , 2008 ; 2:00 PM Washington Post staff writers David Nakamura and Anita Kumar were online Wednesday , Sept. 24 at 2 p.m. ET to discuss how the lower home prices , unemployment and the downturn in the economy are causing budget shortfalls for D.C. , Virginia and Maryland . 
`` Virginia officials said yesterday that the state budget shortfall may be as wide as $ 3 billion over two years , triple what they estimated a month ago , while District officials said they are facing a gap of $ 131 million after years of surpluses . '' 
-- From Wednesday 's story Arlington , Va. : I see Gov. Kaine said he will not propose raising taxes . 
So , how much can I expect my taxes to go up ? 
Alexandria , Va. : Is it fair to assume we wo n't be seeing any progress on the Dulles Extension , a Silver Line , expanding I-66 inside the beltway , etc. , anytime soon ? 
Washington , D.C. : How much of this shortfall could DC avoid by rooting out some of the corruption and waste that plague it ? 
Washington , D.C. : Are we likely to see the District and Virginia , either at the state or county level , mandate unpaid leave or furloughs ? 
Anonymous : I 'm a home owner and do n't get it . 
Home prices are up and so are assessments . 
I know prices have dropped but the most recent assessment have not gone down . 
Where 's the revenue shortfall , foreclosures ? 
Other than the District , Maryland and Virginia added many new houses to their infrastructure . 
It seems there should be a solid base or equilibrium base to project revenues . 
David Nakamura : Good question . 
Here 's the answer , at least in D.C. West Falls Church , Va. : Did any of the governments budget conservatively ? 
The housing market , at the very least , has been bad for years now . 
I never understand why governments do n't plan for the worst , then , if they end up with a surplus , it 's a pleasant surprise . 
Columbia , Md. : My husband is a firefighter in PG County , which is furloughing all of its public safety employees for 56 hours -- 8 hours per pay period until next spring . 
I 've also heard that the county is closing some fire stations for several days or weeks as a money-saving tactic as well . 
I sure feel for anyone whose house catches fire when the station nearest them is closed . 
I also feel for those employees who lives paycheck to paycheck or whose spouses -LRB- like me -RRB- ca n't pick up the financial slack caused by an 8-hour pay loss every 2 weeks . 
There has to be a better way . 
Takoma Park , Md. : Is the market instability and clamp down on lending going to affect local businesses ? 
Anonymous : If the government is willing to subsidize Wall Street to the tune of $ 700 billion , could n't they send a few billion to the states ? 
David Nakamura : Considering Virginia alone is $ 3 billion in the hole , a few billion to the states might not go far . 
Of course , the federal government is already subsidizing local budgets . 
In D.C. , the city uses $ 5.5 billion in local funds , but it 's overall budget , including federal money and grants , is more than $ 9 billion . 
DC tax revenue shortfalls : A reader asked : `` Where 's the revenue shortfall , foreclosures ? '' 
At least $ 40 million was stolen - that must hurt . 
Editor 's Note : washingtonpost.com moderators retain editorial control over Discussions and choose the most relevant questions for guests and hosts ; guests and hosts can decline to answer questions . 
washingtonpost.com is not responsible for any content posted by third parties . '' 
The Washington Post editorial staff was not involved in the moderation . 
