McCain Calls for Debate Delay to Focus on Financial Crisis Sen. John McCain -LRB- R-Ariz . -RRB- 
makes a statement in New York September 24 , 2008 , announcing he is suspending his campaign because of the economic crisis in the United States . 
-LRB- Brian Snyder\/Reuters -RRB- By Michael D. Shear and Robert Barnes NEW YORK -- The financial crisis on Wall Street overwhelmed the 2008 presidential race today , as Republican presidential nominee John McCain this afternoon said he would suspend his presidential campaign tomorrow to return to Washington to work on the proposed $ 700 billion bailout plan . 
Democratic rival Barack Obama declined to follow suit , saying he would return only if congressional leaders requested his presence and said there was no reason to suspend the campaign or delay Friday night 's presidential debate . 
A president , Obama said , `` is going to have to deal with more than one thing at a time . '' 
The dramatic events on the campaign trail began after Obama called McCain early this morning to seek a joint statement on on their goals for the bailout measure now being negotiated between Congress and the Bush administration . 
But before that statement was issued , McCain went before television cameras to say he was putting the campaign on hold and wanted to delay Friday night 's presidential debate on foreign policy . 
Among other things , McCain senior adviser Steve Schmidt said McCain would begin unilaterally pulling down his campaign ads and cease fundraising . 
`` It has become clear that no consensus has developed to support the Administration 's proposal , '' McCain said in a brief statement to reporters . 
`` I do not believe that the plan on the table will pass as it currently stands , and we are running out of time . '' 
McCain said he is calling on President Bush `` to convene a meeting with the leadership from both houses of Congress , including Senator Obama and myself . 
It is time for both parties to come together to solve this problem . '' 
President Bush said he welcomed the gesture . 
`` We are making progress in negotiations on the financial markets rescue legislation , but we have not finished it yet , '' said press secretary Dana Perino . 
`` Bipartisan support from Sens. McCain and Obama would be helpful in driving to a conclusion . '' 
But Democrats blasted McCain 's action as a political stunt , delivered as the economy has surged to the forefront of voters ' concerns , and to Obama 's advantage . 
Rep. Barney Frank -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
said McCain 's move was `` the longest ` Hail Mary ' in the history of either football or Marys . '' 
The chairman of the House Financial Services Committee , which was holding a hearing on the bailout , added `` I 'm not particularly focused on Senator McCain . 
I guess if I wanted expertise there -LRB- from the GOP ticket -RRB- , I 'd ask Sarah Palin . '' 
Democratic Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid of Nevada had a similar reaction . 
`` It would not be helpful at this time to have them come back during these negotiations and risk injecting presidential politics into this process or distract important talks about the future of our nation 's economy , '' Reid said . 
`` If that changes , we will call upon them . 
We need leadership ; not a campaign photo op . '' 
He added : `` If there were ever a time for both candidates to hold a debate before the American people about this serious challenge , it is now . '' 
McCain 's surprise announcement caught the Obama campaign off-guard -- officials were still waiting for McCain to return a call Obama had placed this morning seeking a joint statement on the bailout plan . 
`` At 8:30 this morning , Senator Obama called Senator McCain to ask him if he would join in issuing a joint statement outlining their shared principles and conditions for the Treasury proposal and urging Congress and the White House to act in a bipartisan manner to pass such a proposal , '' Obama spokesman Bill Burton said in a statement . 
`` At 2:30 this afternoon , Senator McCain returned Senator Obama 's call and agreed to join him in issuing such a statement . 
The two campaigns are currently working together on the details . '' 
The McCain version : `` Sen. Obama phoned Sen. McCain at 8:30 am this morning but did not reach him . 
The topic of Sen. Obama 's call to Sen. McCain was never discussed . 
Sen. McCain was meeting with economic advisers and talking to leaders in Congress throughout the day prior to calling Sen. Obama . 
At 2:30 pm , Sen. McCain phoned Sen. Obama and expressed deep concern that the plan on the table would not pass as it currently stands . 
He asked Sen. Obama to join him in returning to Washington to lead a bipartisan effort to solve this problem . 
Unlike his Democratic supporters , Obama declined to say McCain was playing politics . 
He said he wanted to go forward with the debate . 
`` That 's what I 'm preparing to do . 
My general view is that the American people need to know what we intend to do . '' 
He added : `` Senator McCain is running his campaign , I 'm running mine , '' though he noted the `` the fierce competition of this election and the enormous stakes involved . '' 
Obama campaign spokesman Robert Gibbs was more direct . 
The scene at the debate site in Oxford , Miss. . 
Friday night , he said , would consist of `` a stage , an audience , a moderator , and at least one presidential candidate . '' 
The Commission on Presidential Debates -LRB- CPD -RRB- said that it is `` moving forward with its plan for the first presidential debate at the University of Mississippi in Oxford , MS this Friday , September 26 , '' despite the McCain announcement . 
`` We believe the public will be well served by having all of the debates go forward as scheduled , '' the Commission said . 
McCain aides acknowledged that McCain called Bush before he returned Obama 's call , but they denied playing politics . 
`` You did n't hear a hint of a partisan attack or posturing in that statement , '' said McCain senior adviser Mark Salter . 
`` He really wants he and Senator Obama , leadership , throw in the chairmen , the administration , lock themselves in a room for the next 100 hours or however long it is between now and Monday morning and achieve some kind of consensus on something that will have the Congress 's support . '' 
Shailagh Murray , reporting from Clearwater , Fla. , and Paul Kane , Anne E. Kornblut and Dan Balz in Washington , D.C. , contributed to this report . 
By Web Politics Editor | September 24 , 2008 ; 2:58 PM ET McCain want to make noise so ppl can put atention no him . 
there are alot of ppl on the congress to work on ... Posted by : minimini | September 26 , 2008 1:57 AM | Report abuse Come on people ... do you really think that McCain pulled this just bc he is scared of debating with Obama ? 
This is a guy who has faced physical tourture and not only survived it but went right back into service knowing he could end up right back in that position ... and you think he is actually scared of voicing oppinions with another person . 
Really ???? please ... if you do n't like McCain thats one thing , and you are entitled to your opinion . 
But do n't take cheap shots at him bc you do n't know enough politicly to say anything truely damning against him . 
The Neo-con con is over . 
40 some days to go ! 
The Neo-con con is over . 
40 some days to go ! 
He is not even present to give his great financial wisdom that he and the Democrats say he has . 
If he is such a great leader why is he not focusing on the greatest issue at hand since the great depression ? 
Why is he not putting his wonderful debating skills to use bringing the democrats and republicans together to figure out a way to better the American public , the middle class , and the working people ? 
So Obama is telling all of use that the issue of the economy ; which the media has taken hold of and has pushed onto people as the next great depression in which the American public has been feeling the pinch and whom are scared and frightened about , is the fears of Americans are not important . 
That he has been working on this debate so much that he needs to put it on because he didn t waste his time on learning foreign policy to worry about what the American public is worried about . 
He shows that he is only worried about himself and being the president . 
Just as the media is only worried about their programming schedule ; `` Every network in America has that time laid out , '' Fox News anchor Shepard Smith said on the air Wednesday . 
`` There are thousands of people en route to Oxford , Miss. , at this point . 
For seven months they 've been working on this . '' 
Who really cares about what you want Obama says that ; It 's my belief that this is exactly the time when the American people need to hear from the person who , in approximately 40 days , will be responsible for dealing with this mess . 
The problem is Mr. Obama the debate is not about the economy it s about foreign policy ! 
In my opinion that is the Presidential stage and McCain is coming out ahead because he is putting the American public first and is trying to force a truce between republicans and democrats . 
Weather you like his tactics or not is put pressure on the Democrats to work more with the republicans to move this issue along . 
The Democrats do not want to look as if they are stalling this issue . 
Plus , they don t want this debate to be put on hold and have it on their heads . 
`` He then said I would actually also like to look at us potentially suspending campaigns and pushing debates off . 
What I suggested to him was , well , why do n't we get the joint statement out first and our staffs will discuss this , '' Obama said . 
`` I think the only -- the only possible miscommunication might have been how quickly there was an announcement -LRB- by McCain -RRB- and somebody was on television . 
I think probably my assumption was that the joint statement would go out initially , '' said Obama . 
First things first , Mr. Obama everyone knows what happens when you assume something . 
Secondly , to be completely honest ; who care who came up with the idea ? 
It s not who thought it up , it s about who took the initiative to go out on a limb and take the bulls by the horn to try and solve the problem . 
Barry Obama is acting like a grade school kid who needs attention and praise . 
Grow up and do the job you think you deserve ! 
E-Verify has been touted by the U.S. Dept. of Homeland Security as '' ... one of the nations best and most effective tools for ensuring a legal workforce . '' 
And according to the General Accountability Office , `` E-Verify is 99.5 % effect . '' 
Senator Menendez -LRB- D-NJ -RRB- has placed a hold on the E-Verify bill and is trying to hijack it by insisting on an increase of over half a million visas for foreign workers next year . 
`` The E-Verify Program MUST be authorized before it expires in November if U.S. Citizens are to believe our Congress is serious at all about restoring the rule of law , '' per Senator Sessions . 
E-Verify is one of the governments most successful programs targeting workplace enforcement of our immigration laws and is now in danger of being eliminated . 
The federal government has breeched its Constitutionally required duty under Article IV , Section IV to protect citizens and states from foreign invasion , instead choosing to play politics with the law and mislabeling the invasion -LRB- of an estimated 12-20 million armed and unarmed Mexican citizens and another 4-8 million non-Mexicans -RRB- as merely unfortunate -- ignoring the $ 300 + billion yearly impact on local and state governments and landslide of negative impacts on Americans . 
The leaders of this Democratic Congress are hoping U.S. Citizens wo n't be paying much attention as they try to betray us yet again regarding enforcement of our immigration laws and using programs that work against illegal workers . 
They are hoping We are too busy with the Presidential election and the meltdown of our economy , which illegal immigration has contributed greatly to , as our lawmakers still continue to pander to corporate america . 
Dash Nancy Pelosi and Senator Harry Reids hopes that Senator Robert Menendezs ' attempts to block E-Verify will work ! 
Menendez is putting his personal views ahead of our national interests . 
CONTACT YOUR SENATORS NOW - TELL THEM TO AUTHORIZE E-VERIFY ! 
This is a national crisis . 
Nobody interests in Mr. Obama ! 
Bush won the war in Iraq . 
But it will be McCain who will win the war at home . 
Good one , McCain . 
But your Hail Mary pass was knocked out of bounds by the American people . 
Take it like a man . 
Do the debate , and let your running mate deal with the press like every candidate before in American history . 
You can run but you ca n't hide from America . 
We 're kind of like Santa . 
We see you when you 're sleeping , we know when you 're awake . 
So be a good boy and maybe by Christmas you wo n't be completely ruined by your own shenanigans . 
And btw , if you do n't want all this , call it off . 
It 'll save you a lot of trouble . 
That is because he is not . 
Both are tied in a statistical dead heat as of 09\/24\/08 . 
Oh , the poll that shows Obama up by 9 , that was thrown out for bias polling in demographics and race issues . 
McCain pointed this mess out in 2006 and co-sponsored s. 190 that would have averted this mess . 
McCain will get the deal signed by Monday with no thanks to Barry the Kid ! 
Sean Hannity said so , darnit , I think . 
Is anyone else a little sick of EVEN MORE diversionary tactics by the Republican Party ? 
Is 8 years of this b.s. not quite enough ? 
McCain , face the music , your oratorical beating is coming no matter how long the delay . 
And it is n't because Obama is a gifted speaker or for any other reason than the fact that you can no longer run from your own mistakes or those of your party . 
These debates actually do matter ; more American citizens than ever before realize the monumental importance of this election . 
Be a man already . 
This is a gimmick . 
Plus , McCain has released really nasty tv commercials in Michigan , about AAyres and Wright . 
McCain is linking Obama to Kilpatrick ??? Obama refused to SPEAK to Kilpatrick ! 
McCain and his campaign thinks everyone is stupid ! 
Bush told him Americans are stupid , and they have been , UP UNTIL NOW ! 
8 YEARS OF BUSH IS ENOUGH ! 
CAN YOU IMAGINE A MCCAIN ADMINISTRATION !!! OBAMA IS SURE AND STEADY . 
wE NEED A STEADY HAND TO LEAD US THROUGH THESE DISASTERS ! 
i.e. , gamble it away ? 
And now wants to bail out , hyperthetically , people he considers just mere compulsive Mr Obama stated that he would want to see that tax payers who are faced with bank closures on their homes and businesses protected in any bail out . 
And your head bookkeeper in Congress , reckons any bailout as suggested could make will do to avert a complex situation , other than avoid debating foreign affairs ? 
Politics Mr McCain is what you are in . 
And if you ca n't handle a debate on foreign relations , etc. , and become informed re the financial situation at the same time God Help You . 
It 's going to get worse if and I say if you become President . 
Palin to sit in for you while you debate with Sen. Obama . 
If she takes her handy calculator with her she might solve the problem in no time ? 
LOL Posted by : bush-bunny | September 25 , 2008 2:02 AM | Report abuse Obviously you really do n't understand what is the root cause of this crisis . 
It can not be explained in a 100 words or less sound bite so there is n't much point to try to explain it here . 
I suggest you do a bit of research , there are plenty of general circulation papers on line . 
Go read the Wall Street Journal for another source . 
Ok , so maybe it can be summed up in one word , greed . 
Then he may be ready to debate and talk about the economy . 
BUT at this rate , McSlime and Pain will NEVER debate before Nov. 4th . 
After all , the Repub camapign said the vote is not about issues but about personality . 
Like who has `` racial misgivings , '' who is more of a celebrity , who can see Russia and skin a moose and kill wolves from helipcopters better . 
And the media is letting him get away with this crap . 
Just like his wife let him get away with calling her a `` CU \* T '' in front of strange men . 
We are all going bankrupt because this bottom-of-the-class 20 + years Senator voted to regulate every time Posted by : lin | September 25 , 2008 1:42 AM | Report abuse Obama is still waiting for axelrod to type something into the teleprompter before he knows which way to go on this one . 
WHAT WAS I THINKING THAT OBAMA SHOULD ACTUALLY GO TO WORK . 
DOES N'T MATTER , HE WILL JUST SHOW UP AND VOTE PRESENT . 
OBAMA NOT AN EXPERT ON ANYTHING BUT RUNNING SMEAR CAMPAIGNS . 
BUT HEY MCCAIN ACTUALLY RECOGNIZES THAT OUR FINANCIAL SECURITY IS HEADED TO THE TOILET AND WE NEED TO CLEAN IT UP AND SAVE IT BEFORE IT IN DOWN THE TUBES AND SOMEHOW LIBERALS HAVE CHALKED IT UP AS SOME KIND OF POLITICAL PLOT . 
GET OFF THE CRACK PIPE ! 
However , I remember George W. Bush negotiating down the number of debates in both 2000 and 2004 . 
I remember McCain 's thinly disguised request to change the format of all debates to ` town hall style ' settings . 
I remember George W. Bush holding a fraction of the press conferences any other modern president has held while in office . 
And now we are learning that Governor Palin is basically on press lockdown . 
The old saying , ` what you do n't know ca n't hurt you ' is totally false . 
Despite a constant effort on the part of the political machinations of the G.O.P. , what we have n't known has hurt us very much over the last 7.5 years . 
Senator McCain , go to Oxford . 
IT 'S OBVIOUS THE CLOWN IS CLUELESS ! 
FIRST HE SAYS NO TO MCCAIN NOW HE SAYS `` OH SURE , MR PRESIDENT , I 'LL COME MEET WITH YOU '' SO SOMEHOW THE VERRY PERSON HE HAS BEEN HATING ON THE LAST 2 YEARS CONVINCED HIM TO CHANGE HIS MIND TO COME TO WASHINGTON ? 
HE KNOWS HE WAS WRONG FOR DECLINING TO GO TO WASHINGTON AND DO HIS JOB ! 
FOR THE MORONS WHO CA N'T SEEM TO READ BETWEEN THE LINES , HE IS NOWAY CLOSE TO BEING READY TO LEAD . 
MCCAIN\/PALIN 08 ALL THE WAY Posted by : OBAMA IS A CLOWN | September 25 , 2008 1:08 AM | Report abuse It 's ironic that Republicans accused Obama of coming across as self-important , yet here 's McCain saying that he -LRB- who by his own admission is weak on economics -RRB- will step into this `` fray '' over the bailout bill and get the two sides to come together to save the day . 
How 's that for chutzpah ? 
McCain has n't been in the senate since April . 
If he ca n't multi-task , then he should n't be President . 
He knows he will be beaten in the debate . 
Pay a former campaign aide to John McCain $ 30,000 a month for five years following the senator 's failed bid in 2000 for the presidency . 
At any other time , it would be business as usual in Washington . 
The money came from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , two failed housing giants that are a huge part of the financial crisis imperiling the economy . 
And the recipient of most of the funds is McCain 's current campaign manager , Rick Davis . 
`` The payments are for ` access insurance ' with the Republican Party and with someone very close to McCain , '' James Thurber , director of American University 's Center for Congressional and Presidential Studies , said Wednesday . 
Thurber , who teaches lobbying and spent seven years looking into the conduct of political campaigns , says the money to Davis is especially instructive with regard to McCain , who bills himself as the candidate who will change the way Washington works . 
Good-government groups say Washington 's money trail goes a long way in explaining why the country finds itself having to hang its future on a financial bailout that may or may not work . 
Over the years , the hated `` r '' word regulation came up frequently in Congress with regard to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , but not often enough , financial experts say in retrospect . 
McCain was among those who said more regulation was needed , a point his campaign emphasized in lambasting The New York Times for writing about the payments to Davis and his lobbying firm . 
In the end , the idea of reining in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac always got buried under a cascade of dollars that went to both Democrats and Republicans , concludes a report by Common Cause . 
Before this month 's inconvenient crackup , Fannie Mae gave more than 60 percent of its $ 916,000 in campaign donations this election cycle to Democrats in Congress , since the party broke Republicans ' long grip on Capitol Hill . 
Likewise , Freddie Mac gave 54 percent of its $ 478,000 in donations to Democrats , according to figures from the Center for Responsive Politics , a private group that tracks money in politics . 
Overall , the financial sector has contributed $ 1.6 billion to federal candidates and their parties since 1997 , the center says . 
The money game in Washington is played in a myriad of ways and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac played it to the hilt . 
Campaign contributions , fundraisers and hiring the well-connected are all part of it . 
In Davis 's case , Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac set him up to run an entity they created and paid for called the Homeownership Alliance . 
It promoted Fannie 's and Freddie 's achievements and discouraged any changes to the wide-open road on which Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac operated . 
Everyone Barack Obama 's campaign included profited , at least until now . 
On Wednesday , McCain 's campaign pushed back . 
`` Mr. Davis has never never been a lobbyist for either Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac , '' the McCain campaign said in criticizing the news media 's focus on the payments to Davis and his lobbying firm . 
Robert McCarson , who was director of corporate relations at Fannie Mae from 1999 to 2004 , said it is `` ironic that the campaign that bills itself as the campaign of reform would give such a legalistic answer . 
`` The reality is that Rick Davis did n't have to register as a lobbyist to do his most powerful lobbying , which was to be the person that John McCain staked his future in as his campaign manager , '' said McCarson , a Democrat who was an aide in 1990-91 to then-Rep . 
Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. Posted by : McCain | September 25 , 2008 12:55 AM | Report abuse WHAT A SCUM BAG OBAMA IS ! 
WE HAVE A HUGE ENORMIOUS PROBLEM AND HE WANTS TO JUST SIMPLY KEEP ON SCHEDULE . 
IT IS ALL ABOUT HIM AND HIS CAREER . 
HE DOES N'T CARE ABOUT THIS COUNTRY . 
FOR THE PEOPLE ON HERE WHO HAVE THE CAJONES TO TRY AND JUSTIFY WHY THIS IDIOT OBAMA WO N'T DO HIS JOB , I FEEL SORRY FOR YOU . 
YOU POOR PATHETIC SOULS . 
STOP DRINKIN THE KOOL AIDE ! 
I agree 100 % . 
And that President 's name is Bush . 
It then shows a photograph of an elderly white woman taxpayer who has supposedly been `` stuck with the bill '' as a result of the `` extensive financial fraud '' at Fannie Mae . 
The Obama campaign last night issued a statement by Raines insisting , `` I am not an advisor to Barack Obama , nor have I provided his campaign with advice on housing or economic matters . '' 
Obama spokesman Bill Burton went a little further , telling me in an e-mail that the campaign had `` neither sought nor received '' advice from Raines `` on any matter . '' 
So what evidence does the McCain campaign have for the supposed Obama-Raines connection ? 
It is pretty flimsy , but it is not made up completely out of whole cloth . 
McCain spokesman Brian Rogers points to three items in the Washington Post in July and August . 
It turns out that the three items -LRB- including an editorial -RRB- all rely on the same single conversation , between Raines and a Washington Post business reporter , Anita Huslin , who wrote a profile of the discredited Fannie Mae boss that appeared on July 16 . 
The profile reported that Raines , who retired from Fannie Mae four years ago , had `` taken calls from Barack Obama 's presidential campaign seeking his advice on mortgage and housing policy matters . '' 
Since this has now become a campaign issue , I asked Huslin to provide the exact circumstances of the quote . 
She explained that she was chatting with Raines during the photo shoot , and asked `` if he was engaged at all with the Democrats ' quest for the White House . 
He said that he had gotten a couple of calls from the Obama campaign . 
I asked him about what , and he said ` oh , general housing , economy issues . ' 
-LRB- ` Not mortgage\/foreclosure meltdown or Fannie-specific , ' I asked , and he said ` no. ' -RRB- '' By Raines 's own account , he took a couple of calls from someone on the Obama campaign , and they had some general discussions about economic issues . 
I have asked both Raines and the Obama people for more details on these calls and will let you know if I receive a reply . 
Over the past week Team McCain has perfected a new kind of political attack that should offend the sensibilities of campaign junkies everywhere -- simply because it 's so counterproductive . 
First , McCain chastises Obama for committing a sin that he himself has committed . 
Then Obama points this out , distracting voters from his own foibles and refocusing the spotlight on McCain . 
For Obama , the impact of the attack is immediately negated . 
But for McCain it 's doubled : he ends up looking both a -RRB- guilty of whatever he accused Obama of and b -RRB- totally hypocritical . 
The real problem here is that McCain 's campaign is swarming with 26 advisers or fundraisers who have lobbied for Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac -- including nearly a dozen who lobby right now . 
As the Washington Monthly 's Steve Benen wrote last week , `` one of McCain 's top policy advisers , Charlie Black , was lobbyist for Freddie Mac for 10 years , while his campaign manager , Rick Davis , lobbied to help Fannie and Freddie steer clear of additional federal regulations -LRB- and earned $ 2 million in the process -RRB- ... Tom Loeffler , who serves McCain 's campaign co-chairman , also lobbied for Fannie Mae . 
Aquiles Suarez , a McCain economic adviser , was a Fannie Mae executive . 
Dan Crippen , a McCain adviser who helped craft the campaign 's health-care policy , lobbied for Fannie Mae -LRB- and Merrill Lynch -RRB- . 
Arthur B. Culvahouse , who helped lead McCain 's VP search committee , also lobbied for Fannie Mae . '' 
According to former Fannie Mae executive William Maloni , `` photographs of Sen. McCain 's staff ... loo -LRB- k -RRB- to me like the team of lobbyists who used to report to me . '' 
Without these ties -- which are far more extensive than Obama 's -- McCain would have every right to say that associating with officials from troubled financial institutions is a sign of bad judgment . 
Again , it 's not like Obama 's hands are spotless . 
But with them , McCain offers Obama an otherwise unavailable opportunity to remind voters that McCain 's own judgment -- at least by McCain 's own standards -- is worse . 
In his announcement to temporarily suspend his Presidential campaign to return to Washington D.C. to work toward a bipartisan solution to the nation 's economic situation , Sen. McCain is demonstrating what real leadership is . 
John McCain is putting our country first and politics second . 
It 's the right thing to do . 
Sen. Barack Obama should follow Sen. McCain 's lead Posted by : Anonymous | September 25 , 2008 12:32 AM | Report abuse McCain reason for wanting to delay the debate with Obama - The Pit Bull ate his notes ... Posted by : citystreet | September 25 , 2008 12:32 AM | Report abuse no he has not got druping jaws because he has had a stork . 
He has been trying out for a movie called `` the God Father to the Rescue '' I thought he had tried out for the duet part with Fontella Bass with the song `` Rescue Me '' then someone I know said those were all lies and that he was going to sign a bill for more war . 
But when to assended on the mob at D.C. they all laughted and said we knew you would fall for it . 
those knots are getting bigger with each passing day , he is gritting and grinding his teeth because he is falling behind in the polls . 
Banks use to require an income appropriate to the debt undertaken . 
Democrats called this `` Red lining '' and `` encouraged '' -LRB- with a big stick -RRB- lending institutions to relax these discriminatory practices . 
Frank Raines the Obama financial adviser today was the CEO of Fannie Mae when this payment began . 
Frank Raines was Clinton 's Budget manager and fired for Fannie Mae in 2005 for failure of leadership !! he left making almost a 100 million dollars !! Top Recipients of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Campaign Contributions , 1989-2008 1 . 
Dodd , Christopher D-CT $ 133,900 2 . 
Kerry , John D-MA $ 111,000 3 . 
Obama , Barack D-IL $ 105,849 4 . 
Clinton , Hillary D-NY $ 75,550 No wonder Obama doesn t want to go back to Washington We re in this financial mess because the realities of economics trumps the liberal social programs every time Posted by : Mike | September 25 , 2008 12:21 AM | Report abuse Yes , brave McChicken turned about And gallantly he chickened out . 
Bravely taking to his feet He beat a very brave retreat , Bravest of the brave , John McChicken ! 
Obama is liked for his steadfastness , cool , ability to think . 
That is typical Republican thinking . 
he just vanished into the clouds . 
maybe he is the assending lord of spin and majic . 
did you see that , oh that was john going to get more depends . 
An interesting vote of no-confidence in their party 's candidate , Posted by : WylieD | September 25 , 2008 12:07 AM | Report abuse In a time of crisis , everyone does what they do best . 
McCain goes into action and looks for resolution to a serious problem ... a leader Obama goes to speeches and platitudes and looks for his teleprompter ... an empty suit Posted by : Mike | September 25 , 2008 12:06 AM | Report abuse that dropping jaw is not a stroke it a bore . 
John McCain looks like a President today . 
In his announcement to temporarily suspend his Presidential campaign to return to Washington D.C. to work toward a bipartisan solution to the nation 's economic situation , Sen. McCain is demonstrating what real leadership is . 
John McCain is putting our country first and politics second . 
It 's the right thing to do . 
Sen. Barack Obama should follow Sen. McCain 's lead Posted by : j | September 25 , 2008 12:02 AM | Report abuse McCain says that he has `` suspended '' his campaign for obvious reasons ; but instead , he has `` ABANDONED '' it . 
Obama 's actions have shown Americans that instead of `` abandoning '' us as McCain has , he will stick with us and stick up for us during this critical time . 
Looks like I 'm right on something ... AT LAST ! 
he will not leave you for phoney postureing and make up silly stories for silly people to fall for . 
you my friend are a kookkist - krazy - koolaidist . 
Obama for 2008 as far as I am concerned Obama has my vote he has been instrumental in helping me and others keep our pensions . 
McCain is obviously a man who refuses to play the hand that 's dealt and tries to change the rules whenever things are n't going his way . 
This is n't the sign of leadership , but rather a pathetic little boy who always wants to have his way . 
It 's time he go back home to his mama , and let the adult -LRB- i.e. Obama -RRB- take care of this country !!! Posted by : jh1401 | September 24 , 2008 11:55 PM | Report abuse How is McCain going to `` solve '' the bailout bill ? 
He is n't in the majority , he is n't in the executive branch , he is n't in Republican leadership , and he is n't on the relevant committees . 
As far as I know , there is no plan for Congress and the exec branch to meet from 8-9 :30 pm on Friday night to work on the bailout and even if they were , McCain is n't needed there to figure it out . 
I frankly do n't want a man who thought the fundamentals of our economy were sound 8 days ago directing or even giving input on how to fix the very obviously broken economy . 
Scam , scam , scam . 
I see now you are a \* parody \* of Republican posts . 
Man , it 's hard to tell the difference between Republicans and parodies of Republicans . 
clanist and olive oilist . 
I know , November 5th . 
Face it , mccain mcchicken will never debate Obama . 
And by the way , Mooseburger will never debate Joe Biden . 
After all , when was the last time any republikan had anything worthwhile to say to working class Americans ? 
Financial crisis my foot ! 
Let those rich crooks fail . 
I would n't postpone lunch to give them the time of day . 
So Marxism = Not McCain ? 
And yet you believe in the party that is asking for $ 700 billion to nationalize the financial sector ? 
That 's not Marxism ? 
But anything else is ? 
I 'm at a loss to imagine what exactly you think Marxism is . 
I really ca n't even think of how to challenge such a deep , profound , limitless ignorance . 
But let me repeat your post so everyone absorbs it : `` I do n't like McCain , but the alternative is Marxism . '' 
We are probably all familiar with the children s poem about Chicken Little -LRB- McCain -RRB- . 
This rather `` dumb cluck '' was struck on the head with an acorn -LRB- bailout plan -RRB- and she immediately concluded that the sky was falling -LRB- financial crisis -RRB- . 
She quickly gathered her friends , Goosey Loosey , Ducky Lucky and Turkey Lurky -LRB- Paulson , Bush W , Bernacke -RRB- , sharing her alarming news with them . 
As the panicked group ran off to tell the king -LRB- the American People -RRB- , the cunning Foxy Loxy -LRB- Obama -RRB- had them all for lunch -LRB- Friday debate -RRB- , literally . 
John McCain was a prisoner of war for 5 years , and he ca n't hold up to the pressure of attending a meeting in DC on Thursday and going to a Friday debate in MS with Obama . 
How can he stand up to Iran or North Korea when they call him out to debate their nuclear weapons program -- I guess he will fly to Crawford , Texas and be with Turkey Lurkey -LRB- bush W -RRB- . 
E-mail John McCain and tell him to meet Obama in MS on Friday so the American People can hear them debate ! 
That 's what I had marked for Friday , and that 's what I intend to see from these political figures . 
One can be tuned in on the issues , informed , but also address the people as well . 
I need that in a president . 
I find it important . 
What 's 45 minutes each going to do , out of a whole day ? 
Why not meet before and after the debate ? 
that the Campaign was never suspended , as the media had misquoted , yet again , their intentions . 
In fact it was Obama 's suggestion , to hold a joint meeting on the economy , and they assumed that meant an all day summit on Friday in Washington , thus making it impossible to hold a debate on the same day . 
Obama should be ashamed of putting politics first ... '' . 
- end of statement . 
think !! Posted by : AMT64 | September 24 , 2008 11:15 PM I 've called Senator Obama for what he is : A liar and a Marxist . 
I 'm qualified to be a John McChicken supporter because I can flip-flop just as good as John McChicken can . 
lol lol just like a neocon . 
This is the time to face each other . 
What is McCaine hiding . 
Lack of knowledge on the issues without a teleprompter ? 
Have you seen the left side of McCain 's face ? 
He 's had a mild stroke ! 
Can explain exactly what marxism is and how Obama has shown himself to be one ? 
No I ca n't because I do n't want to open myself up for honest criticism of a man who just gave the McChicken sandwich at McDonalds a bad name . 
McDonalds should sue John McChicken . 
This is the time to face each other . 
What is McCaine hiding . 
Lack of knowledge on the issues without a teleprompter ? 
Democrats , Debates are not won or lost by logic , but rather on the emotional reaction of the audience to the candidate . 
Therefore do n't count your chickens yet . 
Republicans , you know this is political games-manship . 
The question is how will it play with the public . 
Honestly , I wanted to hear their answers to our current crises . 
And how they react under the glare of TV lights . 
Thus , I think many undecide will resent McCains suspension of his campaign . 
The man who sold us out as a POW is now running away from the Presidential campaign . 
This is a democracy . 
Even Hoover did n't call off the election of 1932 , during the depths of the Great Depression . 
talking about them is tiring and hearing about them is boring . 
it is a good thing he will not be president because he would need to halt the state of the union address to get more depends and polish . 
Can explain exactly what marxism is and how Obama has shown himself to be one ? 
then we wo n't have to worry about socialism , marxism , or any of the other garbage lies that I am spewing to take the heat off of John McChicken . 
There are a lot of swiss bank accounts growing in size by the second and being converted into gold bullion . 
Those of you hurling insults are chasing independents away from McCain . 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
McCain is a chicken ! 
McCain has no balls ! 
There is NO WAY he can avoid the debate without looking stupid . 
It takes 2 hours to fly from DC to Oxford , MS in a private plane with traffic escorts . 
75 % of people want the debates and campaigns to go ahead . 
We must be able to assess how the people who will be left with this mess will handle it . 
McCain will need to explain how he 'll cut the average CEO 's taxes by $ 700,000 and only cut the average nurse 's tax by $ 435 -LRB- while making her employer subsidized health care fully taxable -RRB- build nuclear power plants , pay for the bailout and still balance the books . 
I am prepared to debate any Republican willing to debate real economic issues . 
Those of you hurling insults are chasing independents away from McCain . 
McCain just ca n't drop everything to attend a crisis . 
The whole country is in crisis on many fronts ! 
This smells of injecting Presidential politics into an already barely bipartisan effort - what chance is there now of crafting a successful bailout agreement with McCain running around and poking his finger into things that are moving along with relative speed ? 
In fact , now by inserting Presidential politics there is even a greater chance that the bailout will come to nothing ! 
This is not only unpresidential - it 's irresponsible by causing even more fears in the market . 
think !! Posted by : AMT64 | September 24 , 2008 11:15 PM I 've called Senator Obama for what he is : A liar and a Marxist . 
Before you start calling me or other patriots neocons ... you might want to understand what you are calling us . 
The current usage of the term by far left socialists who use the term as a derogatory term to decribe conservatives has a comical result . 
Ironically the term did not orginally and still does not decribe in any understandable way the beliefs of the opposition party that the current users of the term intend . 
Given a vocabulary of 1000-2000 it becomes obvious why socialists want to label conservatives something derrogatory . 
The humorous side comes when educated readers quickly see how inadequate the attempt becomes . 
So before you use the word neocon as some kind of `` cut '' on a republican , you might want to know the term is really the definition of a Democrat who does n't believe in socialism . 
So if you are criticizing those Democrats who do n't believe in socialism , does that mean you are a proponent of socialism ? 
Unfortunately for the free and proud of the US of A , that is most likely the case . 
have you noticed when things dont go his way he does DRASTIC things ? 
Think about this type of logic in a National emergency ! 
This man could have us in WW3 just because some country did not do what ` he ' wanted . 
Come neo 's or Rebuplicans ca n't you see he is already showing signs of ` stress ' which means you think s. Palin should be President . . 
Think about the Country -LRB- our Country -RRB- . 
All you can do against Obama is come up with Racist BS . . 
think !! Posted by : AMT64 | September 24 , 2008 11:15 PM | Report abuse Posted by : Janet McCabe | September 24 , 2008 11:15 PM | Report abuse LeeHInAlexandria , so it 's ok for you and your kind to sink to the level of the I Hate America liberals as you call them ? 
You are no better , in fact I expected more out of the republicans than this . 
I have to wonder just how much you love America if you 're so willing to swim in this filth . 
McCain is not a Reagan Republican anymore like he once was and neither are many of his co-Republicans in Congress . 
What we need is less government not more . 
Does anyone see the sick irony here ? 
Shakespeare couldn t write this stuff ! 
Mccain are you strong enough , are you mentally fit and is your health capable to endure the demand for the job ? 
We should not hand over a blank check to the discretion of one man . 
We support an independent , bipartisan board to ensure accountability and complete transparency . 
Second , we need to protect taxpayers . 
There should be a path for taxpayers to recover their money , and to turn a profit if Wall Street prospers . 
Third , no Wall Street executive should profit from taxpayer dollars . 
This plan can not be a welfare program for CEOs whose greed and irresponsibility has contributed to this crisis . 
Fourth , we must help families who are struggling to stay in their homes . 
We can not bail out Wall Street without helping millions of families facing foreclosure on Main Street . 
Fifth , we both agree that this financial rescue package should move on its own without any earmarks or other measures . 
We have different views about the need for other action , but this must be a clean bill . 
This is a time to rise above politics for the good of the country . 
We can not risk an economic catastrophe . 
This is not a Democratic problem or a Republican problem - this is an American problem . 
Now , we must find an American solutions . 
It looks kind of dead , like the side of his face is falling . 
Is it a stroke coming ? 
I do n't remember him looking like this . 
Maybe that 's why he 's taking time off . 
We benefit by knowing Obama 's position . 
Senator McCain benefits because his confusion and lapses remain hidden . 
Besides , what more can Senator McCain say which President Bush has not already said ? 
I have respect for some things about McCain . 
This move ... is scary . 
He has no role on the finance committee . 
He is not an economic expert . 
He has not been part of ongoing discussions . 
What exactly does he think his presence accomplishes ? 
Moreover , what does his presence during the day have to do with his debate at night ? 
More than just being blatantly political , which I expect from all politicians on both sides , this is just blatantly reckless . 
And he is not done yet . 
Watch the headlines and follow John McCain . 
Maybe that is why McCain is doing this . 
If he loses Virginia even if he wins Florida and Ohio he loses the election . 
Bold move when you know you are losing is not a risk . 
Its all about changing the dynamics . 
You have to wonder though . 
With all this running from scrutiny of the McCain Campaign does McCain believe in freedom of the press . 
You are no better , in fact I expected more out of the republicans than this . 
I have to wonder just how much you love America if you 're so willing to swim in this filth . 
The most important thing right now is the bailout of the illegal 's home purchases . 
Depression is pretty easy to understand . 
Not behind Sarah 's skirts , and not in the Oval Office with your mentor . 
Both you and that Polar bear-hating bimbo have to face the American public before November . 
You might as well come out Friday and take your whuppin ' like a man . 
You 'll regret it if you do n't . 
We have a President in office already and we have an elected Congress . 
They should be working on this . 
It 's not like McCain is the guy who is in charge that he needs to postpone the debate and rush to DC . 
Also , Senator Reid was telling people around the capital today that he really needed John McCain here in DC to get a deal done . 
Encumbent presidents manage crises and campaigns all the time , if he ca n't multi task he has no business running and should not be elected . 
If you want to know the real reason for this panic reaction , take a look at the softball interview of Palin by Katie Couric - after all this preparation she is still incapable of getting out of the talking points . 
McCain and company are terrified and this call to stop campaigning is nothing more than an attempt to change the subject . 
They 've gone from Palin Mania to actual hysteria . 
They 're throwing mud as fast as they can . 
You have to wonder though , they 're not all insane , not all of them are morons . 
What are they going to do tonight when they lay down to sleep , how many of them are going to be able to admit what 's happened here today ? 
How many votes did McCain lose today , how many of his supporters are just not going to bother voting because of what they 've seen their candidate do . 
I know he 's lost a lot of the independents . 
I was only going to vote for Obama defensively , to keep McCain out . 
Now I can vote for whomever I wish , there is n't a chance that McCain will win . 
= abandon the presidential debates ... Prologue -LRB- Part I strategy of distraction -RRB- = shock the electorate with a gun-totting , moose hunting , `` can see Russia from Alaska '' hockey mum with lipstick . 
The shock has dissipated and the despair has now set in on this part . 
So guess what is the Part III of his strategy of distraction ? 
Postpone the Presidential elections for at least another 4 years or until this mess is all sorted out , and have his close pal continue as lame duck , globally discredited president . 
Part IV : ... your guess . 
Do you want to know more about the Keating 5 scandal ? 
It 's one of McCain 's more dishonorable moments . 
To learn more about McCain and the Keating 5 , you can visit a helpful website - Posted by : Allen6 | September 24 , 2008 11:05 PM | Report abuse look at Dianne72 John McCain , look at the people who claim to be your most devoted followers . 
These are the kind of people you want on your side ? 
I 'm becoming ashamed of you John McCain . 
That impacted our economy . 
Houses are not selling . 
Yes the lenders screwed up , but if the housing market had not dipped , they could have recovered ... however , due to our trmendous DEBT ... due to ... THE USELESS WAR in Iraq ... here we are ... Posted by : doctorlily | September 24 , 2008 11:03 PM | Report abuse Let 's cut this BS by Republicans . 
We have a President in office already and we have an elected Congress . 
They should be working on this . 
It 's not like McCain is the guy who is in charge that he needs to postpone the debate and rush to DC . 
McCain wants the three debates agreed to . 
He simply asked to reschedule Friday 's debate . 
Perhaps Obama is fearful that he 'll forget the cramming he 's done over the last few days and will have to relearn his talking points once again . 
That would be great . 
Yes the man Obama picked for his experience and wisdom and foreign affairs ability said this : `` When the stock market crashed , Franklin Roosevelt got on the television and did n't just talk about the princes of greed . 
He said , ` look , here 's what happened . ' '' 
-- Sen. Joe Biden , in an interview with CBS News . 
Of course , as Reason points out , Roosevelt was n't president in 1929 and televisions were still experimental . 
Yes could you imagine if Palin or McCain said this ? 
The WP parrots could n't contain themselves ... their feathers would be flying and want McCain sent to an institution immediately and Palin back in beauty contests . 
Yes Democrats and WP parrots , so sorry your STUCK WITH TWEEDLEDEE AND TWEEDLEDUM . 
The only choice you have have is which one is TWEEDLEDEE and which one is TWEEDLEDUM Yes , you can start debating that now Posted by : Mike | September 24 , 2008 11:01 PM | Report abuse Okay , I actually am a shrink . 
I like the idea that McCain is controlling . 
Most people who suffer from Post Traumatic Stress do tend to exhibit such behaviors . 
I wonder if McCain has ever been treated for PTSD , as many war veterans returning from traumatic experiences have . 
Having said that , Obama showed a real strength in not letting McCain manipulate him . 
Remember when Katrina hit , Bush hemmed and haaad ... not sure what to do . 
McSame is also using stalling tactics because he knows Obama will eat him for lunch when it comes to FACTS , intelligent debataing , hello Obama is a Harvard Law man ... pleeeeeeeease ... McCain is dust . 
and Palin is dust too once Biden gets his teeth in her ... Posted by : doctorlily | September 24 , 2008 10:59 PM | Report abuse McCain need this deal to be done , so he can get more campaign funds ! 
If McCain debated Barr , Americans would see that the GOP is NOT `` Conservative '' at all , rather the NEO-GOP has become BIGGER SOCIALISTS than the DEMS , case in point , the `` BAIL-OUTS '' . 
Those concerned about the economy would see that the LIBERTARIANS are the ONLY REAL `` Fiscally Responsible Conservative '' Party in this race and that could be a BIG problem for McSame ! 
Yep , McCain is probably wise to CUT AND RUN , although it makes him look like a COWARD ! 
These are the kind of people you want on your side ? 
I 'm becoming ashamed of you John McCain . 
What are the Republicans thinking ? 
The Republicans really do n't know how to run a government , do they ? 
I am so glad that the Republicans will be out of the White House soon . 
President Obama will do a much better job -LRB- after he cleans up the Republicans ' mess -RRB- . 
Am I the only one smelling a rat here ? 
I do and so do others who have been doing a little investigation into why the fed is causeing the crises . 
the fed the neocons and the central banker along with the globalist are a busy bunch of money masters . 
mater over my tax and my prosperity and the master minds of the tanking of the middle class . 
you repucks need to study and show yourself aproved just like you silly religious gang . 
The VPs of companies get huge severance packages , while the workers are laid off by the thousands ? 
`` John McCain has been quick to criticize the lucrative payouts for the heads of bailed-out mortgage lenders at Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae . 
But for the second time in as many days , the Republican presidential nominee declined to apply the same principle to his campaign s high-profile economic adviser . 
After touring a solar power panel factory in rural , Freeland , Mich. , a reporter asked McCain Tuesday if his campaign economic adviser , Carly Fiorina , who once led Hewlett Packard Co. but was forced to step down , should give back any portion of her golden parachute . 
McCain quickly drew a distinction between HP and the mortgage lenders he singled out , calling them quasi-governmental lenders . 
Carly Fiorina is a role model to millions of American women , McCain said pointing out that she rose from working as a part-time secretary to heading HP . 
He added : I m proud of her record . 
McCain had been asked about Fiorina s compensation package in an interview Monday on NBC-TVs Today Show . 
I think she did a good job as CEO in many respects , he said , adding : I don t know the details of her compensation package but she is one of many advisers that I have . '' 
simple , 'cause someone told him he could look like the cowboy who rode in to town on a white horse to save the day . 
1 -RRB- there was no lack of progress in reaching a consensus to begin with , so there 's no `` day '' to save 2 -RRB- the folks in DC who know what they are doing and are working on it would absolutely agree that McCain is the last person whose help they would want , and 3 -RRB- McCain is so busy lying to Letterman about needing to cancel his appearance to get to Washington -LRB- watch Letterman tonight calling out McCain for lying to him - somehow McCain did n't think he would be caught down the hall taping an interview with Couric and not leaving til tomorrow -RRB- that his horse wo n't even get to Washington before the deal is done , at which time he will look like the complete fool he takes the American public for . 
I look at your image on top of this thread and it makes weep . 
You should never have consorted with Jerry Falwell , you should never have listened to Karl Rove , you should never have picked the religious fanatic trollop to be your VP . 
You should have listened to your own mind on these things , you should have kept your soul instead of selling it to these people in a vain attempt to win the presidency . 
I would have voted for you , proudly . 
But this , this ? 
I 'm sorry John McCain , I ca n't vote for you any more . 
Obama 's handlers were so terrified that their candidate would screw up -LRB- a safe bet after his weak performances in the primary debates -RRB- they agreed to only three . 
First the lies about the cone of silence at saddleback , then the miracle of Saint Sarah , now this ploy to game the debates -LRB- nice coordination with GW in the whitehouse -RRB- . 
I have an idea for you John . 
You and Obama meet at the Trinity United Church of Christ in Chicago and answer questions from Rev. Jeremiah Wright about the Bail out Bill . 
We will call it `` Putting Country First - A Very Special Political Forum About the Financial Crises . '' 
Seeing that you trapped in side your rovian bubble of lies we will not make you pretend like you are in a cone of silence this time . 
The last thing this crisis needs is partisan presidential politics injecting itself into the situation . 
It 's already happening ... the bailout negotiations have become a circus since this afternoon . 
The last two people I want to see in DC right now are McCain and Obama . 
Congress needs to pass legislation . 
And McCain needs to stay out of it . 
Electoral politics will not make the situation better . 
McCain shouldnt be allowed to politicize this further by trying to score points and dodge the debate with Obama . 
He sealed the deal today . 
Did n't he say , '' The issue of economics is not something I ve understood as well as I should ... I ve got Greenspan s book ? 
He has himself holed up in a Clearwater , FL hotel all week to prepare for the debate . 
Sounds like cramming for an exam . 
Does he know his way around DC yet ? 
Oh yeah , the DO NOTHING DEMOCRATS !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Probably too busy spending all that money they received from Fannie May and Freddie Mac to worry about the average tax payer ! 
The Democrats do n't have a 2\/3 majority to override a Bush veto . 
Yes , it is the REPUBLICANS fault . 
The thing is - Obama has been surging in polls again - because Palin 's luster has worn off . 
Now that people know that Palin `` can see Russia from her house '' - the voters are realizing that John McCain made a bad choice . 
So , McCain is now being dramatic - and making a spectacle of himself . 
He 's going to say that the economy deserves his undivided attention - but you know what - McCain and his party should have been paying more attention 6 months ago . 
It 's is a tad LATE to start caring about the economy now . 
McCain 's doing the right thing . 
No-answer Nobama is doing the Obama thing . 
Obama is afraid if he goes to D.C. , somebody 's going to make him vote ; and somebody will actually RECORD it . 
McCain is taking care of the country . 
Obama is taking care of the empty-suited Obama . 
He 'll get more votes by being in Washington , shown doing what he is being paid for , than appearing at shopping malls and preening for the cameras like Obama . 
i was the one who posted that i agree with bernie sanders . 
write your legislators and tell them we do n't want to give our tax money away to those who gambled us into this mess . 
also , we want to bring back regulatory safeguards that mccain 's friends gramm etc. convinced us to get rid of in '99 and before . 
He goes to Washington , the conservatives put together another quick fix proposal and tag McCain 's name on it , saying he was instrumental in putting it together . 
It also gives him a perfect exscuse to get a lesson in the current economic crisis , get the info and names down pat , hopefully making him sound like he knows what he 's talking about when they do debate . 
Then all he has to do is come back , attack Obama for not going with him and make himself out to be the patriot who cares about our economy and how it affects you and me . 
As if patriotism has anything to do with wall street and corporate greed . 
I 'm glad Obama told him no. . 
Am I the only one smelling a rat here ? 
Th market is not going to totally collapse just because we take a few days to reason through things . 
Lawmakers owe it to us to carefully consider what should be done , and not to jump to swallow wholesale the `` solution '' proposed by the party in power that is also in cahoots with the powerful people who caused this mess . 
I support Senator Bernie Sanders 's recommendations . 
However its not an important enough of a issue , for Obama to stop campaigning . 
Can any of you Bots explain that ? 
Can you explain why McSame does n't have the nads to debate Obama ? 
He spent a lot of time squawking that Obama would n't debate him ; now McSame uses this as an excuse to get out of the debate that he 's been begging for ? 
Does `` I do n't understand much about the economy '' McCain think he can add anything of value by postponing the debate . 
What 's next , he 's going to ask for the election to be postponed because Palin is on her period ? 
Does McCain think that only he will be able to fix the financial crisis that he and Gramm created ? 
An hour or two for a debate will not hurt the economy anymore than it already is . 
I never thought that McCain would reinvent himself as the McChicken sandwich at McDonalds . 
This does n't smell right , '' he said . 
`` This is n't the way a tested hero behaves . '' 
And he joked : `` I think someone 's putting something in his metamucil . '' 
And another : `` What are you going to do if you 're elected and things get tough ? 
We 've got a guy like that now ! '' 
shie | September 24 , 2008 10:40 PM | Report abuse McCain is trying an old control trick . 
He thinks he is wielding his power by not attending the Debate . 
I am glad Obama told this childish little old man that No as Far As I am concerned the Debate goes on . 
McCain is used to being controling if someone is ahead of him . 
and that is a very bad trait for a president . 
Bush is also a controler Both of these two ole boys are foot stomping ninnies . 
fist shakers and crybabies . 
control issues are very hard to stop when you are as old as McCain . 
He looks Very tired his control issues have about got the best of him . 
He does not want to be President for the good of the country He just needs to control . 
like bush this is bad when it comes to being president . 
control issues are hard for some to detect but if they go to a good shrinke they can start to see why they behave like a little kid . 
control issues are the # 1 problem with criminals of all sorts . 
a lot of control freeks beat their wives , do great bodily damage to others and control conversations and start fights steal , connive , contrive issues , smile and talk sweet and caring and all sorts of things are caused by the need to control . 
personally I like the predictable people like Obama , not a Drama artist , calm and relaxed and poised . 
takes time to focus , leads instead of drives . 
listens to others , weights things , senceable , not hecktic , not theatrical , has his own mind and yet will take other peoples thoughts into view and add his own and he will build a relationship . 
controlers are not relationship types . 
they run others off . 
controlers set up their own rejection . 
that is partly why bush has failed the people the people do not like him , and the lure of mcvain is leaveing the people as well . 
It is a shorthand way of indicating openness to negotiation , rather than a solid `` no. '' This idea that it 's wishy washy is n't true . 
Look it up yourself . 
No more hiding behind Sarah 's skirts or behind your idol , GWB . 
Get out here and talk to us , you gutless wonder . 
NOW !!!! Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 10:38 PM | Report abuse For the memory impaired , McCain wanted 10 debates . 
Obama 's handlers were so terrified that their candidate would screw up -LRB- a safe bet after his weak performances in the primary debates -RRB- they agreed to only three . 
Oh yeah , the DO NOTHING DEMOCRATS !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Probably too busy spending all that money they received from Fannie May and Freddie Mac to worry about the average tax payer ! 
the president wants the deal done tommorrow . 
McCain just realized how serious it was WHY ? 
No wonder he could ` nt find the eject button in his jet fighter . 
Worse than bush Maybe he 's possesed and you can get Sarah 's pastor to lay hands on him and exercise the curiosity back . 
Or maybe Sarah can find some and bring it to im ' Your just being CUTE . 
Anyone who believes that this financial crisis is just storm in a cup of tea is dreadfully mistaken . 
McCain knows it and is giving his due attention . 
To Obama , this clearly is the best opportunity for scoring easy political points . 
Forget about the economy and people 's life savings . 
Obama is willing sit and do nothing and hence sacrifice few tens of millions of US families who will undoubtedly loose their jobs and their 401K plans , because of the unresolved credit crunch . 
It 's a worth while sacrifice for Obama to make - cause it does n't cost him anything and he could win a lot . 
But do n't worry , Sarah Palin is just a heart beat away from the presidency ! 
And Palin can see Russia from her house ! 
And you know , Palin 's extensive observation of Russia can really help Americans . 
You might not know it - but all the best American presidents - also saw Russia from their houses too ! 
Being able to recognize Russia from afar - is a true test of presidential ability ! 
Just ask John McCain ! 
He picked a real winner . 
Plus a voting record that has him voting for tax increases on everybody every chance he has ever had or taking the bold choice to vote `` Present '' . 
He is a deceitful shady street punk . 
What 's not to like ? . '' 
Your racism is showing ! 
`` Shady , '' `` street punk ? '' 
A Columbia and Harvard graduate and first African-American President of the Harvard Law Review ? 
Maybe you do n't agree with his politics , but your adjectives betray your rage that a handsome , inspiring , eloquent , intelligent , calm and confident biracial man with european and african ancestry dares to succeed against the white male and white female . 
Underneath all of the emphasis on Sen. Obama 's supposed `` foreign-ness '' or `` exotic-ness , '' much less your more obvious choice of words betrays how much work we still need to do to combat racism in this country . 
I do n't pretend that this response will change yours or others ' like you , but I will not sit by and not respond . 
Think about it : if Sen. Obama were white , would you come up with the description `` street punk , '' especially when there is NOTHING in his biography to suggest that it is accurate . 
It 's not even worth trying to have any discussion of black liberation theology or the fact that white people are members of Sen. Obama 's former church . 
Bottomline , you listen to too much Hannity , Limbaugh , Coulter - the narcissistic personality disorder , partisan , talking heads for the GOP . 
Now you want to say McCain is afraid to debate ? 
Even more ridiculous ... Obama without his telepromptor . 
Check out you tube for the actor without a script ! 
Someone who denies that things are a problem , then yells louder than anyone else that the sky is falling . 
Because that 's SO helpful in restoring confidence to the markets . 
Yes , I want change . 
But what McCain is offering is constant drama and instability . 
K-Street 's lobbyists were discussing the documents publicly so who here possibly thinks McCain 's Lobbyists were not privy to this ? 
The suspension is a cut and run gambit from his dropping poll numbers , the lack of confidence in his running mate screamed from GOP rooftops ... and his terror of debating this weekend since as he admitted numerously , he 's clueless about economics which were surely going to be brought up . 
That bill would n't have done anything to prevent the present crisis , because it was designed to protect institutions against interest rate fluctuations , and actually would have accelerated their investment in mortgage-backed securities , which is the root of the present problem . 
Try reading the actual effing bill , instead of committing a copyright violation . 
1992 , Republicans destroy our economy . 
2008 , Republicans destroy our economy . 
You want to see the economy really tank ? 
Democrats should not `` suspend the campaign '' but withdraw from the race . 
Let the Republicans clean up their own mess this time , while trying to claim they are n't socialists and are the only party that believes in the free market . 
The whole world knows how this story goes . 
If Democrats refuse to play this time , guess what happens to the dollar ? 
Guess what happens to you ? 
McCain and Obama fly all over the country and conduct serious business after brief interruptions all the time . 
If they debate in Oxford for two hours on Friday night , can t they go to work saving Western-Civilization as-we-know-it again on Saturday ? 
It seems painfully obvious that McCain doesn t want to debate the economy as-is . 
Or is John McCain just trying to stall for time - so Palin wo n't have to debate Biden ? 
I used to have \* some \* respect for John McCain before this election - but he 's just sinking fast . 
I think Ezra Klein said it best - `` You do n't get to call time out when you 're president . '' 
And that 's what McCain is doing - calling a time out . 
Who is running McCain 's campaign and why are they such idiots ? 
You do n't bail out on a debate ! 
It 's time for him to show us just how much he knows , and how much is hot air . 
No more hiding , Johnny boy ! 
Other than that , the rest of your post is the same garbage that comes from Steve Schmidt , the Rove employee who 's working for McCain . 
And McCain does not want to get embarrassed -- in front of 100 million people , Posted by : PA-VA | September 24 , 2008 10:26 PM | Report abuse Posted by : pubichaironmycokecan | September 24 , 2008 10:25 PM | Report abuse Sue , your rant is getting old . 
It is too bad that you did n't follow your mom 's advice . 
Or maybe , your whole family has a personality disorder . 
Unless I miss my guess , you might as well get ready for this `` street punk . '' 
At least he is an intelligent `` street punk '' who does not believe that war is the first option . 
For Obama to survive southside Chicago when he was a young man , he has some skills which will definitely help him with the Republican thugs he 'll see on a regular basis . 
Sue , I pray for your health when Obama becomes President . 
You may need some blood pressure medication . 
I think it is just a political stunt and if he believe Americans will fall for it , then he is foolish and stupid . 
What does that mean ? 
It means my payroll taxes are going back up at least 40-45 % -LRB- so will yours -RRB- . 
2 -RRB- If you look on BarackObama.com , the people who are truly going to benefit from the tax cuts for the middle class are those who pay nothing into the system -LRB- on avg , the Obama plan will pay $ 1000 to those who pay no tax whatsoever -RRB- . 
That is called wealth redistribution one key component of Marxism . 
Exactly how much will Senator Obama have to raise taxes on those making over 250,000 ? 
3 -RRB- Senator Obama will raise taxes on those making over $ 250,000 and who have a small business . 
Their personal income tax rate will rise to 39 % . 
The payroll cap rate will be raised to 6.2 % on employer Social Security and 6.2 % employee Social Security . 
He will also raise the Medicare payroll cap on Small Business to 2.9 % . 
This equates to a 54 % tax rate for small business owners . 
It is also called wealth redistribution and a key component of Marxism . 
If your taxable income is : You would pay $ 567 less under the Obama plan and $ 19 less under the McCain plan . 
You would pay $ 892 less under the Obama plan and $ 113 less under the McCain plan . 
You would pay $ 1,042 less under the Obama plan and $ 319 less under the McCain plan . 
You would pay $ 1,290 less under the Obama plan and $ 1,009 less under the McCain plan . 
You would pay $ 2,300 less under the Obama plan and $ 3,200 less under the McCain plan . 
$ 227,000 and above -LRB- 5 % of population -RRB- You would pay $ 23,000 more under the Obama plan and $ 15,000 less under the McCain plan . 
not tax seniors who earn less than $ 50,000 per year issue a $ 4,000 credit per child in college issue a $ 500 per worker credit for those who make $ 150,000 a year and do not itemize change inheritance tax to 45 % for those estates over $ 3.5 million continue to withdraw Social Security tax on those who make over $ 250,000 per year , but keep the moratorium for those who earn between $ 102,000 and $ 250,000 ; the current tax is taken out up to $ 102,000 double dependent credit from $ 3,500 to $ 7,000 . 
set inheritance tax at 15 % for all estates over $ 5 million . 
cut corporate taxes from 35 % to 25 % The overall impact on the federal budget is that Obama 's plan returns $ 700 billion to the budget and John McCain 's would cost $ 600 billion . 
To be fair , these figures are muddied by assumptions that we can not make , like the cost of war , government spending and the world economy . 
For comparison , here are tax bracket from 2007 : You pay 10 % if you : file as single and and your taxable income is $ 0 $ 7,825 . 
file as married filing jointly or qualified widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your taxable income is $ 0 - $ 15,650 . 
file as married filing separately and your taxable income is $ 0 - $ 7,825 . 
file as head of household and your taxable income is $ 0 - $ 11,200 . 
You pay 15 % if you : file as single and and your taxable income is $ 7,826 - $ 31,850 . 
file as married filing jointly or qualified widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your taxable income is $ 15,651 - $ 63,700 . 
file as married filing separately and your taxable income is $ 7,826 - $ 31,850 . 
file as head of household and your taxable income is $ 11,201 - $ 42,650 . 
You pay 25 % if you : file as single and and your taxable income is $ 31,851 - $ 77,100 . 
file as married filing jointly or qualified widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your taxable income is $ 63,701 - $ 128,500 . 
file as married filing separately and your taxable income is $ 31,851 - $ 64,250 . 
file as head of household and your taxable income is $ 42,651 - $ 110,100 . 
You pay 28 % if you : file as single and and your taxable income is $ 77,101 - $ 160,850 . 
file as married filing jointly or qualified widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your taxable income is $ 128,501 - $ 195,850 . 
file as married filing separately and your taxable income is $ 64,251 - $ 97,925 . 
file as head of household and your taxable income is $ 110,101 - $ 178,350 . 
You pay 33 % if you : file as single and and your taxable income is $ 160,851 - $ 349,700 . 
file as married filing jointly or qualified widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your taxable income is $ 195,851 - $ 349,700 . 
file as married filing separately and your taxable income is $ 97,926 - $ 174,850 . 
file as head of household and your taxable income is $ 178,351 - $ 349,700 . 
You pay 35 % if you : file as single and and your taxable income is $ 349,701 and above . 
file as married filing jointly or qualified widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your taxable income is $ 349,701 and above . 
file as married filing separately and your taxable income is $ 174,851 and above . 
file as head of household and your taxable income is $ 349,701 and above . 
An individual pays tax at a given bracket only for each dollar within that bracket 's range . 
For example , a single taxpayer who earned $ 10,000 in 2007 would be taxed 10 % of each dollar earned from the 1st dollar to the 7,825 th dollar -LRB- 10 % $ 7,825 = $ 782.50 -RRB- , then 15 % of each dollar earned from the 7,826 th dollar to the 10,000 th dollar -LRB- 15 % $ 2,175 = $ 326.25 -RRB- , for a total of $ 1,108.75 . 
Notice this amount -LRB- $ 1,108.75 -RRB- is lower than if the individual had been taxed at 15 % on the full $ 10,000 -LRB- for a tax of $ 1,500 -RRB- . 
This is because the individual 's marginal rate -LRB- the percentage tax on the last dollar earned , here 15 % -RRB- has no effect on the income taxed at a lower bracket -LRB- here the first $ 7,825 of income taxed at 10 % -RRB- . 
This ensures that every rise in a person 's pre-tax salary results in an increase of their after-tax salary . 
Approximately 2.5 million filers fall into the top two brackets listed for 2007 out of over 100 million plus filers and only the wealthiest 5 % of America 's households make over $ 174,000 per year . 
Obama is certainly appealing to the masses in this case while McCain joked that you are middle class if you make less than $ 5 million per year -LRB- yes , this was a joke -RRB- . 
However , while McCain ran against George Bush in the Republican primaries in 2000 , he said `` I don t think the governor s tax cut is too big it s just misplaced . 
Sixty percent of the benefits from his tax cuts go to the wealthiest 10 percent of Americans and that s not the kind of tax relief that Americans need . 
I don t believe the wealthiest 10 percent of Americans should get 60 percent of the tax breaks . 
I think the lowest 10 percent should get the breaks . '' 
He continued his objection in 2001 and 2003 when he voted against these same tax cuts before finally agreeing to pass them because he felt it would hurt the economy if tax laws were changed . 
Now his plan is just a continuation of these same tax laws . 
I fall into the $ 38,000 - $ 66,000 group . 
We want to see who is fit to lead us . 
Show up and face the people or hide like your piece of monkey dung VP pick . 
We 've had it up to our pocketbooks with government for the rich . 
Stand and deliver or get out of the way ! 
However its not an important enough of a issue , for Obama to stop campaigning . 
Can any of you Bots explain that ? 
Neither one of them are on the committees involved , so the only thing they can do is wait to vote ! 
Please !! Stop making excuses for McCain ! 
He want to change the terms of the game , WE 'VE SEEN THIS BEFORE ! 
Why is McCain meeting with Rothschild ? 
Is there a link between the Rothschild 's and the current financial crisis ? 
Why is a ` democratic ' fundraiser supporting McCain now that Hillary lost ? 
Could Hillary and McCain both be Neocon puppets who are dead set against losing their grip on American government ? 
What 's going on here ? 
Inquiring minds want to know . 
>> McCain campaign today : we could be in a >> depression by Monday if this does n't pass . 
Overall , the fundamentals of the economy are strong the mortgage piece is only one piece of the puzzle . 
The depression will be because the Democrats have so screwed up the credit system and the financial system in this country that no one will be able to get any credit whatsoever . 
You think this is bad ? 
Wait until they get to Social Security and Medicare two bigger components of the economy -LRB- which overall is around $ 14 trillion dollars -RRB- . 
Those two will be even bigger bailouts . 
He 's a walking corpse . 
Classic dementia ... Slurs his words , forgets little things when he was list in Washington -LRB- April -RRB- , so now that the polls are looking -LRB- very -RRB- bad , instead of change , what we need is more of the old boys club fixing all this between the gin and tonics and bimbo -LRB- oh , sorry , that was Gov Palin -RRB- . 
Comming out of the shower -- he has got to look like : Posted by : Truth | September 24 , 2008 10:21 PM | Report abuse You ca n't call a mulligan in the middle of a tournament . 
If you 're unprepared or think you 're going to lose , concede defeat . 
That 's the honorable thing to do . 
The chairman of the House Financial Services Committee , which was holding a hearing on the bailout , added `` I 'm not particularly focused on Senator McCain . 
I guess if I wanted expertise there -LRB- from the GOP ticket -RRB- , I 'd ask Sarah Palin . '' 
shie | September 24 , 2008 10:21 PM | Report abuse John McCain ca n't walk and chew gum at the same time . 
Excerpts from Sarah Palins foriegn policy swing @ the UN : `` You 're even cuter in Person '' `` I almost want to hug you '' `` Thank You Sweetie '' Women should be outraged . 
Sad day for American strength abroad . 
The McCain campaign is imploding . 
As they say , `` A day late and a dollar short . '' 
He is no leader . 
If anyone has been following Obama for any period of time now , you would know that he leads , usually out of the limelight . 
Apparently , McCain can only pretend to lead when he calls attention to himself . 
Yes , Obama can be at the meeting tomorrow . 
Obama is a team player and a gentleman . 
Obama has the one trump card that can beat McCain 's supposedly superior experience : practical intelligence . 
Personally , I have been very impressed with Obama 's press conferences , especially since he must think quickly on his feet without the teleprompters that the Repubs always talk about . 
Yes , Obama can multitask . 
It is ashame that both McCain and Palin demonstrate each and every day why they are not scholars . 
This may appeal to the average Joe , but we need brainpower on the international stage . 
One stooge for 8 years has been too much for me to have to suffer when I hear other world leaders sound much more presidential than our own . 
All we need is another President who pounds his fist and yells , `` bomb , bomb , bomb , '' as his answer to a world crisis . 
May Obama ride a wave of approval into the White House . 
As Chris Dodd said tonight , Obama has been very engaged in the economic crisis and McCain has been AWOL . 
McCain is all show and no action . 
He is all cowboy and no cattle . 
McCain and Palin need to take a nice stroll down the Road to Nowhere after they pay the toll . 
Plus a voting record that has him voting for tax increases on everybody every chance he has ever had or taking the bold choice to vote `` Present '' . 
He is a deceitful shady street punk . 
What 's not to like ? . 
The Republicans , including uberderegulator and McCain insider Phil Gramm , let the economy tank and Wall Street pig out , made a mess , and now pretend that poor old man McCain ca n't meet for an hour and debate foreign policy for the position of , yes , President of the United States ? 
Let 's face it : if he and Bush cooked this up in a phone call , we 're talking Dumb and Dumberer . 
He handed Obama a huge gift . 
Checkmated himself into his own scaredy-hole . 
McCain campaign today : we could be in a depression by Monday if this does n't pass . 
And by the way , did you see the Palin interview with Katie Couric . 
I mean , people . 
This woman can not put a coherent sentence together . 
It was squirm-inducing watching her , she appeared so airheaded . 
I just ca n't even fathom the notion of this woman being a heartbeat away . 
They could continue running political commercials and ads for him . 
It is just one big sham . 
That should tell you something : HE IS UNFIT and INCAPABLE to be president . 
They 're dragging out all the old `` hate democrats '' reasons used throughout history , they 're lifting garbage from rush limbaugh and directly channeling fox ... they have run out of anything they can say FOR McCain , all they have left is bashing the opponent . 
These are the kind of people McCain is counting on to carry him to the whitehouse , the same kind of people who brought us George Bush and 12 years of uninterrupted republican control of the congress . 
The only pit bull I see is Obama , taken a bite out of McChicken sandwhich . 
Another shameful stunt by a disorganized , hotheaded , unqualified , out-of-touch old man . 
He did the same thing with the fake Georgia crisis . 
He probably stops at car accidents to hold a press conference and take charge . 
He has done more work and thinking just today than you have done in your entire lifetime . 
Also , do you have any idea how long this debate takes ? 
Do you seriously think not having the debate will help ? 
If one night could solve this problem , why did n't your hero G.W. have this puppy whipped already ? 
Before we became a socialist country under this REPUBLICAN administration , republiCON pukes like you were calling Obama a Socialist . 
But before you answer that question , tell us all why John McSame does n't have the `` nads '' to debate Obama ? 
Is he too tired ? 
Has his thought process grown slower with old age ? 
If McCain ca n't perform more than one task while running , he ca n't be president . 
What does that mean ? 
It means my payroll taxes are going back up at least 40-45 % -LRB- so will yours -RRB- . 
2 -RRB- If you look on BarackObama.com , the people who are truly going to benefit from the tax cuts for the middle class are those who pay nothing into the system -LRB- on avg , the Obama plan will pay $ 1000 to those who pay no tax whatsoever -RRB- . 
That is called wealth redistribution one key component of Marxism . 
Exactly how much will Senator Obama have to raise taxes on those making over 250,000 ? 
3 -RRB- Senator Obama will raise taxes on those making over $ 250,000 and who have a small business . 
Their personal income tax rate will rise to 39 % . 
The payroll cap rate will be raised to 6.2 % on employer Social Security and 6.2 % employee Social Security . 
He will also raise the Medicare payroll cap on Small Business to 2.9 % . 
This equates to a 54 % tax rate for small business owners . 
It is also called wealth redistribution and a key component of Marxism . 
Well , if you find it please PUNT it back to the Mississippi debates on Friday . 
No less than three members of the man s family including one by sworn affidavit have claimed that Sarah Palin engaged in an extramarital affair with hus band Todd s former business partner , Brad Hanson . 
These sources have named Hanson as Palin s secret love , and say their affair nearly wrecked both their marriages . 
McShame size it please Posted by : jd | September 24 , 2008 10:09 PM | Report abuse Mccain can not suspend his campain , the campain is on and will be until the election . 
Mccain actions are just the product of campain strategy however poorly thought of . 
A classic strategy when you are weak . 
I think the truth is he is running out of money , Palin is not ready to debate Biden next week , and McCain wants to look like the Knight in shining armor . 
The truth is he is a knight-errant ... a wanderer looking for adventures to prove himself . 
Do n't let the cheap trick get played by McCain or his people . 
It 's not like McCain adds anything noteworthy to the conversation since he does not understand the economy . 
Heck , Phil Gramm , McCain 's then-chief economic advisor , called it a `` mental recession '' and the American people have become `` a nation of whiners . '' 
So McCain , save the jet fuel and keep hitting the hustings . 
You might learn something from the future President Barack Hussein Obama ! 
That 's all it is ! 
He ca n't take out an 3 hours to debate -LRB- Travel time included -RRB- ? 
What is he going to bring to the table ? 
He 's NOT on the Finance or Banking Committees ! 
He REALLY NEEDS TO QUIT !! And why does everybody think that McCain gets to call the shots on Obama 's campaign ? 
Not to mention that Obama called him first !! Posted by : Angryman | September 24 , 2008 10:06 PM | Report abuse I guess McCain did n't do his homework and study for his debate . 
He had to call George and see if uncle Dick would arrange a meeting to delay the debate . 
Can McCain get anymore pathetic ? 
As we will see in the next month , nothing is too low for McCain . 
Why do n't you bring up being a POW ... wait , he has tried that a million times . 
Too bad your fellow POWs think you would make a horrible president . 
I thought he was , again for the umpteenth time , quoted a week aga sayin '' i Dont have a solid grasp of ECONOMIC matters , but I will get the best and the brightest to help me figur it out '' i guess that means all those lobbyists on his payroll will be going along with him too . 
Bush is out of his mind if he thinks Anyone in this country TRUSTS him to oversee 700 billion Bailout , even if it is for only a few months . 
I think article 1 of the proposal should be to arrest , and hold WITHOUT BOND all of the CEO 's , EXECUTIVES , and supposed MANAGERS of this debacle , and hold them accountable for their Crimes . 
Unfortunately , Bush would be among them , so it would be a Hard act to get anything past CHENEY , who im sure has had more than a hand in on this mess . 
Let 's see who 's really ready to lead with Biden and Palin on Friday . 
He is showing the American public that it is Obama first , the rest of us be damned . 
Push the debate and forget about this mess . 
I guess that when we have a foreign policy crisis , he will ask to debate the opposite head of state . 
Does this man have any clue how the world works ? 
Does he know what work is about ? 
Do you really believe this ? 
She waited for and supported him while in Vietnam . 
Deserted his children and married Cindy without getting the divorce first . 
Real Moral values & compassion . 
Speaks well of you conservative religious wingnuts and your commitment to the teachings of the Bible . 
Could ` nt have suspended his campaign Monday while the fundamentals of our economy was strong heh ? 
You do n't need any of the 700 BILLION ? 
We get absolutely NOTHING ! 
This is despicable , pandering , and cowardly behavior that just further proves that it 's not just Palin sho is NOT READY to lead ... Posted by : k_dreams | September 24 , 2008 10:04 PM | Report abuse Well , my friends I may not know jack about the economy and I damn sure do n't have a clue what we 're going to do with this so called financial melt down , because as you know I maintain the economy is still fundamentally sound . 
Just ask Phil Gramm . 
But I really need to get out of that debate Friday nite , so I pulled a fast one on Barack . 
Do n't you love it , my friends ? 
He will destroy this country even further . 
You think this crisis is bad ? 
Wait until they have to bail out Social Security and Medicare -LRB- Government run health care -RRB- . 
Only a fool would vote Obama . 
Before we became a socialist country under this REPUBLICAN administration , republiCON pukes like you were calling Obama a Socialist . 
But before you answer that question , tell us all why John McSame does n't have the `` nads '' to debate Obama ? 
Is he too tired ? 
Has his thought process grown slower with old age ? 
If McCain ca n't perform more than one task while running , he ca n't be president . 
And McCain does not want to get embarrassed -- in front of 100 million people , Posted by : The Poet | September 24 , 2008 10:02 PM | Report abuse After reading most of these comments , it amazes me that no one is remembering about McCain being involved in the SNL scandal . 
A leopard can not change its spots , Mr. McCain , no matter how hard it tries . 
Why is n't the Obama camp bringing up Keating 5 , especially now ? 
`` it 's not my fault , '' `` it just happened . '' 
it just happened on REagans and George H.W. 's stint too ... Posted by : Mc Cain | September 24 , 2008 10:02 PM | Report abuse Next thing you know they 'll want to delay the VP debates too ... Oops ! 
they 're calling for that too now . 
No need to suspend his campaign , it 's already self-destructing . 
Has anyone asked for his assistance ? 
Has the Senate put out an SOS call for McCain ? 
Is our whole government and economy dependent on one of the Senators from Arizona ? 
I had no idea . 
Since he 's Superman , why did n't suspend his campaign to go fend off the hurricanes ? 
Soon the grumpy old man who ca n't remember how many houses he owns and his Homecoming Queen VP pick will soon be a fading memory , thank God ! 
He is showing the American public that it is Obama first , the rest of us be damned . 
Push the debate and forget about this mess . 
I guess that when we have a foreign policy crisis , he will ask to debate the opposite head of state . 
Does this man have any clue how the world works ? 
Does he know what work is about ? 
If you elect 72 year old John McCain , White House interns of both genders will likely go unmolested -LRB- and intelligence briefings will likely go unread -RRB- . 
Let the American people see the truth . 
We are in a Greater Depression . 
It amazes me that all the analysts and politicians can openly cloud the minds of the people . 
Americans need to tighten their belts and stop being so wasteful . 
We are broke , poor and the dollar is worth notebook paper . 
Put away the plastic and get a second job . 
I thought the fundamentals of the economy were strong ? 
your words - last week . 
You just do n't have what it takes . 
Oh , BTW some peers of yours are in town from Fl talking about Carol and their disgust with you over the way you left her . 
Then the subject turned to Wall Street and your connection to it . 
It seems they want their money back ... They 're all meeting in DC . 
Overheard at the Marine Corps League . 
No less than three members of the man s family including one by sworn affidavit have claimed that Sarah Palin engaged in an extramarital affair with hus band Todd s former business partner , Brad Hanson . 
These sources have named Hanson as Palin s secret love , and say their affair nearly wrecked both their marriages . 
China is going to put up the 700 billion . 
So we wo n't be able to complain about lead paint in our toys , or poison in our food , expansion of China 's ICBM nuclear warheads . 
The trampling of human rights . 
We 'll be afraid to say anything because they own us . 
Country first my A$ $ ! 
If you have n't seen the movie I.O.U. SA yet , this should be on everyone 's to do list . 
Visit iousathemovie.com for more . 
He 's used to taking both sides on every issue . 
She is a risk to National Security and should NOT receive a security clearance . 
We will win it easily . 
Four years later , McCain said he knew all along that the war in Iraq war was probably going to be long and hard and tough . 
In December 2003 , McCain praised the same strategy as a mission accomplished . 
In March 2004 , he said , I m confident we re on the right course . 
In December 2005 , he said , Overall , I think a year from now , we will have made a fair amount of progress if we stay the course . 
\* On a related note , he said 2005 that he opposed the tax cuts because they were too tilted to the wealthy . 
By 2007 , he denied ever having said this , and insisted he opposed the cuts because of increased government spending . 
\* In 2000 , McCain accused Texas businessmen Sam and Charles Wyly of being corrupt , spending dirty money to help finance Bush s presidential campaign . 
McCain not only filed a complaint against the Wylys for allegedly violating campaign finance law , he also lashed out at them publicly . 
In April , McCain reached out to the Wylys for support . 
In June 2007 , he abandoned his own legislation . 
Now he s pro-ethanol . 
Three weeks earlier , he was perfectly comfortable with the idea . 
Now he says he s against privatization -LRB- though he actually still supports it . -RRB- 
Now he doesn t . 
Now he believes the opposite . 
\* He opposed indefinite detention of terrorist suspects . 
When the Supreme Court reached the same conclusion , he called it one of the worst decisions in the history of this country . 
He used to promise the opposite . 
And these come after these other reversals from April and May : \* McCain believes the telecoms should be forced to explain their role in the administration s warrantless surveillance program as a condition for retroactive immunity . 
He used to believe the opposite . 
Now he believes the opposite . 
Now he believes the opposite . 
Now he believes the opposite . 
Now he believes the opposite . 
\* He argued the NRA should not have a role in the Republican Party s policy making . 
Now he believes the opposite . 
Now he doesn t . 
\* He wanted political support from radical televangelists like John Hagee and Rod Parsley . 
Now he doesn t . 
Now he doesn t . 
And these are the flip-flops I ve noticed earlier : \* McCain pledged in February 2008 that he would not , under any circumstances , raise taxes . 
Specifically , McCain was asked if he is a read my lips candidate , no new taxes , no matter what ? 
referring to George H.W. Bush s 1988 pledge . 
No new taxes , McCain responded . 
Two weeks later , McCain said , I m not making a read my lips statement , in that I will not raise taxes . 
\* In 1998 , he championed raising cigarette taxes to fund programs to cut underage smoking , insisting that it would prevent illnesses and provide resources for public health programs . 
Now , McCain opposes a $ 0.61-per-pack tax increase , won t commit to supporting a regulation bill he s co-sponsoring , and has hired Philip Morris former lobbyist as his senior campaign adviser . 
His second mortgage plan took largely the opposite position . 
Soon after , he decided he would no longer even try to reach that goal . 
\* In February 2008 , McCain reversed course on prohibiting waterboarding . 
Now he opposes it . 
Now he s against it . 
\* On immigration policy in general , McCain announced in February 2008 that he would vote against his own legislation . 
\* In 2006 , McCain sponsored legislation to require grassroots lobbying coalitions to reveal their financial donors . 
In 2007 , after receiving feedback on the proposal , McCain told far-right activist groups that he opposes his own measure . 
McCain now believes the opposite . 
\* He opposed indefinite detention of terrorist suspects . 
When the Supreme Court reached the same conclusion , he called it `` one of the worst decisions in the history of this country . '' 
\* In February , McCain reversed course on prohibiting waterboarding . 
\* When Barack Obama talked about going after terrorists in Pakistani mountains with Predators , McCain criticized him for it . 
He 's since come to the opposite conclusion . 
Now he believes the opposite . 
Now he believes the opposite . 
Now he believes the opposite . 
Now he opposes it . 
In December 2003 , McCain praised the same strategy as `` a mission accomplished . '' 
In March 2004 , he said , `` I 'm confident we 're on the right course . '' 
In December 2005 , he said , `` Overall , I think a year from now , we will have made a fair amount of progress if we stay the course . '' 
We will win it easily . '' 
Four years later , McCain said he knew all along that the war in Iraq war was `` probably going to be long and hard and tough . '' 
In May , McCain announced that most American troops would be home from Iraq by 2013 . 
Now he says he 's against privatization -LRB- though he actually still supports it . -RRB- 
Now he does n't . 
Now he believes the opposite . 
\* He argued that the NRA should not have a role in the Republican Party 's policy making . 
Now he believes the opposite . 
\* In 1998 , he championed raising cigarette taxes to fund programs to cut underage smoking , insisting that it would prevent illnesses and provide resources for public health programs . 
Now , McCain opposes a $ 0.61-per-pack tax increase , wo n't commit to supporting a regulation bill he 's co-sponsoring , and has hired Philip Morris ' former lobbyist as his senior campaign adviser . 
His second mortgage plan took largely the opposite position . 
Now he 's pro-ethanol . 
\* In 2005 , McCain endorsed intelligent design creationism , a year later he said the opposite , and a few months after that , he was both for and against creationism at the same time . 
\* John McCain initially argued that economics is not an area of expertise for him , saying , `` I 'm going to be honest : I know a lot less about economics than I do about military and foreign policy issues ; I still need to be educated , '' and `` The issue of economics is not something I 've understood as well as I should . '' 
He now falsely denies ever having made these remarks and insists that he has a `` very strong '' understanding of economics . 
Soon after , he decided he would no longer even try to reach that goal . 
And soon after that , McCain abandoned his second position and went back to his first . 
By 2007 , he denied ever having said this , and falsely argued that he opposed the cuts because of increased government spending . 
Now he believes the opposite . 
Specifically , McCain was asked if he is a '' ` read my lips ' candidate , no new taxes , no matter what ? '' 
referring to George H.W. Bush 's 1988 pledge . 
`` No new taxes , '' McCain responded . 
Two weeks later , McCain said , `` I 'm not making a ` read my lips ' statement , in that I will not raise taxes . '' 
Three weeks earlier , he was perfectly comfortable with the idea . 
In mid-June , McCain announced he wants the caps to be voluntary . 
Shortly thereafter , he argued the exact opposite . 
Now he does n't . 
Now he 's against it . 
\* On immigration policy in general , McCain announced in February 2008 that he would vote against his own bill . 
\* In April , McCain promised voters that he would secure the borders `` before proceeding to other reform measures . '' 
Two months later , he abandoned his public pledge , pretended that he 'd never made the promise in the first place , and vowed that a comprehensive immigration reform policy has always been , and would always be , his `` top priority . '' 
Judicial Policy and the Rule of Law \* McCain said he would `` not impose a litmus test on any nominee . '' 
He used to promise the opposite . 
He used to believe the opposite . 
Campaign , Ethics , and Lobbying Reform \* McCain supported his own lobbying-reform legislation from 1997 . 
Now he does n't . 
\* In 2006 , McCain sponsored legislation to require grassroots lobbying coalitions to reveal their financial donors . 
In 2007 , after receiving `` feedback '' on the proposal , McCain told far-right activist groups that he opposes his own measure . 
In June 2007 , he abandoned his own legislation . 
Now he does n't . 
Now he does n't . 
\* In 2000 , McCain accused Texas businessmen Sam and Charles Wyly of being corrupt , spending `` dirty money '' to help finance Bush 's presidential campaign . 
McCain not only filed a complaint against the Wylys for allegedly violating campaign finance law , he also lashed out at them publicly . 
In April , McCain reached out to the Wylys for support . 
Kissinger is now the honorary co-chair for his presidential campaign in New York . 
McCain now considers Norquist a key political ally . 
He is n't a senior senator and has no record or clue on how to work bipartisan . 
McCain is a senior senator of his party and is a central figure in bipartisan efforts . 
His presence is needed in Congress right now in a way Obama 's is not useful . 
Anybody who is n't sucking McCain 's little guy , from part of the republicans through the center , all the way to the lunatic obama fringe - all of us can that McCain is calling for a delay on the debates because we would n't bother with the original focus of this debate , foreign policy . 
No , McCain does n't want to stand in front of America and be assaulted by the intense anger we all feel at his party and his president . 
McCain is is on a negative slope , accelerating . 
Do us all a favor and resign your senate seat to spare the shame to the good citizens of Arizona . 
Did n't the bailout get done , and was n't McCain investigated by the Senate Ethics Committee ? 
The Republicans , the party of personal responsiblity , the party of trickle down economics , are pushing to tax the common-man for $ 700 Billion to pay for the financial irresponsibility of a few . 
Imagine if it were the democrats asking for $ 700 Billion to pay for education or health care or transportation for the porrest Americans . 
Bloody Murder !!!! No to the Bailout ! 
No to 4 more years of the same policies and politics that got us into this mess . 
Say no to the Fossil and Beauty Queen !! Posted by : Joe M. | September 24 , 2008 9:53 PM | Report abuse Why would John McCain need to `` suspend '' his campaign when he is in Washington as a US Senator to address the bailout proposal ? 
He has a running mate , Sarah Palin , on his ticket who is supposedly ready on day one to take over , if necessary . 
Why ca n't she step in and take over campaigning while he is in DC ? 
Apparently , John McCain does n't even believe Sarah Palin is qualified . 
China is going to put up the 700 billion . 
So we wo n't be able to complain about lead paint in our toys , or poison in our food , expansion of China 's ICBM nuclear warheads . 
The trampling of human rights . 
We 'll be afraid to say anything because they own us . 
Country first my A$ $ ! 
Since his flop-flops and endless doubletalk has put him ON BOTH SIDES OF EVERY MAJOR ISSUE , that should be quite an interesting and lively debate . 
Here are some of the debate topics : I will take public financing for my campaign ----- I will NOT take public financing for my campaign . 
Clinton 's NAFTA is BAD ----- Just kidding , NAFTA is GREAT . 
I will get the troops home immediately ----- I will NOT get the troops home immediately . 
`` I could no more disown him -LRB- rev. wright -RRB- than I could disown my ... grandmother . '' 
----- I DISOWN rev wright . 
-LRB- Look out grandma , you may be next ! -RRB- . 
I support total gun control ----- I do NOT support total gun control . 
NO on offshore drilling ----- YES on offshore drilling . 
End bush tax-cuts for the rich ----- Well , maybe NOT . 
The surge is BAD ----- The surge is GOOD NO on tapping the strategic oil reserve ----- YES on tapping the strategic oil reserve . 
I do n't need no stinkin ' flag pin ----- I NOW WEAR a flag pin since I 'm now patriotic -LRB- wink , wink -RRB- ! 
No immunity for illegal wiretapping telcos ----- I vote YES on Bush 's immunity for illegal wiretapping telcos . 
To people in rural Pennsylvania : `` I 'm one of you '' ----- To people in San Francisco : those rural types are `` bitter people clinging to their guns and religion '' . 
Then the American people will see what a shallow , arrogant , platitude-spouting , inexperienced , elitist , drug-addicted , narcissistic , flip-flopping gas-bag the d-crats are trying to foist on them ! 
OBAMA ROCKS !!! Rock the Vote !!! OBAMA OBAMA Can we get your vote ? 
He will destroy this country even further . 
You think this crisis is bad ? 
Wait until they have to bail out Social Security and Medicare -LRB- Government run health care -RRB- . 
Only a fool would vote Obama . 
VP 's always have to be ready to step in the shoes of the President . 
Please see my previous post and do the RESEARCH . 
I promise you , there is a rat in all this bailout . 
My previous post provides the trail . 
Hey FBI , RESEARCH THIS - These are the rats I sniffed out ! 
THIS IS AN ASSET GRAB , and we are being asked to finance it . 
Go here to read how foreclosed homes can be purchased by towns and faith The mortgage transfer orgasm happened electronically via MERS . 
Mortgage Electronic Regisration Systems is the holder of many foreclosed properties listed in your local newspapers . 
That 's how I learned about MERS . 
-LRB- Like deregulating the banking industry . -RRB- 
Do yourself a favor and google the ` Community Reinvestment Act ' . 
In short , this was an act passed in 1977 by Carter then uber-enforced in 1995 under President Clinton . 
Under threat of lawsuits , the Clinton Administration essentially forced the banks to begin giving homes to people who could n't afford them . 
The repeal of the Glass-Steagall act in 2000 was a deregulation bill aimed at allowing banks whose credit lines had dried up to merge with other institutions over this mess . 
Do yourself a favor and look stuff up before you make accusations . 
OBAMA ROCKS !!! Rock the Vote !!! OBAMA OBAMA Can we get your vote ? 
The insistence by Bush administration that its our way or the highway . 
Running from Presidential debate . 
After all he is not in charge of anything in this area yet . 
So the only crisis is the pushing through of the Bush plan without any chance of oversight allowed . 
Let alone think about people with incomes less than $ 250 000 Palin has avoided Press Conferences . 
I wonder what excuse they are going to come up with for her to avoid debates . 
I did expect McCain would at least turn up to the Presidential debates . 
Not try and run the other way . 
After all he was a POW Posted by : guytaur1 | September 24 , 2008 9:47 PM | Report abuse McCain 's rashness , always a concern , is truly frightening . 
When Russia invaded Georgia , McCain rushed to rattle sabers . 
When it appeared Barack Obama had done well at his convention , his response was to throw the ultimate hail mary pass and chose the deeply unqualified and unprepared Sarah Palin . 
His response to this crisis ? 
Fire the head of the SEC in the middle of the crisis . 
He suspends his campaign and postpones the debate . 
How would you like four years of this ? 
George Will , of all people , nailed it : McCain is `` behaving like a flustered rookie playing in a league too high . '' 
The Wall Street Journal , one of the most conservative voices in America , editorialized McCain as `` untethered . '' 
Mature , reasoned , calming : It s my belief that this is exactly the time the American people need to hear from the person who in approximately 40 days will be responsible with dealing with this mess , '' he said . 
`` In my mind , actually , it 's more important than ever that we present ourselves to the American people and try to describe where we want to take the country and where we wnt to take the economy as well as dealing with some of the issues of foreign policy that were initially the subject of the debate . '' 
However its not an important enough of a issue , for Obama to stop campaigning . 
Can any of you Bots explain that ? 
Here is the reason for todays grenade . '' 
... The disclosure undercuts a remark by Mr. McCain on Sunday night that the campaign manager , Rick Davis , had had no involvement with the company for the last several years ... '' ... As president of the Homeownership Alliance , Mr. Davis received $ 30,000 to $ 35,000 a month . 
He , along with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , have characterized the alliance as a coalition of many housing industry and consumer groups to promote homeownership , but numerous current and former officials at both companies say the companies created and bankrolled the operation to combat efforts by competitors to rein in their business . 
The companies dissolved the group at the end of 2005 as part of cost-cutting in the wake of accounting scandals and , at Freddie Mac , a lobbying scandal that forced out its top Republican lobbyist ... On Monday , the McCain campaign attacked The Times for its account of those payments to Mr. Davis , saying the paper was 150 percent in the tank for Mr. Obama . 
Mr. Davis said that he had worked not for the two companies but for the advocacy group , which included other organizations as well and , he said , was focused only on promoting homeownership ... . . 
After the Homeownership Alliance was dissolved , Mr. Davis asked to stay on a retainer , the people familiar with the deal said . 
Hollis McLoughlin , who was chief of staff to Richard F. Syron , Freddie Mac s chief executive , arranged for a new contract with Davis Manafort at the reduced rate of $ 15,000 a month , they said ... '' The unintended victim is ... well , remember George F. Will 's comment `` McCain has lost his head '' Posted by : Rick Davis threw another ` FLASH BANG GRENADE '' | September 24 , 2008 9:46 PM | Report abuse How un-original ! 
Mcain now has Bush doing his dirty work !!!! How low will this man go ? 
Just a plain user and an unworthy choice for leadership ! 
John McCain - son and grandson of admirals - graduated 5 ` th from the bottom at the US Naval Academy because ... Between 1954 and 1958 , that outfit was overrun by leftist Zumwalts , who punished honorable McCains for diligent service . 
Besides , McCain was busy during those years encouraging `` abstinence only '' education . 
-LRB- Like deregulating the banking industry . -RRB- 
Since McCain 's announcement of `` suspending the campaign '' did n't do the trick to get the debate canceled , George Bush has now personally invited Obama to try to lure him away from the campaign and debates . 
THE VOTERS NEED TO HEAR THE DEBATES . 
THIS IS A CRUCIAL ELECTION . 
Imagine , posting garbage and then trashing yourself . 
It 's just a debate and I guess his staff of writers ca n't get him ready in time . 
It 's only dire , because now it effects them and their friends . 
I guess if I wanted expertise there -LRB- from the GOP ticket -RRB- , I 'd ask Sarah Palin . '' 
The Republicans -LRB- President Bush included -RRB- have tried to institute some real reforms covering the Community Reinvestment Act since 2003 and Barney Frank has helped block it since saying the Republicans `` should n't exaggerate the problem '' . 
Well , it is a problem now is n't it ? 
Obama\/Biden08 Posted by : sharon | September 24 , 2008 9:40 PM | Report abuse I shudder to think what would come of our economy were John McCain to continue campaigning . 
I 'd venture to guess it demonstrates a `` me first '' orientation , but I 'm just a liberal democrat , what do I know ? 
They will stop at nothing ... nor will their `` candidate '' . 
The man who was not there ... who does n't exist . 
Watch them as they attempt to blame all the others ... oh ... what a price they shall pay at the hands of the American people . 
The congress is worthless and are traitors . 
WTF is McCain thinking ??? Posted by : Tetris | September 24 , 2008 9:26 PM Because Senator McCain is putting Country -LRB- that means you and I -RRB- first before party or the elections . 
There is a financial crisis that is about to occur . 
The credit system in this country is almost dried up . 
What does that mean ? 
That means that you and I wo n't be able to buy anything on credit . 
Try saving up 500,000-600 ,000 for a house . 
It will take you a lifetime . 
Kudos to Senator McCain for the courage to try and help get a deal done . 
Personally , he should call the real culprits -LRB- the Democrats who started this mess in 1995 -RRB- on the carpet and shove this deal in the President 's face as well as Senator Reid 's . 
All Obama can do is say `` if they need me , they know where they can call me . '' 
That does n't sound very Presidential does it ? 
I guess if I wanted expertise there -LRB- from the GOP ticket -RRB- , I 'd ask Sarah Palin . '' 
It is yet another incident of a politician -- regardless of ideological stripe -- coughing up a lot of money for the sake of good looks . 
He 's used to taking both sides on every issue . 
Besides , you make your RepubliCON buddies look like Einstein . 
He voted to allow them do what ever thy wanted by deregulating them thanks John . 
As more and more of his connections to those responsible for pillaging the economy come to the light of day he 's now scrambling to appear as the concerned statesman when he is neither . 
McCain 's fingerprints are all over this economic crime scene . 
I find it amusing yet sad that both McCain and Palin are working overtime to avoid the media and thereby the public as the heat continues to increase surrounding their policies and actions as well as their personal affairs . 
The last thing we need are another inept , misguided -LRB- if not corrupt -RRB- president and vice president that take cover when they might face fire for their failures and\/or malfeasance . 
McCain is not available for the debate , therefore Palin should step in and debate on behalf of McCain . 
John McCain has no honor and is a disgrace to this nation . 
Add coward on top of that . 
This is pathetic Posted by : teh internets | September 24 , 2008 9:32 PM | Report abuse Until the next president is sworn into office , McCain and Obama are candidates and senators . 
They play a role in this financial crisis as other senators , but more importantly , they need to provide the American people with the closest thing we have to presidential job interviews , i.e. , the debates . 
- Penn Gov. Ed Rendell renewable energy tax credit = $ 700 billion bailout proposal ???? Put the pipe stem down , Ed . 
Step back from the turbo bong . 
born rich , admiral daddy got him >> into academy even though he did n't deserve >> a place there . . 
handed everything on a >> silver platter . 
Actually , he was not born rich . 
At least look these things up . 
>> Obama ... left lucrative law firm to work >> with churches in poorest nighborhood in >> Chicago And left them poorer and much worse off when he left . 
>> McCain ... alcoholic , cheating then left >> first wife -LRB- crippled -RRB- to marry his >> mistress with $ 100 million in bank ... what >> a guy ! 
I 'm an alchoholic , but did n't go through the torture that Senator McCain went through as a POW . 
Maybe he had some issues when he got out , ever think of that ? 
>> Obama ; served honorably in Illinois Senate Voted ` present ' more times than not . 
For those of you uneducated , disadvantaged people voting for Senator Obama , that means he voted neither yes or no. . 
Now , we find out the Illinois records have been ` scrubbed ' . 
You could n't get them if you tried . 
What is he hiding . 
What a coward Obama is . 
>> McCain : almost served time for Keating >> Five scandal Actually , he was found innocent because most of the money in the McCain household is tied up in trust and he ca n't get his hands on it . 
Either McCain is scared to debate Obama , or McCain knows he can not remember all the lies he has told and is unable to meet anyone outside his town Hall environment . 
So I will be glad to see Obama and Biden in the white house next January , but they will have to clean it well to get rid of the stench of Bush . 
I guess it was time for McCain to change it up in the hopes the Republicans , who value party over country , would perk up even more . 
From some of the posts I am guessing it worked , but does any educated person think this is something other than a hail mary pass and after listening to Palin talke to Couric tonight I am wondering , W T F is really wrong with the right and who IN THEIR RIGHT MIND would really believe it and still come out and support it . 
But he svaged the old man on his show today , so hard , that I doubt McStoopid will ever be on the show again . 
McCain 's rationalization for pulling out of the campaign in the face of plummeting poll numbers and the continuing embarrassment of his VP pick : Yep ! 
As in McClellan SKEDADDLED from the battlefield at Bull Run ... Posted by : History Buff | September 24 , 2008 9:29 PM | Report abuse A sound proposal for economic recovery , from Christopher D. Andersen -LRB- 2 -RRB- I believe these proposed changes embody a win-win for all constituencies and for the United States of America , while limiting the potential for unintended consequences . 
Specifically , I believe they would result in the following positive developments : First , the changes would provide for the genesis of a limited new group of first time home buyers , thereby allowing the current glut of housing stock for sale to return to normalized levels without causing a tectonic shift from one asset class to another . 
In turn , this would help to restore the supply\/demand balance in the housing market , thereby stemming the ongoing decline in the value of all homes . 
Of course , these developments would have positive implications for the regional banks balance sheets insofar as they are exposed both to the primary mortgage market as well as the home equity loan market . 
Existing homeowners would also benefit as the value of their homes would cease to be negatively impacted by the neighborhood effect . 
Second , since regular and Roth IRAs are mere investment vehicles , no one type of fiduciary institution or market would be unduly affected by the implicit withdrawal of funds inherent in my proposal . 
Some of the withdrawals would come from bank CDs , some from money market funds , some from the bond market and others from the equity market . 
In essence , this temporary burden would be diffused and , in the end , I believe the resultant improvement in the underlying economy and equity markets would more than offset this temporary shift in asset allocation . 
Next , since withdrawals from regular IRA accounts would be taxed at the capital gains tax rate , the Treasury s current funding needs would be bolstered at a time when the federal deficit is increasing at an alarming pace . 
The resultant increase in marginal revenues from my proposal may actually lower the deficit s overall cost to the taxpayer by concurrently lowering the yield on Treasury securities due to the implicit improvement in the federal government s balance sheet . 
Also , to the extent that the Treasury acquires mortgage related assets within the parameters of the legislation currently being considered , the resultant improvement in the underlying housing market will help to mitigate the final cost to the taxpayer under this program . 
Finally , it is clear that a rebound in general economic activity can not be achieved until the current dislocations in the housing market and resultant negative effects on our nation s financial system are reversed . 
I believe my proposals would go a long way to help turn the tide in this respect . 
Ultimately , this reversal will allow the Federal Reserve to free itself from being held hostage to the cascade of falling asset values and permit it to pursue monetary policy in a manner which is truly balanced between the dual objectives of full employment and price stability . 
In addition , our nation s trade and foreign policy initiatives will regain strength . 
Bolstered by a vibrant economy and a sound financial system our representatives will no longer be hamstrung in their response to the specter of the Chinese balking at the rollover of debt at Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac or Russia s aggressive incursions into fledgling democracies and the potential disruptions to the supply of natural resources inherent therein . 
My proposal will also allow many of our nation s wounded financial institutions to repair themselves based on improving economic fundamentals , not questionable recapitalizations by foreign sovereign wealth funds . 
As they should , many irresponsible financial institutions will fail in coming quarters due to their past mistakes . 
The more prudent institutions will benefit through increased market share and pricing power in the future . 
In the same respect , by allowing them to participate in the American dream of home ownership I believe my proposal would benefit those Americans that did not overextend themselves . 
To the extent that these same American taxpayers will be burdened by the costs of irresponsible parties actions of the past , and to the extent that they have been further penalized by the erosion of the value of their savings in recent years as measured by the true rate of inflation , I believe they deserve the opportunity inherent in my proposal . 
Finally , in a politically charged election year , legislation designed to address the current financial\/economic crisis must be politically acceptable on both sides of the aisle . 
Since my proposal encourages home ownership , does not have moral hazard implications , is targeted to middle income citizens , is immediately revenue positive , can be viewed as a tax cut , rewards responsible lending and borrowing practices , and is a temporary action , I believe it should be enthusiastically embraced by both political parties . 
Thank you for your time and consideration . 
Or was it his Dukakis in a tank moment ? 
The polls will be brutal , as they should be . 
My proposal is politically neutral , revenue positive , limited in scope , avoids moral hazard at both the individual and financial institution levels and directly addresses the current overhang of new and existing single family homes held for sale . 
Before briefly outlining my proposal , however , Mr. Secretary , I would like to state the following : I have been a student of and professional engaged in capital markets for more than fifteen years . 
As such , I know that last week s developments , if left unchecked for a matter of only a few hours more , would have led to a total systemic failure of the global financial system . 
Your efforts to halt the then ensuing death spiral are sincerely appreciated . 
You have spared the American people from untold hardship , the likes of which have not been seen since the Great Depression . 
The outlines of my proposal are as follows : Mr. Secretary , I applaud your efforts to avoid the moral hazard of baling out both individuals and institutions that made irresponsible decisions in the past . 
I believe the authority you are currently seeking from the Congress to purchase mortgage related assets largely avoids this problem as those institutions which tender these securities will still be forced to take the necessary marks to their portfolios . 
I do not believe my proposal in any way presents a moral hazard issue either . 
Current law allows first time home buyers to withdraw up to $ 10,000.00 from a Roth IRA account without taxation . 
I believe the same relief is extended to monies withdrawn from regular IRA accounts . 
This tax relief was recently enhanced by the Housing Assistance Tax Act of 2008 which included a $ 7,500.00 tax credit for first time purchases . 
The tax credit in this Act , however , phases out for individuals with incomes exceeding $ 75,000.00 and the credit is re-paid over a fifteen year period . 
I propose that the tax exemption limit for withdrawals from Roth IRA accounts be raised to $ 150,000.00 for first time purchasers . 
Income tax on these monies was already collected by State and Federal governments . 
In addition , I propose that monies withdrawn from regular IRA accounts be taxed at the fifteen percent capital gains tax rate for first time purchasers , again , up to $ 150,000.00 . 
This legislation should be limited in duration to July 1 , 2009 . 
... Posted by : Martin Edwin Andersen | September 24 , 2008 9:27 PM | Report abuse I ca n't believe this . 
WTF is McCain thinking ??? Posted by : Tetris | September 24 , 2008 9:26 PM | Report abuse Sen. Todd . 
on McCain flying to Washington to take care of the economic crisis : '' ... I think it 's more of a rescue plan for his campaign rather than a rescue plan for the economy ... '' Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 9:25 PM | Report abuse Posted by : kurt hunt | September 24 , 2008 9:25 PM | Report abuse Palin is a religious moron ... Creationism ... dinosaurs chasing cavemen , mammoths roaming the earth when pyramids were built , Grand Canyon created in a few days during Noah 's Flood ... just a heartbeat from the Presidency folks . 
They are as overvalued as the real state market ! 
Where were they 2 weeks ago ? 
I guess if I wanted expertise there -LRB- from the GOP ticket -RRB- , I 'd ask Sarah Palin . '' 
-- Rep. Franks , D-Mass . 
That sarcastic snipe pretty much sums up the Democratic attitude toward a Senator who wishes to set aside politics , roll up his sleeves and get to work on this bail-out plan . 
For those who do n't know , these bipartisan negotiations on great matters of state can easily run 16 hours a day , seven days a week . 
This is no trivial matter , and I respect McCain 's wish to postpone the petty , selfish slugfest they call a presidential campaign and try to do something for the American people . 
Clearly , Obama does n't see it this way and would rather posture in front of a camera than do any real work in the chambers of Congress . 
For all the people in this talkback who called McCain a loser , coward , incompetent , alcoholic , etc. -- you are merely persuading those of us who respect his courage and record of service to set aside whatever doubts we have and vote for McCain-Palin . 
If you are Obama 's constituency , I sure do n't want people like you running the country . 
David Asstoorough will just have to get used to the fact that his ilk 's constant employment of propaganda and condescending sneerage towards liberalism has seen its day . 
It 's like the GOP has to keep jumping back 2000 years to a mythical time and hop scotch right over the first and greatest Republican President . 
Can you name the 2 politicians whom were lawyers , known for articulate speech , both served 8-years in the Illinois State Senate , both served one term in the US Congress out of Illinois , and both were in the decided minority that opposed the wars of their day ? 
Hint - observe pennies or $ 5 doallr bill in your wallet or largest monument on the Washington Mall . 
And then tell me Obama has no training or experience that might prepare him to lead this nation in a time of crisis . 
You nut jobs have had your run of picking losers - time for the educated realists to carry this election . 
His sleazy party 's hacks who ran and looted Fannie and Freddie , aided by Chris Dodd and Barney Frank are largely responsible for the debacle . 
Obama knows it , and he received a lot of money from Raines and Johnson , but he still tries to blame Bush . 
They have no shame and no integrity . 
He 's just going to be sleeping on the job . 
While the his gender card choice VP shoots bears . 
Is there longevity in McCain 's family ? 
Then what happens the hunter with no experience takes over ? 
Why she gets spoon feed her speeches . 
America does n't have time for this . 
Come on people open your eyes Posted by : jd | September 24 , 2008 9:22 PM | Report abuse 1 -RRB- Both Paulson and Bernanke were appointed by George W. Bush -- beware of the Bush-wack . 
2 -RRB- McCain is all about gietie-up hurry-up . 
Watch the Tenderfoot , who is so quick to shoot from the hip , bring some small changes to the program and then brag how important they were ... He will stay close to the GOP herd . 
3 -RRB- Most of our Nations top economists are urging us to go slow , and not hurry-up . 
- Barack Obama , rejecting McCain 's proposal . 
Apparently Obama does not believe this is a time to do what 's right . 
The Obscure Candidate has been talking for what seems like centuries and never gave us a hint of what was coming on the economic front ! 
We do n't need more debates to figure out that the Federal Reserve and the Treasury will be calling the shots for a long , long , long time ! 
Here 's the New York Times article from September 11 , 2003 . 
The Democrats DID NOT WANT to regulate Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac . 
Note the Barney Frank quote on page 2 of the New York Times article from September 11 , 2003 . 
It 's very revealing ! 
It was the Democrats who pushed for this deregulation -- because the liberals feared that regulations placed on Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac would deny home loans to poor minorities . 
A vote for Obama in November is a vote for unprecedented financial DISASTER . 
You ai n't seen nothing yet ! 
The Democrats caused this financial mess with their stupid deregulation of the mortgage industry via liberal policies of forcing lenders to lend to poor people ... who ca n't possibly pay back . 
Average Americans will not receive a dime ! 
No stimulus , not lower but higher interest rates , tighter restrictions on borrowing , but lots of flag waving and fear mongering . 
Things are so dire he spoke for less than 5 minutes . 
The Conservatives are not even going to kiss you first , just shove it ! 
I do n't make enough money , ca n't tap dance -LRB- especially in public toilets -RRB- , have n't hit on interns , am not a gay evangelist , am not greedy , did n't kill any of my fellow servicemembers while I served , my daddy was n't an admiral nor was he in a position to be able to influence anyone , did not apply for deferrals because I had better things to do , did not support the Bush administration over 90 % of the time , and do not have foreign policy experience because I ca n't see Russia from my back yard . 
So , I guess I 'll be voting for Obama . 
No Mccain No how No way . 
No more bush policies . 
Throw in the towel now . 
That young guy Obama is gonna knock you out . 
It 'll take another gimmick to put another GOP president in the white house . 
Let me unspin this one for you , McCain was planning on playing the ` we are winning the war in Iraq now ' card during fridays debate but now is afraid that with the current economic situation , that lots of folks might say , `` yeah , thats right , but , considering the cost in dollars and lives was it really worth it ? '' 
As Tip O'Neil once said `` all politics is local '' and the state of the American economy currently trumps the American adventure in Iraq . 
McCain wants to reshuffle the cards and -LRB- like our friends on Wall street -RRB- get a do over . 
This is about him trying to change the subject from the money down the Iraq rathole to him being some kind of proactive leader , but , the flaw in the scheme is that HE HAS ALREADY ADMITTED THAT HE DOES N'T KNOW THAT MUCH ABOUT ECONOMIC MATTERS . 
So , I think that is fair to conclude that this just a McCain Campaign DOG AND PONY SHOW !!!!! LOL Posted by : rkerg | September 24 , 2008 9:11 PM | Report abuse Posted by : George R Sands | September 24 , 2008 9:10 PM | Report abuse usa3 - Woo ! 
Time for a Larry Craig joke ! 
It 's your Jesus Obama who partners with people who intentionally blow up and kill people . 
And you want him to be president . 
Like vwcat , I 'm sure you 'd be `` down '' with murdering people too as long as you had a big enough mob behind you . 
And it is n't his ability to look serious when calling Obama elitist who never had any silver spoon in his mouth and daddy and granddaddy opening doors for him . 
His greatest strength is not the legion of conservative crazies out there some of whom honestly think Obama is the anti-Christ and that Fred Flinstone could have handled the brontosaurus ribs if he only had a hummer fueled by ANWR oil . 
His greatest gift is steering his plane -LRB- substitute campaign -RRB- into enemy fire and getting shot down . 
Once on the ground and crippled up he works his magic . 
born poor , lived on food stamps , put self through college McCain . . 
born rich , admiral daddy got him into academy even though he did n't deserve a place there . . 
handed everything on a silver platter . 
Obama ... left lucrative law firm to work with churches in poorest nighborhood in Chicago McCain ... alcoholic , cheating then left first wife -LRB- crippled -RRB- to marry his mistress with $ 100 million in bank ... what a guy ! 
Obama ; served honorably in Illinois Senate McCain : almost served time for Keating Five scandal Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 9:05 PM | Report abuse Gosh David Astroturf , I thought it was Cheney who liked to shoot people ? 
Stay on topic or troll eslewhere . 
So get your Punk-A SENIOR Senator butt in gear ! 
And learn to if not `` Respect WE THE PEOPLE ! '' 
, At least your Moral Superiors , and your Betters ! 
In other words John McSame ; Senator Obama would like both sugar and cream-IN HIS COFFEE ! 
So get it diaper boy ! 
; ~ -RRB- Posted by : RAT-The | September 24 , 2008 9:01 PM | Report abuse John McCain has a campaign jet for his personal use , I do n't understand why he ca n't multi-task . 
Crisis often do n't come one at a time . 
The President of the United States is going to have to be able to manage not only domestic issues , but international crisis all at the same time . 
You ca n't suspend the Executive Office of the President . 
This is shameless politicizing of a very real American economic dilema . 
John McCain , who admittedly , does not know much about the economy , wants to interrupt the ongoing negotiations on Capital Hill , for a political photo-op and to save political face . 
Get yourself an AK and be one of the murderers . 
As a typically compassionate , high-intellect liberal Democrat I 'm sure you 'd get sexually aroused by killing unarmed political opponents and rolling in their blood . 
And remember , you 're not alone . 
There are many just like you in the Democratic Party . 
Electing George Bush President -LRB- twice -RRB- 2 . 
Ignoring terrorist warnings month before the 9\/ll attacks . 
Financial Crisis I : Enron & Bush 's friends . 
Unncessary , costly , immoral war in Iraq . 
Incompetent reconstruction of Iraq 6 . 
Incompetent FEMA response to Katrina disaster with 1,800 dead . 
Financial Crisis II : Great Depression II The end of an era is approaching ... change is coming to Washington and his name is Obama ! 
He stole the nomination from HRC , now he wants to steal the election . 
So what if the economy goesinto the tank . 
Never mind , it is about him getting into the WH , that 's what matters . 
His gutter rat groupies wil ofcourse not even know what is good for them , and will jumpinto the river for him . 
So , of course , he is going to reject the McCain offer to work together on the bailout plan , because that is a variable he is not prepared for . 
He ca n't go to DC to discuss , cause he is too clueless to discuss or negotiate anything . 
The economy is not a topic he has any knowledge of , it is not the topic of stealing nominations , for godssake . 
So , he is grandstanding , and he will make some drama by going to MS to the debate site and score some cheap points , the economy be damned . 
Now we know the real reason he created a stunt for the debate . 
Palin is not ready . 
I have a good idea - let 's put Palin and Biden in this Friday slot and see what McCain says about this . 
Say what you 're going to do , and then do it . 
-LRB- Remember Alan Greenspan and his nuanced slowly evolving language about interest rates ? -RRB- 
Right now we are in the orderly process of picking a new president . 
There are 3 presidential debates , one VP debate and on Nov 4th we vote . 
Throwing that all out the window and `` winging it '' will \* NOT \* reasure the markets . 
There is a fine line between a Maverick and a Loose Cannon . 
I think McCain has crossed it . 
If anything , he will just add to the chaos in Washington and help spread a sense of panic . 
What 's next if we suspend the debates ? 
Why not suspend the entire election and declare martial law ? 
Call in a bomb threat a few hours before the debate ? 
No go - Secret Service watching over his shoulder . 
Best bet - yell fire in the movie theater and lead everyone over to the fire department to help load the hoses , help firemen dress , show them how to jump down the pole and where to stand or sit on the fire engine . 
I wonder if he still knows where his office is ? 
I wonder what McSame will be doing in Washington on Friday night at 9PM when all the other members of Congress have gone home for the weekend ? 
Perhaps he could hang out in his hotel room and watch Obama debate McCutNRun 's empty seat on TV . 
And learn to if not `` Respect your Elders ! '' 
, At least your Superiors , and your Betters ! 
In other words Barack O'Bomba-Nation ; Senator McCain would like both sugar and cream-IN HIS COFFEE ! 
Give away our tax money for Wall Street and war in the middle east ? 
Something is very wrong with the way America does business . 
Did soldiers die for this kind of limp democracy ? 
Democracy may not be free , but it wasnt intended to be this weak kneed with no risk and just give from the public . 
If Obama 's version of how things developed pre-McCain withdrawing from the debate , I would like to hear any Republican supporter seriously argue that this was nothing more than a desperate political move . 
For an added bonus try to justify moving the presidential debate to Thursday and moving the VP debate to an undisclosed later date . 
Does he look right to you ? 
Seriously , what 's wrong with him ? 
The economic situation is so dire that McCain believes he must suspend his campaign , cancel the presidential debate , and no-show for tonight 's program on David Letterman . 
But ... he 's available for an interview on CBS tonight and can attend the Global Initiative conference tomorrow . 
THEN he 'll head to Washington to solve all America 's economic woes , even though he does n't `` know much about the economy '' . 
On the other hand , Senator Obama is capable of multi-tasking : monitoring and participating in the bail-out negotiations in Washington while managing his campaign operations AND preparing for Friday night 's debate . 
Let the debate go on . 
Perhaps McCain 's very qualified second-in-command , Ms. Palin , can sit in for her boss . 
That 's her role after all . 
So is she ready or is she not ? 
APRIL Since he 's shown his face to vote against the G.I. bill , and like the sissy he is , he is running away . 
He 's incapable of doing more than one thing at a time . 
Thought everyone would call Obama unpatriotic ! 
Ha , Voting AGAINST the G.I. bill is unpatriotic ! 
Get a grip Senator McCain , you are confusing everyone . 
now you say , if the bill does n't pass by Friday , WE 'LL BE IN A DEEP DEPRESSION BY MONDAY ! 
Geeze , Just a week ago Monday , you said the fundaemental of the economy were SOUND ! 
Now , by this Monday we 'll be in a deep DEPRESSION , OVERNIGHT ! 
ALSO WHY DOES SARAH PALIN HAVE A WITCH DOCTOR LAYING HANDS ON HER AT CHURCH , WHY WO N'T SARAH TALK ABOUT TROOPERGATE ? 
WHY DID RICK DAVIS , YOUR CAMPAIGN MANAGER TAKE $ 2 MILLION FROM FANNIE AND FREDDIE , EVEN THOUGH YOU SAID HE DID N'T ? 
YOU ARE VERY CONFUSING OLD MAN , GET A GRIP ! 
Gee ... I think I 'll go with Obama , thanks . 
McCain is not up to the job . 
Electing George Bush President -LRB- twice -RRB- 2 . 
Ignoring terrorist warnings month before the 9\/ll attacks . 
Financial Crisis I : Enron & Bush 's friends . 
Unncessary , costly , immoral war in Iraq . 
Incompetent reconstruction of Iraq 6 . 
Incompetent FEMA response to Katrina disaster with 1,800 dead . 
Financial Crisis II : Great Depression II The end of an era is approaching ... change is coming to Washington and his name is Obama ! 
I think just lining them up would be fine . 
I am hoping to get tickets to the event . 
Yeah and he was also one of those swarthy Sephardic Jews . 
Y So remember all you good Christians , you are following the teachings of one of them dark skinned fer-rin types if you believe in Jesus . 
Did you somehow think Jesus was a white European ? 
Maybe you should do some serious soul searching before you succumb to your racist instincts in who you are voting for and why . 
NOW HE WANT TO CANCEL THE VICE-PRESIDENT DEBATE . 
IF I WAS OBAMA I WOULD N'T CANCEL AGAIN . 
MCCAIN KNOW THEY ARE LOSING HE LOOK SO PATHETIC . 
THE CRISIS HAPPEN LAST WEEK NOW HE THINKING TODAY IT NO. 1 ISSUES . 
HE HAVE N'T BEEN IN WASHINGTON SINCE MARCH AND NOW HE THINK THEY NEED HIM . 
BARAK CAME OUT LOOKING PRESIDENT WITH LEADERSHIP SO PROUD OF HIM . 
MCCAIN LEFT THE STAGE LIKE SOMEBODY AFTER HIM . 
LOOK AT THE TAPE . 
ObamaJesus is pure as sunlight and when the Dems are in office they 're going to give Bush , Cheney , Rove , etc. , a fair five minute trial then line them up against a wall and machine gun them just like their other idol Che Guevara would . 
Bill Ayers and Bernadine Dohrn will be on hand as consultants . 
Taking a few junkets to Iraq does n't cut it John . 
You could n't even keep straight the difference between Sunni and Shia ... time to retire to one of your dozen homes John . 
It will all be over soon enough . 
Get prepared everyone ... for President Barack Hussein Obama . 
YOU ARE ALONE IN YOUR Posted by : Cookie100 | September 24 , 2008 8:48 PM | Report abuse Why American Woman is nomber One in the World ? 
-LRB- If you got the wrong answer I fire you Sen. Obama & Mccain . -RRB- 
1 -RRB- American woman is Beautiful . 
2 -RRB- No money Easy & Free Xex . 
Looks like Obama is afraid that McCain will show up and keep the debate on topic . 
What a scam obama is . 
And the press may be duped Posted by : john | September 24 , 2008 8:47 PM | Report abuse This whole mess screams Shock Doctrine . 
Shock Doctrine : The privatization of an economy under the authority not because it is democratically popular , but because ideals are pushed through while the citizens of countries were in shock from disasters or upheavals . 
It is also claimed that these shocks are in some cases , created with the intention of being able to push through these unpopular reforms in the wake of the crisis . 
The mccain campain knows that , of course , and that is why they are trying to run from the fight or should I say the beating ? 
After all , what is he going to say ? 
`` the basics of our econmy are good '' ? 
We 're tired of platitudes and we believe Biden `` Obama is not ready to lead '' Yes Biden we know , more and more people are finding out every day Posted by : Mike | September 24 , 2008 8:46 PM | Report abuse Hey ! 
Why not get involved with your responsibilities as a US Senator ?! Heck , getting involved with this mess and voting for a resolution will FINALLY give you something to put on our resume ! 
So far you pretty much have a blank slate . 
Only 117 days left folks but its still way too long and they will come up with other mischief and un-American activities . 
`` Do n't be distracted by the ground noise . '' 
No wonder you want to cancel the VP debates . 
Yes , we can see through it all . 
| September 24 , 2008 8:45 PM | Report abuse What are you going to do if you 're elected and things get tough ? 
We 've got a guy like that now ! 
So , he pulls his second political stunt in 4 weeks . 
The first fizzled out in 2 weeks . 
This one lasted about 2 hours . 
Friday s debate should proceed as planned . 
If McCain chooses to eject , Obama should attend and frame McCain as he chooses . 
Showboating in the skies of Vietnam is over . 
This time , McCain has crashed and burned . 
We 're tired of platitudes and we believe Biden `` Obama is not ready to lead '' Yes Biden we know , more and more people are finding out every day Posted by : mike | September 24 , 2008 8:45 PM | Report abuse ... just like a Marine to imply that their branch of the service is more important than any other branch . 
We may not all agree , but we 're all on the same team . 
Maybe you should have learn to read while you were `` in the rear with the gear . '' 
He did n't say you said it , he said you implied it - which you just did again . 
Maybe you should have finished getting that GED before choosing a career just so you could wave it in everyone 's face . 
We 're tired of platitudes and we believe Biden `` Obama is not ready to lead '' Yes Biden we know , more and more people are finding out every day Posted by : Mike | September 24 , 2008 8:44 PM | Report abuse The Democrats created this mess . 
In 2003 , the Republicans wanted to regulate Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac ... and the Democrats refused ! 
See this New York Times article from September 11 , 2003 . 
The Democrats DID NOT WANT to regulate Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac . 
Note the Barney Frank quote on page 2 of the New York Times article from September 11 , 2003 . 
It 's very revealing ! 
It was the Democrats who pushed for this deregulation -- because the liberals feared that regulations placed on Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac would deny home loans to poor minorities . 
A vote for Obama in November is a vote for unprecedented financial DISASTER . 
You ai n't seen nothing yet ! 
The Democrats caused this financial mess with their stupid deregulation of the mortgage industry via liberal policies of forcing lenders to lend to poor people ... who ca n't possibly pay back . 
White privilege is when you can get pregnant at seventeen like Bristol Palin and everyone is quick to insist that your life and that of your family is a personal matter , and that no one has a right to judge you or your parents , because `` every family has challenges , '' even as black and Latino families with similar `` challenges '' are regularly typified as irresponsible , pathological and arbiters of social decay . . 
White privilege is when you can call yourself a `` f \* ckin ' redneck , '' like Bristol Palin 's boyfriend does , and talk about how if anyone messes with you , you 'll `` kick their f \* ckin ' \* ss , '' and talk about how you like to `` shoot sh \* t '' for fun , and still be viewed as a responsible , all-American boy -LRB- and a great son-in-law to be -RRB- rather than a thug . 
White privilege is when you can attend four different colleges in six years like Sarah Palin did -LRB- one of which you basically failed out of , then returned to after making up some coursework at a community college -RRB- , and no one questions your intelligence or commitment to achievement , whereas a person of color who did this would be viewed as unfit for college , and probably someone who only got in in the first place because of affirmative action . 
White privilege is when you can claim that being mayor of a town smaller than most medium-sized colleges , and then Governor of a state with about the same number of people as the lower fifth of the island of Manhattan , makes you ready to potentially be president , and people do n't all p \* ss on themselves with laughter , while being a black U.S. Senator , two-term state Senator , and constitutional law scholar , means you 're `` untested . '' 
White privilege is being able to say that you support the words `` under God '' in the pledge of allegiance because `` if it was good enough for the founding fathers , it 's good enough for me , '' and not be immediately disqualified from holding office -- since , after all , the pledge was written in the late 1800s and the `` under God '' part was n't added until the 1950s -- while believing that reading accused criminals and terrorists their rights -LRB- because , ya know , the Constitution , which you used to teach at a prestigious law school requires it -RRB- , is a dangerous and silly idea only supported by mushy liberals . 
White privilege is being able to be a gun enthusiast and not make people immediately scared of you . 
White privilege is being able to have a husband who was a member of an extremist political party that wants your state to secede from the Union , and whose motto was `` Alaska first , '' and no one questions your patriotism or that of your family , while if you 're black and your spouse merely fails to come to a 9\/11 memorial so she can be home with her kids on the first day of school , people immediately think she 's being disrespectful . 
White privilege is being able to make fun of community organizers and the work they do -- like , among other things , fight for the right of women to vote , or for civil rights , or the 8-hour workday , or an end to child labor -- and people think you 're being pithy and tough , but if you merely question the experience of a small town mayor and 18-month governor with no foreign policy expertise beyond a class she took in college -- you 're somehow being mean , or even sexist . 
White privilege is being able to convince white women who do n't even agree with you on any substantive issue to vote for you and your running mate anyway , because all of a sudden your presence on the ticket has inspired confidence in these same white women , and made them give your party a `` second look . '' 
White privilege is being able to fire people who did n't support your political campaigns and not be accused of abusing your power or being a typical politician who engages in favoritism , while being black and merely knowing some folks from the old-line political machines in Chicago means you must be corrupt . 
White privilege is being able to attend churches over the years whose pastors say that people who voted for John Kerry or merely criticize George W. Bush are going to h \* ll , and that the U.S. is an explicitly Christian nation and the job of Christians is to bring Christian theological principles into government , and who bring in speakers who say the conflict in the Middle East is God 's punishment on Jews for rejecting Jesus , and everyone can still think you 're just a good church-going Christian , but if you 're black and friends with a black pastor who has noted -LRB- as have Colin Powell and the U.S. Department of Defense -RRB- that terrorist attacks are often the result of U.S. foreign policy and who talks about the history of racism and its effect on black people , you 're an extremist who probably hates America . 
White privilege is not knowing what the Bush Doctrine is when asked by a reporter , and then people get angry at the reporter for asking you such a `` trick question , '' while being black and merely refusing to give one-word answers to the queries of Bill O'Reilly means you 're dodging the question , or trying to seem overly intellectual and nuanced . 
White privilege is being able to claim your experience as a POW has anything at all to do with your fitness for president , while being black and experiencing racism is , as Sarah Palin has referred to it a `` light '' burden . 
And finally , white privilege is the only thing that could possibly allow someone to become president when he has voted with George W. Bush 90 percent of the time , even as unemployment is skyrocketing , people are losing their homes , inflation is rising , and the U.S. is increasingly isolated from world opinion , just because white voters are n't sure about that whole `` change '' thing . 
Ya know , it 's just too vague and ill-defined , unlike , say , four more years of the same , which is very concrete and certain . 
White privilege is , in short , the problem . 
Tim Wise is the author of White Like Me -LRB- Soft Skull , 2005 , revised 2008 -RRB- , and of Speaking Treason Fluently , publishing this month , also by Soft Skull . 
The Democrats created this ? 
Who was it that controlled both chambers of congress AND the presidency ? 
Share what you 're smokin ' dude , because we could all use some . 
No ones buying it except your people . 
Who 's going to be debating on Friday if Mccain is still in Washington . 
It 's not going to work . 
The American Public smells a rat and McCain needed a `` time out '' . 
Bush is still the elected president and he should stay out of the next election . 
Neither McCain or Obama have authority at this point conferred by the people beyond their Senate seat . 
This is wrong , and its antidemocratic . 
There is a real danger here to our democratic process . 
Just like there were no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq , there is no reason to bail out Wall Street . 
This thing needs to play out . 
The stock market has been highly volatile for two-years or more and the last few days is the same as it has been . 
FYI : McSame chose Alaska , not Palin . 
Alaska is an oil state and McSame has been bought and paid for by the oil companies . 
If McSame gets elected , forget about getting off of our dependency on oil . 
The truth is that the USA will be doomed if we do not quickly change to using renewable energy and fuels . 
Mexico just announced that its oil production has dropped 26 % , which means that their liquid oil reserves are essentially depleted and they will be pumping out sludge before too long . 
The same thing is going to happen in the Persian Gulf any time now . 
The USA will be completely crippled when oil runs out . 
Forget about drilling for more oil because it will take years and trillions of dollars to find anything but sludge . 
It costs too much to refine sludge . 
It wo n't be long before the price of gasoline is $ 15 per gallon . 
If McSame gets elected , all of the protected wilderness areas and coastal areas are going to be invaded and drilled , with tax payer money . 
Obama should proceed to the debate podium with or without McCain . 
McCain can either show up , send Sarah as a stand-in or leave his podium empty . 
In any case , Obama and the mediators should proceed as planned with the televised debate . 
Everyone knows mcCain is in trouble . 
He does n't want Palin to debate next week and his campaign manager got caught with his hand in the Freddie\/Fannie cookie jar . 
McCain needs to do something to as well to stop the bleeding in the polls . 
He is in trouble and a month and a half out . 
Too bad , so sad . 
McCain is going to lose and Obama is looking presidential . 
WHAT 'S THE MATTER WITH YA 'LL !!! YOU 'VE BECOME THE LAUGHING STOCK OF THE WORLD . 
THIS IS A SHAM ! 
AND YOU GET NOTHING ! 
STAY AT HOME DADS UNITE ! 
TAKE BACK YOUR COUNTRY ! 
... 4,100 US Soldiers dead , 32,000 wounded , 95,000 + Iraqi civilians killed , 250,000 wounded ... number of Iraqi 's involved in 9\/11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 Posted by : A. Lincoln | September 24 , 2008 8:39 PM | Report abuse Obama and the democrats look bad on this one . 
Obama makes $ 160,000.00 a year , when is he going to start earning it ? 
Oh well , McSame will be letting Palin write policy while he catches up on his sleep . 
Palin , in turn , can let Todd write policy and tell her how she should vote . 
All hail the next RepubliCON president ... Todd ! 
He could n't risk a bad performance so close to a sudden drop in the polls . 
It would be political suicide . 
He needed to buy time . 
He needed to do something . 
That 's all there is . 
Ray Charles can see through that . 
In 2003 , the Republicans wanted to regulate Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac ... and the Democrats refused ! 
See this New York Times article from September 11 , 2003 . 
The Democrats DID NOT WANT to regulate Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac . 
Note the Barney Frank quote on page 2 of the article . 
It 's very revealing ! 
It was the Democrats who pushed for this deregulation -- because the liberals feared that regulations placed on Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac would deny home loans to poor minorities . 
A vote for Obama in November is a vote for unprecedented financial DISASTER . 
You ai n't seen nothing yet ! 
The Democrats caused this financial mess with their deregulation of the mortgage industry via liberal policies of forcing lenders to lend to poor people ... who ca n't possibly pay back . 
uh oh the ghost of President Nixon ! 
First I do n't need to go to washington , now he 's willing to go -LRB- according to CNN -RRB- when he has a seat at the adult table instead of the kiddie table Posted by : Todd | September 24 , 2008 8:39 PM | Report abuse There 's a lot going on that the media is not reporting . 
People can not wrap their minds around what is ACTUALLY HAPPENING , so they adopt REALLY STRONG , nonsensical beliefs ; any perspective by which they may perceive themselves as righteous and furthermore safe . 
So , the `` kool aid drinkers '' jab is more apt then you might expect . 
This ship is crashing , the least Republicans can do is get out of the pilot 's cabin . 
Take 700 billion for an elite ? 
they are doing it again ... Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 8:38 PM | Report abuse and now Bush completes McCain 's stunt by in fact inviting he and Obama to meet with him to help resolve the crisis . 
they 'll have to hurry , because news out of capitol hill is that they may finish the bailout bill before the meeting to help resolve the non-existent stalemate . 
McCain chose to do what he was elected to do as Senator even if it ruins his political career . 
He definitely has put his country first . 
Obama was also elected a US Senator why is n't he working with congress to solve the problem ? 
no he is n't for change he is me first then country . 
This shows me that Obama is all talk & no do . 
I do n't think he has a clue what to do . 
McCain chose to do something about the economy instead of just talking about it . 
The 3 am call has come & who is doing something about it ? 
Lets just debate about it . 
We need action now not later . 
Obama has just proven to me he can not lead . 
Win or lose my vote is for McCain . 
As a matter of fact He believed in trickle down . 
He told those that tended to the fields to not pick the fields clean and leave some for the poor to come by pick up . 
Ca n't wait to watch Letterman tonight , and Palin 's interview with Couric should be standard viewing for all undecided voters ! 
`` I 'll try to find some and I 'll bring 'em to ya ! '' 
with that creepy culty grin . 
| September 24 , 2008 8:37 PM | Report abuse c'mon Former Marine , you do n't have to be that way . 
There 's lots of room for a big boy like you . 
Do you know who Ahmadinejad is ? 
Probably not , but that doesn t surprise me . 
He ca n't come up with a consistent storyline on the economy , freaks out when everyone realizes McCain 's campaign manager has been on Freddie Mac 's dole right up through last month , then hits the mondo panic button when he goes down by nine in the polls . 
McCain keeps pulling crap out of his a $ $ and the media treats it as if it were real -LRB- like they did with Palin -RRB- instead of calling a gimmicky stunt a gimmicky stunt . 
McCain now wants the debate to be moved to the night of the vp debate and then have that on rescheduled . 
They do not want Palin to debate Biden . 
The republicans are afraid Palin is going to choke like she did today with Katie K. Posted by : Janie | September 24 , 2008 8:35 PM | Report abuse `` Obama makes $ 160,000.00 a year , when is he going to start earning it ? '' 
The McCain 's raked in over $ 100 MILLION last year , and do n't even know how many homes they own . 
John has 13 cars in his name . 
Cindy has 11 , however the Lexus she prefers is actually in her daughter 's name . 
Obama owns ONE car - a Ford Escape Hybrid . 
They cost about $ 25,000 . 
The McCain 's pay $ 130,000 a year just for their maid service and a nanny for a teenager . 
Grandma watches the Obama girls . . 
Obama 's $ 160,000 is NOTHING in comparison . 
McCain ca n't relate to the little people , but Obama can . 
Its awfully fun to read about the tax returns . 
Too bad Sarah Palin refuses to make hers public . 
Physically , he is old , intellectually he is feeble . 
What a sad way to tell on his self . 
His South Side Chicago district is a tangled mess of corruption and poverty with rich contributors raking it in . 
His Finance Chair is Penny Pritzker , the subprime princess , whose bank was seized by the government . 
Rezko was in court yesterday facing mortage fraud charges . 
Franklin Raines from Fannie and Obama 's big bucks from both Fannie and Freddie . 
Guy does n't have a clue what 's right , what 's wrong . 
They play a role in this financial crisis as other senators , but more importantly , they need to provide the American people with the closest thing we have to presidential job interviews , i.e. , the debates . 
We 've got a guy like that now ! 
Just like there were no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq , there is no reason to bail out Wall Street . 
This thing needs to play out . 
The stock market has been highly volatile for two-years or more and the last few days is the same as it has been . 
FYI : McSame chose Alaska , not Palin . 
Alaska is an oil state and McSame has been bought and paid for by the oil companies . 
If McSame gets elected , forget about getting off of our dependency on oil . 
The truth is that the USA will be doomed if we do not quickly change to using renewable energy and fuels . 
Mexico just announced that its oil production has dropped 26 % , which means that their liquid oil reserves are essentially depleted and they will be pumping out sludge before too long . 
The same thing is going to happen in the Persian Gulf any time now . 
The USA will be completely crippled when oil runs out . 
Forget about drilling for more oil because it will take years and trillions of dollars to find anything but sludge . 
It costs too much to refine sludge . 
It wo n't be long before the price of gasoline is $ 15 per gallon . 
If McSame gets elected , all of the protected wilderness areas and coastal areas are going to be invaded and drilled , with tax payer money . 
Just like there were no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq , there is no reason to bail out Wall Street . 
This thing needs to play out . 
The stock market has been highly volatile for two-years or more and the last few days is the same as it has been . 
FYI : McSame chose Alaska , not Palin . 
Alaska is an oil state and McSame has been bought and paid for by the oil companies . 
If McSame gets elected , forget about getting off of our dependency on oil . 
The truth is that the USA will be doomed if we do not quickly change to using renewable energy and fuels . 
Mexico just announced that its oil production has dropped 26 % , which means that their liquid oil reserves are essentially depleted and they will be pumping out sludge before too long . 
The same thing is going to happen in the Persian Gulf any time now . 
The USA will be completely crippled when oil runs out . 
Forget about drilling for more oil because it will take years and trillions of dollars to find anything but sludge . 
It costs too much to refine sludge . 
It wo n't be long before the price of gasoline is $ 15 per gallon . 
If McSame gets elected , all of the protected wilderness areas and coastal areas are going to be invaded and drilled , with tax payer money . 
Just like there were no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq , there is no reason to bail out Wall Street . 
This thing needs to play out . 
The stock market has been highly volatile for two-years or more and the last few days is the same as it has been . 
FYI : McSame chose Alaska , not Palin . 
Alaska is an oil state and McSame has been bought and paid for by the oil companies . 
If McSame gets elected , forget about getting off of our dependency on oil . 
The truth is that the USA will be doomed if we do not quickly change to using renewable energy and fuels . 
Mexico just announced that its oil production has dropped 26 % , which means that their liquid oil reserves are essentially depleted and they will be pumping out sludge before too long . 
The same thing is going to happen in the Persian Gulf any time now . 
The USA will be completely crippled when oil runs out . 
Forget about drilling for more oil because it will take years and trillions of dollars to find anything but sludge . 
It costs too much to refine sludge . 
It wo n't be long before the price of gasoline is $ 15 per gallon . 
If McSame gets elected , all of the protected wilderness areas and coastal areas are going to be invaded and drilled , with tax payer money . 
We may not all agree , but we 're all on the same team . 
Maybe you should have learned to read while you were `` in the rear with the gear . '' 
We may not all agree , but we 're all on the same team . 
Maybe you should have learn to read while you were `` in the rear with the gear . '' 
I 'm sick of it ! 
Of course she believes that dinosaurs once chased cavemen a couple of thousand years ago , that the Grand Canyon was created during `` the Flood '' , that this immense universe with countless trillions of stars was painted on the sky . 
Of course she believes that our occupation of Iraq is part of `` God 's Plan '' . 
Of course she believes it 's sporting to shoot bears and wolves from helicopters . 
Of course she believes that global warming is just a natural occurance ... oops ! 
Go right ahead and insult her , she deserves it . 
I 'm sick of it ! 
Of course she believes that dinosaurs once chased cavemen a couple of thousand years ago , that the Grand Canyon was created during `` the Flood '' , that this immense universe with countless trillions of stars was painted on the sky . 
Of course she believes that our occupation of Iraq is part of `` God 's Plan '' . 
Of course she believes it 's sporting to shoot bears and wolves from helicopters . 
Of course she believes that global warming is just a natural occurance ... oops ! 
Go right ahead and insult her , she deserves it . 
So is that what is behind this in the first place ? 
And the lie to Dave Letterman ? 
And then caught red handed in that lie ? 
Make sure to see his show tonight . 
Talk about desperate and low . 
So is that what is behind this in the first place ? 
And the lie to Dave Letterman ? 
And then caught red handed in that lie ? 
Make sure to see his show tonight . 
Talk about desperate and low . 
Sounds pretty credible , and I certainly would n't find it surprising . 
The NE actually has a decent track record for being out ahead on some of these stories . 
Maybe that 's one of the reasons the McCain campaign is shielding her from the Press . 
The Palins are just one big redneck family . 
I 'm sure all the Republican sycophants will defend her to the hilt , just like they did with the unwed pregnant teenage daughter . 
There 's lots of room for a big boy like you . 
Jesus is Jesus - so sick and tired of everyone claiming He 's on their side , wondering when someone 's going to be concerned whether they 're on HIS side . 
Trying to drag God into something as self-serving as politics is literally taking the Lord 's name in vain . 
Cut Him a break and do n't do it ; He does n't want any part of our mudfight . 
Why did Ron and Nancy Reagan shun him and try to derail his political career ? 
Under the terms of the 14th Amendment is McCain actually barred from ever sitting in the Oval Office ? 
To many unanswered questions . 
Maybe you , Obama and Ahmadinejad could have a meeting to discuss whether homosexuals exist . 
We may not all agree , but we 're all on the same team . 
What do we do now McCain asks ? 
Sarah Palin and her `` bullsh \* t narrative '' did n't work ... let 's see ... time out !! time out !!! I need some time for the public to forget about my contribution to this financial crisis ! 
That 's it ... now I 'm Mr. Regulator ... at least until November 5th . 
Much better that BOTH SENATORS go to the Senate and pass legislation than simply debate in Mississippi . 
she hasnt been coached\/prepped enough ... Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 8:26 PM | Report abuse Obama and the democrats look bad on this one . 
Obama makes $ 160,000.00 a year , when is he going to start earning it ? 
The High Holy Uber-Christ of the Universe . 
You libs and your media enablers are a bunch of cult-of-personality , `` all for the state '' , state media lunatics . 
And if Obama would have pulled a McSame , McSameiacs would be posting the same thing . 
Between Mc Cain and Palin , the GOP ticket might as well be in the witness protection program . 
That McCain who was for deregulation pre-disaster might not be quite prepared to explain his sudden epiphany or to deal with the political fallout from the bailout he might have to say it will take to clean up his mess is no real surprise . 
Whether McCain shows up to debate or not , Obama needs to sock it to him . 
In the middle of the taping Dave got word that McCain was , in fact just down the street being interviewed by Katie Couric . 
Dave even cut over to the live video of the interview , and said , `` Hey Senator , can I give you a ride home ? '' 
Earlier in the show , Dave kept saying , `` You do n't suspend your campaign . 
This does n't smell right . 
This is n't the way a tested hero behaves . '' 
And he joked : `` I think someone 's putting something in his metamucil . '' 
`` He ca n't run the campaign because the economy is cratering ? 
Fine , put in your second string quarterback , Sarah Palin . 
Where is she ? '' 
`` What are you going to do if you 're elected and things get tough ? 
We 've got a guy like that now ! '' 
Also , why did n't McCain do this last week , what 's different this week . 
NOE MCCAIN IS SAYING , IF THEY DO N'T REACH A DECISION OF ABOUT THE PACKAGE , WE WILL BE IN A DEEP DEPRESSION BY THIS COMING MONDAY !!! McCain has fallen apart . 
MCCAIN HAS N'T BEEN TO WASHINGTON SINCE APRIL , he has lost the rest of his mind ! 
What a gimmick , they seem like the biggest confused , inconsistant dopes in the world ! 
I like you Sailors ; you always gave us a ride when we needed to fight somewhere Posted by : Former Marine | September 24 , 2008 8:21 PM | Report abuse This is an attempted triple play by the McCain camp . 
First , they try to dupe some Americans into thinking McCain helps achieve a bailout bill . 
As Representative Frank said this afternoon , he is `` optimistic '' a bill will be passed `` within a a few days . '' 
McCain is merely trying to bring favorable political attention to himself , all the while pretending to `` suspend '' his campaign . 
Secondly , he realizes Palin has not received enough tutoring to be ready for her debate with Biden , so he seeks an excuse to postpone her debate . 
How about the day after the election ? 
Third , he may not want to answer questions this Friday about the economy . 
The McCain camp wants the bailout enacted before the first debate so it may be entirely about foreign policy issues , without economic issues being raised . 
While a majority of people realize McCain is hardly an agent of change , it is sad about 40 % of voters believe he would represent change if elected president , despite voting for Bush policies on over 90 % of occasions . 
McCain camp presents itself as bold in choosing Palin , yet is arguably sexist in largely keeping her away from reporters . 
They seem to think Palin is incapable of presenting herself in a coherent way if she had a press conference . 
This seems to be an implicit acknowledgment she is not qualified to be president or vice-president . 
They are the Armed Forces Comm . 
, the Indian Affairs Comm . 
, and the Commerce , Science and Transportation Comm . 
HE IS NOT ON ANY TYPE OF BANKING COMMITTEE OR FINANCE COMMITTEE . 
Thus he has no role in DC at this time as the BAIL-OUT issue is in the appropriate committee where it is being discussed . 
McCain will have no role until the final bill comes out of committee to the Senate floor for vote . 
Then , he will have a role . 
This was a ploy to delay the VP debate because Sarah is not prepared . 
First the economy is fundamentally strong , then he goes looking for heads , then he makes the comment about 400k limits on compensation , now he is suspending his campaign in the face of this national emergency . 
Where is his head ? 
Every day he looks less reliable and his staff\/supporters appear more angry -LRB- at the press -RRB- and disoriented . 
Is there a McCain plan for anything ? 
Or , does this guy spend all of his time running around putting out -- or starting -- little fires ? 
the more I see of McCain , the more he reminds me of `` W '' . 
Let me say that again : LIBERALISM IS A MENTAL DISORDER . 
You people need a doctor , badly . 
Catch Letterman tonight if you want to hear some straight talk . 
`` What is Obama talking about ? 
I think the country can wait to hear how he is going to disgrace the nation by losing in Iraq on purpose . 
I oppose the surge '' Uhh , yes , the debate is about foreign policy . 
I personally would like to see the son and grandson of admirals , who managed to graduate 894 ` th out of 899 at the US Naval Academy in 1958 , debate . 
I 'd like to see how he does against the black son of ordinary people who won admission to Columbia University and Harvard Law School , graduating Magna Cum Laude from the latter . 
Your man , after his party years at the Naval Academy , crashed two multi-million dollar Navy planes and flew another one into power lines before finally crashing a third plane that landed him squarely in North Vietnam , and he accomplished this all within 9 years of his less than illustrious graduation . 
I 'm not sure what qualifies that man to be president . 
Was it his association with Charles Keating ? 
Is it that he 's some kind of royalty , being the son and grandson of admirals ? 
Is it that his reckless irresponsibility culminated in his loss of a third US fighter jet and his brutalization by his captors , our enemies ? 
Or is it just that about 30 per cent of citizens of the USA are diehard republicans , and another 19 per cent are white racists ? 
I think you 've met your match this time , Former Marine , whoever you are . 
McCain would rather save the country than save his election . 
That 's why I am voting for him , and am now writing my first check of this campaign . 
And the democrats , of course you 're right there to dig your thumb into their eyes and stick out your tongue . 
This independent sees it for what it is . 
McCain just lost my vote . 
Selecting Palin wore my support to the last nerve , and this action broke it off . 
I 'm pretty sad that about that . 
Ok you republican and democrat children , resume the mud . 
John McCain spend 26 years of his life working on legislature . 
Barack Obama , in his more or less 11 years of elected office , has done little more than write his memoirs and then promote them as well as his celebrity status . 
And this is surprising to people ? 
the choice this year is between public service and self service . 
simple - vote mccain\/palin 08 ! 
Biden was right on when he said that Obama is not ready to lead . 
If the American people allow private banks to control the issuance of their currency , first by inflation and then by deflation , the banks and corporations that will grow up around them will deprive the people of all their property until their children will wake up homeless on the continent their fathers conquered . 
- Thomas Jefferson Posted by : Founding Father | September 24 , 2008 8:15 PM | Report abuse Liberalism is a mental disorder . 
Let me say that again : LIBERALISM IS A MENTAL DISORDER . 
You people need a doctor , badly . 
We have suffered through recessions before , I do n't see this getting to a Depression , but the fear is there , of course it does n't help when McCain and Palin are politicizing it in the blatant way they are . 
Her Couric interview shows she is not ready for a debate let alone the vp position . 
Heaven help us if she would accidentally become president . 
There are enough politicians in Washington to handle this , McCain taking the low road and going there to `` look '' like he can bring the Republicans together where Cheney could n't is a contrived kabuki show where everyone loses . 
Let 's have the debate Friday , only change it to one on the economy . 
Then let the American public decide for themselves . 
Decide without all the false assertions , without trying to divide , without political gain , without trying to make something look good when it is n't . 
They never stop thinking about new ways to harm our country and our people , and neither do we . 
- George Bush Jr. . 
We see right through this as the gimmick it is . 
You guys are doing Sen. McCain no favors . 
You are taking a good man and honorable public servant and making him look like a putz . 
We see right through this as the gimmick it is . 
You guys are doing Sen. McCain no favors . 
You are taking a good man and honorable public servant and making him look like a putz . 
McCain is gutless and panic-stricken . 
It 's not going to be pretty Friday night for the old one . 
But the real Republican train wreck comes October 2 , when that bimbo has to come forward and stand accountable to the American people . 
McCain 's despicable , totally unpatriotic attempt to scam the American public with that ignorant evangelical nutjob is finally going to be exposed . 
Then , just maybe we can start some serious attempts to put Humpty back together again . 
God know he 's broken . 
You also would be bashing McCain for having a debate with himself , how he should be in Washington doing the first job he was elected to , not the job he wants , President . 
Real leaders solve real problems , others hide in Mississippi . 
McCain was to be on David Letterman today -LRB- airs tonight -RRB- . 
He called Letterman to cancel apologize that he had to go to the airport to go back to washington . 
Letterman found out that McCain went on another interview for the news instead . 
Letterman will air it tonight . 
send that little she-maverick sarah palin to washington to help congress draft the bailout ; she is , after all , the one with all of the financial expertise , as exemplified in her running the great state of alaska -LRB- into the ground -RRB- . 
this would be a great chance for her to prove her critics wrong . 
what the heck does that accomplish ? 
I 'm not distracted , and I do n't have a role in the bailout . 
I can follow his ads and the news at the same time . 
if it overtaxes his brain , he should drop out of the race as unfit to serve . 
and the folks doing the work on this have n't asked for his help , have n't suggested that there 's any sort of deadlock or problem like the one McCain has invented so he can pretend to be involved in the solution that looks like it 's already on the table without him . 
what a complete joke the McCain campaign has become . 
McCain just told Letterman he could n't appear on his show because he had to return to Washington to work on the crisis , but he lied to him because he stayed in CBS studios to tape an interview with Couric . 
no one on capital hill has asked for his help or perceives any need for it . 
and since he does n't know anything about the economy , let alone credit default swaps , he should stay out of it . 
he 's pretending to be bipartisan , above politics and statesmanlike , but he is doing the opposite since he has no role to play and would just muck it up Now his campaign manager is caught in a lie about being paid by Fannie Mae as late as last month even while they are inventing ties between Obama and Fannie Mae Posted by : JoeT | September 24 , 2008 8:10 PM | Report abuse let the debate go on as planned . 
send that little she-maverick sarah palin to washington to help congress draft the bailout ; she is , after all , the one with all of the financial expertise , as exemplified in her running the great state of alaska -LRB- into the ground -RRB- . 
this would be a great chance for her to prove her critics wrong . 
send that little she-maverick sarah palin to washington to help congress draft the bailout ; she is , after all , the one with all of the financial expertise , as exemplified in her running the great state of alaska -LRB- into the ground -RRB- . 
this would be a great chance for her to prove her critics wrong . 
Washington says they do n't want him there anyway . 
It seems what this is really about is buying time before Palin has to face Biden , or just getting that debate canceled . 
Indeed : `` time outs are for losers ! '' 
You also would be bashing McCain for having a debate with himself , how he should be in Washington doing the first job he was elected to , not the job he wants , President . 
Real leaders solve real problems , others hide in Mississippi . 
You also would be bashing McCain for having a debate with himself , how he should be in Washington doing the first job he was elected to , not the job he wants , President . 
Real leaders solve real problems , others hide in Mississippi . 
send that little she-maverick sarah palin to washington to help congress draft the bailout ; she is , after all , the one with all of the financial expertise , as exemplified in her running the great state of alaska -LRB- into the ground -RRB- . 
this would be a great chance for her to prove her critics wrong . 
All of a sudden , Congressional leaders need to hear from John McCain , a man who claimed to know little about the economy !!! Does he honestly think the electorate is this gullible and stupid ? 
His poll numbers are tanking , so he 's trying to appear `` Presidential '' . 
Sadly , all that he has done is to cement people 's opinions of him as one who makes on-the-run , hasty decisions about very complex issues . 
Same type of thinking lead to his selection of the woefully unqualified Palin as his running mate . 
This is the type of man we want running this country ? 
God help us all if that were to happen . 
John , time to retire to your many homes . 
All of a sudden , Congressional leaders need to hear from John McCain , a man who claimed to know little about the economy !!! Does he honestly think the electorate is this gullible and stupid ? 
His poll numbers are tanking , so he 's trying to appear `` Presidential '' . 
Sadly , all that he has done is to cement people 's opinions of him as one who makes on-the-run , hasty decisions about very complex issues . 
Same type of thinking lead to his selection of the woefully unqualified Palin as his running mate . 
This is the type of man we want running this country ? 
God help us all if that were to happen . 
John , time to retire to your many homes . 
All of a sudden , Congressional leaders need to hear from John McCain , a man who claimed to know little about the economy !!! Does he honestly think the electorate is this gullible and stupid ? 
His poll numbers are tanking , so he 's trying to appear `` Presidential '' . 
Sadly , all that he has done is to cement people 's opinions of him as one who makes on-the-run , hasty decisions about very complex issues . 
Same type of thinking lead to his selection of the woefully unqualified Palin as his running mate . 
This is the type of man we want running this country ? 
God help us all if that were to happen . 
John , time to retire to your many homes . 
All of a sudden , Congressional leaders need to hear from John McCain , a man who claimed to know little about the economy !!! Does he honestly think the electorate is this gullible and stupid ? 
His poll numbers are tanking , so he 's trying to appear `` Presidential '' . 
Sadly , all that he has done is to cement people 's opinions of him as one who makes on-the-run , hasty decisions about very complex issues . 
Same type of thinking lead to his selection of the woefully unqualified Palin as his running mate . 
This is the type of man we want running this country ? 
God help us all if that were to happen . 
John , time to retire to your many homes . 
What is Obama talking about ? 
I think the country can wait to hear how he is going to disgrace the nation by losing in Iraq on purpose . 
I oppose the surge Posted by : Former Marine | September 24 , 2008 8:00 PM I think that 's true . 
Looks like the GOP one upped the libs again ... to bad . 
What is Obama talking about ? 
I think the country can wait to hear how he is going to disgrace the nation by losing in Iraq on purpose . 
I oppose the surge Posted by : Former Marine | September 24 , 2008 8:00 PM I think that 's true . 
Looks like the GOP one upped the libs again ... to bad . 
Congress NEEDS someone who has stated . '' 
Even if the economy is the , quote , No. 1 issue , the real issue will remain America s security , and if they choose to say , Look , I do not need this guy because he s not as good on home loan mortgages or whatever it is , I understand about that , I will accept that verdict . 
Someone to tell them `` the fundamentals are strong '' that there should be no bailouts . 
There SHOULD be a bailout . 
That kind of leadership is really needed right now in Washington . 
This financial crisis will be decided in the U.S. SENATE . 
Currently , the brilliant plan is that after this 7 hundred billion dollar bail out ... Pelosi and Reed will be in charge of picking who will be in charge of ongoing oversight for continued spending . 
This is another example of how Senator John McCain puts country first . 
All Obama cares about is winning the election at any cost . 
Obama neglected his duties as U.S. Senator before running for President , and especially after he began running for President . 
This ` bail out - quick fix '' will negatively affect Americans for decades . 
Many of the bloggers who are criticizing McCain for this decision would n't recognize responsibility , or integrity if it bit them on the ass . 
Keep America strong and safe ... Elect McCain\/Palin in November . 
All I can say is that I am SO glad the Democrats went for the unflappable , mature , intelligent , PRESIDENTIAL Barack Obama ! 
We 're in for some very , very rough years ahead , cleaning up the horrendous mess the Republicans and their culture have left us with , but in the hands of President Obama , we will do fine . 
He will be our F.D.R. Posted by : TerryOakland | September 24 , 2008 8:08 PM | Report abuse Is n't the debate about foreign policy ? 
What is Obama talking about ? 
I think the country can wait to hear how he is going to disgrace the nation by losing in Iraq on purpose . 
I oppose the surge Posted by : Former Marine | September 24 , 2008 8:00 PM I think that 's true . 
Looks like the GOP one upped the libs again ... to bad . 
If he is afraid to spend 90 minutes stating his case to America , and the world for that matter , why he believes he should be president , then that 's proof enough he is unqualified to confront a difficult situation face-to-face . 
To which I reply : yes , and it was the most famous value investor of our time , Warren Buffet . 
This is NOT McCain 's choice of metaphor . 
So why are you trying to make so much hay out fo this ? 
Do you have an ax to grind ? 
Pay more attention to what we all need to do to prevent this financial crisis from turning into the worst Depression since the 30s . 
We are running out of time . 
Besides : even Democrats in the Senate have picked up on Buffett 's metaphor . 
If I wanted Obama to debate Rove , why would I need to have McCain on the stage ? 
There is more brain power in Obama 's camp , by far ! 
Like Biden suggested , let 's let the Dems try their political enemies as they 've been screeching about for several years . 
A Dem White House and a Dem Congress means the arrival of American fascism . 
Yes , brave McCain turned about And gallantly he chickened out . 
Bravely taking to his feet He beat a very brave retreat , Bravest of the brave , Sir John ! 
He is packing it in and packing it up And sneaking away and buggering up And chickening out and pising off home , Yes , bravely he is throwing in the sponge ... Posted by : sir robin | September 24 , 2008 8:00 PM | Report abuse Here 's what McCain REALLY said to Bush : '' -LRB- ... heeeeeeelp ... -RRB- Posted by : wardropper | September 24 , 2008 8:00 PM | Report abuse Put the Maverick out to pasture Posted by : Danmonkey | September 24 , 2008 8:00 PM | Report abuse Is n't the debate about foreign policy ? 
What is Obama talking about ? 
I think the country can wait to hear how he is going to disgrace the nation by losing in Iraq on purpose . 
I oppose the surge Posted by : Former Marine | September 24 , 2008 8:00 PM | Report abuse LennyJazz wrote , `` Nader should be in on these debates . '' 
That would be the Nader who stopped production of the most innovative , fuel-efficient GM car of the 1960 's , eh ? 
Is n't that the guy who fell asleep on an airplane with his face against the window and sued the airline because his face felt funny afterward ? 
No , McCain did the right thing , it is Obama who is being sly and partisan . 
As the Bloomberg news article : `` How the Democrats Created the Financial Crisis : '' by Kevin Hassett points out , Obama was one of the Deomocrats who resisted sound regulation for Fannie Mae back when it was still timely . 
Now we are facing the results of his neglect , and he makes this dishonest plea that the President has to be able to do two things at once . 
And this really is dishonest : if Obama had done the right thing back then , we would not HAVE this big mess ! 
But now that we DO have it , it really does demand the full attention of the Senate and President -- except that the current President 's attention might hurt more than help : -LRB- If Obama really cared about the economy -- as he keeps saying he does -- he really would welcome McCain 's invitation , drop everything else , and concentrate on getting a suitable modification of Paulson 's original `` blank-check '' proposal passed THIS WEEK . 
It really is that urgent . 
McCain wants he , Obama and the President to negotiate the deal . 
who asked him to appoint himself the chief negotiator ? 
since when is Bush leading this anyway ? 
Paulson and Bernanke are busy with the Senate Committee that has jurisdiction , and a bipartisan team of leaders is working on it . 
McCain just does n't want to be left out and is insinuating himself into a process that does n't need any more leadership , let alone his . 
no one wants him to get in the middle of this by prematurely declaring it in need of his help . 
We ARE supposed to believe they are interchangeabe , right . 
Or maybe we could throw the 4 names in a hat and have which ever two are drawn first debate this Friday . 
THE GOP REALLY DOES N'T WANT TO LOSE THEIR POWER . 
Look what they are doing to our eonomy . 
Grab a history book sometime and check something called World War II . 
This is a disaster , no doubt . 
But the last time I checked , Bush is still President and no one attacked us last week . 
McCain keeps forgetting that little nasty detail . 
Maybe Caribou Barbie can straighten him out , so to speak . 
People miss the point on this . 
Without a supermajority the Democratic majority has to listen to the stupid Republican filibusters and has to accept the presidential vetoes . 
The result is gridlock . 
So if you want change , put both the executive branch and congress under Democratic control , or give both houses of congress veto-proof majorities . 
I usually take a seat near McCain and have some fun while the pilot brings me safely home . 
The reverse may end up being quite problematic . 
... Be a Senator AND debate your opponent . 
When they agreed to debate , they knew the economy was already in the toilet , we 're fighting two wars ! 
My representatives , senators need me to solve this crisis . 
I 'm sure you understand . 
Look , one administration -LRB- Slick Willy -RRB- had no response to multiple terror attacks -LRB- '93 World Trade Center , USS Cole , the African embassies , etc. -RRB- and set up the Community Reinvestment Act that infected and destroyed the whole system . 
Who left the US well and truly screwed ? 
The autopsy on this one is not going to be pleasant for Democrats . 
Granted there will be a few Republicans too but this is a Democratic cesspool . '' 
You know Daman , I think that 's going to be a hard line to sell after 8 years of Republican government , which turned Clinton surpluses and peace into Bush deficits and war . 
In this scenario , the vice presidential debate between Joe Biden and Sarah Palin would be rescheduled for a date yet to be determined , and take place in Oxford , Mississippi , currently slated to be the site of the first presidential faceoff this Friday . '' 
They are controlled joint appearances with both candidates mouthing basically the same garbage . 
Nader should be in on these debates . 
Then it would be a debate because an alternative -LRB- and deeply American -RRB- point of view would be presented . 
Andrea is right , McCain wants to bag the Veep Debate now . 
If our estimates are correct , Bush will address the American people and postpone the election indefintely . 
Its not his fault , Cheney is behind it all ! 
This crap is BAD for the country . 
What , with the hurricanes , economic calamities , and photo-ops with those guys at that building in NYC , the Republicans may be able to pull off never having to show up at anything where people can actually have a chance at hearing something beyond bs sound bites . 
The autopsy on this one is not going to be pleasant for Democrats . 
Granted there will be a few Republicans too but this is a Democratic cesspool . 
`` Mainly , they 've listened to a lot of Republican fillibusters , and chafed under a number of presidential vetoes . 
And yet the Democratic leadership has done nothing ! 
Obama will do nothing ! 
I guess this is the kind of change you all want . 
A do nothing congress and a do nothing president . 
So why does he think the Wall Street bailout ballyho needs his guidance ? 
Give me a break . 
All he 's doing is making sure his Bridge to Nowhere gets bailed out . 
But now that dementia has obviously set in we must see that he gets into a nice , quiet rest home . 
Fortunately Arizona is full of them . 
One party left the White House with America at peace , prosperous , with budget surpluses and lower crime and abortion rates . 
The other party is leaving -LRB- most certainly -RRB- with America at war , the economy teetering on the verge of collapse , with skyrocketing debt and deficits and higher crime and abortion rates . 
Plus the Constitution has been assaulted on all fronts , including this latest one . 
Based on this , who would you say loves and hates America ? 
The one whose kid is all beaten up and starving , or the one whose kid is unbruised and well fed ? 
Thanks to you lunatics we 're almost assured of it ! 
If you had told McCain early enough not to pick Kelly Bundy for VP and he had listened , he might have had a chance with the independents . 
Now there 's no chance at all . 
You can scream your mutual hatred at the democrats , neither side is going to change their mind nor their numbers . 
The independents will decide this one . 
`` Drilling is a hoax ! '' 
Wow , great leadership . 
Let 's give them the White House , too . 
Postpone Friday night 's debate until October 2 and then postpone the Palin Biden debate to a later unspecified date . 
This is the latest news ... After watching Palin 's interview with Katie Couric tonight , I can see the problem She 's worse that I thought . 
Maybe not quite as teachable as the handlers thought , I reckon . 
What 's going on here ? 
Granted , she 's dumber than a rock . 
But then , you 're no rocket scientist , either . 
At least she 's got some cojones . 
Maybe she stole yours . 
First Gidget gets to play world leader . 
Now Pop Pop gets to play economics wizard . 
Boy are WE LUCKY to have a brain like Pop Pop 's in Washington solving the CRISIS for us . 
They better fix this fast because they ca n't attack Iran with this crap coming down . 
Maybe tonight the Moron in Chief will say he is anxious to `` confer '' with Pop Pop about the big CRISIS . 
No Way , No How , No McSame and definitely NO abuse of power Palin ! 
I like the leadership ! 
Where is Obama in a time of crisis ? 
Preening for the cameras by chance ? 
`` Pleeaase debate me '' . 
McCain will clean Obama 's clock whenever they end up debating . 
Barry is a fraud . 
George Bush holds that office until January . 
McCain is clueless on the economy and would be useless , if not a hinderance in the sort of session he is suggesting . 
He has missed so many votes that one more will make no difference . 
He and Palin make Bush\/Cheney look wonderful and if anything can give Bush a great legacy it would be that pair in the White House . 
Mainly , they 've listened to a lot of Republican fillibusters , and chafed under a number of presidential vetoes . 
I am always happy to share my wisdom on substantial matters . 
Straight out of a 60 's cartoon . 
Magoo 's campaign is coming unhinged . 
All that is left for the national press to drop the other shoe about Caribou Barbie 's malfeasance , and it is GG ! 
This particular debate was to have been about international relations . 
No , the problem here is that Caribou Barbie 's debate tutors have given her an `` F. '' She 's not ready to lead , it seems , despite all declamations to the contrary . 
Hence the proposal to bump the veeps from their time slot next week to make room for a postponed debate . 
Barney Frank was asleep at the wheel of the House financial Service committee . 
Wait , Frank is Bushes fault , after all , its his fault the dems took control and appointed do nothing types in charge to watch . 
It funny , even the comments here do n't say what obama is going to do , instead you all follow the party line of telling what others are doing wrong but not about how you will solve any problems God save us from Obama and the Dems ! 
Again , thanks to another leftist for proving and highlighting my points . 
You hate-drenched psychopaths are about an inch away from murdering people who disagree with you . 
And if we get a Obama White House combined with a Pelosi Congress the state might start doing it for you . 
Why ca n't the man do more than one thing at a time ? 
HE 'S NOT ON THE COMMITTEE , BANKING AND FINANCE , AND \*\* HE HAS N'T BEEN IN WASHINGTON SINCE APRIL \*\* NOW HE 'S RUNNING BACK , FOR WHAT ? 
THEY DO N'T WANT HIM THERE , THERE 'S NOTHING FOR HIM TO DO , EXCEPT WAIT AND VOTE ON THE LEGISLATION !!! Posted by : Mike from Augusta | September 24 , 2008 7:45 PM | Report abuse THATS BECAUSE PALIN TANKED ON HER CBS INTERVIEW ... SHE COULDNT GIVE KATIE A SPECIFIC EXAMPLE OF WHAT MCCAIN HAS REFORMED !! IS SHE COULD MEET WITH THE NEO-CON PUPPET LEADER SET AND BONO THEN THEY CAN DEBATE . 
Stop it , your killing me ! 
LoL - What next , McCain calls for election to be postponed indefintely ? 
He says that a President must be able to `` multi-task . '' 
Does this mean that when Pearl Harbor was attacked that President Roosevelt should not have canceled other events to address the `` immediate '' crisis . 
Look , Obama and McCain can always debate later on next week , the public is not concerned about their debate as much as this immediate `` crisis . '' 
One of these guys is going to have this problem on his hands within 40 days and it behooves both of them to have a ` hands-on '' policy to ensure what comes out of congress is something that is for the good of the nation . 
If this is a portend of the Obama presidency , look for a disengaged President who hands off the ball to subordinates because he does not have the guts to get into the fight . 
Do n't put it past Bush to do that . 
He has a tainted campaign manager who has been accepting 15,000 per month from Fannie\/Freddie . 
Caught red-handed with their hand in the cookie jar while preaching something else on the campaign trail . 
Unfortunately , someone who is vying for the highest office in the land should know that \*\*\* t happens ! 
McSame is showing his weakness . 
Time-outs are for LOSERS !!! Posted by : Michigan for Obama | September 24 , 2008 7:43 PM | Report abuse Democratic Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid of Nevada had a similar reaction . 
`` It would not be helpful at this time to have them come back during these negotiations and risk injecting presidential politics into this process or distract important talks about the future of our nation 's economy , '' Reid said . 
`` If that changes , we will call upon them . 
We need leadership ; not a campaign photo op . '' 
How Odd yesterday Mr. Reid said : Fearing a political backlash against Democrats , Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid -LRB- D-Nev . -RRB- 
has told the White House that it must serve up support from Republican presidential nominee Sen. John McCain -LRB- Ariz. -RRB- if it hopes to ensure bipartisan backing for a massive economic bailout package by week 's end . 
NEW YORK -- The financial crisis on Wall Street overwhelmed the 2008 presidential race today , as Republican presidential nominee John McCain this afternoon said he would suspend his presidential campaign tomorrow to return to Washington to work on the proposed $ 700 billion bailout plan . 
Democratic rival Barack Obama declined to follow suit , saying he would return only if congressional leaders requested his presence and said there was no reason to suspend the campaign or delay Friday night 's presidential debate . 
I guess Mr. Reid did not request Obama 's presence . 
Guess Reid knew Obama 's vote of present and lack of bill writing experience coupled with his inability to cross party lines to get any thing done would be a draw back . 
But McCain showing up has blocked the Democrats from getting out of DODGE before getting any work done . 
Well Mr. Reid you asked for it you got it now deal with it . 
McCain is coming to work and you ca n't leave until you get some work done for the people . 
What a selfish egotistical nobody ! 
If he 's so full of angst over this `` crisis '' why is n't he in Washington NOW . 
This is a joke !!! Could this be anything but posturing ??? This is a tactic . 
Now that Caribou Barbie has lost her shine , he needed another gimmick . 
Reminds me of Gypsy Rose Lee : You gotta have a gimmick . 
Time outs are for children who ca n't get their acts together . 
McCain is looking more and more like a joke . 
The man is unfit to lead . 
He needs to be put to pasture , and he can take Palin with him . 
Obama is dead on correct when he says a president needs to be able to handle more than one problem . 
You do n't get to put the world on hold . 
And Sarah Mooseburger wo n't answer any questions . 
And half the public still supports these frauds . 
Or , better yet , assign Palin the task of debating against Obama , a person who does n't have have as much experience as Palin doe ? 
YOU are killing our country . 
Look what your `` leadership '' has accomplished ! 
You are the true enemies of America , and have done more to hurt us than terrorists ever could . 
Your entire worldview has been dumped into the `` distbin of history '' where it belongs . 
You are not welcome at the table of rebuilding our nation . 
You ca n't make this stuff up . 
All of these hate-filled lunatics lined up together and in power . 
If you think things are bad now , you ain t seen nothing yet . '' 
I do n't know which country 's newspapers you have been reading , but in America , the MSM are strongly RIGHT-biased , simply because they are owned by strong right-wing supporters . 
The current support for Obama is just the logical result of there being no plausible excuses left for the GOP to hide behind . 
The media have been FORCED by events to acknowledge the truth , after seven and a half years of the same denial in which Bush and his fellow freaks are still stuck . 
If you think things might get bad with Obama , get back to me after four years if McCain wins -LRB- I ca n't even believe I just wrote that -RRB- , and tell me how that is working for you . 
Or are you just one of those trolls the Internet is always warning people to stay away from ? 
A Dem president combined with a Dem Congress will mean political show trials reminiscent of Red China in the ' 60 's . 
The new Democratic Party combined with the one-party , leftist American media equals pure , unvarnished fascism . 
You are America-hating psychopaths who sometime soon are going to begin murdering people who disagree with you . 
Especially if Jesus Obama loses . '' 
I think it 's more likely that , if John McCain is elected , the 2012 presidential election will be canceled due to some national emergency . 
Here is the reason for todays grenade . '' 
... The disclosure undercuts a remark by Mr. McCain on Sunday night that the campaign manager , Rick Davis , had had no involvement with the company for the last several years ... '' ... As president of the Homeownership Alliance , Mr. Davis received $ 30,000 to $ 35,000 a month . 
He , along with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , have characterized the alliance as a coalition of many housing industry and consumer groups to promote homeownership , but numerous current and former officials at both companies say the companies created and bankrolled the operation to combat efforts by competitors to rein in their business . 
The companies dissolved the group at the end of 2005 as part of cost-cutting in the wake of accounting scandals and , at Freddie Mac , a lobbying scandal that forced out its top Republican lobbyist ... On Monday , the McCain campaign attacked The Times for its account of those payments to Mr. Davis , saying the paper was 150 percent in the tank for Mr. Obama . 
Mr. Davis said that he had worked not for the two companies but for the advocacy group , which included other organizations as well and , he said , was focused only on promoting homeownership ... . . 
After the Homeownership Alliance was dissolved , Mr. Davis asked to stay on a retainer , the people familiar with the deal said . 
Hollis McLoughlin , who was chief of staff to Richard F. Syron , Freddie Mac s chief executive , arranged for a new contract with Davis Manafort at the reduced rate of $ 15,000 a month , they said ... '' The unintended victim is ... well , remember George F. Will 's comment `` McCain has lost his head '' Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 7:38 PM | Report abuse LIARS never seem to tire of justifying McCain 's stances . 
They 've helped bullies in suits rip this country off for the last eight years with everything from `` national security '' to `` the fundamentals are solid . '' 
Liars always , always , always recognize and support one of their own . 
No matter what Obama suggests or posits , you can count on McCain 's lying supporters to rip into whatever Obama says just because he 's not -LRB- a -RRB- a Republican , and -LRB- b -RRB- a white male . 
I guess this country 's going to rip itself in two rather than listen to an intelligent African-American candidate . 
We can not keep relying on ads or media reports , we need to have some information to help us vote ! 
McCain just looks more and more the doddering old fool . 
He has lost all credibility . 
There goes another one . 
I mean another former small government enthusiast , who now desperately wants Congress to fix everything and make his portfolio okay again . 
In this scenario , the vice presidential debate between Joe Biden and Sarah Palin would be rescheduled for a date yet to be determined , and take place in Oxford , Mississippi , currently slated to be the site of the first presidential faceoff this Friday . 
Graham says the McCain camp is well aware of the position of the Obama campaign and the debate commission that the debate should go on as planned but both he and another senior McCain adviser insist the Republican nominee will not go to the debate Friday if there 's no deal on the bailout . 
Do you want a president that uses tactics like this ? 
He has a Chartered Jet and he ca n't come to DC to vote and speak on Wednesday and Thursday , even Friday morning , then make it back by Friday for the debate ? 
I could drive there myself for cryin out loud ?!? Sheltering a 3 week old VP pick from the press and from outside the circle interviews ? 
You 're supposed to elect them now that they 've tried to dodge this debate we 've waited so long for ? 
If you fear black people that much , you should move to Alaska , you 'd probably like it there , Palin will still be there for you to idolize next year and the Klan is at the gator lodge waiting for you to come to dinner . 
As for McCain , this is completely spineless and underhanded , and its media manipulation to the highest degree once again ... Imagine how he will deal with issues you face in `` Outlaw Bush Term 3 -LRB- tm -RRB- '' ? 
Now he 's a public liar and a cheat ... McCain thinks you -LRB- The American People -RRB- are stupid , vote for him and prove him right , do n't vote and prove him right , 75 % chance of misery !! Posted by : jack5 | September 24 , 2008 7:36 PM | Report abuse McCain doesn , t know how to keep track of things , how on earth is he going to remember the important things if he is elected read this big flub-up by his side today : Your rant reflects the typical right-wing lunatic stupidity that is almost entirely responsible for the meltdown of this country . 
YOU hate America if you want to continue off a cliff . 
You are killing America , and we reject you and your mock patriotism . 
Down with the Republicans and up with America ! 
We want our county back , freaks . 
We are NOT going to let these America haters pretend to be patriots . 
They had 8 years and look what they 've done ! 
They should be on their knees apologizing to the American people who love this nation . 
I hope he calls for the immediate investigation -LRB- jailing ? -RRB- 
of Schumer , Dodd , Barney Frank and Franklin Raines , the perps in this scandal . 
They raped Fannie and Freddie -LRB- and why has Obama gotten so much money for Fannie and Freddie in only 2 years ??? -RRB- . '' 
This would be the McCain who wants to fire the head of the Securities and Exchange Commission , and replace him with Andrew Cuomo , right ? 
When he was Secretary of Housing and Urban Development , Andrew Cuomo was the person directly responsible for overseeing Fannie Mae - and the person directly responsible for ordering Fannie into the subprime market . 
Mario Cuomo I like a lot . 
Andrew , who now makes his living nailing scalps to his wall for doing the sort of thing he did to Fannie , not so much . 
And McCain , not at all . 
When he gets `` THE PLAN '' he will tell McCain . 
Then , at the `` meeting '' W will offer a DIFFERENT PLAN . 
McCain will argue against W 's PLAN and offer up what is the REAL CHENEY PLAN . 
IF Obama were there , he would disagree , and get steamrolled . 
Then they will adopt the `` MCCAIN PLAN '' and say `` Oh ! 
He 's so wise ! '' 
So McCain will get kudos and props for what CHENEY DICTATED ALL ALONG . . 
AND THE BEST PART ? 
Decisions by the Secretary pursuant to the authority of this Act are non-reviewable and committed to agency discretion , and may not be reviewed by any court of law or any administrative agency . 
AMERICA TAKES IT ON THE CHIN . 
OUR CONSTITUTION IS GARBAGE . 
BUT - Here 's the real NEWS : CHENEY IS ABOUT TO MOBILIZE AN ARMY REGIMENT AGAINST THE PEOPLE . 
Thousands of protesting U.S. Citizens , reacting to the theft of the election . 
Let 's just cancel the election and McCain can take a nap . 
McCain may not want to debate financial stuff right now is my guess . 
I was just listening to David Gregory and that Jean -LRB- ? -RRB- 
woman that took Carly Fiorina 's place just said that McCain would not debate unless this bill is passed . 
So here we have it . 
The Administration wants this bill passed tomorrow and McC does n't want this economy thing to be dragged out -LRB- because he 's better at lipstick on a pig campaigning -RRB- . 
That is what this is about . 
The administration has been doing all they can to get this passed by tomorrow and this just appears to be the latest tactic . 
It just so happens McC would benefit if we quit talking about this bailout . 
He does not sit on the committee that is working on this issue . 
His `` expertise '' is neither needed nor wanted in hammering out the details . 
On the other hand , we need the debates - we need to see what the candidates have to say . 
If McCain is President will he say that he ca n't deal with international crisis A because we have domestic crisis B to deal with . 
I 'd love to see Obama show up for the debate and McCain not be there . 
There is no hope for dialogue with the left . 
You are America-hating psychopaths who sometime soon are going to begin murdering people who disagree with you . 
Especially if Jesus Obama loses . 
Republicans are stupid , but not even they can buy into this charade . 
They are SCARED to go head-to-head against Obama\/Biden ! 
| September 24 , 2008 7:32 PM | Report abuse I appreciate your valuable input into this debate . 
A mind is a terrible thing to waste ! 
But you might not know this . 
w | September 24 , 2008 7:32 PM | Report abuse 1 -RRB- Both Paulson and Bernankie were appointed by George W. Bush -- beware of the Bush-wack . 
2 -RRB- McCain is all about gietie-up hurry-up . 
Watch the Tenderfoot who is so quick to shoot from the hip will bring some change to the program -- but not much ... He will stay close to the GOP herd . 
3 -RRB- Some of our Nations top economists are urging us to go slow , not hurry-up . 
Now suddenly it is absolutely crucial for him to be in Washington to weigh in on a bailout package that obviously so desperately needs his expertise ? 
You 'd think he and he alone held the answer to all our problems , and that if he does n't get to Washington to present it we 'll all DIE , DIE ! 
Is there anyone here who was asking , `` Where 's McCain ? 
When 's he going to save us ? 
Where is this last , best hope of our financial system ? 
Come to Washington , McCain , before it 's too late ! '' 
GIVE - ME - A BREAK !!! Posted by : treetopflyer | September 24 , 2008 7:32 PM | Report abuse He 's clearly afraid of debating Barack . 
Barack is a Ferrari , John McCain is a horse and buggy . 
McCain chickened the hell out of the debate and used this financial mess as an excuse because he did n't want to get criticized on national television about knowing anything more on the economy . 
and everyone See 's it for what it is . 
Hes a wet fart of a coward . 
OBAMA should go on and talk to the nation one on one . 
Do n't need McCain . 
Now if only he could come up with a way to put Bush\/Cheney in front of a firing squad ! 
There 's not enough lipstick in the world for this Posted by : McShame | September 24 , 2008 7:31 PM | Report abuse Mccain is just one crazy loon . 
First the Palin Hail Mary . 
That has fizzled as the economy has tanked . 
Now he 's off to D.C. to rescue Bush ? 
McCain was at the center of this nations ' last financial debacle , the savings and loan bailout , remember ? 
He was the one on the inside -RRB- He should have resigned in disgrace back then . 
But instead he continues to hold on for dear life . 
Please , will someone get McCain to a rest home where he belongs . 
Call in the Supreme Court - let them decide once again . 
In the unlikely event that they NOT decide for Mr. McCain then he can call for a do over . 
This smacks of caviling cowardice unbecoming an officer and gentleman , to say nothing of a supposedly straight talking war hero . 
What a tangled web we weave when first we practice to deceive ! 
He has strayed so far from the straight talk express that he lacks any credibility whatsoever . 
A once upright maverick has mortgaged his soul to Mephistopheles and is facing spiritual foreclosure . 
While he s apparently lost all sense of honor must he lose all sense of shame in the process ? 
What a conniving codger he is !!! Posted by : Kevin | September 24 , 2008 7:30 PM | Report abuse I 'm so sorry that there probably wo n't be a debate on Friday , now you will have to spend time with your wives instead . 
Why is everything politically motivated , do n't you want congress to fix the confidence in our monetary system , so that banks will loan money to business , students , car buyers . 
Remember , it was Obama who ran away from Mccains offer to do up to 10 townhall and debates . 
Were you calling oboma chicken then ... Posted by : EmilyP | September 24 , 2008 7:30 PM | Report abuse I think Senator McCain 's suggestion is bizarre and irresponsible . 
At this level , you just do n't get `` timeouts . '' 
Whoever cancels debates that have been scheduled for some time ? 
Sitting presidents , busy as they always are , have long agreed to hold debates , so why ca n't a candidate keep his commitment to do so ? 
McCain 's suggestion is n't statesmanlike ; it is absurd to the point where I almost question his fitness to run . 
Moreover , pretending to be `` above politics '' during a political campaign is the worst sort of political scam . 
Not that both parties have n't been guilty of it on occasion , but the timing here is way out of line . 
I 've also just read that the McCain people are also trying to put off the veep debate , which , if it 's true , would be even more bizarre . 
But that needs verification . 
This could cost Ole Miss 5.5 million dollars . 
This is all a PLOY to prevent Sarah Palin from speaking to the public . 
YOU hate America if you want to continue off a cliff . 
You are killing America , and we reject you and your mock patriotism . 
Down with the Republicans and up with America ! 
We want our county back , freaks . 
Using a right wing rant in support of whatever your position is -LRB- you obviously do n't have one of your own -RRB- , is so sad . 
McCain is a joke . 
I can just see McCain and his handlers huddling in their hotel room coming up with this little ploy in attempt to manipulate Obama and at the same time appear to be the savior of our economy . 
I love Republicans : They create the disasters and then they want credit when they are rescued . 
With 8 years of George Bush , the electorate is not quite as gullible as they used to be . 
And , by the way , do n't you suppose that the `` crisis '' is already in the last stages of management ? 
It 's a done deal . 
Now that 's a real fact . 
McCain is too late . 
He wanted the deregulation and he got it . 
It due to McCain and his party that we have this bailout . 
Let the market fix it . 
does he think he is a superhero ... and now ... the continuing adventures of Economy Man ... I am totally floored ... does anyone else see this for what it is ... a ploy i was undecided ... now i am voting for Obama Posted by : Bill Foster | September 24 , 2008 7:28 PM | Report abuse I love watching the cut-and-paste desperate comments some of your GOP wingnuts trot out . 
You 're like the borg . 
Granted , she 's dumber than a rock . 
But then , you 're no rocket scientist , either . 
At least she 's got some cojones . 
Maybe she stole yours . 
He talks tough but runs from the fight . 
And explain what would have happened if Bush 's ploy to privitize social security had been successful . 
The guy knows he falling in the polls and that he 's on the wrong side of this issue . 
Obama can just quote his previous statements about the economy all night . 
What a pathetic attempt . 
Funny thing is that most Americans see it just for what it is . 
He must have re-hired the fools who were running his campaign when he was tanking during the primary . 
And that they want to move the VP debate to a later -LRB- as yet unspecified -RRB- date . 
And to top it off he is willing to bring his freakshow circus of a campaign to Washington and screw around with the most important legislation in a generation . 
McCain is willing to throw our economy under the bus in or to win an election . 
MCCAIN HAS NO HONOR . 
I leaned towards McCain because of his experience , but I liked Sen. Obama 's vision for this nation . 
I now know , Sen. McCain ca n't handle a crisis . 
This is clearly a political stunt , and I wo n't fall for it . 
My vote is going to Sen. Obama . 
Troops would sure love that luxury . 
Unfortunately , though , insurgents in Iraq do n't stop shooting at us , or setting IEDs , because our Commander in Chief needs a breather to figure out Wall Street . 
Al Qaeda in the Afghanistan\/Pakistan border region do n't send our troops notes that read , `` Hey , I hear you guys are tied up with Wall Street . 
Your President needs to concentrate on other things , so we 'll give you a break . 
So , to make things easier on you , here 's our coordinates . '' 
Nor do our troops get a few days to figure out how to hold onto an area we 've secured , if there 's an unexpected attack . 
Sometimes we need to deal with multiple flare-ups at once in any warzone . 
We 'd sure love a time-out , but sadly , the world is n't such a nice place that it gives us that kind of pity . 
When you 're Commander in Chief , I do n't think there 'd be a worse signal to send to our troops in harm 's way than to say , `` Hey , hold on guys . 
I know you 're getting killed over there , but I have to get a time-out here to deal with Wall Street . '' 
If troops need to multi-task without a break , is it so wrong that we demand that a potential President-in-waiting prove that he can manage a financial crisis , and still address crises around the world for 90 minutes ? 
And , if a potential President-to-be ca n't manage that , is it wrong to think that maybe he ought not just suspend a debate and the campaign , but move aside and get out of the race ? 
Just something to think about . 
It 's quite another actually to do something which would help us . 
It 's pretty obvious that the man has no intention of giving up anything at all . 
He is certainly not giving up campaigning . 
This IS his campaign - a cynical vote-scrounging ploy , just like Bush and his Katrina photo-ops . 
Quite apart from the fact that McCain has every reason to fear a confrontation with Obama after the failure of his inane choice of V.P. nominee . 
I 'd run away too , if I landed in the same excrement in which he has landed . 
McCain wants next Thursday for The Presidental Debates , and move Palins debate with Biden to a later date . 
Truth be known I 'm sure McCain is feeling a little unprepared as well . 
I find it so very weird That Palin is allowed to attend the UN meeting , but wo n't meet the press . 
Last Sunday it was , Kissinger , Albright , Powell , Baker , and I ca n't remember the last one who said they felt Palin was not experienced enough to handle VP , or becoming President . 
Especially with the serious condition that the American citizens are facing , and the global turmoil occurring . 
It 's obvious to me this woman will do anything to stay away from interviews . 
The republicans have made a big enough mess , and it 's time to put the Democrats into office , and get the diplomacy starting with truth , and addressing the issues that have been ignored for the past 8 years . 
We need to earn the respect back in our Nation , and say we have had enough of this Party . 
McCain can not even be original . 
He has to steal Obama 's campaign slogans . 
I heard about `` Change '' and `` Enough '' way before mcCain took it a few days later . 
McCain\/Palin are two of the strangest candidates I 've ever encountered . 
I hope he calls for the immediate investigation -LRB- jailing ? -RRB- 
of Schumer , Dodd , Barney Frank and Franklin Raines , the perps in this scandal . 
They raped Fannie and Freddie -LRB- and why has Obama gotten so much money for Fannie and Freddie in only 2 years ??? -RRB- . 
But after all his lies , shennanigans , and idiotic statements in the last few days , and seeing how obvious he is being controlled the freaks in the right , this is nothing more than cowardice . 
He 's sinking in the polls , Palin is beginning to smell like a tird for hiding from the press , and now this stunt . 
America is looking at the very real prospect of Barack Obama as president - a man aligned with domestic terrorists like Ayers and Dohrn , whose campaign is being run from the playbook of a fascist rioter like Saul Alinksy , who is managed by David Axelrod and George Soros -LRB- who s stated openly that he wants to cripple America -RRB- and who had Jeremiah Wright as a spiritual advisor for twenty years , a man full of racial hatred who loathes America . 
Add to that a vindictive and bitter Pelosi Congress , a Vice President -LRB- Biden -RRB- calling for the criminal prosecution of the current president , hate-filled borderline insane lefty partisans running the Democratic Party who threaten violence and speak frankly of prosecuting political opponents , all egged on by the most left-wing , biased , dishonest media in American history . 
All of these hate-filled lunatics lined up together and in power . 
If you think things are bad now , you ain t seen nothing yet . 
His running mate wo n't talk to the press . 
Neither of these two people are fit to lead . 
Instead he 'd rather `` talk about it '' give a joint statement about it . 
Now come on I thought everyone was about action . 
By the way the debate the all -LRB- D -RRB- think McCain is scared of is on the topic of foreign policy and national security . 
Wow I guess McCain should be scared of that topic . 
More action less Talk - Independent Voter Posted by : Sean Maurice | September 24 , 2008 7:22 PM | Report abuse McCain is calling for a `` postponement '' without a new date for the debate . 
In other words , an indefinite postponement . 
From this we may conclude that McCain probably wo n't find time to let Obama slaughter him in a debate withing the remaining 40 days before the election . 
So McCain is n't really `` postponing '' the debate , he is canceling it . 
Word on the street is that McCain was a spoiled little coward who sang link a canary for the North Vietnamese . 
Watching McCain duck tail and run from Obama sort of confirms this image for me . 
The best he can hope for is to take credit for somebody else 's idea and make sure his picture 's taken with the people who are actually doing the work on this . 
McCain 's the jock who just discovered computer nerds are cool , so he 's busting into the lab offering all sorts of `` help '' trying to impress the `` girls '' -LRB- voters -RRB- , while the geeky kids with glasses and pimples are trying to shoo him away because he 's interfering with the development of the next killer app . 
Give it up , McLame . 
Face the public and admit to them you do n't have what it takes - that when the 3 AM call comes you 'll fire someone , try to do their job and then wonder why nothing works . 
Now he has to shut down his campaign -LRB- right after he meets with Lady de Rothschild , Katie Bell Couric and the prime minister of India -RRB- to return to Washington where he has not cast a vote in 5 months . 
What a political stunt . 
McCain gets my vote , though , for running the `` Most Gimmicky '' campaign in the history of presidential politics . 
He should uh , uh ... debate with me Friday . 
He ... uhh ... he ca n't help Washington with the ... uh ... the ... the , uhh . . 
situation we 're , ya know , that we 're facing right now . 
It 's ... uh ... it 's just not fair . '' 
Do your job first . 
Why does n't Obama do his ? 
He was n't planning to even vote again on this issue like he did n't on so many before . 
The `` Bad News '' Bores of the Obama camp have given him some bad advice , and that is , to say someting stupid like `` call me if you need me '' . 
Or maybe , the Obama camp is afraid for Obama to actrually commit to a vote and speak in front of the Senate and state their position once and for all . 
So , Obama looks helpless and avoiding responsibility , as usual , and then do his hindsight criticism of someone else 's vote . 
McCain only has one vote -LRB- I hope -RRB- and the is any indication , he has abused that one . 
Twenty six years of working against the best behalf of the American people ca n't help us now just playing pretending lip service with the people feeling . 
The last great big lie was about Davis -LRB- Sunday -RRB- and willing to lay his hand on the Koran by it until Monday when new information surface to the public . 
Is this the type of man the people need in Washington ? 
More lies of the same . 
Obama is a follower , not a leader . 
Sarah Paliin cant chew gum and handle an interview at the same time . 
Good for Obama to forge ahead . 
I hope that McChicken does n't show up , an empty chair would speak volumes that this guy is totally incompetent and tone deaf . 
Neither Mc Goo nor his trailer trash VP will put themselves out there before the American people . 
Could it be because they are dropping in the polls and know that they will just embarrass themselves ? 
If you want to be president , you have to be willing to debate your opponent and answer questions from the media . 
These two GOP nitwits should just concede right now . 
Truly it is said , actions speak louder than words . 
McCain 's last big legacy to the future was Caribou Barbie . 
I could give a fig for his concern for the future of this country . 
Once he decides who he is , we can decide if we 're going to vote for him or not . 
They can always stand in a cardboard cutout and mike it like they did with Bush 4 years ago . 
No need to hide it under his suit coat , just duct tape it to the cutout of McCain . 
That 's Bush-style leadership for you . 
McCain is not necessarily trying to dodge a debate with Obama . 
His strategy is for Palin to dodge a debate with Biden . 
If you push back the Presidential debate into the VP 's debate , you give Palin more time . 
I believe that McCain is seeing that all of this is very overwhelming for Palin , and it 's a lot to ask for her to get up to speed so fast . 
I really feel sorry for her . 
Could I have an extension ? 
Remember , this bozo was something like 695 outta 700 \* in in his And his opponent is a University of Chicago Law School Prof. Maybe McCain can convince Sarah to sub for him . 
McSame is at it again . 
with his uncontrollable temperament . 
If you are losing the game and have no chance of winning ; you can either try to change the rule in the middle of the game or simply quit . 
WHAT A SORE LOSER ! 
MCBush has no answer for the current economic fiasco and he has seen his popularity suffers . 
Therefore , he did what a decent loser would do , quit ! 
My fellow Americans , is this the guy you want to be your president ? 
God help us all . 
The only response any sensible American should give ; if and when ask for opinion on McLiar s latest action ; simly say : RUN JOHNNY RUN . 
You can debate another day , but the economy is more important than a debate . 
Obama is not change , just part of the old , do nothing congress . 
Unfortunately , that 's precisely the point . 
Even hardcore Repubs like my brother are outraged by this stunt because they expected McCain to do very well Friday . 
Thinking Republicans are mystified and furious . 
Ca n't wait to read George Will 's and Richard Cohen 's next columns . 
I am against Senator Obama because he is a liar -LRB- fact -RRB- , he believes in marxism -LRB- fact -RRB- , he considers terrorists friends -LRB- fact -RRB- , and he believes in letting babies who have been born alive after an abortion that it is okay to let them die -LRB- fact -RRB- . 
That is why I am against Obama . 
Fuzzy is fuzzy ... Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 7:15 PM | Report abuse McCain is a total coward . 
The chips are down , so he 's taking a time out to regroup . 
It 's so transparent . 
Just goes to show there 's no crisis a Republican wo n't exploit . 
Is this really a guy you could trust as president . 
A president should be able to juggle more than one ball , even though I realize we 're not accustomed to that with Bush . 
Obama looks far more presidential . 
Obama is right when he says this is the time when Americans need to hear from the candidates . 
I guess he can stand up there and give a press conference or something about his vast foreign policy experience . 
Who gives a HOOT about this foreign policy debate anyway until this financial crisis is over - Obama does `` only '' because McCain is going back to do his `` real job '' in Washington and Obama has to `` not appear '' to be following McCain 's lead . 
What a joke Obama is - always checking the political wind and NEVER putting the country first !! Of course since Obama has never really done ANYTHING anyway in congress -LRB- expect run for president -RRB- not having him there now wo n't make any difference . 
Obama is THE WORST excuse for a presidential candidate since Jimmy Carter . 
For crying out loud Obama , go back to Washington and do your job FOR ONCE !!!! Posted by : Dave H | September 24 , 2008 7:14 PM | Report abuse The desperation in the McCain supporters here today is clear , and loud . 
You know Rove would n't have made this kind of decision lightly ... I meant McCain of course . 
Rove is a calculator , he adds up the benefits vs the consequences and makes his move . 
He has to know how this is going to look to the independents -LRB- me -RRB- ... so this is the best stop-loss he could come up with at this time . 
It sure does look like the end for McCain does n't it ? 
Well , he 's lost this independent 's vote . 
He already told us he does n't know sht from applebutter when it comes to economics , and he can vote by internet . 
So what good is he going to do in Washington other than appear there as a political maneuver ? 
I meant McCain of course . 
Why do I keep thinking that Rove is making all the decisions for McCain these days . 
McCain decided to STOP advertisements , to stop the political non sense in order to pay attention to what most American have being demanding from their `` representatives '' : to work together and find a solution . 
And now the public wants to fry him up for doing exactly that . 
His Highness ca n't do that . 
He is too afraid of the consequences for his ambitions if he were to stop for a moment the political noise to take care of the people . 
It takes galls to do what McCain is doing . 
Not advertising could hurt him , but he cares more about this crisis . 
Whether i will agree with his solutions or not is to be seen . 
But one thing is for sure : I do appreciate his courage and boldness in stopping political advertisements . 
The reason the MSM is attacking him is simple : no advertisement , no millions of dollars in ads for them . 
His campaign has been so weird it scares me . 
Obama 's account of what transpired today between his campaign and McSame 's campaign rings true . 
McSame 's account , like that of all liars , contains TMI . 
No matter how many years McSame has been lying , he 's still not very good at it . 
McSame is at it again . 
with his uncontrollable temperament . 
If you are losing the game and have no chance of winning ; you can either try to change the rule in the middle of the game or simply quit . 
WHAT A SORE LOSER ! 
MCBush has no answer for the current economic fiasco and he has seen his popularity suffers . 
Therefore , he did what a decent loser would do , quit ! 
My fellow Americans , is this the guy you want to be your president ? 
God help us all . 
The only response any sensible American should give ; if and when ask for opinion on McLiar s latest action ; simly say : RUN JOHNNY RUN . 
A few weeks ago at Saddleback , McCain took Obama 's fuzzy head and mopped the stage with it . 
Unfortunately , that 's precisely the point . 
Even hardcore Repubs like my brother are outraged by this stunt because they expected McCain to do very well Friday . 
Thinking Republicans are mystified and furious . 
Ca n't wait to read George Will 's and Richard Cohen 's next columns . 
McCain is doing Bush\/Cheney 's bidding ; proving true that he 's one of Bush 's people and would continue the failed Bush policies of the past 8 years . 
He needs a strong position on the rescue package to have a chance of resurrecting his candidacy . 
Its easy to see why Obama would prefer to continue his campaign without any disruption . 
But there is a danger to him in that course . 
It is obvious that the rescue package is a very big deal to the electorate . 
If he allows McCain the position of appearing more concerned and more central to the outcome , it could wind up costing Obama dearly . 
It was a well calculated move on the part of McCain . 
It could blow up but it was a very calculated move . 
He needs to stay and work in the Senate . 
Let McCain continue to do his good works in the Senate where he 's best . 
Vote for McCain to stay in the Senate , Vote Obama for President . 
-LRB- apologies to JFK -RRB- Posted by : babar1 | September 24 , 2008 7:10 PM | Report abuse Excuse me , McCain has n't voted in the Senate since APRIL 11th . 
Too bad you wingnuts keep having your flimsy arguments knocked down with FACTS ! 
Americans want to see a debate ! 
I agree with McCain that he and Obama should be involved with the bailout talks , and I hope they have been all week like Obama says . 
But to cancel\/postpone the debate ? 
The trading is heavier in McCain than Obama . 
Are you there , Larry Kudlow ? 
Perhaps McCain 's moral preening coupled with his resort to every low-down-dirty gimmick in the book is coming home to roost ? 
I hope so , even though I do n't look forward to 8 years of ear-beating by Joe Biden . 
Then again , maybe he 'll be busy attending the funerals of obscure foreign statesmen . 
Fine , put in your second string quarterback , Sara Palin . 
Where is she ? '' 
`` What are you going to do if you 're elected and things get tough ? 
We 've got a guy like that now ! '' 
Very interesting and much appreciated . 
The hardcore right will complain about Letterman , but the independents watch him and will agree : Songbird McCain blinked . 
Who cares about a wingnut palace like Saddleback ? 
Palin locked in the looney evangelicals . 
McCain is welcome to them now that HE HAS BECOME A JOKE ! 
Let McCain run and hide . 
Obama can appear alone and answer Jim Lehrer 's questions by himself . 
I 'm an Independent and I 'm growing sick and tired of McCain 's tactics and posturing . 
Politicians everywhere : Grow up and lead ! 
-LRB- a -RRB- Voters are gonna hate it because it bails out the plutocrats , -LRB- b -RRB- McCain has just positioned himself so deeply involved that the deal will be thought of as McCain 's deal , and -LRB- c -RRB- Obama , by staying away except to vote for it -LRB- which he 'll have to do -RRB- will be able to say , `` I voted for it 'cause it was necessary , but I coulda done better . '' 
McCain made the pain from this much worse for himself than he needed to . 
Now we know who the real leader is ... The debate is rhetoric and the stage is set for the democratic lead congress to fix the problem or be part of the economic problem that will cost many their jobs in November . 
Do you think he might let YOU pick one ? 
A few weeks ago at Saddleback , McCain took Obama 's fuzzy head and mopped the stage with it . 
Then in the middle of the taping Dave got word that McCain was , in fact just down the street being interviewed by Katie Couric . 
Dave even cut over to the live video of the interview , and said , `` Hey Senator , can I give you a ride home ? '' 
Earlier in the show , Dave kept saying , `` You do n't suspend your campaign . 
This does n't smell right . 
This is n't the way a tested hero behaves . '' 
And he joked : `` I think someone 's putting something in his metamucil . '' 
`` He ca n't run the campaign because the economy is cratering ? 
Fine , put in your second string quarterback , Sara Palin . 
Where is she ? '' 
`` What are you going to do if you 're elected and things get tough ? 
We 've got a guy like that now ! '' 
It never occurs to them that McCain in concerned about our country 's future , after he 's dead and gone . 
A 72 year old man thinks he 's gonna live forever and make wads of cash on autobiographies , consulting contracts with foreign companies , and speaking tours . 
No-siree-bob , a guy like McCain must be in it for ego and profit . 
On the other hand , Puppet , with decades to go , has no interest in all the fun of being an ex-US president making tons off endorsements for cash and running victory laps for being America 's First Black President . 
But given the state this country will be in after he 's done leading it , he 'll be about as important in the history books as Romulus Augustus . 
These policies , which include huge tax breaks for the rich , unfettered free trade and the wholesale deregulation of commerce , have resulted in a massive redistribution of wealth from the middle class to the very wealthy . 
The middle class has really been under assault . 
Since President George W. Bush has been in office , nearly six million Americans have slipped into poverty , median family income for working Americans has declined by more than $ 2,000 , more than seven million Americans have lost their health insurance , more than four million have lost their pensions , foreclosures are at an all-time high , total consumer debt has more than doubled , and we have a national debt of more than $ 9.7 trillion dollars . 
While the middle class collapses , the richest people in this country have made out like bandits and have not had it so good since the 1920s . 
The top 0.1 percent now earn more money than the bottom 50 percent of Americans , and the top one percent own more wealth than the bottom 90 percent . 
BEAR IN MIND THAT OLD McBUSH 's VOTED AND ADVICE IN THE SENATE FOR LESS GOVERMENT REGULATION . 
SEND SARAH DUH BACK TO ALASKA TO WATCH RUSSIA IN ONE OF YOUR 13 AUTOS . 
For Pete 's sake , McCain has been needling him for weeks for not having the courage to debate him . 
I almost feel sorry for the guy , but I know he 'd shoot me in the face if I got in his way . 
Sympathy tends to melt away under those circumstances . 
Country First !!! Obama on the economic crisis : `` Call me if you need me . '' 
Obama First !!! Posted by : Brian | September 24 , 2008 7:03 PM | Report abuse Oh sure . 
Government can just fix the problem like that . 
McCain just needs to get back there on Friday and it 'll all be taken care of . 
Then we can get back to the unimportant issue of not changing which direction the country is headed in . 
They will still be panicking on Wall St. after Friday , no matter what the Congress does . 
We 've just begun to see the bad doo doo coming our way . 
The next fun stuff will be a further plunge of the dollar in response to the long new steps into debt that the government is taking . 
Then the new inflation numbers will come out . 
McCain is not capable to be President . 
Far more pathetic attempts to defend the WUSS MCCAIN move to `` suspend his campaign '' for nakedly political reasons than your 19 % -LRB- of people who still think W is doing a good job -RRB- would suggest . 
I guess that 's what happens when you spend all day in front of the PC trolling Post message boards . 
NEWSFLASH GOP : YOUR CANDIDATE IS OFFICIALLY A JOKE ! 
GO CHECK OUT DRUDGE !! BWAHAHAHAHAHAHAHA ! 
Several of the top core beliefs of republicans include : Let the the market run its course . 
John McCain doesnt want a debate because the Republican party is on its heels and this is the final blow . 
Has he lost his freaking mind ? 
Is this is a crack ? 
George Will , columnist , put it this way yesterday : Under the pressure of the financial crisis , one presidential candidate is behaving like a flustered rookie playing in a league too high . 
It is not Barack Obama . 
I guess he knew things brewing in McCain s camp ! 
Apparently , someone from the McCain campaign read this on a plaque in the library . 
Now you know where McCain is getting his ideas : robberbarons who fleeced the country in much the same way McCain and the GOP is fleecting us now . 
Shades of the Keating 5 . 
In all seriousness , it does n't quite jibe with the NYT chronology , but could still stand . 
Would you source this , please ? 
If the public can stand being made a fool by Karl Rove ... well , so be it ! 
He is looking presidential someone said . 
He might be looking presidential but there is neither leadership nor substance under this glossy suit . 
Sen. Obama should report back to work that he was elected to do . 
Sen. Obama should take the leadership of the Democrat-led do-nothing Congress to deal with this problem . 
I personally do not agree with the bailout proposal and expect Sen. McCain to come out strongly against it through the leadership meetings and negotiations . 
Sen. Obama decided to avoid the leadership call and concentrate instead on his debate speech . 
That s the leadership that we do not need . 
We do not need empty suits making empty speeches while missing in action . 
Sen. Obama , let s get to work . 
`` In the middle of the taping Dave got word that McCain was , in fact just down the street being interviewed by Katie Couric . 
Dave even cut over to the live video of the interview , and said , `` Hey Senator , can I give you a ride home ? '' 
Earlier in the show , Dave kept saying , `` You do n't suspend your campaign . 
This does n't smell right . 
This is n't the way a tested hero behaves . '' 
And he joked : `` I think someone 's putting something in his metamucil . '' 
`` He ca n't run the campaign because the economy is cratering ? 
Fine , put in your second string quarterback , Sara Palin . 
Where is she ? '' 
`` What are you going to do if you 're elected and things get tough ? 
We 've got a guy like that now ! '' 
McCain is trying to hide from the American people . 
Obama should show up and debate an empty chair if McCain does n't show . 
Postponing this debate is the same as shutting the American people out ! 
It 's on a Friday night for Pete 's sake ! 
What is McCain going to do in Congress on a Friday night ?! Most of congress probably wo n't even be there . 
| September 24 , 2008 6:59 PM | Report abuse Both McCain and Obama want to talk about the financial crisis . 
They have a debate scheduled in MS on Friday on foreign policy . 
As most people in Mississippi ca n't even point out the US on a world map why not just change the topic to the financial crisis and move the foreign policy debate to a later date ? 
At Saddleback , McCain took Obama 's fuzzy head and mopped the stage with it . 
It is not Barack Obama . 
| September 24 , 2008 6:57 PM | Report abuse So let me get this straight ... McCain has simply decided to unilaterally cancel the debate on Friday ? 
What is WRONG with this man ? 
This may seem like `` leadership '' to that 25 % lunatic Bush-deadender fringe , but to normal Americans , this bizarre tantrum\/stunt is completely unacceptable ! 
Enjoy hiding in the Senate where you will be for a long time ! 
| September 24 , 2008 6:57 PM | Report abuse A McCain spokesperson says , `` He really wants he and Senator Obama , leadership , throw in the chairmen , the administration , lock themselves in a room for the next 100 hours or however long it is between now and Monday morning and achieve some kind of consensus on something that will have the Congress 's support . '' 
This is neither an original thought or quote . 
McCain was in the J. Pierpont Morgan library when this scheme was hatched . 
Way back in 1907 Morgan locked the leading bankers of his day in the is library until the came up with a solution to the economic crisis of the day . 
Apparently , someone from the McCain campaign read this on a plaque in the library . 
Now you know where McCain is getting his ideas : robberbarons who fleeced the country in much the same way McCain and the GOP is fleecting us now . 
Shades of the Keating 5 . 
If that opinion reflects the WaPo\/ABC poll , let me interject a little reality for you : `` Chevrolet Announces Clear Lead Over Ford '' In a poll conducted by GMC\/ABC today ... Posted by : viejo1 | September 24 , 2008 6:56 PM | Report abuse Ever heard of `` voice activated e-mail '' programs Moran . '' 
??? It 's called technology ... apparently you and McCain are both not up Posted by : bnoz | September 24 , 2008 6:56 PM | Report abuse Actually , the reason Senator Obama has refused to appear at any townhall with Senator McCain , is that Obama does not come off as very smart when he is not using prepared remarks and not using a teleprompter . 
So , he pulls his second political stunt in 4 weeks . 
The first fizzled out in 2 weeks . 
This one lasted about 2 hours . 
Friday s debate should proceed as planned . 
If McCain chooses to eject , Obama should attend and frame McCain as he chooses . 
Showboating in the skies of Vietnam is over . 
This time , McCain has crashed and burned . 
I see the evening shift of RNC\/Palin-McCain off shore paid trolls have arrived ! 
Let 's make sure they feel welcomed ! 
In fact I bet you can count on one or two fingers how many of these hallowed town halls McCain has had since selecting Palin . 
Gee , wonder why that is ? 
On the other hand McCain DID agree to the scheduled debates . 
Both he and Obama have made clear what they feel needs to be included in any bailout , what more can they do but get in the way and usurp the actual negotiations ? 
It is a political ploy plain and simple . 
I hope it backfires on him because it is yet another cynical move by this sellout . 
If it truly was as important for him to be there as he says he would leave immediately , not wait until after the photo ops and sound bites he 'll get tonight . 
Suspend it ????? End it already . 
Same for Biden , go to your debate alone on Oct 2 , even if Palin does not show up . 
Presidents show up for the task at hand . 
His campaign surrogates are saying it 's a typical `` maverick '' move , that McCain is simply `` putting country first . '' 
Let 's look at the evidence : 1 -RRB- As Ben Smith notes , McCain 's move `` is a mark , most of all , that he does n't like the way this campaign is going . 
... The only thing that 's changed in the last 48 hours is the public polling . '' 
2 -RRB- The idea of uniting the campaigns to find a bipartisan solution to the Wall Street crisis was n't even McCain 's idea . 
A few minutes ago , Obama spokesman Bill Burton emailed to reporters : `` At 8:30 this morning , Senator Obama called Senator McCain to ask him if he would join in issuing a joint statement outlining their shared principles and conditions for the Treasury proposal and urging Congress and the White House to act in a bipartisan manner to pass such a proposal . 
At 2:30 this afternoon , Senator McCain returned Senator Obama 's call and agreed to join him in issuing such a statement . 
The two campaigns are currently working together on the details . '' 
3 -RRB- John McCain has skipped more votes during this session than any member of the Senate except for Tim Johnson , who had major brain surgery . 
He has cast a single vote in five months , since April 9 . 
All of a sudden , McCain is demanding that the presidential race shut down so he can return to Washington ? 
4 -RRB- A reminder : President Bush was able to debate John Kerry while he was president . 
For all of his sudden urgency , McCain acknowledged just yesterday that he had not even read the administration 's three-page bailout proposal . 
5 -RRB- It 's not clear at all that having McCain and Obama back in DC will actually help . 
`` What does seem apparent , though , is that putting the two candidates in the negotiating room is far more likely to distract -- and derail -- negotiations than having them out on the hustings , '' Jonathan Cohn writes at the New Republic . 
He ca n't handle this but he expects to be able to handle being president ? 
What 's even sadder -LRB- or actually funnier -RRB- are the gop hacks defending him with a straight face . 
A committee in which Obama was not a member . 
Wake up Democrats , you 're playing with the big boys now . 
Do n't kid yourselves . 
My brother , a diehard Republican , called me from LA this afternoon after he heard of the stunt . 
He is livid with the McCain campaign . 
He 's an extremely intelligent man -LRB- despite supporting the wrong party -RRB- and I guarantee you : if he feels this way , many , many other Republicans do , too . 
McCain wants to cancel the first debate and move it to the Vice Presidential debate . 
Moving that debate into the future . 
Talk about killing two birds with one stone -- in addition to McCain 's avoiding his debate in the face of falling poll numbers , after Palin 's day of near-silent photo-ops at the U.N. , attempting to also give Palin more time to prepare . 
As suggested by Dana Milbank on CNN , there 's an easy solution -- just let Palin debate this Friday night ! 
The fundamentals of the debate are strong ! 
Everybody knows it , starting or , at least , including McCain . 
His current cheap tricks could not and would not change this fundamental fact . 
This current crash simply means that Obama is running unopposed . 
McCain could -LRB- or should -RRB- , of course , suspend his campain , at least , the senseless waste of money would be stopped . 
President Bush and the conservative wing of the Republican party have been trying to stop this since 2003 but have been foiled at every turn by the Democratic party . 
Obama is not a leader and is n't needed in Washington , therefore , they are both correct in their decisions . 
In fact I bet you can count on one or two fingers how many of these hallowed town halls McCain has had since selecting Palin . 
Gee , wonder why that is ? 
On the other hand McCain DID agree to the scheduled debates . 
Both he and Obama have made clear what they feel needs to be included in any bailout , what more can they do but get in the way and usurp the actual negotiations ? 
It is a political ploy plain and simple . 
I hope it backfires on him because it is yet another cynical move by this sellout . 
If it truly was as important for him to be there as he says he would leave immediately , not wait until after the photo ops and sound bites he 'll get tonight . 
George W , debated Kerry as a sittinf president . 
Also , the real issue is THEY WANT TO PUSH THE VP DEBATE out to the future . 
That is the issue - pay attention folks , this is a classic banana in the tail pipe moment . 
He knows he will get creamed and that it will be a LOT worse if Palin is forced to like ... answer questions . 
And just this morning Mccain was touring New York like nothing was on his mind . 
That is until he got the news that TWO polls show Obama has already shot ahead of him in a big way . 
You do not LEAD by debating an unrelated issue during a time of crisis . 
You do not LEAD by standing by taking ORDERS from your PARTY as a politician . 
You do not lead by putting SELF , and ambitions ahead of your Country . 
I do not want a PRESIDENT that can not LEAD that would rather sit on his hands and WAIT for others to tell him what to say and what to do . 
You do not LEAD by putting your POLITICAL PARTY ahead of your Country . 
That is exactly the things that THE ALMIGHTY OBAMA is doing . 
He is again sitting on the fence , playing lip service to Main Stream America 's problems . 
wanting to campaign and debate DURING WHAT MAY be the most important financial crisis since the Great Depression . 
His Democratic cronies have already met behind closed doors to pass funding for the War . . 
adding about 6.9 BILLION dollars in PORK to the Bill . . 
The democrats seem SURE that they will be able to put OBAMA in the White House in November ... thus they are doing everything crooked , foul , illegal , dirty that they can to insure that he is ELECTED . 
Obama has not educational plans , no infrastructure plans . 
not health care plans , no new plans at all ... BECAUSE GET WHAT ... there is not MONEY available to fund anything . 
IF HE IS ELECTED , We will have a 10 Trillion Dollar debt to the WORLD , by the time he is sworn in . 
Talk about a poison pill . . 
The taxpayer will owe over 1 trillion dollars in CREDIT CARD DEBIT . 
And he preaches about what HE IS GOING TO DO TO CHANGE WASHINGTON . 
Best thing he or anyone could do . . 
anyone over two terms in office . . 
Put them on board a moth-balled ship ... take them to the middle of the Atlantic Ocean , and then shuttle the ship . 
Because these same individuals have shuttled the American Taxpayer by not BALANCING THE BUDGET . 
OBAMA is worst than that . . 
pig in the pen . 
He is putting a dress on that pig and adding a dress and it will be the same Democratic agenda as always . 
Take from the poor , give to the wealthy and spend , spend on social programs ... WITHOUT a care for balancing the budget . 
W 's not goin ' anywheres . 
This is the Big Leagues , junior . 
Street jive wo n't cut it . 
Everybody knows it , starting or , at least , including McCain . 
His current cheap tricks could not and would not change this fundamental fact . 
This current crash simply means that Obama is running unopposed . 
McCain could -LRB- or should -RRB- , of course , suspend his campain , at least , the senseless waste of money would be stopped . 
Discuss domestic policy Friday , then foreign policy during the second debate . 
Or at the absolute worst , have the VP debate Friday . 
What exactly does McBush think he 's going to do ? 
Throw open the conference room doors , drop is vague and obvious 5 point plan on the table and let everyone bask in his brilliance ? 
Let the Banking Committee , with both Dem and GOP representatives hammer out a deal first , then evaluate it . 
We do n't need 100 cooks in the kitchen on this one . 
The Right would be all over him for supposed cowardice and fear of his performance . 
If Obama were to get solidly behind the bailout he 's then pandering to greedy Wall St. If he does n't then he 's not putting the interest of the country first . 
But in the end none of this silliness matters . 
That 's because only the Rasmussen poll now shows McCain with the 270 electoral votes he needs . 
Most of the others give Obama at least a plurality if not the 270 . 
And if no candidate gets 270 then the race gets decided in the House under U.S. Constitution rules . 
Do you catch my drift ? 
I 'm sure Joe Biden would be ready . 
Obama is not a leader and is n't needed in Washington , therefore , they are both correct in their decisions . 
its what we can always expect from lil hussein , always looking out for his own self interest and screw America . 
I 'm glad the Obama campaign decided to go ahead with Friday 's debate , and it 's true now more than ever it 's time for such a debate . 
First , his knee jerk reaction is to fire the head of the SEC , as if that was relevant , now he goes back to Washington and do what ? 
He just want to dodge the debate with Obama because Obama will clean his clock . 
He 's proving too old to handle the rigors of the job . 
You ca n't say he 's more ready to take that 3AM call if he 's too old and weak to handle it . 
Sad , but that 's the way it is . 
Now he wants to cancel the debate , no wait , he jsut changed his mind again , now he wants to re-schedule the debate to 10\/2 , gee , was n't that supposed to be the VP debate ... guess Sarah 's not quite up to speed yet or for that matter it appears that McCain is n't either . 
They ca n't keep hiding forever . 
Where 's Sarah ??? We need answers , do n't you think . 
An honest press conference or two would be helpful . 
McCain needs to answer the American people . 
The debates must go on ... all of them . . 
on date , on time . 
Country first ... it appears as if it 's politics first , last and always . 
Ya think the voters will be sitting there yelling at their screens , `` I do n't care about Armenia , I care about whether my house is still my house or my retirement fund still is solvent '' . 
I think this is a stroke of genius by McCain . 
There 's a crisis , Obama and McCain are US Senators , they ought to be on Capitol Hill earning their paychecks that you and I are paying . 
The delay will provide you with time to brainstorm with Bette Midler . 
I 'm sure she has loads of suggestions ! 
Why , you and she and Nancy `` Do n't Blame Me ! '' 
Pelosi can literally save the planet while McCain fixes another Democrat SNAFU . 
This is socialism pure and simple . 
Second , he 's asked Sen. Obama to join him in one-on-one townhall meetings for MONTHS , and was continually rebuffed . 
Third , Sen. Obama states that he would work in a non-partisan manner if elected President . 
Well this is a perfect opportunity to prove it . 
There are 40 days left until the election . 
We have plenty of time for debates . 
Let 's get our priorities in order . 
They are after all STILL sitting U.S. Senators . 
They should both be in D.C. doing the job they are paid to do . 
Lastly , for the ones calling Sen. McCain a coward or worse ... well just ask Bill . 
See ya , John . 
Not even congress would swallow this pig in lipstick without cooking it first . 
Now he wants to cancel the debate , no wait , he jsut changed his mind again , now he wants to re-schedule the debate to 10\/2 , gee , was n't that supposed to be the VP debate ... guess Sarah 's not quite up to speed yet or for that matter it appears that McCain is n't either . 
They ca n't keep hiding forever . 
Where 's Sarah ??? We need answers , do n't you think . 
An honest press conference or two would be helpful . 
McCain needs to answer the American people . 
The debates must go on ... all of them . . 
on date , on time . 
Country first ... it appears as if it 's politics first , last and always . 
The plan that the administration wants the congress to approve right away , that 's the administration 's plan ? 
As in George Bush plan ? 
If so , why would W be balking at CEO compensation that all of congress and citizens agree with ? 
There is no policy reason for McCain to be in Washington , nor is there any logistical reason for not having the debate . 
Not in the days of airplanes . 
Notice that McCain did n't suggest moving it to a TV studio in D.C. , but rather dropped out . 
Politically , the move makes no sense , either . 
Friday 's debate plays to McCain 's strengths , at a time when he 's slightly behind in a see-sawing race and needs to catch an updraft . 
Going to Washington to be photographed with a bunch of Republican senators is not a move calculated to win friends or influence voters . 
No substantive reason , no symbolic benefit . 
That puts this in a different category , which is personal problems . 
Medical , psychological or both . 
This is irrational and erratic at best . 
I really hope the media will ask some meaningful questions , for once . 
Your sophomoric logic and simplemindedness perfectly complements the whining and the foaming-at-the-mouth of your party . 
Your pit bull may have lipstick but it also has rabies . 
By the way , it 's a good thing no one listened to Jimmy Carter 30 years ago when he warned we needed to develop alternative energy . 
Yeah , Reagan put a stop to that foolishness . 
We 'd never have had the pleasure of $ 4 gas . 
The Republicans , and I am talking about true conservatives , not the left wing socialists that have infested the party , have wanted to lift the off shore drilling ban for years . 
All of these measures have been in part to keep gas prices low . 
If you take the price of gas in 1920 and adjust for inflation today , the price of gas should be somewhere around $ 3.21 a gallon . 
One reason -LRB- out of many -RRB- that gas prices are high is that Congress mandates that the oil companies MUST refine 26 different grades of gas . 
Why not pick the top three grades and be done with it ? 
Are ` nt there any BRAVES left in AMERICA ? 
Obama - through his advisors -LRB- who , btw , as experts in markets and economics actually know something about this stuff -RRB- - is totally in the middle of this , but in a constructive way , without injecting himself or the campaign into it . 
Seems rather presidential to me . 
You do n't see Bush huddling in the back rooms on the Hill . 
He sent Bernanke and Paulson , precisely as he should have . 
For Obama to take the same tack -LRB- sending advisors and emissaries -RRB- seems rather more presidential than McCain 's inclination to revert to his identity as a legislator . 
I think that when this perspective sinks in with the public , that 'll be it for McCain . 
The final example of Obama keeping his head in a crisis and McCain flying into a panic . 
This is the audition - today , and only one candidate is passing it . 
McCain is NOT sitting anything in this WALL STREET crisis and is just out to triangulate AND hopes the `` dopes '' will raise his poll numbers BECAUSE McCain is posturing as though he has a little bit of CLOUT . 
Last week or so he wanted to fire Paulson , right ? 
Debate must go on as scheduled . 
McCain with Obama can throw out a joint-statement , if they like but a McCain pretense of stopping the RACE for the WHITE HOUSE to solve what McCain does NOT even UNDERSTAND is too ludicrous . 
Yes , McCain if NOT doddering and faking on this , should MOVE ON with his CAMPAIGN and tell everybody out of McCain mouth what McCain can do ! 
If MCCAIN is not just trash express talking again , and he is ! 
Does n't this strike you as back room wheeling and dealing ? 
I 'd rather transparency myself , in full public view . 
Yup , Palin-McCain are sure gonna ' do some shakin ' and fixin ' all right by golly ! 
Do n't forget the Hot Dish and the Jello mold with the little marshmallows ! 
That 's why he graduated magna from HLS and was editor-in-chief of the law review . 
How did you manage to count that high in your handle ? 
You 're worried about Obama not releasing his academic records ? 
What about Palin 's academic records from her six schools ? 
How about her `` lost '' emails ? 
You are a pathetic automaton hypocrite . 
That 's why he graduated magna from HLS and was editor-in-chief of the law review . 
How did you manage to count that high in your handle ? 
The primary engine driving the partisanship , that could destroy the quality of life that we enjoy , is the presidential campaign . 
Most of the previous posts prove that this is true . 
TRUTH - why bother ? 
FAIRNESS - You 've got to be kidding !! Unless we can have a more civil discussion and join to protect our common good , our country may not survive as we know it . 
You will still be able to write your vile partisan rhetoric but may not be able to post it when IP s are unable to get loans and shut down . 
You will have a lot of time on your hands since most of us will be unemployed . 
If we solve this crisis , we will be able to survive with either Obama or McCain as President , we survived Carter and Nixon . 
If we allow the crisis to overwhelm us , the election wo n't matter . 
The loser will be the candidate that is elected . 
No nation or ideology can destroy our country , but we can . 
The statements by congressional Democrats and Republicans about the crisis are scary . 
It is clear that we have elected partisan Republicans and partisan Democrats in recent years instead of Americans who happen to be Democrat or Republican . 
I call on all Americans to set aside our differences and partisan rhetoric until this crisis is resolved and to demand of their elected officials that they do the same . 
Those who will not deserve to be punished at their next election regardless of their political affiliation . 
Warren Buffet said that this could be a financial Pearl Harbor . 
We can see the airplanes on the horizon , but we are given 1000 excuses for not taking action . 
this jerkoff ca n't find his owndick to pee without the help of aunt esther Posted by : dick cabesa | September 24 , 2008 6:36 PM | Report abuse McCain Supported A Banking Bill Because It Eliminated `` The Tremendous Regulatory Burden Imposed On Financial Institutions . '' 
While speaking in favor of bank deregulation on the floor of the senate , John McCain said , `` This legislation takes a small but important step toward eliminating the tremendous regulatory burden imposed on financial institution ... One principal reason banks are unable to make loans is the bewildering array of statutory and regulatory restrictions and paperwork requirements imposed by Congress and the regulatory agencies . 
While a case can certainly be made that every law and regulation is intended to serve a laudable purpose , the aggregate effect of the rapidly increasing regulatory burden imposed on banks is to cause them to devote substantial time , energy and money to compliance rather than meeting the credit needs of the community . '' 
-LRB- Congressional Record , 11\/19\/93 ; emphasis added -RRB- McCain Supported A Bill To `` Takes A Small Step Forward Toward Eliminating Unnecessary Regulatory Burdens Imposed On Banks . '' 
While speaking in favor of bank deregulation on the floor of the senate , John McCain said , `` While a case can certainly be made that every law and regulation is intended to serve a laudable purpose , the aggregate effect of the rapidly increasing regulatory burden imposed on banks is to cause them to devote substantial time , energy and money to compliance rather than meeting the credit needs of the community ... This bill recognizes this fact , and takes a small step forward toward eliminating unnecessary regulatory burdens imposed on banks . '' 
-LRB- Congressional Record , 11\/19\/93 ; emphasis added -RRB- McCain Said The Best Thing Government Can Do For Business Is `` Stay Out Of Its Way . '' 
While speaking about the American Competitiveness in the Twenty-First Century Act on the floor on the Senate in 2000 , John McCain said , ' I am convinced that the best thing government can often do to advance the fortunes of the private sector is to stay out of its way . 
I support this bill because it makes progress toward that end , by improving companies ' flexibility to hire the talent they need , while providing for the regulatory framework and new educational opportunities to protect and promote American workers . '' 
-LRB- Congressional Record , 10\/3\/00 ; emphasis added -RRB- In 1999 , McCain Supported Phil Gramm 's Banking Deregulation Bill . 
In 1999 , John McCain voted for passage of the Senate version of a bill that would eliminate current barriers erected by the 1933 Glass-Steagall Act and other laws that impede affiliations between banking , securities , insurance and other firms . 
The bill also would exempt small , non-urban banks from the 1977 Community Reinvestment Act -LRB- CRA -RRB- , revise the Federal Home Loan Bank system and require that owners of automated teller machines -LRB- ATMs -RRB- provide notice on the ATM and on-screen of any charges imposed for the use of the terminal . 
The bill passed 54-44 . 
-LRB- S. 900 , Vote # 105 , 5\/6\/99 -RRB- McCain Missed The Vote For Final Passage Because He Was Campaigning In New Hampshire . 
John McCain missed the final vote on Phil Gramm 's banking deregulation bill because he was campaigning in New Hampshire . 
-LRB- NPR , `` Morning Edition , '' 11\/5\/99 ; S. 900 , Vote # 354 , 11\/4\/99 -RRB- -- Progressive Accountability Posted by : ziadora | September 24 , 2008 6:36 PM | Report abuse Stop the presses !!!! John McCain is going back to Washington to single-handedly rescue the country from financial disaster . 
He is going to lend his formidable fiscal expertise and expert knowledge of economics to help out . 
What a selfless and noble man !! What a maverick !! What a straight-talker !!! Not . 
Look , this is a transparent ploy . 
McCain is trying to sell this stunt as consistent with his `` country first '' campaign slogan , but all it shows is that he needs more debate prep time and wants to hide behind the financial crisis . 
Poor leadership from John McCain . 
In 2003 , he said '' These two entities -- Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac -- are not facing any kind of financial crisis , '' said Representative Barney Frank of Massachusetts , the ranking Democrat on the Financial Services Committee . 
`` The more people exaggerate these problems , the more pressure there is on these companies , the less we will see in terms of affordable housing . '' 
- from the NY Times -LRB- 9\/11\/2003 -RRB- Posted by : LeeHInAlexandria | September 24 , 2008 6:36 PM | Report abuse John McCain is 72 years old ... and a VERY BAD 72 years . 
He 's Senile , and ANGRY , and dilussional ! 
BOMB , BOMB , BOMB IRAN ... he sung to the quitars of this mess . 
The sooner he dies , the sooner 99.99 % of the human race rejoices ! 
Bipartisan means joint statements , not oneupsmanship . 
Your sophomoric logic and simplemindedness perfectly complements the whining and the foaming-at-the-mouth of your party . 
Your pit bull may have lipstick but it also has rabies . 
By the way , it 's a good thing no one listened to Jimmy Carter 30 years ago when he warned we needed to develop alternative energy . 
Yeah , Reagan put a stop to that foolishness . 
We 'd never have had the pleasure of $ 4 gas . 
But that was Monday morning , not Wed afternoon , when these guys have been in heavy negotiations for 6 days now and nearing an agreement . 
Remember when McCain and Bush took credit for Webb 's GI Bill they both previously opposed ???? I hope the Republican leadership in Congress does n't let McCain disrespect them like this . 
Without McCain the House Republicans are impudent ???? Bitter pill to swallow even in an election year - bleck ! 
Just smile , wave , and pose . 
Oh of course the secretary is just exaggerating and things will just go on as normal in your sunny little towns across American . 
But really , what IF this REALLY is a crisis of historic proportions do you want to listen to some lame debate on foreign policy or do you want your elected officials in Washington ? 
So if time is critical then personally I could care less about hearing a bunch of `` hot air '' from either Obama or McCain on Friday . 
You can alway reschedule the debate ... you ca n't ca n't reschedule a bank from closing its doors !!! If Obama refuses to come back to Washington and the bill does n't pass ... Obama is toast !!! Posted by : politcal stunt or financial collapse ? 
| September 24 , 2008 6:31 PM | Report abuse Here 's another great quote from Barney Frank : `` These two entities -- Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac -- are not facing any kind of financial crisis , '' said Representative Barney Frank of Massachusetts , the ranking Democrat on the Financial Services Committee . '' 
The more people exaggerate these problems , the more pressure there is on these companies , the less we will see in terms of affordable housing . '' 
EVERYONE SHOULD WAKE UP AND STAND DOWN . 
Obama thinks he 's running for president of the sophomore class . 
Got news for you , Obama . 
Having McCain back in DC will inject presidential politics into the process . 
This is just another case of horrible judgement . 
We need leadership , not a campaign photo op in DC . 
blogspot | September 24 , 2008 6:31 PM | Report abuse Should Sen. McCain have ignored the call from the Senate leadership ??? We all understand the seriousness of the financial crisis , Reid added . 
We also understand that it 's the Republican philosophy that has been adhered to totally by Sen. McCain that has gotten us to this Republican crisis that we now find ourselves . 
We have a Republican proposal they 've given us . 
And we now need some Republican votes to help us with this . 
Another political stunt from McCain , just as Sarah Palin was a political stunt . 
I thought he 'd be a formidable contender , not a pathetic liar . 
This is an embarrassment to our country - his motives are transparent to the world , and should be an embarrassment to conservatives and republicans as well . 
Some members of his party have been complaining that Clinton has not been enthusiastic enough in his support for Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama , who defeated Clinton 's wife in the primary campaign , and heaping too much praise on McCain . 
But Clinton told CNN 's `` Larry King Live '' on Wednesday that he does n't think `` dumping '' on McCain or his running mate , Sarah Palin , is a winning strategy . 
He said undecided voters are n't interested in attacks but solutions for the problems they face . 
`` I just do n't believe that getting up here and hyperventilating about Gov. Palin , or Sen. McCain for that matter , is a productive use of a former president 's time and is not a vote-getter , '' he said , adding that he admires McCain even though he disagrees with several of his positions . 
Poor leadership from John McCain . 
That 's the problem now , too much credit . 
My Mom always said , `` you ca n't borrow your way out of debt '' WE NEED GOOD PAYING JOBS ! 
Newsweek John McCain Does n't Get It ! 
Dear God , can you please discuss this like adults ? 
I understand that it is a Senator 's job to vote on these issues , but two Senators that do not have financial experience and that are both running for president in a volatile environment would not help going back . 
As the son of someone who has run a company I feel obliged to say something that I learned from my dad . 
An executive 's job is to DELEGATE responsibilities to experts in specific fields while at the same time making sure to INSPIRE and LEAD with decisions that they make after CONFERRING with experts . 
McCain and Obama should have released a joint statement , sent their financial brains to Washington to work out a deal and made sure that they could leave for DC in a moments notice . 
I actually think that the debate should be moved to DC , then everyone wins . 
The debate is held -LRB- the vote will not be held during the time they are on the stage -RRB- and both can be present if they are needed . 
He 's Senile , and ANGRY , and dilussional ! 
BOMB , BOMB , BOMB IRAN ... he sung to the quitars of this mess . 
The sooner he dies , the sooner 99.99 % of the human race rejoices ! 
There was no quota filled because he left the part about race on his application blank . 
That is a LIE . 
Barack Obama has refused to release any of his transcripts from Columbia where he majored in the fluffy subject of `` political science '' , and WITHOUT HONORS . 
He was not Harvard material without a boost from Affirmative Action . 
Turn them over , they 're done . 
All Obama can say is `` if they need me , they know where they can call me . '' 
DO YOU THINK THAT OUR ENEMIES WILL LET THE PRESIDENT TAKE A TIME OUT ? 
THE PRESIDENT NEEDS TO BE ABLE TO HANDLE MULTIPLE ISSUES AT ONCE ... IF HE CAN NOT THEN HE IS NOT FIT TO LEAD . 
| September 24 , 2008 6:25 PM | Report abuse This will work wonderfully for McCain for one reason and one reason alone : you rabid libs are frothing at the mouth with rage over it lol !!!!!!!! That 's historically the best indicator for a move that will play well with the portion of the American public that does not suffer from rabies-induced-liberal-derangement . 
The Bamboozle Express takes yet another detour from reality . 
Am I the only person out there in the ether who would love to put a combat boot up Lindsey Graham 's butt . 
McCain has n't been in Congress missed a huge amount of votes just in the past year why now ? 
Was the other votes not important enough for him to show up especially the ones for the Veterans ? 
The debate is about foreign policy not economics and I for one would like to hear their debate . 
You ca n't be a part time President one who decides which votes are important enough to show for and which ones are unimportant enought to have a BBQ in your backyard doing a fundraiser . 
you are truly an idiot ... Posted by : robinhood | September 24 , 2008 6:25 PM | Report abuse `` McCain has a pattern of using a crisis to avoid unpleasant situations such as Gustov to avoid Bush\/Cheney from showing up live at the convention and now this . '' 
So that 's why he stayed in the cockpit of his crippled fighter bomber until after he had finished his mission of dropping bombs on Hanoi . 
Sound dishonorable to you ? 
rcc_2000 : you are a vile insect . 
It sounds like the Obama campaign had the same idea because Sen. Obama called Sen. McCain at 8:30 this morning to make this suggestion . 
It took Sen. McCain until 2:30 pm to respond - one can only think that his counter-move to post-pone the campaign and debate is a power play to try to take away the focus from Sen. Obama 's gesture to work together . 
Like Sen. McCain 's other actions lately -LRB- e.g. choosing Gov. Palin so suddenly and without vetting ; calling for firing of Cox ; etc. -RRB- , this seems impetuous and politically motivated . 
Sen. Obama and all Americans should demand that Sen. McCain specify just exactly what he would be doing in Washington that requires him to pull out of the debates . 
My guess is that he is not needed in person . 
He has missed many important votes this year , so why now ? 
I 'll tell you why - the more McCain and Palin have unscripted time in front of the cameras , the more their poll numbers go DOWN . 
Sadly , McCain is following the Rove strategy for protecting the country from knowing W 's weaknesses - hide your candidate in plain site and only bring him out in front of GOP-friendly crowds ... I hope Sen. Obama and the bipartisan commission on debates hold their ground and keep the debate schedule . 
Then , watch McCain go on the `` unpatriotic '' attack mode . 
I wonder how they 'll get Palin out of her debate with Biden ? 
Maybe another weather calamity ? 
There is absolutely no need for him on Capitol Hill right now unless we assume that every other Republican Congressman is totally incompetent -LRB- maybe not such a far fetched assumption -RRB- . 
McSame saw the same poll numbers we did this morning and knew his only hope of preventing a disaster was to come up with some gimmick that might trick the American people into believing he cares more about them then winning the election . 
Unfortunately for Johnny , no one is buying it . 
A CNN poll right now shows that 75 % of the participant think that Johnny 's request is nothing more than a political gimmick . 
Give it up Johnny , change your Depends , and wait for your inevitable defeat . 
6 more weeks and then no more Republican BS to put up with . 
Obama\/Biden 2008 !!! Posted by : caliguy55 | September 24 , 2008 6:24 PM | Report abuse People here in these comments are asking what crisis . 
If nothing is done about this situation , credit will dry up , with devastating consequences for our economy . 
People will no longer be able to buy homes and their life savings will be at stake . 
Businesses will not have enough money to pay their employees . 
If we do not act , every corner of our country will be impacted . 
This can not be allowed to happen . 
Does n't this sound like something Senator Obama should be addressing in Washington ? 
In fact , his voting record the past two years is worse than any other Senator , even worse than the South Dakota senator who had the brain hemorrhage . 
And now he wants to go to DC ? 
-LRB- See also , Palin , Repub . 
Do n't fool yourselves , McCain means four more years of radical , extremist politics . 
It 's time to elect Obama , the one candidate who working people can count on in this election . 
Obama thinks he 's running for president of the sophomore class . 
Got news for you , Obama . 
McCain is clueless and desperate . 
The debate will go on with or without McCancel . 
In fact , his voting record the past two years is worse than any other Senator , even worse than the South Dakota senator who had the brain hemorrhage . 
And now he wants to go to DC ? 
If nothing is done about this situation , credit will dry up , with devastating consequences for our economy . 
People will no longer be able to buy homes and their life savings will be at stake . 
Businesses will not have enough money to pay their employees . 
If we do not act , every corner of our country will be impacted . 
This can not be allowed to happen . 
Does n't this sound like something Senator Obama should be addressing in Washington ? 
In fact , his voting record the past two years is worse than any other Senator , even worse than the South Dakota senator who had the brain hemorrhage . 
And now he wants to go to DC ? 
Since McCain was the one to call for the halt to the debate Obama did n't want to be seen as following MaCain 's lead so he opposed the return to Washinton request . 
Obama is always looking for the poltical benefit and by the way ... who cares about the financial crisis because Obama wants to just point fingers at the Bush Administration to cover his partisan tail . 
This guy makes me sick . 
Obama has ZERO leadership and is ALL about political posturing . 
All I can say is he better PRAY that this financial mess gets resolved before the debate because NOBODY is going give a hoot about some lame foreign policy debate when the nation is on the verge of financial collapse . 
Obama -LRB- for once -RRB- needs to stop running for president and actually `` act '' like a US congressman . 
If he was really interested in putting country first and quickly passing a bailout bill , then he should have made sure both presidential candidates agreed to suspend the debate and their campaigns prior to any candidate making an announcement . 
I am already furious about the financial crisis and the lack leadership in Washington from both sides , so the last thing I want is for one of the presidential candidates to try to reap political gains while risking the passage of a bill that protects taxpayers and worsening the financial crisis . 
You have the same writing style . 
Your statements are sophomoric , emotional and poorly presented . 
You use rhetoric as a a way to present your case but it simply comes across as ... As ... Well ignorant . 
This was a dishonorable and unpatriotic move on the part of McCain . 
The electoral process is THE foundation of the United States . 
The candidates have a responsibility to go before the American people and explain why they think they are the best choice . 
McCain has a pattern of using a crisis to avoid unpleasant situations such as Gustov to avoid Bush\/Cheney from showing up live at the convention and now this . 
McCain is a wimp and a dishonorable man . 
I bet he 'll have forgotten all about this by tomorrow . 
This may be the first debate where one candidates ' wardrobe was provided by Depends Adult Under Garments . 
I 'd rather he and Obama meet and debate the issues than he duck-out of the debate because he 's putting `` country first '' . 
The financial problem -LRB- s -RRB- will not be resolved in the 40 + days between now and the election nor the 115 + days until the inauguration . 
But the next POTUS will have to face the problem -LRB- s -RRB- and he can tell us now , via the debates , how he will address these issues . 
There have been 643 votes taken in the current Senate session : McCain has missed 412 of them . 
McCain has not voted in the Senate since April 8th . 
Since March , he has missed 109 of the last 110 votes . 
He missed votes on the GI Bill , energy policy , and in 2007 he missed `` all 15 critical environmental votes in the Senate '' -- giving him a 2007 rating of 0 % from the League of Conservation Voters . 
Cheap stunt , just like the Palin choice . 
You have the same writing style . 
Your statements are sophomoric , emotional and poorly presented . 
You use rhetoric as a a way to present your case but it simply comes across as ... As ... Well ignorant . 
This was a dishonorable and unpatriotic move on the part of McCain . 
The electoral process is THE foundation of the United States . 
The candidates have a responsibility to go before the American people and explain why they think they are the best choice . 
McCain has a pattern of using a crisis to avoid unpleasant situations such as Gustov to avoid Bush\/Cheney from showing up live at the convention and now this . 
McCain is a wimp and a dishonorable man . 
If he does not show up on Friday to mop the floor with Obama ... '' Say , as a show of bipartisan spirit they can mop the floor together . 
It 's getting a little sticky from all the bile in this campaign . 
Obama is right on this one . 
Any president must be able to multi-task and handle a variety of problems at one time . 
Frankly , though I am now an older guy -LRB- and a Viet Nam Era Vet -RRB- I favor giving a new generation of rulers -- those with different approaches to old problems and the unlimited energy of younger years -- the chance to right this sinking ship . 
After all , the presidency is a 26-hour-a-day job . 
I am guessing McCain would like to cancel Palin 's debate too . 
What exactly does he have to relay to the American people ? 
The republican party has systematically destroyed our economy , gotten us into an illegal war with no end in site , empowered corporate giants , and ignored urgent environmental issues , to name just a few ... I ca n't believe any thinking person with a bit of conscious would even consider putting another republican in charge of the country . 
These debates better go on as planned , or many Americans , including myself , will be highly pis_ed . 
The fact that he 's foregoing a much needed face to face with Obama shows where McCain 's true priorities are -- his country . 
Obama , the nobody from nowhere , obviously only cares about his political career . 
, to say McCain `` is not ready '' for a foreign policy debate with Obama is like saying Obama is n't ready to read his telemprompter . 
This is a debate McCain was widely expect to wipe the floor with Obama . 
That 's why Obama 's been downplaying expectations for weeks . 
And he want us to elect him president ? 
If he and Palin ca n't handle the press and Obama and , you know , current events on the campaign trail , how can they handle the presidency ? 
Palin is more sequestered than a cloistered nun , Rick Davis is in bed with Freddie and Fannie , the McCain polls are tanking , and now Johnny Mac loses his , er , nerve and wants to postpone or cancel the debate . 
Do n't vote for McCain . 
He is ready for the retirement home -- does that make eight houses ? 
I 'd rather he and Obama meet and debate the issues than he duck-out of the debate because he 's putting `` country first '' . 
The financial problem -LRB- s -RRB- will not be resolved in the 40 + days between now and the election nor the 115 + days until the inauguration . 
But the next POTUS will have to face the problem -LRB- s -RRB- and he can tell us now , via the debates , how he will address these issues . 
Obama has said he supports it . 
Many Americans do n't want the bailout -- they want to hang wall street greed out to dry , and use the money to help Main Street . 
McCain is trying to figure out what to do by being on the ground to talk and figure out what is best for the American people . 
That is what leaders do . 
Then the American people will see what a shallow , arrogant , platitude-spouting , inexperienced , elitist , drug-addicted , narcissistic , flip-flopping gas-bag the d-crats are trying to foist on them ! 
I 'm sure if congress needs an `` almost last in his class '' aviator 's opinion on how to fix the economy , then his two cents is welcome . 
Remind you of someone ? 
C + average at Columbia . 
Did not graduate with honors in a school known for grade inflation . 
71 may be senior but 47 is no spring chicken ? 
He 's a mulatto . 
Wants to avoid him by walking across the street ? 
Maybe McCain wants to avoid the shower of spittle if the Puppet gets in his face . 
There was no quota filled because he left the part about race on his application blank . 
He was also head of the Harvard Review . 
I think people saying Obama performed poorly in school really have no clue what they are talking about . 
McCain know the focus of the debate will shift to the economy . 
He wants to know what Washington comes up with , so he get sez the right things . 
Debating now is too risky . 
Nice try , Repubs . 
Why in a time of crisis is one of the senators more interested in a job interview than doing his job ? 
This is no stunt , it is recognizing work needs to be doing and rolling up your sleeves to do it . 
What kind of leader would he be ? 
He ca n't manage more than one thing at a time . 
He 's too feeble . 
All of the sudden , he has to run away , he knows nothing about the economy , he has said so . 
Phil Gramm , his financial adviser and him , DEREGUALTION , well , between deregulating everything and TAX CUTS FOR THE WEALTHY , SEE HOW GREAT EVERYTHING IS ! 
RONALD REAGAN SAID , GOVERNEMNT IS THE PROBLEM , WELL NOW RONNIE , YOUR PRECIOUS GOP 9Greedy Old Pigs -RRB- ARE SOCIALIZING WALL STREET ! 
For all of you who say Obama is a socialist and a Marxist , TOO LATE , THE GOP TOOK THAT TALKING POINT AWAY FROM HIM ALSO . 
well every idea Obama has , it 's a couple of days later , McCain claims it to be is . 
Very flattering , but the difference is , MCCAIN DOES N'T MEAN A WORD OF WHAT HE SAYS . 
FOR ALL OF YOU WHO VOTED FOR BUSH , especially in 2004 , YOU OWE AMERICANS AN APOLOGY ! 
Obama has said he supports it . 
Many Americans do n't want the bailout -- they want to hang wall street greed out to dry , and use the money to help Main Street . 
McCain is trying to figure out what to do by being on the ground to talk and figure out what is best for the American people . 
That is what leaders do . 
Or the ing nue who debated himself . 
Secondly , he 's going to find time to do an event with Clinton but not the debate ? 
Oh and , it was Obama 's idea , McCain pulled a fast one . 
on and none of Sarah Palin 's kids play hockey either , she 's not even a hockey mom . 
Bush 43 is playing politics in this General election . 
Remember the Israili Knesett and his lecture there ? 
McBush are synchronising their moves . 
Ca n't even go out in peace without Karl Rove in his pants !! Posted by : Ajay Jain , Garland , TX , USA | September 24 , 2008 6:17 PM | Report abuse `` McCain would begin unilaterally pulling down his campaign ads and cease fundraising . '' 
OK , he got his $ 84 million so he should n't be fundraising anyway . 
But he 's suggesting in a roundabout way that now Obama should also cease fundraising and stop campaigning to work on this banking mess ? 
And if you fall for that I have a bridge in Alaska that I 'll sell you ... . 
McCain should not hide from the debate - focusing on the economic catastrophe created by Bush\/Cheney will be part of being president and should be part of any serious contender 's campaign for president . 
I am beginning to wonder if McCain really has the stomach for the complexities and multiple focuses of the job . 
He needs to stop listening to Rick Davis and Carl Rove . . 
and just be himself . 
That way , even if he loses , he will be himself ... not what he seems to be devolving into . 
You have the same writing style . 
Your statements are sophomoric , emotional and poorly presented . 
You use rhetoric as a a way to present your case but it simply comes across as ... As ... Well ignorant . 
This was a dishonorable and unpatriotic move on the part of McCain . 
The electoral process is THE foundation of the United States . 
The candidates have a responsibility to go before the American people and explain why they think they are the best choice . 
McCain has a pattern of using a crisis to avoid unpleasant situations such as Gustov to avoid Bush\/Cheney from showing up live at the convention and now this . 
McCain is a wimp and a dishonorable man . 
He chose instead to make a unilateral statement that is easily perceived as serving his own partisan interests . 
If he is being misinterpreted now , he can only blame in on yet the most recent of his many recent misjudgments . 
Having lost significant ground to Obama on the issue of the economy , and facing a potentially defining and withering debate on Friday where he would be confronted on his statements on the economy that have led to this sharp decline , McCain has attempted to change the rules of the game , to erase many past errors through a putatively `` unpolitical '' move -- something we have seen before . 
A simple question : Under the same economic conditions , if McCain had been leading , does anyone believe that McCain would have `` suspended '' his campaign ? 
This is the ultimate in cynicism -- using the current conditions in order to attempt to blunt a sharp decline and try to control the media dialogue , through a political act designed to avoid a potential political debacle . 
He is continuing his campaign -- which was leading to loss in all directions -- by `` suspending '' it . 
It is an attempt to silence media criticism and questions -- and to prevent a debate on these issues that for him is sharply unfavorable . 
As such , it is impulsivity masked as statesmanship , as well as an attempt to control the media dialogue , as we saw yesterday at the U.N. , -- factors we have seen all along . 
He wants to attempt to force media to avoid covering openly his flailing campaign , the cynically political masked as the unpolitical , as we saw in the VP pick . 
Do n't be fooled . 
McCain is attempting to avoid the debate in the face of this decline , through the type of evasion and lack of press access and communication that has characterized his campaign . 
It shows an extraordinary willingness to use difficult conditions to erase and avoid political errors , and serve political needs . 
He surely would like to put off the debate , and attempt to create more favorable conditions for it . 
This is just the time for a debate . 
We can work on solutions as well . 
Do n't be cowed . 
The candidate who dropped everything to go to Washington to try to keep everybody 's savings from evaporating . 
Or the ing nue who debated himself . 
Secondly , he 's going to find time to do an event with Clinton but not the debate ? 
Oh , and , it was Obama 's idea , McCain pulled a fast one . 
Oh , and none of Sarah Palin 's kids play hockey either , she 's not even a hockey mom . 
How the Democrats Created the Financial Crisis : Kevin Hassett Enough cards on this table have been turned over that the story is now clear . 
The economic history books will describe this episode in simple and understandable terms : Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac exploded , and many bystanders were injured in the blast , some fatally . 
Fannie and Freddie did this by becoming a key enabler of the mortgage crisis . 
They fueled Wall Street 's efforts to securitize subprime loans by becoming the primary customer of all AAA-rated subprime-mortgage pools . 
In addition , they held an enormous portfolio of mortgages themselves . 
Take away Fannie and Freddie , or regulate them more wisely , and it 's hard to imagine how these highly liquid markets would ever have emerged . 
This whole mess would never have happened . 
It is easy to identify the historical turning point that marked the beginning of the end . 
Back in 2005 , Fannie and Freddie were , after years of dominating Washington , on the ropes . 
They were enmeshed in accounting scandals that led to turnover at the top . 
At one telling moment in late 2004 , captured in an article by my American Enterprise Institute colleague Peter Wallison , the Securities and Exchange Comiission 's chief accountant told disgraced Fannie Mae chief Franklin Raines that Fannie 's position on the relevant accounting issue was not even `` on the page '' of allowable interpretations . 
Then legislative momentum emerged for an attempt to create a `` world-class regulator '' that would oversee the pair more like banks , imposing strict requirements on their ability to take excessive risks . 
Politicians who previously had associated themselves proudly with the two accounting miscreants were less eager to be associated with them . 
The time was ripe . 
The clear gravity of the situation pushed the legislation forward . 
Some might say the current mess could n't be foreseen , yet in 2005 Alan Greenspan told Congress how urgent it was for it to act in the clearest possible terms : If Fannie and Freddie `` continue to grow , continue to have the low capital that they have , continue to engage in the dynamic hedging of their portfolios , which they need to do for interest rate risk aversion , they potentially create ever-growing potential systemic risk down the road , '' he said . 
`` We are placing the total financial system of the future at a substantial risk . '' 
What happened next was extraordinary . 
For the first time in history , a serious Fannie and Freddie reform bill was passed by the Senate Banking Committee . 
The bill gave a regulator power to crack down , and would have required the companies to eliminate their investments in risky assets . 
If that bill had become law , then the world today would be different . 
In 2005 , 2006 and 2007 , a blizzard of terrible mortgage paper fluttered out of the Fannie and Freddie clouds , burying many of our oldest and most venerable institutions . 
Without their checkbooks keeping the market liquid and buying up excess supply , the market would likely have not existed . 
But the bill did n't become law , for a simple reason : Democrats opposed it on a party-line vote in the committee , signaling that this would be a partisan issue . 
Republicans , tied in knots by the tight Democratic opposition , could n't even get the Senate to vote on the matter . 
That such a reckless political stand could have been taken by the Democrats was obscene even then . 
Wallison wrote at the time : `` It is a classic case of socializing the risk while privatizing the profit . 
The Democrats and the few Republicans who oppose portfolio limitations could not possibly do so if their constituents understood what they were doing . '' 
Now that the collapse has occurred , the roadblock built by Senate Democrats in 2005 is unforgivable . 
Many who opposed the bill doubtlessly did so for honorable reasons . 
Fannie and Freddie provided mounds of materials defending their practices . 
Perhaps some found their propaganda convincing . 
But we now know that many of the senators who protected Fannie and Freddie , including Barack Obama , Hillary Clinton and Christopher Dodd , have received mind-boggling levels of financial support from them over the years . 
Throughout his political career , Obama has gotten more than $ 125,000 in campaign contributions from employees and political action committees of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , second only to Dodd , the Senate Banking Committee chairman , who received more than $ 165,000 . 
Oh , and there is one little footnote to the story that 's worth keeping in mind while Democrats point fingers between now and Nov. 4 : Senator John McCain was one of the three cosponsors of S. 190 , the bill that would have averted this mess . 
What happens when Gimmick Palin does n't work out , employ another GIMMICK ... and make it DRAMATIC . 
Nice try , Repubs . 
Nice try , Repubs . 
And he want us to elect him president ? 
If he and Palin ca n't handle the press and Obama and , you know , current events on the campaign trail , how can they handle the presidency ? 
When off the teleprompter , he is as dumb as a post . 
Dumber than Paris Hilton . 
Watch even five minutes of this : Posted by : Beren | September 24 , 2008 6:17 PM | Report abuse The candidate who dropped everything to go to Washington to try to keep everybody 's savings from evaporating . 
Or the ing nue who debated himself . 
Secondly , he 's going to find time to do an event with Clinton but not the debate ? 
Oh , and , it was Obama 's idea , McCain pulled a fast one . 
Oh , and none of Sarah Palin 's kids play hockey either , she 's not even a hockey mom . 
You have the same writing style . 
Your statements are sophomoric , emotional and poorly presented . 
You use rhetoric as a a way to present your case but it simply comes across as ... As ... Well ignorant . 
This was a dishonorable and unpatriotic move on the part of McCain . 
The electoral process is THE foundation of the United States . 
The candidates have a responsibility to go before the American people and explain why they think they are the best choice . 
McCain has a pattern of using a crisis to avoid unpleasant situations such as Gustov to avoid Bush\/Cheney from showing up live at the convention and now this . 
McCain is a wimp and a dishonorable man . 
You have the same writing style . 
Your statements are sophomoric , emotional and poorly presented . 
You use rhetoric as a a way to present your case but it simply comes across as ... As ... Well ignorant . 
This was a dishonorable and unpatriotic move on the part of McCain . 
The electoral process is THE foundation of the United States . 
The candidates have a responsibility to go before the American people and explain why they think they are the best choice . 
McCain has a pattern of using a crisis to avoid unplesant situations such as Gustov to avoid Bush\/Cheney from showing up live at the convention and now this . 
McCain is a wimp and a dishonorable man . 
I bet by tomorrow he 'll have forgotten he did this . 
This may be the first debate where one of the candidates wardrobe was provide by Depends . 
Does Fed Tresurary need this approval from the congress ? . 
When Fed bail out AIG and Fredi mac etc. all democrats were shouting that one person has so much power to use more than 800 billion doller -LRB- Nancy on CNN -RRB- What happen to those powers . 
Let him do his job and keep all the politician to concentrate about incoming election . 
Do n't expect right decision from a politician who has to face election in two months . 
I think Obama 's line was perfect . 
Presidents need to multi-task . 
You have the same writing style . 
Your statements are sophomoric , emotional and poorly presented . 
You use rhetoric as a a way to present your case but it simply comes across as ... As ... Well ignorant . 
This was a dishonorable and unpatriotic move on the part of McCain . 
The electoral process is THE foundation of the United States . 
The candidates have a responsibility to go before the American people and explain why they think they are the best choice . 
McCain has a pattern of using a crisis to avoid unpleasant situations such as Gustov to avoid Bush\/Cheney from showing up live at the convention and now this . 
McCain is a wimp and a dishonorable man . 
Like the GI Bill he was so against and now uses it in speeches like he helped get it passed . 
He chose instead to make a unilateral statement that is easily perceived as serving his own partisan interests . 
If he is being misinterpreted now , he can only blame in on yet the most recent of his many recent misjudgments . 
How the Democrats Created the Financial Crisis : Kevin Hassett Enough cards on this table have been turned over that the story is now clear . 
The economic history books will describe this episode in simple and understandable terms : Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac exploded , and many bystanders were injured in the blast , some fatally . 
Fannie and Freddie did this by becoming a key enabler of the mortgage crisis . 
They fueled Wall Street 's efforts to securitize subprime loans by becoming the primary customer of all AAA-rated subprime-mortgage pools . 
In addition , they held an enormous portfolio of mortgages themselves . 
Take away Fannie and Freddie , or regulate them more wisely , and it 's hard to imagine how these highly liquid markets would ever have emerged . 
This whole mess would never have happened . 
It is easy to identify the historical turning point that marked the beginning of the end . 
Back in 2005 , Fannie and Freddie were , after years of dominating Washington , on the ropes . 
They were enmeshed in accounting scandals that led to turnover at the top . 
At one telling moment in late 2004 , captured in an article by my American Enterprise Institute colleague Peter Wallison , the Securities and Exchange Comiission 's chief accountant told disgraced Fannie Mae chief Franklin Raines that Fannie 's position on the relevant accounting issue was not even `` on the page '' of allowable interpretations . 
Then legislative momentum emerged for an attempt to create a `` world-class regulator '' that would oversee the pair more like banks , imposing strict requirements on their ability to take excessive risks . 
Politicians who previously had associated themselves proudly with the two accounting miscreants were less eager to be associated with them . 
The time was ripe . 
The clear gravity of the situation pushed the legislation forward . 
Some might say the current mess could n't be foreseen , yet in 2005 Alan Greenspan told Congress how urgent it was for it to act in the clearest possible terms : If Fannie and Freddie `` continue to grow , continue to have the low capital that they have , continue to engage in the dynamic hedging of their portfolios , which they need to do for interest rate risk aversion , they potentially create ever-growing potential systemic risk down the road , '' he said . 
`` We are placing the total financial system of the future at a substantial risk . '' 
What happened next was extraordinary . 
For the first time in history , a serious Fannie and Freddie reform bill was passed by the Senate Banking Committee . 
The bill gave a regulator power to crack down , and would have required the companies to eliminate their investments in risky assets . 
If that bill had become law , then the world today would be different . 
In 2005 , 2006 and 2007 , a blizzard of terrible mortgage paper fluttered out of the Fannie and Freddie clouds , burying many of our oldest and most venerable institutions . 
Without their checkbooks keeping the market liquid and buying up excess supply , the market would likely have not existed . 
But the bill did n't become law , for a simple reason : Democrats opposed it on a party-line vote in the committee , signaling that this would be a partisan issue . 
Republicans , tied in knots by the tight Democratic opposition , could n't even get the Senate to vote on the matter . 
That such a reckless political stand could have been taken by the Democrats was obscene even then . 
Wallison wrote at the time : `` It is a classic case of socializing the risk while privatizing the profit . 
The Democrats and the few Republicans who oppose portfolio limitations could not possibly do so if their constituents understood what they were doing . '' 
Now that the collapse has occurred , the roadblock built by Senate Democrats in 2005 is unforgivable . 
Many who opposed the bill doubtlessly did so for honorable reasons . 
Fannie and Freddie provided mounds of materials defending their practices . 
Perhaps some found their propaganda convincing . 
But we now know that many of the senators who protected Fannie and Freddie , including Barack Obama , Hillary Clinton and Christopher Dodd , have received mind-boggling levels of financial support from them over the years . 
Throughout his political career , Obama has gotten more than $ 125,000 in campaign contributions from employees and political action committees of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , second only to Dodd , the Senate Banking Committee chairman , who received more than $ 165,000 . 
Oh , and there is one little footnote to the story that 's worth keeping in mind while Democrats point fingers between now and Nov. 4 : Senator John McCain was one of the three cosponsors of S. 190 , the bill that would have averted this mess . 
Remind you of someone ? 
OK , he got his $ 84 million so he should n't be fundraising anyway . 
But he 's suggesting in a roundabout way that now Obama should also cease fundraising and stop campaigning to work on this banking mess ? 
And if you fall for that I have a bridge in Alaska that I 'll sell you ... . 
OK , he got his $ 84 million so he should n't be fundraising anyway . 
But he 's suggesting in a roundabout way that now Obama should also cease fundraising and stop campaigning to work on this banking mess ? 
And if you fall for that I have a bridge in Alaska that I 'll sell you ... . 
He confesses that he knows very little about our economy , and then presumes to run to D.C. and save it . 
I 'm disappointed in him , primarily because I think he 's `` playing for time '' to get it together to debate Obama . 
I 'm not voting . 
I ca n't imagine Reagan or either Bush pulling this stunt . 
The Republicans ignored him then we should now . 
Remind you of someone ? 
You 're a Senator and you should be voting on an important issue , or is it that you 're afraid to vote on it and have that vote haunt you in the debates and on Nov 4th ? 
That was a great response , Barry H Obama . . 
`` call me , if you need me '' ... I can tell you now , no one needs you . 
So Obama is afraid to commit to an answer again ! 
What a total juvenile ! 
I guess Barry 's sitting in Florida saying to himself , `` I wonder what George McGovern would do ? '' 
Then the American people will see what a shallow , arrogant , platitude-spouting , inexperienced , elitist , drug-addicted , narcissistic , flip-flopping gas-bag the d-crats are trying to foist on them ! 
I think Obama 's line was perfect . 
Presidents need to multi-task . 
Then we 'll know that the polling places are safe once more for Republicans , eh ? 
You 're a Senator and you should be voting on an important issue , or is it that you 're afraid to vote on it and have that vote haunt you in the debates and on Nov 4th ? 
That was a great response , Barry H Obama . . 
`` call me , if you need me '' ... I can tell you now , no one needs you . 
So Obama is afraid to commit to an answer again ! 
What a total juvenile ! 
I guess Barry 's sitting in Florida saying to himself , `` I wonder what George McGovern would do ? '' 
Oh , for the same reasons there should be laws against fraud . 
The voters HATE this bill -- bailing out fat cats at their expense . 
McCain knows this and tried to distance himself . 
Reid called him on it and said he HAD to vote for it , or no deal . 
So McCain 's distancing strategy is a no-go . 
Obama offered him a low-drama way to take his lumps -- a joint statement that said they both are on board . 
But McCain went for the Hail Mary pass . 
The outcome : When something passes at 8:00 am Monday morning , McCain is going to be INTIMATELY tied to it , and voters agoing to HATE him for leading the effort to bail out the fat cats . 
He took a small problem and is about to turn it into a HUGE one for himself . 
Second , Sen. McCain has asked Obama for one-on-one townhall meetings for MONTHS to discuss the issues and his invitations were never accepted . 
Third , Sen. Obama has said he would act in a non-partisan manner if elected President . 
Well , THIS is the perfect opportunity to prove it . 
Let 's put our priorities in order . 
We have over 40 days until the election . 
Lastly , for the people calling Sen. McCain a coward or worse , you are only showing your ignorance . 
The fact that he 's foregoing a much needed face to face with Obama shows where McCain 's true priorities are -- his country . 
Obama , the nobody from nowhere , obviously only cares about his political career . 
, to say McCain `` is not ready '' for a foreign policy debate is like saying Obama is n't ready to read his telemprompter . 
This is a debate McCain was widely expect to wipe the floor with Obama . 
That 's why Obama 's been downplaying expectations for weeks . 
He definitely needs new and shine ideas from his young rival . 
Obviously McCain trying to fillup the gap and playing the poll . 
We understand his game . 
This act of cowardice takes the cake . 
Where has McCain been the last 12 months ? 
Certainly not on the Senate floor as he has missed 80 % of votes cast . 
And that 's bogus , because the technology exists so that Senators could vote remotely via a secure video hookup or they could postpone the vote until Saturday and that would give them time to get back into town vote . 
Meanwhile they can watch the hearings via C-Span and participate in the debate via a video conferencing connection . 
McCain is just trying to grandstand 'cause the polls are turning against him . 
And that 's bogus , because the technology exists so that Senators could vote remotely via a secure video hookup or they could postpone the vote until Saturday and that would give them time to get back into town vote . 
Meanwhile they can watch the hearings via C-Span and participate in the debate via a video conferencing connection . 
McCain is just trying to grandstand 'cause the polls are turning against him . 
And that 's bogus , because the technology exists so that Senators could vote remotely via a secure video hookup or they could postpone the vote until Saturday and that would give them time to get back into town vote . 
Meanwhile they can watch the hearings via C-Span and participate in the debate via a video conferencing connection . 
McCain is just trying to grandstand 'cause the polls are turning against him . 
And that 's bogus , because the technology exists so that Senators could vote remotely via a secure video hookup or they could postpone the vote until Saturday and that would give them time to get back into town vote . 
Meanwhile they can watch the hearings via C-Span and participate in the debate via a video conferencing connection . 
McCain is just trying to grandstand 'cause the polls are turning against him . 
This act of cowardice takes the cake . 
Where has McCain been the last 12 months ? 
Certainly not on the Senate floor as he has missed 80 % of votes cast . 
They include , in part , that there be oversight , that the taxpayers get an actual stake in the companies , that regulations be put in place to prevent the banks from continuing to do the same thing that put us in this mess , that the people responsible not be rewarded for their negligence . 
This was issued before McCain ever came up with anything and should be enough to make his position known . 
Those who claim that Mr. Obama is negligent are just repeating talking points issued from the Rove undisclosed location and have no idea of what they are talking about . 
Given that Mr McCain has absolutely no credibility in economic matters , I should n't have to point out that for him to mess with this situation will only make matters worse . 
After all , it is his advisers who set the stage for this fiasco and he himself who has been voting to deregulate . 
Furthermore , he ca n't seem to make up his mind even now about whether or not there should be regulations . 
How long ago was it that he last said that the fundamentals of our economy are strong ? 
How can he blame Mr. Cox for not regulating when Mr. McCain himself did away with the regulations . 
And does anyone actually think that in a couple days he has all of a sudden learned enough about the situation to do any good ?! Anyone who believes that his action is not an attempt to flee from a confrontation with Mr. Obama believes that oil had nothing to do with the invasion of Iraq . 
If he does not show up on Friday to mop the floor with Obama , he can forget about my vote . 
I 'll stay home on election night . 
When off the teleprompter , he is as dumb as a post . 
Dumber than Paris Hilton . 
Watch even five minutes of this : Posted by : Beren | September 24 , 2008 6:10 PM | Report abuse Did you hear ? 
McCain has suspended his campaign ! 
Obama really screwed up , McCain said country first , Obama said , I have no plan , no ideas , but if they want some coffee or something I 'm sure they 'll call me ! 
I mean McCain may be over acting a bit , but Obama looks like an inept dolt ... Ooops ! 
A president should be able to carry out multiple tasks and should not have knee-jerk reactions . 
Obama displayed correct judgement , confidence , maturity , and leadership . 
While I question the term leadership when it applies to the White House , Bush is still supposed to be running this country , not candidates . 
So step up McCain , lets here how you do in a debate . 
Do n't we already have a president in Washington who is supposed to be leading ? 
Sure some\/most know who they are voting for at this point but that 's beside the point . 
There is no justifiable reason to cancel the debate . 
If that 's the case how about we just cancel the voting process all together ? 
Not sure what McCain is up to but I know for DAMN sure it 's not for the betterment of me or the economy . 
McCain FYI , this economic crisis is not new but you would n't know anything about that with 13 calls and all ; or is it 14 seeing as though you do n't know so spare me this latest bull crap you are trying to throw . 
Besides , what the hell do you think you are going to accomplish in 2 days ? 
And the debate is on Nation Security and Foreign Policies , duh ? 
BTW Obama is a socialist ! 
The Republicans ignored him then we should now . 
Last thing we need is a quick half baked `` solution '' . 
First , he does n't know about the economy , he does n't know how many homes he own and does n't know how to text . 
The economy is a long-term problem we citizens will fix . 
Therefore , McSame will go to DC and appear as if he really cares about the economy and learn everything about it in a few days . 
He may think that it is the taxpayers fault and not Wall Street after all -LRB- what a leader he will be -RRB- because were so call `` WHINERS '' And , Bush , by the way , will address the nation and want American citizens support . 
A leader is not very effective when he is far away . 
Lacking skills necessary to multi-task . 
McCa n't just is a bit too old for the pressure and responsibility . 
He 'll bail on responsibilities when in the White House too . 
His desperate gesture only works for those to dense to see through it . 
All of a sudden he returns to congress ... after all these months . 
Go ahead fall for it . 
How embarrasssing Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 6:10 PM | Report abuse FYI , the word from the McCain camp is that they are suggesting the first P debate be moved to Oct 2 , which is originally scheduled for the first VP debate . 
Subsequently , the VP debate will be held a week later in MS. Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 6:10 PM | Report abuse I wonder if McCain maybe has had a minor stroke , or a nervous breakdown . 
And it died in a Republican committee . 
In ' 95 , the Clinton administration essentially put a gun to the heads of the banks and lending institutions by enforcing the CRA -LRB- Community Reinvestment Act -RRB- which started this whole mess . 
President Bush and the Republicans -LRB- the conservatives , not the socialist wing of the party -RRB- tried to institute some sort of independent reform , but were shot down at every turn by the Dumbocrats . 
A president shouild be able to carry out multiple tasks and should not have knee-jerk reactions . 
Obama displayed correct judgement , confidence , maturity , and leadership . 
If McCain is unable to do that , he should withdraw . 
Let the debate go on . 
He confesses that he knows very little about our economy , and then presumes to run to D.C. and save it . 
I 'm disappointed in him , primarily because I think he 's `` playing for time '' to get it together to debate Obama . 
I 'm not voting . 
I ca n't imagine Reagan or either Bush pulling this stunt . 
You 're a Senator and you should be voting on an important issue , or is it that you 're afraid to vote on it and have that vote haunt you in the debates and on Nov 4th ? 
That was a great response , Barry H Obama . . 
`` call me , if you nedd me '' ... I can tell you now , no one needs you . 
So Obama is afraid to commit to an answer again ! 
What a total juvenile ! 
I guess Barry 's sitting in Florida saying to himself , `` I wonder what George McGovern would do ? '' 
The fact that he 's foregoing a much needed face to face with Obama shows where McCain 's true priorities are -- his country . 
Obama , the nobody from nowhere , obviously only cares about his political career . 
It is n't going to be fun to have YOUR ASSS handed to you in front of millions of Americans , already clutching pitchforks and torches ... . . 
It is n't going to be fun to have YOUR ASSS handed to you in front of millions of Americans , already clutching pitchforks and torches ... . . 
It is n't going to be fun to have YOUR ASSS handed to you in front of millions of Americans , already clutching pitchforks and torches ... . . 
It is n't going to be fun to have YOUR ASSS handed to you in front of millions of Americans , already clutching pitchforks and torches ... . . 
He definitely needs new and shine ideas from his young rival . 
Obviously McCain trying to fillup the gap and playing the poll . 
We understand his game . 
This act of cowardice takes the cake . 
Where has McCain been the last 12 months ? 
Certainly not on the Senate floor as he has missed 80 % of votes cast . 
Sounds like a lynching . 
Which candidate are you talking about ? 
P \* ssing off the dull witted Demoroids in this comment section is an unqualified gas . 
And it died in a Republican committee . 
In ' 95 , the Clinton administration esentially put a gun to the heads of the banks and lending institutions by enforcing the CRA -LRB- Community Reinvestment Act -RRB- which started this whole mess . 
President Bush and the Republicans -LRB- the conservatives , not the socialist wing of the party -RRB- tried to institute some sort of independent reform , but were shot down at every turn by the Dumbocrats . 
It is n't going to be fun to have YOUR ASSS handed to you in front of millions of Americans , already clutching pitchforks and torches ... . . 
In the end , McCain is terrified of facing Senator Obama . 
Dems in Congress shot down the bill . 
Obama was Fannie 's 3rd highest $ $ $ recipient : Posted by : David123456 | September 24 , 2008 5:51 PM He sponsored the bill but could not get it passed . 
Neither David nor the McCain camp realize they point out how ineffectual McCain is . 
Why keep repeating that ? 
This is a reason for McCain to stay away from Washington , not go there . 
Same old political tricks from John McCain . 
He 's a muppet . 
Or the ing nue who debated himself . 
When off the teleprompter , he is as dumb as a post . 
Dumber than Paris Hilton . 
He does not give sound bites on serious issues . 
At least he is not making these useless grandstanding proclamations like : `` we need action , now ! '' 
If you think Obama is dumb as a post then try graduating from Harvard . 
This is certainly not leadership . 
Maybe so , but it sure seems too risky in a race separated by 2 to 6 points , depending on whose polls you watch . 
And the idea that McCain ca n't find a six or seven hours to fly from Washington to Oxford , Mississippi , have a debate , and fly back on Friday night is just preposterous . 
So , here 's another possibility : McCain is losing it . 
As in someone found him talking to a coffee pot and said , `` Holy crap ! 
The meds are n't working ! 
We have to do something before he spazzes out in front of a crowd ! '' 
Think of it : This `` suspension '' of his campaign will take McCain out of the public eye for the better part of a week . 
Why might they need to do that ? 
`` Nervous exhaustion ? '' 
It 's not out of the question , given the candidate 's increasingly erratic behavior over the last couple of weeks . 
There is something really weird about this one . 
I wonder if we 'll find out . 
And it does n't look seem like the Senate vote is happening this week anyway . 
The crash started weeks ago . 
McCain 's camp have been happily airing attack ads and parading Sarah Palin around during this time , while banks folded and world markets tanked . 
Now , two days before the debate , they suddenly say they need extra time to deal with the crisis ? 
The issue is not whether this is a major crisis that deserves the candidates attention -LRB- of course it is -RRB- or if they should be in D.C. working on it -LRB- they should . -RRB- 
But with private jets , these things are not mutually exclusive with holding a debate . 
Come on , people . 
If McCain was the one charging ahead in the polls , do you think he 'd stop campaigning and fundraising now ? 
This is stalling , grandstanding , or both . 
One day `` we 're all Georgians '' and he 's threatening the Russians over what turns out to be a minor flap , the next he 's panicked about the financial market situation ... It 's becoming obvious who 's got the temperament to be President and who 's just kind 've scary and fear-inducing in his erratic , `` chicken with it 's head cut off '' approach to crisis management . 
Why should John McCain run back to Washington ? 
Is he really the right guy to do something about this situation ? 
Would canceling the debate over his situation actually be helpful ? 
Or would it send more anxiety into the market , thereby making the problem worse ? 
-LRB- hint : It 's the latter -RRB- . 
Seriously ... the more and more I see of John McCain under pressure , the scarier the thought of him being President becomes . 
Right , the call from 6 hours earlier . 
The call Mr. Obama made to reach out to Mr. McCain . 
The call that McCain feared to return until he had spoken to his soul-mate , George W. Bush . 
Get out of the way , so that Mr. Obama can proceed with the business of LEADING ... . . 
C + average at Columbia . 
Did not graduate with honors in a school known for grade inflation . 
71 may be senior but 47 is no spring chicken ? 
He 's a mulatto . 
Wants to avoid him by walking across the street ? 
Maybe McCain wants to avoid the shower of spittle if the Puppet gets in his face . 
No , that will be called Martial Law and it will be announced before the election by one of the Bush royal family . 
Unless you are filthy , covetous rich -LRB- preferably from pollution or war machines -RRB- and thus pay little taxes you are one of the hosts these bloodsuckers feed on . 
You should n't need to know anymore than the fact that a Rothschild came out from the shadows to endorse Dishonest John ... never mind she flubbed it by 1st referring to `` those people out there '' then corrected her call to arms to the `` rednecks , '' the point is your ubermasters are worried . 
Make no mistake , this is not yet a class war . 
It can be remedied by an HONEST election excersizing the REAL INTENT of the Middle\/Working class , the ACTUAL taxpayers . 
If the American public is cheated again our forefathers will expect us correct it by any means necessary . 
McCain is no more needed in Washington than you are . 
A leader is not very effective when he is far away . 
That makes NO SENSE AT ALL . 
The guy trailing in the polls ALWAYS wants more debates than the guy leading . 
That 's a fact . 
So it 's entirely in McCain 's interest to have AS MANY DEBATES AS POSSIBLE . 
So thanks for pointing out just how more presidential McCain behaves than Obama . 
Why not send Vice-Presidential candidate Sarah Palin in his place ? 
Clearly a far better grade of mind altering medication than we average people can get . 
And frankly we will need it ... it may be the last time we smile in a long time . 
And it died in a Republican committee . 
Obama says nothing , has nothing to offer but one word slogans . 
You folks need to lay off the messiah worship . 
I take it , then , that you 're not familiar with the Lugar-Obama Bill ? 
Or do you think that keeping nuclear weapons locked up and out of the hands of terrorists and rogue states is not ` meaningful ' ? 
If you 're interested , of course , there 's always google , but other places to start might be : Posted by : Beren | September 24 , 2008 5:55 PM | Report abuse I 'm still trying to decided if this was good move or not ... I guess it depends on the results . 
It the plan is reached before Monday , John McCain wins if not Obama wins . 
I also think there is a lot of bitterness in this forum . 
Some of talks sounds like Europeans not like Americans . 
If you do n't like you life , change it . 
If you have been hit hard by life , change it . 
Is n't that the American dream , you make life what you desire . 
No , that will be called Martial Law and it will be announced before the election by one of the Bush royal family . 
Unless you are filthy , covetous rich -LRB- preferably from pollution or war machines -RRB- and thus pay little taxes you are one of the hosts these bloodsuckers feed on . 
You should n't need to know anymore than the fact that a Rothschild came out from the shadows to endorse Dishonest John ... never mind she flubbed it by 1st referring to `` those people out there '' then corrected her call to arms to the `` rednecks , '' the point is your ubermasters are worried . 
Make no mistake , this is not yet a class war . 
It can be remedied by an HONEST election excersizing the REAL INTENT of the Middle\/Working class , the ACTUAL taxpayers . 
If the American public is cheated again our forefathers will expect us correct it by any means necessary . 
Or the ing nue who debated himself . 
It gives me hope that someone is putting the breaks on to do their part in making sure our economy is steered in the right direction . 
Either candidate would be foolish to not slow things down and do the work in D.C. that 's at hand . 
He did n't say he wanted to cancel the debate ... only postpone it . 
Why wo n't Obama concede to that ? 
It would do him good to put the breaks on as well for the good of our nation . 
McCain wants to give the impression that he is doing something . 
He simply is not on of the `` experts '' in this area . 
He would be much more valuable stating what a settlement should look like and get out of the get members of his party to move in that direction . 
With insiders expecting this thing to be settled by 8\/30\/08 with more conviction today than yesterday , maybe McCain is looking to take credit for something he did not do . 
In any case Obama has no reason to stop his campaign . 
This is noy 9\/11 . 
I am concerned that McCain as president will see everything as a 9\/11 and act unilaterally like he is now and try to stir up a frenzy . 
Obama will be calm as he always is and after the drama is over the debate will be held and the distinction between McCain and Obama will be more apparent then in either of the two subsequent debates . 
OUR ROLE IS TO ASK CANDIDATES DIRECT QUESTIONS AND VOTE BASED ON OUR OBSERVATIONS . 
DESPITE BEING FREE FOR SIX MONTHS , MCCAIN POSTPONED INTERVIEWING AND SELECTING PALIN UNTIL THE WEEK OF THE DNC CONVENTION . 
THEN , MCCAIN POSTPONED THE CONVENTION LEAVING NO TIME FOR BUSH TO SPEAK . 
THEN , MCCAIN POSTPONED THE MEDIA 'S ACCESS TO PALIN SO THAT WE CA N'T SEE HOW SHE REACTS TO UNCOMFORTABLE QUESTIONS . 
NOW , HE IS POSTPONING A DEBATE WITH ONLY A MONTH AND HALF LEFT UNTIL THE ELECTION . 
POLITICAL STALL TACTICS DO N'T HELP AMERICANS . 
Then after realizing he is not ready to debate Obama on the economy after a one hour cram session in the library , he dares to pretend that he is delaying the debate for us !! please media sto saying it was Mccain 's idea , Obama phoned Mccain six hours earlier to propose it . 
McCain this afternoon suspended his campaign and said he would skip the first presidential debate in order to return to Capitol Hill to work on the log jammed Bush administration legislation , which as of Wednesday afternoon was in peril . 
Senator Reid has also told several Congressmen and Senators in private that he needs John McCains help to get this thing unjammed . 
Personally , I hope Senator McCain goes to Washington and sticks this bill up Senator Reid 's a \*\* . 
obama : I might as well run for president now - then I 'll be on easy street the rest of my life . 
Accomplishing anything in the senate is too much work . 
He 's rather go to Washington Parties and play tailhook while this mess his buddy Phil Gramm , Dubya and Greenspan have created is festering . 
The bailout proposal is still in the committee and the last time I checked McCain is not a member of that committee and he has not been invited to make a presentation or make a speech . 
So what is he really going to achieve by going to Washington ? 
Can someone please answer the question ? 
This is a political stunt by the GOP ; he want people to think that he cares very much about the economy . 
It is just like the GOP deceived the whole nation during their convention . 
Before the convention , they said because of Hurrican Ike . . 
`` This convention will not be partican '' it will be done with the spirit of the lost that the hurrican will cost in mind . 
McCain flew to the locations of the storm -LRB- despite the fact that he did not do anything to help while there -RRB- . 
Well , we all know how the convention turned out ; it was full of partisan attacks . 
Now McCain poll numbers are in the dumpster and he want to make another political move ! 
The America people are caught up the GOP lies and it is not going to work this time around . 
Does that sound Presidential ? 
A President should get back to Washington , get his hands dirty , and get a deal done . 
Becuase since this crisis happened he has given his party leadership and direction . 
He has been on top of the situation and has been communicating back and forth so that the democrats know what he expects and know what the goals are . 
Why do think that the request that are comming out of the meetings mirror Obama 's statements ? 
A TRUE leader leads no matter where they are on the geographical map . 
McCain is no more needed in Washington than you are . 
-LRB- A -RRB- Crisis arises . 
Rivals discuss matter privately , agree to cooperate . 
Rivals then hold joint press conference to present their plan . 
Nation sees united front . 
-LRB- B -RRB- Crisis arises . 
Rival M ignores highly unusual direct call from Rival O , strings him along for 6 hours , then sandbags everyone with a unilateral announcement reneging on a prior agreement , and publicly dares Rival O to follow suit or look bad . 
Bush White House piles on . 
Dems in Congress shot down the bill . 
Obama was Fannie 's 3rd highest $ $ $ recipient : Posted by : David123456 | September 24 , 2008 5:51 PM | Report abuse McCain is going back to Washington to whip up GOP support for Bush 's plan . 
-LRB- Even the GOP does n't want it -RRB- . 
He will show up at the debate because the debate commission has indicated the debate will go on . 
`` I would really rather not be here as the country is in crisis , the the commision would not push back the debate - till December 1 ! '' 
Maybe we can get a photo op of Bush hugging McSame again . 
`` Therefore , I will debate Obama only if his poll numbers improve . '' 
`` Otherwise , whats in it for me ? '' 
`` In the meantime I will actually serve the Country while Obama sniffs condescendingly at meaningless campaign stops . '' 
I guess we 're not all as fortunate as you to come up with a silver spoon in our mouth Posted by : jcro | September 24 , 2008 5:51 PM | Report abuse `` Once again , Obama is the grown-up . 
He can focus on a crisis AND explain where he stands '' Just not in real time . 
He is a hologram and CPU running Word Cloud . 
When the news cycle changes new talking points need to be uploaded by the Axelrod Master of Puppets . 
When off the teleprompter , he is as dumb as a post . 
Dumber than Paris Hilton . 
He is completely unstable ; he reminds me of the captain in `` Mr Rogers '' . 
Go crazy and watch your shipmates go down with you ! 
McCain this afternoon suspended his campaign and said he would skip the first presidential debate in order to return to Capitol Hill to work on the log jammed Bush administration legislation , which as of Wednesday afternoon was in peril . 
After all , even Jimmy Carter was able to take time to debate Ronald Reagan during the Iran Hostage Crisis . 
If the President can debate during a crisis , what does it tell us when a mere candidate for the job runs from debating ? 
This is exactly why you do n't focus yourself on too many things at once . 
Carter was a joke and so is Barackas Obamas . 
The person who 10 days ago said the fundamentals of our economy are strong is NOW saying that the crisis is so huge that he has to stop his campaign to focus on the economy . 
The person who said AIG should n't be bailed out and then a day later said it should ? 
Who said his campaign manager did n't have ties to Freddie Mac when that was obviously NOT true ? 
I do n't see this as putting country first . 
I see it as a desparate political move to try to stop the bleeding from the McCain camp and to get out of a debate where he knows he is going to get hammered . 
And he is US senator who , out of a deep sense of responsibility , is going back to DC to do the job he receives a monthly check to do . '' 
Oh god , do you actually believe this sanctimonious horse sh \* t ? 
Had Obama asked to postpone the debate , you would have argued that he is running scared , unprepared , etc. etc. . 
Your spin just gets more and more incredible . 
Dems in Congress shot down the bill . 
Obama was Fannie 's 3rd highest $ $ $ recipient : Posted by : David123456 | September 24 , 2008 5:48 PM | Report abuse `` Once again , Obama is the grown-up . 
He can focus on a crisis AND explain where he stands '' Just not in real time . 
He is a hologram and CPU running Word Cloud . 
When the news cycle changes new talking points need to be uploaded by the Axelrod Master of Puppets . 
I saw an obvious McCain supporter say he 's doing this for the good of the country . 
PLEASE THAT 'S BS . 
He is n't delaying the debate for the good of the country , he 's delaying it for the good of his campaign . 
Last time I checked that 's not country first . 
You know what 's funny to , he claimed the reason for the smear campaigns were Obama would n't debate him . 
Now there 's a debate and he wants to cancel . 
I heard Obama rejected McCain 's plea . 
Let Bush handle this crisis and let 's see how these 2 react to the economy . 
On what planet does this statement make sense ? 
Is this the kind of thinking that consuming only right wing news sources creates ? 
Good lord , Obama is beating McCain by 25 points on the latest economy handling poll . 
Economists say that Obama has the correct read on the situation . 
If he went to DC Republicans would accuse him of pretending to be the president -LRB- already happened once this season so it 's not a stretch of imagination -RRB- ; he 's not going , so Republicans say he 's negligent . 
Republicans sure do say an awful lot . 
Unfortunately they also do some of it . 
The people will have something to say about that in November . 
This shows that a serious candidate with great multi-tasking skills will be needed to fix this fine mess over the next term . 
I agree that Congress and the Bush administration will need to handle this issue while the 2 candidates continue with their campaigns . 
-LRB- Besides , they should already know what the people want out of this deal -RRB- Posted by : ssanford00 | September 24 , 2008 5:47 PM | Report abuse Posted by : David123456 | September 24 , 2008 5:46 PM | Report abuse I think the multitasking comments are directly on point concerning McCain 's ability to lead . 
After all , even Jimmy Carter was able to take time to debate Ronald Reagan during the Iran Hostage Crisis . 
If the President can debate during a crisis , what does it tell us when a mere candidate for the job runs from debating ? 
I do n't think so . 
Getting stood up is harsh . 
Like about a million dollars and a lot of time . 
What happened to Jet air travel . 
If Obama handles this right , swear him in now , unless President Bush decides to run for a third term . 
Do n't tell him yet . 
You only get 3 strikes in baseball . 
We need to see these debates to help us decide who can get us out of the mess that Bush and his band of idiots have gotten us into . 
It 's just as important if not more for Americans to get the information they need to pick a new and effective leader . 
McCain 's fearful retreat from the debates under the guise of going back to DC to help , will do nothing but set the real work being done in Washington back weeks . 
What a pathetic coward he really is . 
obama was born in hawai'i , part of the united states . 
Yeah - too bad they 're attached to the side of his face . 
This is typical behavior -- feed the American people unadulterated propoganda and pretend it is truth . 
Hide from the scrutiny of the American people and take no questions . 
Gorbachev could have taught McCain a thing or two about transparency . 
John -- this is AMERICA ! 
Rush Limbaugh , Hannity and the rest of the Nazis would get a hernia calling for a dismissal . 
WTF is going on with McCain...hare-brained gimmick , this is very unpresidential . 
Were those votes not important ? 
This is the most important vote in modern times . 
Makes sense McCain would feel the need to be there . 
Obama , on the other hand , is a nobody who came out of nowhere whose only real interest has been running for the next political office . 
McCain should take my moniker . 
He really deserves it ! 
Not a big surprise Posted by : linda | September 24 , 2008 5:45 PM | Report abuse This is such a brilliant move by McCain -- he has totally flustered Obama . 
I bet Gov. Palin came up with the idea ... Posted by : JaxMax | September 24 , 2008 5:45 PM | Report abuse Ok Matt - let 's go to an article from the huffington post - there 's fair , objective journalism ... Why do n't you go to the obama website - I 'm sure the BS is even deeper there ... What a clown ... go smoke some pot and hug a tree . 
- The bailout bill -LRB- no matter what you think of it -RRB- could come up for a vote within the next day or so . 
- Senators have to be on the floor of the Senate to vote . 
They ca n't vote from their ` cell phone ' . 
John McCain felt it was important enough to go back to Washington to , you know , do his job as Senator . 
Obama would rather just keep publishing half-baked `` plans '' and talking , instead of doing . 
Once again , McCain makes Obama look like the career-campaigner-but-never-actually-do-anything politician that he is . 
I really do n't care , '' he said . 
`` I guess if I wanted expertise there -LRB- from the GOP ticket -RRB- , I 'd ask Sarah Palin . '' 
Barney Frank has always been a funny guy ... Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 5:44 PM | Report abuse Why even let the people who created the problem try and fix it ? 
There is NOTHING that says we must do something this week . 
That is the administration talking -- the same administration that is calling the shots on McCain 's campaign . 
Desperation - especially given today 's emergence of three sworn affidavits about a Palin affair . 
Know the facts before you speak you moron . 
You think this is a crisi ? 
Wait till they HAVE to bail out Social Security and Medicare , two items they have trashed even worse . 
Now that 's a stellar idea , do n't you think . 
The reasons are obvious : 1 . 
hussein has NEVER enacted or crafted ANY meaningful legislation during his entire `` career '' as a senator . 
He is n't likely to start now . 
-LRB- That 's called : `` gross inexperience '' . -RRB- 
hussein is an artificial creation of the loony-left liberal media with no more substance or depth than a Daffy Duck cartoon . 
Whenever there are no mirrors and no cameras , hussein vanishes . 
His existence therefore REQUIRES that he remain in front of a camera campaigning . 
-LRB- That 's called : `` chronic narcissism '' . -RRB- 
It is best to let competent leaders work on solving this crisis . 
Let `` sweetie '' hussein do the only thing he knows how to do : promote himself . 
He sure sounds scared every time he speaks . 
There have been 643 votes taken in the current Senate session : McCain has missed 412 of them . 
`` McCain has not voted in the Senate since April 8th . 
Since March , he has missed 109 of the last 110 votes . '' 
And to those trying to claim that it was the Dems who were in the pocket of Fannie and Freddie : `` John McCain 's campaign manager and Freddie Mac had what amounts to a secret half a million dollar lay-a-way plan . 
For almost three years and as late as last month , Freddie Mac made secret , monthly payments of $ 15,000 to Rick Davis s firm for a no-show job , apparently in exchange for providing special access to a future McCain White House . '' 
- Theodore M. Cole , MD Posted by : mot2win | September 24 , 2008 5:43 PM | Report abuse McCain to the rescue . 
Even tho he has admited he knows very little about economics he 's off to save the country . 
Who is it superman ? 
, The green lantern ? 
No it 's super economist McCain . 
The fact of the matter is the federal reserve bank is behind this just like they were behind the great depression and neither Obama or McCain are going to do anything about it . 
If this bailout does not collapse the dollar completly the only way we can save this country is by voting third party as they have not as yet been corrupted by the fed and it 's bevy of corporations . 
Suddenly , he wants to go to Washington to get something done . 
Oh , and it just so happens it was on the day a bunch of bad polls for him came out . 
Dems in Congress shot down the bill . 
Obama was Fannie 's 3rd highest $ $ $ recipient : Posted by : David123456 | September 24 , 2008 5:42 PM | Report abuse Oh , this is rich . 
Again , McCain is trying to avoid deadling head on with his campaign 's positions . 
Sarah Palin was good for a couple of weeks ' worth of distraction . 
Now , he 's concerned about the economy . 
NOW he 's concerned ? 
For the next debate , will McCain 's mother write him a `` my son is sick '' excuse note to get him out of that one ? 
I think he is working on the theory that if they are stupid enough to elect Bush twice they are stupid enough to fall for my stunts . 
One thing is clear John McStunt thinks Americans are stupid Posted by : unclesam | September 24 , 2008 5:42 PM | Report abuse David123456 - So the other 109 votes he missed - what about those ? 
Were those votes not important ? 
John McCain has been a United States senator for going on 30 years . 
It makes sense he 'd want to be back in the Senate for the most important debate and vote in modern times . 
Barack Obama is a politician running for president . 
Makes sense he would n't . 
The article quotes a desperate Obama campaign programmer : `` Obama campaign spokesman Robert Gibbs was more direct . 
The scene at the debate site in Oxford , Miss. . 
Friday night , he said , would consist of `` a stage , an audience , a moderator , and at least one presidential candidate . '' 
RESPONSE : This hysterical blabbertells you the REAL story of that Obama 's internal polls are documenting his defeat . 
Country first my a \*\* , McBush is hoping to dull the momentum Obama has gained and will continue to gain , especially after Bush speaks tonight -LRB- a little reminder to the folks of this country just which Party led us down this merry path -RRB- . 
Were those votes not important ? 
John McCain has been a United States senator for going on 30 years . 
It makes sense he 'd want to be back in the Senate for the most important debate and vote in modern times . 
Barack Obama is a politician running for president . 
Makes sense he would n't . 
Leaders are supposed to be able to handle many things at once . 
McCain could never be President , he ca n't handle pressure . 
All Obama can say is `` if they need me , they know where they can call me . '' 
And he is US senator who , out of a deep sense of responsibility , is going back to DC to do the job he receives a monthly check to do . 
To date I have n't seen any evidence that David Axelrod Puppet is even a real US citizen -- or sentient , for that matter . 
I do believe he is a life form of some sort . 
It makes sense he 'd want to be back in the Senate for the most important debate and vote in modern times . 
Barack Obama is a politician running for president . 
Makes sense he would n't . 
Most people will see through this political gimmick as an attempt to improve McCain 's image and avoid discussing the issues . 
I hope McCain does take his ads off ... Obama should run this in all of the swing states -LRB- and the list is growing : Posted by : Matt | September 24 , 2008 5:40 PM | Report abuse It is a shame that the Obama supporters are so Brainwahed with hate that they would trash and dishonor John Mccain after all the sacrafices he has given this country ... I guess that is a reflection of ignorance and gullibility in this country ... Posted by : Jerry | September 24 , 2008 5:40 PM | Report abuse Why even let the people who created the problem try and fix it ? 
There is NOTHING that says we must do something this week . 
That is the administration talking -- the same administration that is calling the shots on McCain 's campaign . 
Desperation - especially given today 's emergence of three sworn affidavits about a Palin affair . 
McCain jumped the gun and issued his own statement . 
I do n't want this guy as my president . 
He is the ultimate shrew . 
He made an exception for the religious forum on Saturday at Saddleback Church in Southern California ... It occurs to me that John McCain is as intellectually shallow as our current president . 
When asked what his Christian faith means to him , his answer was a one-liner . 
`` It means I 'm saved and forgiven . '' 
Great scholars have wrestled with the meaning of faith for centuries . 
McCain then retold a story we 've all heard a hundred times about a guard in Vietnam drawing a cross in the sand . 
Asked about his greatest moral failure , he cited his first marriage , which ended in divorce . 
While saying it was his greatest moral failing , he offered nothing in the way of explanation . 
Throughout the evening , McCain chose to recite portions of his stump speech as answers to the questions he was being asked . 
He has lived 71 years . 
Surely he has some thoughts on what it all means that go beyond canned answers culled from the same speech he delivers every day . 
He was asked `` if evil exists . '' 
His response was to repeat for the umpteenth time that Osama bin Laden is a bad man and he will pursue him to `` the gates of h \*\*\* . '' 
That was it ... One after another , McCain 's answers were shallow , simplistic , and trite . 
He showed the same intellectual curiosity that George Bush has -- virtually none . 
Where are John McCain 's writings exploring the vexing moral issues of our time ? 
Where are his position papers setting forth his careful consideration of foreign policy , the welfare state , education , America 's moral responsibility in the world , etc. , etc. , etc. ? 
John McCain graduated 894th in a class of 899 at the Naval Academy at Annapolis . 
His father and grandfather were four star admirals in the Navy . 
Some have suggested that might have played a role in McCain being admitted . 
His academic record was awful . 
And it shows over and over again whenever McCain is called upon to think on his feet . 
He no longer allows reporters unfettered access to him aboard the `` Straight Talk Express '' for a reason . 
He simply makes too many mistakes . 
Unless he 's reciting talking points or reading from notes or a TelePrompTer , John McCain is lost . 
He can drop bon mots at a bowling alley or diner -- short glib responses that get a chuckle , but beyond that McCain gets in over his head very quickly . 
I am sick and tired of the president of the United States embarrassing me ... George Bush 's record as a student , military man , businessman and leader of the free world is one of constant failure . 
And the part that troubles me most is he seems content with himself . 
He will leave office with the country $ 10 trillion in debt , fighting two wars , our international reputation in shambles , our government cloaked in secrecy and suspicion that his entire presidency has been a litany of broken laws and promises , our citizens ' faith in our own country ripped to shreds . 
Yet Bush goes bumbling along , grinning and spewing moronic one-liners , as though nobody understands what a colossal failure he has been . 
I fear to the depth of my being that John McCain is just like him . 
Do you recall who controlled the Senate and the House back then ? 
Hint , it was n't Obama 's party . 
If the GOP wanted this to go through , it would have done so . 
The Congress from 2000-2006 was controlled by the socialists in the Republican party who infested us from switching over from the Democratic side . 
Much like there were many conservtives who switched parties -LRB- Jim Webb -RRB- in 2006 to win the election in 2006 . 
The true Republicans have n't been in power since 1994 and that did n't last long . 
Is n't that what Hillary did when she knew she lost ? 
Bend over and kiss it good bye McCodger ! 
This way they can stop spouting about how badly McCain needs to get back to Washington and how noble it was of him to suspend his campaign . 
There were 109 other things that were voted on since he last sat in the senate -LRB- including the GI Bill -RRB- but I guess he only feels responsible enough to get back to DC when it 's politically expedient . 
I 'm not belittling this crisis , it 's got be quite scared\/enraged - I just find all McCain 's supporters reactions ironic . 
Why did n't anyone demand that he uphold his responsibilities sooner ? 
Leaders are supposed to be able to handle many things at once . 
McCain could never be President , he ca n't handle pressure . 
He can focus on a crisis AND explain where he stands -- and to the people he will represent , imagine that . 
When you 're president , you do n't get to call `` time out . '' 
It 's going to be nice to have a grown-up in the White House again . 
Let s start with the top ten Lobbying firms in Washington . 
You can find them here . 
They are : The data covers activity since 1990 . 
John McCain has been in the Senate for the last 18 years and he received a total of $ 221,754 from these firms and their employees . 
That works out to an average of $ 12,319.67 per year . 
Barack Obama has only been around for less than four years but he has already received more money than John McCain $ 259,022.00 . 
The Dems do protest too much . 
If the Wash Po poll today is accurate why would the Dems even care if McCain canceled the debate ? 
Obama is past tense and he knows it ... note that no one in Washington seeks any of his input in the crisis . 
When he was invited to debate McCain a couple of months ago , he was too narcissistic to share his spot light with anyone ... even now -- he is like a spoiled kid who wants things his way ... he acts like he is `` entitled . '' 
He 'd rather win an election than to go to his `` job '' in the Senate -- but do n't worry , he 'd probably vote `` present '' anyway . 
-- Debate his teleprompter -- I hear it once plagiarised a speech by Deval Patrick -- and gave no credit . 
It was the teleprompters fault of course . 
Do you recall who controlled the Senate and the House back then ? 
Hint , it was n't Obama 's party . 
If the GOP wanted this to go through , it would have done so . 
BTW , since when was it a good idea to rush into one of the Bush administration 's proposals ? 
What a joke !! Posted by : Brian Wegner | September 24 , 2008 5:35 PM | Report abuse Q : Which of these scenarios represents bipartisanship , and which represents political opportunism ? 
-LRB- A -RRB- Crisis arises . 
Rivals discuss matter privately , agree to cooperate . 
Rivals then hold joint press conference to present their plan . 
Nation sees united front . 
-LRB- B -RRB- Crisis arises . 
Rival M ignores highly unusual direct call from Rival O , strings him along for 6 hours , then sandbags everyone with a unilateral announcement reneging on a prior agreement , and publicly dares Rival O to follow suit or look bad . 
Bush White House piles on . 
Has he ever done anything that has n't benefited himself or his ambitions . 
The education board he served on came across the same problems that countless studies and reports have encountered - Obama came up with no answers . 
His platitudes are wearing thin . 
This is one trillion dollars -LRB- of your money and mine -RRB- that they are trying to steal from you . 
The overall fundamentals of the economy is strong . 
The US economy is around 14 trillion dollars overall . 
There is nothing McCain or Obama can do but influence the process . 
Go back to your GOVT 101 class . 
This legislation has to make it out of Committee first . 
Someone please tell McCain there are inventions such as cell phones , commuters , text msgs , etc. . 
You no longer need to BE somewhere to BE somewhere . 
He has missed 109 of the last 110 votes and nearly two-thirds of the Senate votes during the past two years , far more than anyone else . 
Dems in Congress shot down the bill . 
Obama was Fannie 's 3rd highest $ $ $ recipient : Posted by : David123456 | September 24 , 2008 5:33 PM | Report abuse Looks like McCain is good and scared of what he will have to answer to at Friday 's debate . 
BTW , since when was it a good idea to rush into one of the Bush administration 's proposals ? 
Obama has barely figured out where the men 's room is . 
You pompous little sh \* t. Posted by : swatkins1 | September 24 , 2008 5:33 PM | Report abuse So McCain is headed back to DC to show his support of the bailout . 
Since he helped cause it , I guess it 's only fair he would try to help fix it . 
Although , his way is billions to lobbyists and campaign contributors . 
McCain is trying to change the subject from his sagging poll numbers and his lie about Rick Davis . 
Now what does he do after Obama 's very eloquent response ? 
Go to the debate with his tail between his legs . 
His instincts are just awful . 
They desire to delay talking to the real American People until after the election . 
They do n't want us to see their real face and their lake of ability to run this country . 
------------ Cowards Posted by : Richard | September 24 , 2008 5:32 PM | Report abuse OBAMA STUCK ON STUPID -- DOES N'T UNDERSTAND DUTY OF A SENATOR Obama Lite is outraged that Senator McCain would actually participate in the crisis solution . 
Obama Lite -- there is not `` there '' there Posted by : JaxMax | September 24 , 2008 5:32 PM | Report abuse The thing is ... McCain is now the de facto head of the repug party ... just like Obama is of the demo party . 
They lead their Party , and what they say goes . 
McCain could , as in COULD HAVE ... developed a plan based on the next 2 day 's of digesting the President 's speech and the ability of Congress -LRB- getting a lot of mail -RRB- to pass the Bailout . 
Because ... BECAUSE , the entire Nation would be watching the debate ! 
This was his chance to be Presidential ... to pick up this biggest of all balls ever conceived and he PASSED !!!! He has nothing . 
He is holding the ball -LRB- football term -RRB- . 
How anyone , any true American could vote for the phony `` War Hero '' defies logic . 
he is a coward and a groveling politico . 
Something Bush Posted by : angriestdogintheworld | September 24 , 2008 5:32 PM | Report abuse What this really shows is that McCain is too old and decrepit to deal with more than one issue at a time . 
The presidency requires a grasp of multiple and continually changing issues . . 
McCain is obviously not up to a job as demanding as the presidency . 
What did the ` great one ' say ? 
`` If they need me , they know where they can call me . '' 
At least John McCain is going to Washington to try and get something done . 
Has he ever done anything that has n't benefited himself or his ambitions . 
The education board he served on came across the same problems that countless studies and reports have encountered - Obama came up with no answers . 
His platitudes are wearing thin . 
Democratic vice presidential candidate Sen. Joe Biden campaigns in Washington on Tuesday . 
Democratic vice presidential candidate Sen. Joe Biden campaigns in Washington on Tuesday . 
Both Biden and Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama voted to kill a Senate amendment that would have diverted federal funding for the bridge to repair a Louisiana span badly damaged by Hurricane Katrina , Senate records show . 
And both voted for the final transportation bill that included the $ 223 million earmark for the Alaska project . 
An amendment offered by Sen. Tom Coburn , R-Oklahoma , would have stripped the money appropriated to connect the Alaskan coastal city of Ketchikan to its airport on sparsely populated Gravina Island and diverted the money to Louisiana . 
But Biden andObama and 80 of their colleagues rejected the measure , an amendment to a massive 2005 transportation bill that funded thousands of projects across the country . 
Video Watch how Biden has blasted Palin `` That is probably the most disturbing element of this and the campaigning on the Bridge to Nowhere , '' said Bill Allison of the Sunlight Foundation , a taxpayer watchdog group . 
`` Because , yes , they had a chance to vote specifically against the Bridge to Nowhere in Alaska to redirect the money to people , to bridges and infrastructure damaged by Hurricane Katrina going in to New Orleans , and they chose not to . '' 
Palin , whom McCain chose as his running mate in August , has regaled crowds at the Republican convention and on the campaign trail with her declaration of `` Thanks , but no thanks '' for the bridge . 
But her conversion came after she became Alaska 's governor in 2006 and after the bridge became a national symbol of congressional waste . 
The record shows that she supported the bridge as a gubernatorial candidate , and Democrats have seized on the flip-flop , perhaps no one with as much relish as Biden . 
`` I got also a bridge I got to sell you here , and guess what , it 's in Alaska , and it goes nowhere , '' Biden mocked Palin on the campaign trail last week in Maumee , Ohio . 
And in Canton , Ohio , he tied it to McCain . 
`` If you look at it John McCain 's answers for the economy , and we 're in such desperate shape , is the ultimate bridge to nowhere . 
It 's nowhere , '' Biden said . 
`` It takes you nowhere . '' 
But while the applause line appealed to the Democratic faithful , it could come back to bite the Delaware senator . 
This year , Delaware has requested 116 congressional earmarks through Biden , its longtime senator , at a cost to taxpayers of $ 342 million . 
In an appearance on CNN 's `` American Morning '' with anchor John Roberts , Biden said that he had been open about those requests and that they all can be justified . 
`` Everyone has seen them , and we have no Lawrence Welk Museums and have no bridges to nowhere in Delaware . 
It 's all straight up , '' Biden said . 
Among his requests : $ 1 million for renovation of an opera house in Wilmington , another million for the construction of a children 's museum and thousands of dollars for a water park renovation in Lewes . 
`` I think opera patrons generally can afford to -- you can raise money for an opera house ; you can refurbish things a lot of different ways , '' Allison said . 
`` To have federal taxpaying dollars -- which is coming from people all over the country ; low-income , middle-income people , as well as the wealthy -- to go to pay for the renovation of something that is really a luxury for Wilmington ... There are far more vital projects that anyone could think of that needs money . 
You got health care . 
You got all other types of things . 
Instead , we are redirecting money to refurbish an opera house in Wilmington or to build a children 's museum . '' 
And Biden 's request includes a bridge that even the head of the Rehoboth Beach-Dewey Beach Chamber of Commerce says is not crucial at this juncture . 
The Indian River Inlet Bridge is a vital link between two popular beachfront towns : Dewey and Bethany . 
Without it , the estimated 30,000 summer visitors would have to travel an additional 35 minutes to get to the towns . 
`` We need a new bridge , and we are fortunate to be at a place where it is finally going to happen , '' said Carol Everhart , the chief of the Chamber of Commerce . 
The existing bridge has some erosion problems , and if it ever collapsed , Everhart said , it would cause an economic disaster in the community . 
But it 's safe for now . 
`` The bridge , as it is , is perfectly safe , '' she said . 
Still , Biden asked for $ 13 million to help shore up the existing bridge and begin construction of a new one . 
And that 's what troubles the Sunlight Foundation 's Allison . 
`` This bridge is not in any danger of collapse , and essentially what Sen. Biden is doing is saying , ` My state bridge gets the priority dollar even though it is not a priority project , ' '' Allison said . 
He said the Department of Transportation , rather than U.S. senators , should be deciding which bridges get priority funding in the country . 
That way , the bridges in the U.S. that need immediate repair would be first in line for the dollars needed to do the work . 
As he embarked on his presidential bid in 2007 , Obama said he would no longer ask for earmark projects . 
McCain , who has been a longtime critic of the process , does not seek any for his home state of Arizona . 
CNN asked Biden 's campaign whether it could ask the senator about his earmark requests and his votes on the Bridge to Nowhere . 
In response , a staffer e-mailed , `` You 've interviewed Gov. Palin re : her completely made up position on the Bridge to Nowhere right ? '' 
Dems in Congress shot down the bill . 
Obama was Fannie 's 3rd highest $ $ $ recipient : Posted by : David123456 | September 24 , 2008 5:30 PM | Report abuse Not a good move on McCain 's part . 
People will see through this immediately . 
Of course , it could n't be that McCain could see the deal falling apart in the last 24 hours . 
He 's only been in the Senate since 1982-he could n't actually know how to read the tea leaves could he ? 
`` McCain is a coward . '' 
Not worthy of a response except for amazement at the nerve of people who think text-messaging is the same thing as real combat . 
Note the Obamaniacs recycling of the same old shrieks without any sense of engagement with their opponents . 
Could it be that they do n't CARE about telling the truth ? 
Bottom line : only McCain will be taken seriously when he returns to the Senate to work on a solution . 
Obama has barely figured out where the men 's room is . 
All of you who are against me are rather disrespectful . 
You should understand that I am 72 years old and I have lost my agility . 
Actually , if you have been watching you 'll notice that I often forget stuff . 
I realized that Obama was pumelling me in the polls , so I thought of a quick gimmick to get him off my back . 
If you were in my shoes what would you do ? 
I am sensible enough to fight and run away , so I can fight another day . 
Would n't it be fun to hear two candidates talk about the issues without weeks of preparation ? 
Does that sound Presidential ? 
A President should get back to Washington , get his hands dirty , and get a deal done . 
The GOP wants to make the most out of this crisis to push through legislation with a minimal amount of review . 
Is n't this how we got into the Iraq war ? 
The presidency requires a grasp of multiple and continually changing issues . . 
McCain is obviously not up to a job as demanding as the presidency . 
This is certainly what has become of John McCain . 
Sadly , there are no elder statesmen in this country with the public authority necessary to quietly get him to shut up and be quiet . 
Instead of suspending the campaigns let 's move the election day up a month and get this over with . 
He knows full well that his presence and\/or Obama 's presence will turn this thing into a circus . 
He cares about nothing but winning , and he ca n't even do that . 
NEWSFLASH - YOUR CANDIDATE IS RUNNING FROM THE DEBATE , NOT THE OTHER GUY . 
Are you sure you are not Tucker Bounds ? 
The longest hail mary in the history of football or Mary 's ! 
This is such a punk move by McCain . 
He saw the latest polls and crapped his pants . 
He ca n't stand up to Obama and the press and explain his long term policy of being pro deregulation when it comes to financial institutions . 
He would look even worse trying to defend it before a live audience . 
Punk McNasty !! Posted by : C-Dog | September 24 , 2008 5:27 PM | Report abuse Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 5:27 PM | Report abuse I would love for one of the McCain supporters here to PLEASE tell me the LAST TIME McSame voted on ANYTHING in the senate ? 
I 'd like a date , the bill and how McCain voted . 
Dems in Congress shot down the bill . 
Obama was Fannie 's 3rd highest $ $ $ recipient : Posted by : David123456 | September 24 , 2008 5:27 PM | Report abuse OK , then ! 
lets just cancel the elections until we get the economy back in working order ! 
I vote to have the elections held next year when McCain and Palin feel more UP to the JOB of Multitasking ! 
However when it comes to manning up , and solving it , he leaves it up to someone else . 
There is always some justification , is n't there ?! Are we a nation of sheep ? 
If McCain says all is well with the world , then why do n't we all believe him ? 
lied when he suddenly remembered his little story about the POW guard who `` drew a cross with his foot in the dirt '' which DJ claimed gave him strength -LRB- and hopes serves as fast food for the hypochristains , talibangelists and evilgelicals -RRB- ... this story only shows up in DJ talk in the late 90 's ... more recently it is revealed that Dishonest John McCain was , understandably , a big fan of Gulag prisoner Aleksander Solzhenitsyn ... and it is FROM that man 's book that Dishonest John got his little parable . 
Both of them have no standing in the senate and house committees . 
Obama 's suggestion is correct , both candidates should work out an agreed guidance paper , which is not binding , but do reflect what the future president is willing to live with . 
Let McCain hide , keep Palin under wraps from the press . 
Sooner or later , I hope , the American people will get it . 
This is n't Syria . 
It is n't North Korea . 
It is n't Saudi Arabia . 
People who aspire to the highest offices in the land MUST be accountable and MUST answer questions from the press and MUST debate their opponents . 
McCain\/Palin 's smearing of the press and hiding from their questions is simply unpatriotic . 
You realize it 's just a debate , and we have a $ 14 trillion economy , right ? 
Barack HUSSEIN Obama should have accepted John SIDNEY McCain 's prior offer to weekly townhall meetings if this one debate was sooooo important to him . 
McCain says he does n't know much about the economy and relies on his team of experts . 
Brilliant people with a track record of success . 
Name-calling , whining , complaining , blaming , and never helping or coming up with a solution . 
When McCain wins - hunker down because all hell will break loose . 
I would expect rioting . 
The left is angry , bitter , and disrespectful -LRB- we saw that with the stunts displayed in St. Paul -RRB- . 
If obama were to win - the Republicans would n't be happy , but would deal with it . 
When McCain wins - the left is going to absolutely lose their minds -LRB- if they have n't already -RRB- . 
This is the stupidest thing I have heard during the whole campaign . 
`` I will have a debate , '' Obama sneered . 
`` I will debate my teleprompter , '' Obama threatened . 
Other suggestions included just having the media skip the process of asking questions and simply attack McCain with Obama to add snipes in a condescending fashion . 
Schumer sure showed us what a POLITICAL stunt looks like ... But Obama ... oh right , he could NOT Chair his subcommittee on Afghanistan because he was too busy campaigning ... and now he is too busy campaigning to go to WASHINGTON when the entire US economy might collapse ? 
I 'm a Democrat . 
Both Obama and McCain are U.S. senators . 
They belong in the U.S. senate RIGHT NOW . 
This way all the preparation wo n't be lost ; the McCain campaign will win points and not look like it 's pulling another calculated stunt and Americans will hear from the VP candidates directly . 
Otherwise , McCain is comes off as unstable , not what you want in a president . 
And since neither campaign takes a lot of off-the-cuff questions , the debates are critical to the process ; they provide voters a glimpse into the candidates , their positions and their ability to persuade . 
So let the debates begin ! 
Seriously , are you democrats all idiots ? 
I am a resident of Illinois and to this day Senator Obama has not served my interests one iota . 
Instead , he has been campaigning from the very start . 
Even now , on the brink of the greatest financial disaster since 1929 , he blasts Senator McCain for wanting to fix the problem now . 
No , Obama says , we do n't need to do any work now , let 's just let all of America lose money so that I can make someone else look bad while not actually doing anything to help myself . 
This is a crisis people . 
Crises need to be dealt with immediately , not 4 months from now on Innauguration Day . 
Talk about the financial crisis can wait for an hour or two . 
I know that the GOP says this election is n't about issues but not answering questions during debates or during interviews or town halls is ridiculous . 
First Palin , now McCain . 
I think I 'm gonna be a little sad when this campaign is over , ` cuz McCain is just so gosh-darned funny . 
Suspend his campaign ?? Does that mean that Romney can stand in for him ? 
Are we supposed to believe that McCain rushing back to Washington is going to fix this little mess we have here ? 
Sorta like he did w\/the Keating Five mess that he helped create ? 
Is this how the man plans to govern ? 
He certainly has a flair for theatrics , does n't he ? 
And , in keeping w\/that theme , I say that the show must go on ! 
And shifting the topic to the Economy is a fabulous idea - one that I 'm sure Obama would be happy to accommodate . 
McCain just wants to look like a real fixer , nothing to do with being afraid of the debate , the foreign policy debate , which naturally he will win , because on perception because most people already are convinced that is his natural strength . 
The race pulls back to even . 
He needs time to spin this . 
Thanks McBush for the wonderful eight years . 
My wages have gone down , I work longer hours and I have no healthcare ! 
Now that 's the kind of progress Republicans can believe in . 
If McCain 's in office , what do you think will get his attention ? 
Healthcare or the War ? 
The Economy or the War ? 
Education or the War ? 
McCain should say to Obama `` That 's fine if you want to debate , while you 're on a stage in Mississippi I 'll be in Washington actually getting things done . '' 
He has really put Obama in a corner . 
Wake up Democrats , you 're playing with the big boys now . 
Songbird really is a cowardly little punk . 
-LRB- A -RRB- Crisis arises . 
Rivals discuss matter privately , agree to cooperate . 
Rivals then hold joint press conference to present their plan . 
Nation sees united front . 
-LRB- B -RRB- Crisis arises . 
Rival M ignores highly unusual direct call from Rival O , strings him along for 6 hours , then sandbags everyone with a unilateral announcement reneging on a prior agreement , and publicly dares Rival O to follow suit or look bad . 
Bush White House piles on . 
This is an obvious Catch-22 to attempt ensnaring the Obama camp . 
He ca n't agree or McCain is seen as the one reaching across the aisle , he ca n't disagree or the Republicans will make him out to be an elitist who does n't care about America 's problems . 
It reminds me of Sarah Palin : where Obama could n't agree with the choice or she might appear actually qualified , but could n't disagree with the choice without become a sexist elitist . 
This is not about McCain being magnanamous , this is about McCain dropping in the polls and trying to make Obama look bad . 
McCain is a nasty , dirty loser . 
If he and Palin have n't drunk enough of the koolaid to be ready to spout off the neo-con talking points , then so be it . 
But the repubicans causing this disaster , and then trying to lay the blame on Obama is just disgusting . 
| September 24 , 2008 5:22 PM | Report abuse Remember , the country , we save from Saddem Hussien , and gave all that money . 
The country that has all that OIL , the War that was going to pay for itself , the WAR we were going to Welcome as LIBREATORS , the country that now has a surplus of 80 billions dollars . 
What happen to our friends , the countries we pay to join us in this FACITO in IRAQ . 
AS my mother told me when I was a young kid , THE ONLY FRIEND YOU HAVE IS A DOLLAR IN YOUR POCKET . 
In the 2008 Herbert HOOVER has return . . 
All they will see is McCain signaling his support for the bail out . 
This will just further associate McCain with the entire mess . 
As for McCain also trying to use this to claim he is concerned about the economy , again , same problem , most Americans see Wall Street as what is wrong with the economy . 
Not what will fix it . 
All they will see is McCain signaling his support for the bail out . 
This will just further associate McCain with the entire mess . 
As for McCain also trying to use this to claim he is concerned about the economy , again , same problem , most Americans see Wall Street as what is wrong with the economy . 
Not what will fix it . 
Honestly , the campaign 's financial advisors can meet with the administration 's advisors if additional ideas are needed . 
Nothing will get done if both candidates are present disagreeing with each other . 
It would be like a meeting at work with high level directors discussing issues at a high level view when detail level analysis is really needed to determine a course of action . 
Only the hardcore financial guys will figure this out -LRB- i.e. the guys that make recommendations to their respective candidates -RRB- . 
Gov. Ed Rendell of PA thinks Barack is a chickensh@t for not accepting the challenge of debating someone of equal political experience . 
See full coverage tonight on HDNet . 
Dems in Congress shot down the bill . 
Obama was Fannie 's 3rd highest $ $ $ recipient : Posted by : David123456 | September 24 , 2008 5:21 PM | Report abuse If the media does n't call McCain on this nonsense , they are not doing their job . 
He really seems to think he can win this election by getting little bounces out of ridiculous ads , strange VP picks , and now this . 
I thought the Palin pick was the most transparently political thing I 've ever seen . 
This is as bad , and possibly worse because it 's a little bit pathetic too . 
I mean , if we take him at his word , that means he thinks he does n't have the ability to work on the compromise and then hold a debate ! 
Is he afraid of getting tired or something ? 
Take me out of the game ! 
There 's no way he can refute the fact that he wanted to `` privatize '' Social Security , which is about all a LOT of seniors will have left . 
There 's NO WAY he can avoid being reminded that he was hip deep in the Keating 5 . 
Plus , and apparently and tragically , he must not have enough mental capacity to be able to focus on two important things at once . 
Grow up , stop playing politics and start doing this . 
Obama ca n't just vote `` present '' on this one . 
Grow up , stop playing politics and start doing this . 
Obama ca n't just vote `` present '' on this one . 
Do n't hide in Washington . 
The country want to see you and hear your way out of the crisis . 
This is your chance to tell the country that you are no coward but a safe pair of hands in crisis . 
Show us how inexperienced Obama is with your best weapon your experience . 
This is not leadership . 
No one in Washington needs McCain . 
He has n't even voted since April . 
Worse even than Bush . 
do you actually think when suspending his campaign they did n't know what other lobbyists are already publishing as per the following ? 
`` The deal on the `` bail out '' is 98 % done . 
Treasury has capitulated on almost every point . 
A draft is circulating on the Hill now . 
No one needs McCain to help do the remaining 2 % ... except the White House who has no standing on this matter on the Hill with either Democrats or Republicans . '' 
Come to think of it , that headline works for about every `` decision '' McCain has made these past couple of weeks . 
-LRB- A -RRB- Crisis arises . 
Rivals discuss matter privately , agree to cooperate . 
Rivals then hold joint press conference to present their plan . 
Nation sees united front . 
-LRB- B -RRB- Crisis arises . 
Rival M ignores highly unusual direct call from Rival O , strings him along for 6 hours , then sandbags everyone with a unilateral announcement reneging on a prior agreement , and publicly dares Rival O to follow suit or look bad . 
Bush White House piles on . 
This is the act of a desperate , unstable , dangerous man . 
He should suspend his campaign permanently and withdraw from the race , for his own mental well-being and the good of the country . 
Country First , remember , John ? 
Come a crisis McCoward comes a cryin ' . 
John McCain looks like a President today . 
In his announcement to temporarily suspend his Presidential campaign to return to Washington D.C. to work toward a bipartisan solution to the nation 's economic situation , Sen. McCain is demonstrating what real leadership is . 
John McCain is putting our country first and politics second . 
It 's the right thing to do . 
Sen. Barack Obama should follow Sen. McCain 's lead Posted by : k | September 24 , 2008 5:19 PM | Report abuse This is called `` Pulling a Palin out of the Hat . '' 
Just as he succeeded in stunting Obama 's post-convention bounce by picking Sarah Palin out of nowhere to be his running mate , now McCain comes out with this new political trick to stop his recent free-fall in the polls . 
What a convenient time to suspend the political campaign . 
Shamelessly , he does this under the guise of ` Country First ' to pressure Obama into also halting his campaign and postponing the debate . 
I hope public opinion does not allow Mac the Magician to pull another fast one . 
There will be higher ratings ... Posted by : JaxMax | September 24 , 2008 5:19 PM | Report abuse McCain should be prepared to debate any one at anytime if he has confidence in his positions and his track record . 
I thought knew what congressional panic looked like earlier today . 
We 'll see the stock market nose dive in response to this shameful lack of leadership . 
So now that McCain will actually have the opportunity to face Obama , he punks out claiming he has to get to Washington to mediate the financial crisis . 
Give me a break . 
The real answer is the polls are breaking Obama 's way , the media is no longer McCain 's base , the bloom is off Palin 's rose and even McCain 's aged eyes can see the writing on the wall . 
It 's over , McChicken , over . 
Hold the debate in Washington . 
Several hours later , John McCain took it upon himself to make a public announcement that HE was suspending his campaign , and made it seem like it was his idea because he cares so much about the economy that his campaign is not importance right now , and yada , yada , yada ... Come on , we 're not stupid . 
What are you afraid of ? 
Would n't it make more sense right now , to debate the issues and discuss gameplan for fixing this economic mess ? 
If he was that concerned , he would have gone back to Washington way before now . 
Maybe it s just me Posted by : 1rdyforchange | September 24 , 2008 5:18 PM | Report abuse `` Good for him . 
At least there is one adult running for the highest office ... '' Unlike jt who knows only how to copy\/paste . 
I 'm confused by this stock meltdown . 
I ca n't remember the address to any of my homes , either . 
Can we debate next month instead ? 
LOL what a gimmick . 
The idea of McCain leading the charge to fix the economy is hilarious . 
What 's he going to do ? 
Bomb , bomb , bomb it ? 
Mmmmm the current administration already tried that . 
There are other cooler , more qualified heads to fix this mess . 
The candidates need to stick to the debates . 
But McCain just blinked - and it is going to show that he is unprepared - all cluck and no meat . 
For all his mockery , could it be that McSame is a tad intimidated by the community organizer ? 
If McCain is incapable of both focusing on a crisis and explaining his position surrounding it -LRB- or , in his case , his ever-changing multiple positions -RRB- , he is n't qualified to be the president . 
Presidents have to be able to do more than one thing at a time . 
Obama wo n't be near as tough as Putin . 
Prove to us all that you 're ready . 
Wants cage match instead of debate . 
PA Gov. Ed Rendell to comment soon . 
Watch Debate\/Match in full-HD on HDNet Posted by : DanRather | September 24 , 2008 5:16 PM | Report abuse One key thing will be what McCain does in Washington , so far he has not been -LRB- or Obama -RRB- any sort of key player in this . 
Send Sarah Palin in to handle Obama !!! ---------- Posted by : PALIN FOR PRESIDENT | September 24 , 2008 5:16 PM | Report abuse How the Democrats Created the Financial Crisis ??? You 've got to be kidding ? 
It 's time they all take ownership of the mess this country is in all in the name of corporate greed and profits . 
McCain keeps trying every political trick in the book - I hope republican 's start to see him for the `` flip flopper '' he is . 
Let him go back to Washington , it 's about time he earns his keep . 
Oh , If you 're parent try this - Kids , I will let you self regulate with no consequences to any wrong actions . 
Let us know how that works out . 
But there is a simple response . 
Obama should demand that the debate go on . 
The presidency is a demanding job , and you must be able to handle many complex tasks simultaneously , especially in times of crisis . 
If senator McCain can not find an hour of time to go across the street to the studio for a debate , then he is not well organized and is not leading properly . 
In times of crisis the president ca n't duck and hide , he must be visible and coherent . 
Focus the debate on the economy and kill two birds with one stone . 
You 're kidding , you 've got to be kidding . 
You must be one of the people who 've made enough money over the past eight years that you 've benefitted from Bush 's policies , which McCain intends to continue - so you 're fine with how things are working in this country as they stand right now . 
You 're happy with the lack of accountability , oversight and regulation ? 
You 're happy with the fact that the average tax payer is going to foot the bill to all these private companies whose share holders and CEOs have made millions while the average worker has seen their wages stagnate or fall ? 
We want to know how both candidates will deal with the issue going forward NOW . 
Do n't jerk us around . 
We are already angry , no , enraged ! 
Having worked all our lives , sacrificing , scrimping , saving , we thought we saved just enough . 
To make the matters worse , McCain is playing this such transparent desperate games . 
Explain your votes to deregulate , deregulate , R. Davis payment from Fannie , Freddie or whatever , your role in S&L scandal , etc. . 
We want to know . 
So if a similar situation arises tomorrow when he is the President , is he going to stop attending to other issues ? 
He 's been hopping from this end to the other end of the country daily but he ca n't hop back in time for the debate ? 
What a bunch of BS he and his supporters are enacting ? 
Obama was right in saying that the debate is the most important thing that the people needs to watch . 
The candidates owes it to the people . 
Yesterday , Palin was running away from the media and now McCain is running away from the debates . 
I just ca n't believe there are still some people who are supporting this fool . 
he 's not ready to give his presentation so he asks the teacher for more time . 
Does anyone see the sick irony here ? 
Shakespeare couldn t write this stuff ! 
Mccain are you strong enough , are you mentally fit , and is your health capable to endure the demand for the job ? 
By the way , the proposal was only three pages long !!!! HOW LONG COULD IT TAKE TO READ ? 
ARE MCCAIN 's EYES THAT BAD ? 
One massive failure after another . 
err ... I mean true Americans out there who want to buy some Bear-Stearns stock . . 
We republican 's never back down . 
Johnny Mac can go to DC and we can have Sarah Palin vs. Joe Biden . 
That will let us debate Friday and increase the VP Debates to 2 !! Good idea . 
While he might think it makes it look like he cares about this issue , what it really implies is that the man ca n't do 2 things at once . 
As president , he or Obama will have days where there are handling 10 crises at once . 
Do you mean to tell me that McCain ca n't handle a day of working on the bailout , and then do a debate at night ? 
He 'd better suck it up and show some fortitude if he wants to be my president . 
No response yet from the Obama camp . 
You ca n't make this stuff up ! 
These republicans are giving comedian all around the world never ending material ! 
Why no send Palin to Washington to straighten out this while you are debating then the two of you can switch . 
An Obama campaign source confirmed the call and said that McCain returned his call six hours later , and accepted the concept and suggested the two of them return to Washington to join the negotiations . 
The source says that Obama told him that he would do that only if negotiators saw it as useful . 
According to the Obama source , soon after they ended the call , McCain announced he was suspending his campaign and returning to Washington . 
What is Balls so scared of ? 
She is such a phoney . 
I ca n't believe you admire that corrupt and lying piece of trash . 
Have the camera not take close-ups . 
Use the shot that shows the empty chair next to you . 
If that crowd in DC needs you they 'll call you . 
YOU ARE NEEDED AT THAT DEBATE !!! He needs to hide . 
And that is why Rove is trying this scam . 
Now instead of backing Obama in a corner , McCain is in it . 
Carl , Carl , Carl , this was not your finest trick . 
You 're slipping son . 
By the way , How 's Scooter doing these days ? 
Is he making a few bucks while he waits for GW to DISGRACE HIMSELF AGAIN ? 
He could have made this announcement on Monday or last week , but waited two days before the debate . 
Senator McCain , I no longer support you as you and Governor Palin have shown no backbone and have never stated your proposed policies to Americans . 
mccain is in over his head and he ca n't hack it - so he call a crisis after 8 years of his parties economic leadership . 
And why ca n't he call on his VP choice to run the campaign while he 's gone - because she ca n't do anything off script as the UN meetings clearly showed . 
He 's not a leader and he knows it . 
The Republicans are n't going for it , they do n't want any regular people to get anything . 
They do n't want to cut back on CEO salaries . 
No bailouts for normal people , just the big co 's ! 
Rethugnicans are all liars and thieves ! 
You voted for Bush , especially in 2004 , YOU SHOULD HAVE YOUR VOTING RIGHTS TAKEN AWAY . 
THIS IS DEREGULATION AT ITS FINEST ! 
He is now trying to bully a proposal through Congress to reduce further damage to the Bush presidency -LRB- way too late for that -RRB- or to his prospects in November . 
By trying to delay the debate , McCain gets to buy time , help push through some half-baked plan through congress , and then turn around and proclaim his leadership on economic issues . 
There is nothing but selfish self-interest at work here . 
If the economy , or the well-being of the average American were of any concern to McCain has had more than enough opportunity to demonstrate that . 
Let 's hope the Obama campaign , and the American people do n't fall for this latest McCain subterfuge . 
Kind of hard for my head to spin that fast . 
If we are in such dire straights , I think a debate about the future leadership could not be more timely and if anything , the schedule should be moved up ! 
He 's not fooling me for a second . 
McCain 's campaign and his inescable history of advocacy for deregulation and the wealthly is what is in crisis as this country wises up . 
That 's why he picked here - to stand in for him when he ca n't be there . 
That way he can handle Washington and she can debate with Obama or Biden , either one . 
I WANT A DEBATE FRIDAY !! Posted by : Dunder | September 24 , 2008 5:12 PM | Report abuse Yeah , your candidate 's positions have n't changed ... I mean McCain has always been for regulation , right ? 
You 're a sheep just like these other brainless Republican automatons that are too cowardly to accept responsibility for what they have done to this country . 
But to use the financial crisis as an excuse for canceling it was a stupid stunt . 
McCain admittedly knows nothing about economics and can not be helpful in the difficualt negotiations of the Banking Committee , the Fed , and the Treasury Secretary . 
He has no business introducing his campaign politics into the Senate . 
THE END Posted by : WTF | September 24 , 2008 5:12 PM | Report abuse McCain wants to delay the election to next year as a show that he really-REally-REALLY ! 
And have been doing so for the past 8 months while Senators McCain and Obama have been campaigning ? 
How about the hundreds of bills that were debated and passed\/voted down this year that had a direct impact on daily lives of every day Americans and not just the wealthy and their investment portfolios . 
Senator McCain can take a few hours out his schedule to travel to the Gulf region to snap photos and a throw out a few sound bites before hurricane Gustav hit , but he ca n't take a few hours to explain to the country his vision for the direction of our country in the next four years ? 
Oh , wait , could it be those falling poll numbers ? 
He does n't even understand what the problem is . 
Last week he stated that it was all Barack Obama 's fault . 
Please tell me how McCain 's presence in Washington is going to change anything . 
Still a hero wannabee . 
Anything to get out of discussing actual policy . 
Anything to avoid a discussion of McCain 's involvement with previous banking scandals . 
He 's already behind by 10 points in Colorado and it 's getting worse each day . 
He either needs to debate policy or he needs to pack it in because this smoke and mirror baloney is n't working . 
What happened to straight talk ? 
Now it 's No Talk . 
The contrast between him and runaway McCain could not have been more CLEAR !!! Posted by : Libratine | September 24 , 2008 5:10 PM | Report abuse FEDERAL HOUSING ENTERPRISE REGULATORY REFORM ACT OF 2005 For years I have been concerned about the regulatory structure that governs Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac known as Government-sponsored entities or GSEs and the sheer magnitude of these companies and the role they play in the housing market . 
OFHEO s report this week does nothing to ease these concerns . 
In fact , the report does quite the contrary . 
OFHEO s report solidifies my view that the GSEs need to be reformed without delay . 
I join as a cosponsor of the Federal Housing Enterprise Regulatory Reform Act of 2005 , S. 190 , to underscore my support for quick passage of GSE regulatory reform legislation . 
If Congress does not act , American taxpayers will continue to be exposed to the enormous risk that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac pose to the housing market , the overall financial system , and the economy as a whole . 
I urge my colleagues to support swift action on this GSE reform legislation . 
He is a public servant first and a candidate second . 
However , this country will be better served by watching the two men , one of whom will lead us through the next crisis , debate their views on this one . 
Therefore , Obama 's counter-proposal should be to scrap the national security topic and have this Friday 's debate focus on the economy , the most important issue in this country right now . 
Obama has said nothing about the possible outcome of the Administration 's proposal but every news agency is reporting that the prospects for the propsal are getting grim . 
American families ' futures are at risk and it sounds like McCain is trying to do something while Obama is trying to do nothing . 
He 's just like Bush and that goddamned ranch . 
But , he is not up for the job to be President . 
I believe his first mistake was choosing Palin for VP . 
There are many qualified women in the GOP . 
Palin is not one of them ... Now he 's playing politics with the economy . 
He and Palin refuses to answer questions from reporters ... Obama shines over McCain in every area . 
We need a true leader , which we have n't had for 8 years ... Posted by : jh1949 | September 24 , 2008 5:09 PM | Report abuse re : Posted by : MJ | September 24 , 2008 4:57 PM McCain : Let 's go to work and fix this . 
Obama : I 'd rather just talk about it , er , uh , duh , uh , call me if you need me , I have to prepare for the debate . 
dude ... obama made the offer for a joint release , and mccain jumps on six hours later as if it 's all his idea . 
he admitted the other day that he had n't even read the proposal ! 
`` As recently as yesterday , when a reporter asked him about his position on the Bush administration s financial proposals , McCain said , I have not had a chance to see it in writing . 
I have to examine it . '' 
Why not relocate the debate to Washington ? 
I hope Obama continues without him . 
I know he 's keeping up with events , and being prepared for scheduled debates at the same time . 
Have a debate , and try as hard as he can , to think about the economy ! 
Bush EVEN DISAGREES WITH THE SAD OLD SACK . 
MCDOOM IS MORE LIKE IT ! 
Ric Davis , has no involvement in Fannie and Freddie , really ? 
IF YOU DO N'T CONSIDER $ 2 MILLION DOLLARS INVOLVEMENT ! 
WHAT A BUNCH OF ROVIAN LIARS MCROVE , OR JOHN BUSH , IS TRYING TO LOOK PRESIDENTIAL . 
WELL , HIS GOOSE IS COOKED , IT 'S ALL OVER T.V. ! 
EVERYONE KNOWS OBAMA CALLED MCBUSH FIRST , WHICH WAS A SUGGESTION FROM TOM COBURN , REPUBLICAN , OKLAHOMA , SO MCGOO IS AN IDIOT ! 
CHRIS MATTHEWS JUST SAID , MCCAIN IS IN DETERIORATING MODE ! 
MCINSANE , IS FALLING APART , BEFORE OUR VERY EYES ! 
HE NEEDS TO MAKE PALIN WALK AROUND NUDE ! 
We 're not going to miss him or his joke of a running mate . 
Or did he talk in circles -LRB- barry clearly loves the sound of his own voice -RRB- and say absolutely nothing . 
And people keep forgetting that obama is running for Pres. - Palin is running for VP . 
Plus she 's not speaking to the biased media because they treating her unfairly - while they are falling all over obama . 
Voting obama may be the popular to do , but not the smart thing to do . 
obama is all talk and no action . 
If you believe that he is going to do all the things he claims - you 're crazy - look at his record , it does n't add up . 
I.e. , it 's a stunt . 
A very , very transparent stunt . 
I.e. , it 's a stunt . 
A very , very transparent stunt . 
McCain has missed more votes than Obama . 
I guess lying has become a habit with you people . 
If he wants to be back in the Senate , then he needs to drop out of the campaign all together and get back to his day job . 
There are enough folks in House and the Senate that can handle this problem . 
Johnny Boy is not going to make a difference by going to Washington . 
Otherwise , he needs to get back on that campaign trail . 
It has become clear that if he ca n't run his campaign while at the same time helping with this issue , then he does not need to be President of this country . 
I am sure in this day and age of modern communication that they can provide any input needed . 
Also as Obama pointed out they both have jets at their disposal to get to Washington as needed . 
I suspect Obama was pushing a joint action only to have McCain jump at the chance to upstage Obama . 
As several have said in the news the last thing this economic crisis needs is for it to be made more of a political football . 
He will find this gimmick to be favorable to him and he will stop obama 's momentum . 
McCain was the darling of the media until he hired Karl Rove 's goons and went along with their plan to win the election by pitting ` reg ` lar ` murikans '' against the `` liberal elite media '' . 
When you 've made unfettered access your political signature for decades , then freeze reporters out for over a month and start calling them names ; when your vaunted `` straight talk '' express becomes the `` no talk '' express ; there 's a price tag attached . 
McCain is paying it now . 
he 's dancing in so many directions at once , the pratfall here is going to be simply epic . 
obama should just sit back and say , ` the guy 's been out of his chair since April , and now he wants to go back ? 
to set things straight in our economy , which has `` strong '' fundamentals ? 
The NYT and libs are grasping at straws while they circle the drain ... Posted by : Don | September 24 , 2008 5:02 PM I lve how WRONG you are . 
I love how little informed you are . 
Care to brush up on the truth ? 
The total listed for Obama is $ 126,349 a tiny fraction of the approximately $ 390 million his campaign has raised , according to the Center for Responsive Politics . 
The list shows McCain has received a total of $ 21,550 from Fannie and Freddie employees . 
The list includes donations of at least $ 200 from those who receive paychecks from Fannie and Freddie . 
It also includes donations from political action committees pooled contributions from employees . 
Obama decided early in his presidential run not to accept PAC contributions , but the Center for Responsive Politics ' list includes all contributions for members of Congress dating back to 1989 including Obama and McCain 's Senate campaigns . 
The New York Times has published a separate list looking at contributions from `` directors , officers , and lobbyists for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac '' for the 2008 campaign cycle . 
That list using figures from the Federal Election Commission shows McCain receiving $ 169,000 , while Obama received only $ 16,000 . 
And by the way Franklin Raines had nothing to do with ANY of the money from Freddy and Fanny to EITHER campaigns A list of employee contributions including lobbyists and directors shows McCain getting more . 
And far more important is this ... One of the giant mortgage companies at the heart of the credit crisis paid $ 15,000 a month from the end of 2005 through LAST MONTH to a firm owned by Senator John McCain s campaign manager . 
Mr. Davis s firm , Davis & Manafort , had been kept on the payroll because of Mr. Davis s close ties to Mr. McCain , the Republican presidential nominee , who by 2006 was widely expected to run again for the White House . 
The Neocon-Fascist Republicans and DINO-Fascist Democrats in Washington just do n't get it . 
WE THE PEOPLE are not going to let them steal our money anymore . 
Trying to stifle debate including debate between the two leading presidential candidates at a time like this sends a clear message to WE THE PEOPLE . 
Our government is going to continue to do whatever the hell it wants to do . 
It 's time to break out the pitchforks and liberty torches . 
There 's a revolution to be started ! 
There are traitors that must address our grievances . 
There 's a country that must be rebuilt . 
Having a debate tommorrow is a responsibility . 
Go to Washington if you think you should . 
I think that coming in late will add to the confusion . 
But whatever you do show up in Oxford , MS tomorrow night . '' 
This is the most ignorant statement that I have ever seen . 
Being a SENATOR and doing your sworn duty for the citizens of your state is your responsibility . 
Libs are soooo 180 degrees of phase ... Obama has shirked his duty as Senator for 50 % of his Senate career , maybe he should try being one for a couple of days ... Posted by : Don | September 24 , 2008 5:07 PM | Report abuse Yes Fred you are correct ... and Democrats won the Congress 2 years saying they could fix all the problems and look at us now . 
Your Savior of a candidate says he can fix everything yet can not even go back to D.C. and do hios job as a Senator Posted by : shane | September 24 , 2008 4:50 PM Shane , your president has vetoed every single good thing this Congress has tried to do . 
If you party was in power , this bailout bill would have been approved and signed on Sunday night with no debate . 
Pull your head out of the sand and get a clue . 
When Bush took office we had a budget surplus and a 5 trillion dollar debt . 
Now our budget is billions in the red and we 're borrowing money from the Chinese to bailout your buddies on WallStreet so they can keep their homes in the Hamptons . 
Your traitorous leader Bush -LRB- with McCain help -RRB- sold or traded away the guts of the working\/middle class savings and futures to the Commies who now demand that the dollar be devalued . 
I understand the Chinese will YouTube the many videos they have of McCain when , during his stay at the Hanoi Hilton , he would bark like a dog , bray like a donkey or whatever they demanded , while crawling around smeared in his own feces . 
As `` a '' senator , McCain has far less influence than as a candidate for President . 
Barbara Boxer can shout all she wants but when Obama speaks , people will listen . 
The purpose of President is to FACE issues , not run away from them . 
THAT is nothing but cowardice . 
It 's extremely important that both campaigns should proceed as scheduled so we can have a real change in leadership next Jan. . 
I do n't see how a financial crisis disables a candidate from carrying on with his campaign . 
This guy has already been given too much leeway in defining the terms -LRB- he has been saying experience matters until he chose Palin -RRB- and setting the tone of the election -LRB- which is nasty -RRB- . 
Enough about his silliness . 
So no need to stall , or turn this into a political item . 
This looks like crap , especially if it is true the Obama called him first this am and offered a joint statement , and then Johnny called a presser to announce his suspenders . 
Lame Posted by : Swank | September 24 , 2008 5:06 PM | Report abuse The debate is around 9pm , I do n't see how that would have any conflict with what 's going on . 
Even if it did the debate is just as important . 
Do n't be coward get on the stage and get your whooping Mr. Maverick no need to run and hide you coward . 
In short , the more a person is afraid of mice and spiders , the more likely he is to vote for Republicans . 
He must think the rest of us are really that dumb . 
A debate on this Friday instead of next Friday is more important than throwing away 700 billions ! 
Now I know what all the enlightened followers of The One are like ! 
Vote McCain , at least he does not inspire cult followings . 
Sarah Palin is not a US Senator and need not be on Capitol hill to work out a well thought out solution to this financial crisis so she can stand in for John McCain at the debate on Friday night in Mississippi . 
I see why Senator Obama does feel the need to put America first and suspend his campaign . 
His goal is to continue the crisis and hope for it to worsen until November 5 then he knows the media who have been talking down the economy for seven years to prepare his way will suddenly become cheerleaders of the economy and suddenly proclaim `` Wow our economic future is bright Americans please start buying again . '' 
A televised lie is still a lie . 
I say let Wall Street crumble . 
He is running away from his responsibility to the American people . 
We want to hear directly from him in a live debate about the great issues of domestic and foreign policy that affect our nation 's future . 
If McCain is incapable of participating in an hour-long debate then he is unfit for the presidency . 
We need someone who is strong , confident , willing to act with deliberation and insight in a crisis . 
In today ' travesty McCain has revealed himself as a coward who puts crass political ambition above the needs of our nation . 
Over the last month , McCain proved that he was a liar . 
Now we see that he is a coward too . 
What a dishonorable man . 
Or , for that matter , do any task . 
Do you people have any idea how ugly you look ? 
I am particularly pissed by his making this announcement unilaterally and not mentioning anything about the `` country first '' proposal that Obama has privately raised with him earlier . 
His public and unilateral announcement is in stark contrast with Obama 's thoughtful and fair handling of the whole matter which is seek an agreement with your opponent first before you make any public announcement . 
By not mentioning Obama 's earlier gesture and making a unilateral announcement , it 's so obvious that McCain is just trying to score political points ; his so-called `` country first '' is once again a joke . 
Does that sound like McCain is n't crucial to you ? 
Either McCain or Obama will be the next president of this country . . 
what is decided in the next couple of days will be the overriding factor on how they will be able to run this country . . 
and you do n't think it is crucial that they be apart of it ? 
Ignore the Palin interview tonight . 
He literally ca n't handle two things at once . 
He is mentally and intellectually -LRB- and morally -RRB- incapable of leading . 
How can we expect him to be president when he becomes overwhelmed so easily ? 
He does n't EVEN DO the job he was `` hired '' to do , and now he ca n't debate with Obama ? 
He 's just like Bush and that goddamned ranch . 
McCain needs to man up and take part in the debate as scheduled . 
We do n't see Obama backing down now , do we ?? Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 5:04 PM | Report abuse Excellent idea ! 
Yeah , let 's move that one up . 
Palin is busy speed-dating `` world leaders . '' 
Palin is the one with the balls on that ticket . 
This is about as serpentine and Byzantine a load of malarkey as I 've ever seen shoveled out of a horse barn ! 
Who 's buying it ? 
Certainly not this voter and you should n't either ! 
If he wants to be back in the Senate , then he needs to drop out of the campaign all together and get back to his day job . 
Otherwise , he needs to get back on that campaign trail . 
On with the debate . 
Who does McCain think we are , Fred Flintstone ? 
We are not stupid , Mr. McCain . 
You do n't want to debate because you have nothing to say . 
if you do not show up for the debate , you will have shown this country your true character . . 
Dont dare try to use this financial fiasco our country is going thru to your advantage ! 
I 've fallen into my bowl of corn flakes . 
The NYT and libs are grasping at straws while they circle the drain ... Posted by : Don | September 24 , 2008 5:02 PM | Report abuse Yes Fred you are correct ... and Democrats won the Congress 2 years saying they could fix all the problems and look at us now . 
Your Savior of a candidate says he can fix everything yet can not even go back to D.C. and do hios job as a Senator Posted by : shane | September 24 , 2008 4:50 PM Umm you do realize that the Dems dont have the votes to get anything done right ? 
You do realize that in the last two years that filibusters are the highest in US history over the shortest period in time in US History ? 
You do realize that Bush only vetoed ONE single bill as president before the Dems got their slim majority in the house and senate ? 
you do realize that he now vetoes EVERY bill sent to him that manages to clear the house or senate ? 
You do realize that being a president requires being able to multi-task and that solving this crisis and still making yourself available to the American poeple to decide on an election are not mutually exclusive ? 
Now he 's going to solve it ? 
Is he going to bring along Phil Gramm too ? 
If he does , I 'll be liquidating my portfolio on Friday . 
On 11\/19\/93 , McCain took to the Senate floor to support an early financial deregulation bill and decry what he called `` the tremendous regulatory burden imposed on financial institutions . '' 
The guy who now claims to be the trustbusting Teddy Roosevelt back then lamented `` the rapidly increasing regulatory burden imposed on banks is to cause them to devote substantial time , energy and money to compliance rather than meeting the credit needs of the community . '' 
Ten years later , McCain was bragging to the Associated Press that `` I have a long voting record in support of deregulation , '' and to CNN that `` I am a deregulator . 
I believe in deregulation . '' 
And , during this year 's presidential campaign taking place in the shadow of financial meltdown , McCain was only months ago insisting on PBS that `` we need less government -LRB- and -RRB- less regulation '' and that `` I 'm always for less regulation . '' 
`` The issue of economics is not something I 've understood as well as I should . 
I 've got Greenspan 's book . '' 
-- as quoted in the Boston Globe , Dec. 17 , 2007 `` The fact is that I have agreed with President Bush far more than I have disagreed . 
And on the transcendent issues , the most important issues of our day , I 've been totally in agreement and support of President Bush . 
-- `` Meet the Press '' interview , June 19 , 2005 Posted by : ripley | September 24 , 2008 5:02 PM | Report abuse you got the verb tense wrong in your headline . 
he 's no suspending until tomorrow . 
This smacks of political opportunism and showboating in all the wrong ways . 
If he was serious about this , he would have suspended his campaign days ago to make sure tomorrow 's deadline is met . 
McCain has pulled this straight out of the Bush playbook for starting the war in Iraq , and passing the Patriot Act before that . 
This is disgusting , vile , naked political ambition contrary to patriotic ideals . 
Bush 's men , and McCain 's actions today are nothing short of treason . 
A week ago there was no economic crisis according to them . 
Now there is , and it needs to be handled their way , right now , or America is doomed . 
That is tripe , and we Americans know it . 
Bush and McCain = Traitors to America . 
The debate is the opportunity for the American people to see these guys outside of their political adds . 
They can take a few hours out of one day of the week to handle that ; even relocating the debate to DC . 
McCain is dodging the debate , and exacerbating the crisis that he refused to acknowledge as recently as this week . 
He is a complete fraud . 
Millions of voters were hurt by this over the last year as their mortgages crushed them , and their jobs were shipped overseas . 
McCain clearly only cares now because Cindy 's vast fortune , and the fortunes of his top aids\/lobbyists took a hit this week . 
I guess you 're mad that once again John McCain made the first move on an important issue -LRB- unlike obama and his misguided poll driven responses -RRB- . 
Obama made the first move , doofus , McSame sat on Obama 's call for 6 hours then pulled this stunt . 
How about using this crisis as cover for McCain 's lack of economic leadership and courage . 
Coward , cheater and Liar ... now that 's a candidate to be proud of . 
In case you forgot , here 's the quote : `` At 8:30 this morning , Senator Obama called Senator McCain to ask him if he would join in issuing a joint statement outlining their shared principles and conditions for the Treasury proposal and urging Congress and the White House to act in a bipartisan manner to pass such a proposal , '' Obama spokesman Bill Burton said in a statement . 
`` At 2:30 this afternoon , Senator McCain returned Senator Obama 's call and agreed to join him in issuing such a statement . 
The two campaigns are currently working together on the details . '' 
Rivals who sincerely intend to present a united front get together first behind the scenes and then make a joint announcement . 
That 's what Obama was trying to arrange by calling McCain directly at 8:30 this morning . 
Funny how he ` could n't be reached ' . 
Instead , John McCain , having moved from `` fundamentals of our economy are strong '' to `` worst crisis since 9\/11 '' all by himself in the space of a week , figured he 'd start off the ` bipartisan cooperation ' by saying `` here 's the plan , take it or leave it '' . 
The last time McCain was in DC to vote was five months ago . 
Last week he thought the fundamentals of the economy were strong . 
The next day he said we were in crisis . 
Now he 's going to swoop in and save the day ? 
Actually , I 'd rather this self-professed economic genius stay away so that the plan does n't get made any worse . 
By the way , is Mac going to bring along PHIL `` WHINER '' GRAMM too ? 
McCain is not the senate president , he is not the speaker of the house , he is not the majority leader and thank God he is not the president . 
There are atleast 400 people working on this bill from both parties . 
What is McCain going to do in two days ? 
Whip everyone in to shape ? 
The only thing he needs to do is be available to cast his ONE vote . 
This is pure grand standing on his part and if you buy this then you are the fool ! 
Can you not handle more than one thing in one week ? 
Wow , the whole country should shut down because there is something going on Wall Street . 
Just think , would McCain be able to multi-task if we go to another war or have crisis hit the US ? 
All of this reminds me of someone faking a sickness to postpone an exam . 
McCain presently you are only one voice of 100 -- you are not presently president . 
I really find it hard that you are going to add any clarity to the situation and the advisors you are looking into for this are already addressing the problem . 
Similarly , Rubin\/Summers and team of advisors are coming to the aid of the democrats . 
I echo the call to stop grandstanding . 
Obama hardly remembers his way back to the senate and wants to issue a statement rather than do anything , like say - lead ? 
The choice to vote for McCain could not be more clear . 
That candidate is not Barack Obama . 
Having a debate tommorrow is a responsibility . 
Go to Washington if you think you should . 
I think that coming in late will add to the confusion . 
But whatever you do show up in Oxford , MS tomorrow night . 
Where do these guys come from ? 
GOOD BYE JOHN MCCAIN Posted by : Belinda Jackson | September 24 , 2008 4:58 PM | Report abuse In the grand scheme of things , the presidential debates are \* much \* more important than a mere $ 700 billion dollars . 
Bush has wound up costing us four times that amount , by the time Fannie , Freddie , AIG and his vanity war are totted up . 
Sure , Rome is burning , but the first thing to do is tackle the s \*\* theads who are running around torching whatever is n't burning . 
Obama : I 'd rather just talk about it , er , uh , duh , uh , call me if you need me , I have to prepare for the debate . 
-LRB- if it was not about politics , why did n't McCain make a joint statement instead of grandstanding ? -RRB- 
earl | September 24 , 2008 4:57 PM | Report abuse It 's confusing when someone says that the Dems have `` for years blocked any attempt by the Republicans to reform and fix this problem . '' 
Certainly it began before George W. Bush and there 's plenty of blame to go around -LRB- not too many are talking about how much personal credit card debt , etc. is in this country - we 're just told to `` go shopping '' -RRB- , but Republicans had the majority of both the House and Senate for six years and the problem continued . 
The Dems could have talked a blue streak and still not stopped them , had the Republicans cared to act . 
Are those years and that power forgotten , or are such people just so biased that they ca n't stand reality ? 
Debate is good , but let 's debate the facts . 
If this kind of hate is what I will be voting in the WH , then I think I will have to switch sides . 
I 'm sure you will call me names too , but that is to be expected . 
McCain was the MSM 's darling until he began to pose a serious threat to affirmative action in the White House . 
It should come to no surprise how much of the anti-McCain catterwalling on this comment page sounds like hate speech . 
After all , Democrats voted for slavery before they voted against it . 
Now they are just for a new slavery : a peonage of the white middle and working class . 
To Demos I say get bent ! 
Smells like another smoking gun to me . 
The way they packaged it and implied that the it would be diasterous for the America . . 
just like the mushroom cloud . . 
and now McCain is using this as a campaign issue to gain brownie points . . 
just smells like a smoking gun to me . . 
I mean , McCain -LRB- aka McBush ! -RRB- 
this man will stop at NOTHING to try and dupe the country into thinking he gives a d \* mn about us . 
The only reason he wants to halt the debate is he know that sooner or later inthat debate , even though its about foreign policy , the economy will come and he will have to answer for his years and years of promoting deregulation within the very industry that is crumbling right now due to lack of of oversight . 
He is such a little turd !! You know what he and his cronies are doing right now ? 
Searching for every picture he ever took on the golf course or some junket to the Turks with the CEO 's of all the companies about to walk away from this bail out with bags of loot like pirates . 
McCain is a trickster . 
If the debate must be put off let Biden and Palin debate Friday . 
They can fill in and we can see what Palin knows without having another week of tutoring . 
Surely McSame would n't object if he must make a show in Washington . 
More Politricks Posted by : hankomatic | September 24 , 2008 4:57 PM | Report abuse Stan the Man wrote : `` Sounds like there 's alot of angry lefties . '' 
No , there are a lot of angry Americans . 
And here you are , calling them names . 
pure and simple and while I am here , I can not stand Palin 's continual avoidance of the press , she can not give a decent answer just take pictures , it 's disgusting how stupid McCain thinks the American public is he is no better than a pimp and treats women like objects - she 's so feisty ? 
she should have slapped him upside the head and said `` get someone qualified , show some good judgement '' now - polls down - grandstand i do n't want him working on the very problem he helped create Posted by : lndlouis | September 24 , 2008 4:55 PM | Report abuse MY GOD , OBAMA THIS AFTERNOON ACTUALLY ANSWERED QUESTIONS FROM REPORTERS ... WHY DOES N'T MCCAIN AND PALIN REFUSE TO ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS FROM REPORTERS - THE ANSWER IS SIMPLE - THEY HAVE NO ANSWERS !!! Posted by : WVUWEIRTON | September 24 , 2008 4:55 PM | Report abuse One candidate calls for issuing a `` joint statement , '' the other suspends his campaign to return to WA and attend to the important duties facing the nation in this crisis . 
Least there be any doubt which man is ready to lead ? 
You cult members do n't have a leg to stand on and have brought hypocrisy to a whole new level . 
Everybody knows that Obaby wets his pants during debates . 
When there is no teleprompter , it 's nothing but stuttering for Obaby . 
You are a joke - if Obama is so afraid , why is your candidate that does n't want to show up . 
YOU 'RE TALKING ABOUT HYPOCRISY ? 
I think the last time I looked in the Thesaurus , Republican also meant `` hypocrite '' , `` liar '' and `` convenient and opportunistic socialist '' . 
THIS FIASCO IS YOUR PARTY 'S DOING AND YOUR 'S ALONE . 
NOT EVEN THE MEDIA GENIUS TUCKER BOUNDS CAN TALK YOUR WAY OUT OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR THIS MESS . 
The whited haired wrinkly guy has finally done something right . 
Now if he would only take the next and most important step of just plain quitting the world would be a lot safer . 
Perhaps he could work with Palin and shoot wolves from light aircraft in Alaska and collect the $ 150.00 bounty for bringing in the severed leg of the `` wild '' beast ... Pitiful Posted by : 12thmatrix | September 24 , 2008 4:55 PM | Report abuse Quick look over here look over here . 
Ignore the Palin interview tonight . 
The odds on Intrade that a deal will be done by Sept 30 has gone from 60 % to 80 % . 
McCain sees an emergency in every situation and shoots off his mouth and acts alone . 
He did the same thing with Georgia . 
Life goes on and McCain should take a deep breath and exhale slowly . 
A four interlude to carry on the debate will mean nothing . 
Seems to me that he has a tendency to fly off the handle . 
He did that last week with contradictory statements on the crisis . 
I hope that Obama will not try to shy away from debate and the election commission will instruct McCain as to what are the responsibilities of a potential commander in chief . 
`` We need a PRESIDENT who will NOT RUN when the going gets tough . 
Who will not side step the issues at hand , just because polls have you down for the day . '' 
The PRESIDENTIAL election is SOOOO BIG right now , for anyone to suspend the campaign to deal with ONE of THOUSANDS of issues that the AMERICAN person faces today is just IRRESPONSIBLE !!!!!! Not only will the President have to deal with the economy while MULTITASKING several other issues , but he 'll have to do it while being able to address important things at the same time . 
If John McCain ca n't handle an election cycle while at the same time dealing with other important issues , HE 'S NOT RIGHT FOR PRESIDENT . 
He wo n't be able to say TIME OUT when we 're faced with WAR , or other issues as President !!!! This just shows McCain is NOT READY TO LEAD . 
He wants to delay the debates , how pathetic , I say no way , this election is only weeks away and we 've waited long enough , there is n't anything he 's going to be able to do about the deregulation mess him and his croonies created . 
Let the chips fall where they may ! 
They have made their positions clear , they should be there to vote on the final package , but otherwise the appropriate people are working the issue . 
Let them do their job without trying to get the photo op or further politicizing any more than it already is . 
Contrast this with Sarah Palin , who spent her time in New York yesterday running away from the press for fear of having to answer a question . 
Tell me who 's prepared to lead and who is n't . 
All the partisan hacks are out in force ! 
Let 's have the debate while ` they ' are plotting to steal 700 billions of our money , money we do n't even have ! 
Who cares about a 700 billion giveaway to the fat cats . 
Have the debate on time . 
Schedule the vote whenever convenient . 
I have news for you , your so called Democrat leadership is just as keen to give away this money as Bush and company . 
They are just putting on a show for the hicks and the cultists on both sides . 
Just watch the final vote count . 
Idiot is as idiot does . 
As the current leaders of their parties , both candidates are called to lead their parties and forge a compromise . 
What is clear is action is needed , not partisan politics , or stalemate . 
These men are immensely respected by their parties and others , they should take part . 
I 'm sure he can just swoop in there and run things and make it all better . 
Obama could n't do anything either if he went . 
If anything was voted on it would only be one vote for each of them . 
Its not like McCain has a major influence . 
They can work together after the first major debate in TWO DAYS . 
On with the debate . 
Give those good people of Oxford a show . 
John McCain is demonstrating what leadership is . 
His accouncement to temporarily suspend campaign activities to return to Wash D.C. to work toward a bipartisan solution to our nation 's current economic situation is the right thing to do . 
Obama should follow his lead . 
earl | September 24 , 2008 4:52 PM | Report abuse RUN ... HIDE ... RUN ... HIDE ANyWAY YOU WANT TOO Posted by : thejobsincountrymoveoverseasoverseasoverseas | September 24 , 2008 4:52 PM | Report abuse Good move to listen to Bush now . 
Misrepresented to the nation about the state of Iraq 's capacity to develop weapon 's of mass destruction . 
Plunged us into the worst deficit that this country has ever seen . 
Created an administration that is cloaked in secrecy and endorses torture . 
I 'd support anything he says . 
He 's the kinda of guy you want to have a beer with ! 
Senator Purple Lips will not have a chance . 
He has no morals and is a complete fraud . 
Notice we did n't see or hear Bush , Mccain , or Obama on IKE -LRB- but I digress -RRB- . 
Come on now McCain , you ca n't come to a consensus with yourself on issues such as Economy , Bailout or no Bailout . 
How on Earth do you think you can come to any agreement with anyone else . 
e jagam antha dimbacharam ... Setaram Setaram Setaram jai sri hariram Posted by : S.N. Rao | September 24 , 2008 4:51 PM | Report abuse McCain probably wants to postpone the election . 
This is nothing but grandstanding . 
McCain is trying to shift attention away from the really damaging story of Freddie Mac paying $ 15K a month to his campaign manager 's company . 
\* That \* is where he needs to be hammered as Freddie Mac was trying to influence his policies . 
And this came out after McCain said his campaign had no such ties -- a clear lie . 
Do n't let him change the subject ! 
It is similar to youth league sports -- everyone gets to play and no score is kept . 
People neeed to take responsiblity for their actions . 
The DEMS dropped the ball on reform several years ago , and that clown Barney Frank was in the lead . 
I guess you 're mad that once again John McCain made the first move on an important issue -LRB- unlike obama and his misguided poll driven responses -RRB- . 
McCain may not be known to be a dynamic speaker , I 'll take him any day over obama and his style over substance approach . 
I look forward to the debates . 
It will be hilarious listening to obama ... um ... um ... er ... um ... stumble and bumble his way through it . 
Gimmicks and empty promises - that 's your guy obama . 
McCain - honesty and integrity , Country First . 
No way , no how , NOBAMA !! Posted by : Stan the Man | September 24 , 2008 4:50 PM | Report abuse Schmidt , McCain 's handler , is ... well , a pile of schmidt but he 's a freakin ' genius . 
If this had happened 3 weeks from now this would have been the October surprise . 
Now this is Must See TV ! 
This is YOUR mess that YOU created . 
Where does the buck stop with you people ? 
Your Savior of a candidate says he can fix everything yet can not even go back to D.C. and do hios job as a Senator Posted by : shane | September 24 , 2008 4:50 PM | Report abuse If he can t participate in a brief debate while handling other matters , then he has no business running this country . 
A president needs to be able to multi-task and if he can t do this then he has no business in the White House . 
His disrespect for the intelligence of the American people is simply disgraceful !!! Sorry McCain , but not all of us buy into your lame schemes . 
We are hoping new President will bring change and solve the problem . 
Why cant McCain tell us how he wants to solve instead of taking bed rest . 
You cult members do n't have a leg to stand on and have brought hypocrisy to a whole new level . 
Everybody knows that Obaby wets his pants during debates . 
When there is no teleprompter , it 's nothing but stuttering for Obaby . 
anyone else hear that ? 
All he needs to do is fire the head of the FEC or was that the SEC . 
He 's so freekin ' old he does n't remember . 
Do n't get me wrong , I 'm an independent and I DO read the washington post -LRB- and many others -RRB- . 
Just find the comments from the readership interesting given the publication ... Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 4:48 PM | Report abuse Coward McCain , whose brain was kneaded like silly putty by the communist chinese for 5 years , is figuring on hiding he and his hillbilly girlfriend from public scutiny in the hopes that the racists will feed their ambitions . 
This is so transparently fraudulent that I 'd wager even the imbecile base -LRB- those inexplicable intolerents who do n't even profit from repuglicon scams -RRB- will see through it . 
How can anyone think with the nations future at stake it 's more important that the leaders of the respective parties remain campaigning instead of doing THEIR DAY JOBS !!! Posted by : rss | September 24 , 2008 4:48 PM | Report abuse `` McCain is the true leader here . '' 
yeah , leading us off a cliff ! 
Perhaps because Republicans following McCain 's general inclinations have completely gutted national security by making counter-productive wars and stiff-arming our allies ? 
McCain does n't have any safe topics for these debates . 
WHO IS AT FAULT ? 
This week the economist Joseph Stiglitz , winner of the Nobel Prise in Economics in 2001 , said in an interview for Efe Agency that the common citizen would have to be very worried about the crisis in the financial market of the USA , therefore that is just the start and the country is sliding into a recession . 
According to Joseph Stiglitz the bailout plan of large-scale intervention in the markets , announced by the government of the United States , is wrong because the origin of the problem is not only in the system financial . 
He believes that the crisis is a consequence of `` Bad management '' of the republican administration and the Federal Reserve , that they did not supervise the financial sytem and also they did not inject in Wall Street correctly liquidity before the crisis . 
In the opinion of Stiglitz the program of intervention of the government in the financial markets is not enough , was not made of correct form and nor broach the problem basic that is the biggest amount of executions of mortgages in the country . 
The system is weak for the weight of the debt , and part of this if must be attributed to the Iraq War that has cost more than U$ 3 trillions to the country . 
Stiglitz said that the war contributed to the weakness of the economy . 
The war contributed to the high of the prices of oil ; The USA drained the economy to buy oil and it was the reason of the ample liquidity -LRB- supplied for the FED before the crisis -RRB- , to diminish the effect of a so high an expenditure in Iraq . 
But certainly it created a problem for the future . 
And still he said that the unemployment in the USA went up for 6.1 % and probably it will rise . 
The USA is slowly walking for the economic derailment that will intensify the financial problems . 
As the income to fall , the prices of the housing will go down more and it will have ousting of tenants . 
Therefore , the USA is inside of a spiral and has a significant probability of recession in the country . 
What the Government would have to make to brake the crisis ? 
Stiglitz believes that the government must stimulate the renegotiation of the mortgages so that little people have to declare the bankruptcy . 
Why it not help nobody the fact of the people to be obliged to leave its houses . 
And the companies will not have how to sell them for fair price because the market is low . 
Then the companies will continue with the liquidity problem . 
On the interview of the Teacher Joseph Stiglitz for Agency Efe , my point of view as a public accountant in Brazil , it is that the economist has listed all the reasons for the crisis in the USA . 
The war really contributed excessively for the disequilibrium of the public finances of the country and the measures taken by he government before the crisis had been inadequate , therefore the country was increasing its internal indebtedness . 
The measures taken before the crisis had been also wrong , why it generated a false liquidity in the domestic market . 
The company had financed credits to people to renew , to rent and to buy houses without the due precaution and guarantee generating the called risk financing ; The people had bought houses to pay in many installments and later they had not had as to assume its debts , because some factors had affected its lives as for example : increase of inflation , increase in fuel prices and other products , unemployment etc. . 
To finish the article it is important to point out that the bailout plan of aid to the financial sector that the American government tries to approve , of US$ 700 billion , that predict an increase of the limit of public indebtedness of the country of US$ 10.6 trillions for US$ 11.3 trillions . 
Therefore , the American congress must better fiscalize the management of the government on the economy and the indebtedness of the country . 
ATENTTION : My view point on the cancellation of the debate of Friday : it 's more one dirty tactic of the republicans to convince and win voters of undecided and stupid voters , mainly now when Obama opened an advantage of 9 % . 
Why any intelligent person know that McCain and Obama have n't any power to solution something now . 
It there is job to economists and specialists in crisis convince the congress . 
McCain and Bush do n't know anything on modern economy . 
This decision of McCain is more a game to win votes . 
Therefore Obama do n't must to accept and go to the media explain this joke and game of McCain . 
HUGS FROM BRAZIL FOR ALL CONSCIOUS CITIZENS IN USA !!! Posted by : Dalmo | September 24 , 2008 4:47 PM | Report abuse YOUR President has been in office since January 2001 and YOUR Congress has been in office for 6 out of the last 8 years . 
This is YOUR mess that YOU created . 
Where does the buck stop with you people ? 
Lets see what she knows . 
Next comes the loss of your home and your job at the same time . 
Gee whizz , I did n't think things were really that bad !!! Get a clue people , if this bail out bill does n't pass it is YOU and YOUR FAMILY that will pay the biggest price !!! Posted by : The truth | September 24 , 2008 4:47 PM | Report abuse Get a grip O Pods . 
McCain is not afraid to debate `` the one '' on Foreign Policy . 
After all , it was `` the one '' who said Iran was a tiny country that posed no threat and said we should negotiate with terrorist harboring countries without preconditions . 
This is what bipartisan leadership looks like . 
Obama , the self-described `` uniter '' would n't know what bipartisan looks like if it stared him in the face . 
The financial meltdown is a lot more relevant to peoples lives than a foreign policy debate that can be re-scheduled . 
But Obama\/Axelrod just want to play politics . 
Maybe he can debate Biden about whether they support clean coal since it appears he is n't willing to put aside politics in the best interest of the country by coming to work on a solution . 
He just wants to whine about how bad things are but not do anything about it . 
This smacks of political opportunism and showboating in all the wrong ways . 
If he was serious about this , he would have suspended his campaign days ago to make sure tomorrow 's deadline is met . 
McCain has pulled this straight out of the Bush playbook for starting the war in Iraq , and passing the Patriot Act before that . 
This is disgusting , vile , naked political ambition contrary to patriotic ideals . 
Bush 's men , and McCain 's actions today are nothing short of treason . 
A week ago there was no economic crisis according to them . 
Now there is , and it needs to be handled their way , right now , or America is doomed . 
That is tripe , and we Americans know it . 
Bush and McCain = Traitors to America . 
The debate is the opportunity for the American people to see these guys outside of their political adds . 
They can take a few hours out of one day of the week to handle that ; even relocating the debate to DC . 
McCain is dodging the debate , and exacerbating the crisis that he refused to acknowledge as recently as this week . 
He is a complete fraud . 
Millions of voters were hurt by this over the last year as their mortgages crushed them , and their jobs were shipped overseas . 
McCain clearly only cares now because Cindy 's vast fortune , and the fortunes of his top aids\/lobbyists took a hit this week . 
They can certainly debate the economic issues at the time that debate is scheduled . 
I think it makes a lot of sense for McCain to return to Washington to do what he does well -- govern . 
He may not be on the committee , but he is a senator and has always been good at putting together bipartisan deals . 
I think this shows us who really cares about the country . 
McCain said he wanted to `` RESCHEDULE '' not cancel the debate people . 
Think for a second here . 
All you Obama lovers have to ask the question what is more important RIGHT NOW - the debate over foreign policy -LRB- which Obama has ZERO foreign policy experience -RRB- or the American financial structure . 
If you lose your job and your house because congress failed to act I doubt this debate or anything else will matter much at that point . 
Obama is always more concerned with politics than country and this proves it ! 
If Obama were any sort of leader he would IMMEDATELY agree to work in a BI-PARTISAN manner to resolve this crisis . 
Funny , Obama talks a big talk about working across the isle and now the time comes for him to do just that and he is going to vote `` not present '' . 
People , People , People ... for once in you lives get your heads out of your big screens and `` Crackberries '' , stop your political posturing and insulting behavior , open your minds and watch ... You 're about to see a TRUE AMERICAN LEADER in action . 
Country First Mr. McCain ... A PROVEN LIFE TIME OF SERVICE AND COUNTRY FIRST ... What a Proud Moment in American History . 
People -- It 's your loss if you do n't understand that . 
That 's the funniest post I 've read all morning . 
We need to send Palin to all the capitals and universities of the world . 
This would solve everything . 
Instead of `` been there done that '' it could be `` been there seen that '' while she snaps her fingers and signs away the treasury , rights of the people , and 200 years of freedom and respect around the world , all while accepting her Oscar for `` Minnie Moose Goes To Washington . '' 
It is his DUTY to go before the American People and Debate so that they can gain insight into the Election Decision . 
Hiding from the Debate in the name of Saving the Country is NOT Patriotic . 
then get on that DAMN PLANE THIS FRIDAY to debate McCain . 
What in the hell are you talking about ? 
You mean further deregulation ? 
You Wo n't Believe These Results ! 
They even include a write-in for Ron Paul ! 
What planet have you been on . 
Why did Obaby chicken out of the Town Hall Meetings debates AFTER he said he would participate ? 
This just proves that Obaby flip flops , is frightened to debate and is lying scumbag . 
Obviously you do n't have a functioning brain and not a leg to stand on . 
He is going for the surprise element . 
I am sure he thinks this is the SHOCK AND AWE he needs to become relevant in this election . 
He is a celebrawannabe who still plans to speak at the Clinton Global Initiative ! 
Give up NAPTIME and your CAMEO APPEARANCE , McCain and show up to speak to us . 
We do not have the luxury of delay because we STILL have a CRITICAL ELECTION coming up . 
DUCKING and RUNNING is not a good trait for a supposed Commander-in-Chief . 
This is such a scam . 
So that means performing the job they were elected to do . 
Right now they are interviewing for a job that we aren t paying them to do . 
So McCain did the and honest thing which was to get back to work to perform the job he is being paid to do . 
I bet your employers would expect you to do your job instead of interviewing if they were in financial straits . 
I have felt when people are running for other position they need to quite their position so someone who has the time and energy can focus on the states needs instead of the candidates desire to move up the pay scale . 
Bob Dole relinquished his role when he ran for president doing the right thing . 
Why would John McCain run from a debate on national security , which is what the debate is on Friday ?????????? I can see your point if this first debate was on the economy but it is not , which just proves the point that McCain is not doing this to serve his self interests , he is doing it because he believes the well being of the US ecomony is more important at this moment than the campaign . 
You talk about multitasking ???? Do n't you want a leader who , during a crisis , drops everything else he is doing to concentrate on the crisis at hand and get it resolved ??? I think you need to ask yourself why Obama does not want to postpone the debates . 
Maybe he already has his teleprompter loaded and does n't want to forget all of the answers he has memorized . 
McCain is the true leader here . 
Really just a couple of days ago the Congress was all aflutter because `` NO ONE KNOWS WHAT TO DO , '' said Senator Reid . 
`` This is in no way our fault , '' said Speaker Pelosi . 
And there was talk of Congress recessing and going home . 
So something tells me they need someone to come by and hand hold them to a solution . 
At a time when U.S. lawmakers and the white house are negotiating a resolution of this economic disaster , John McCain wants to inject presidential politics , with his and Barrack 's presence , into the process . 
That is the perfect way to NEVER reach a compromise . 
They both need to stay as far away from Washington , D.C. as possible . 
There are enough politicians on the hill to get this agreement done in the short term . 
Lets not poison the process with presidential politics . 
I ca n't believe that McCain is pulling another weaselly stunt . 
If there was ever a time the country NEEDED to have these presidential debates , it 's NOW . 
`` Country First , '' indeed . 
It really sounds like McCain 's stalling for time , for some reason . 
He was caught off-guard and has reacted to the financial crisis by lurching from one ill-considered , sputtering pronouncement to another , throwing up smoke and mirrors to obscure the fact that he always been all for deregulating the banking industry , along with his pal Phil Gramm : `` The SEC chairman should be fired ! '' 
`` We must save Main Street ! '' 
`` This crisis is too important for Congress to proceed without me in Washington for a couple of days ! 
Let 's suspend the debate ! 
Heck , let 's suspend the whole presidential campaign -LRB- because , uh , I 'm losing right now -RRB- ! '' 
He 's acting like a hot-head again . 
Yes , let 's have Caribou Barbie in there to hold up the Republican end of the debate . 
It was bad enough to politicize the need for off-shore drilling and exploration , but now the DEMS wish to impose their socialist agenda on the stock market and banking industry . 
Executive pay limits are anti-capitalistic in nature . 
Help prevent foreclosures is another cry from the self-appointed populists . 
No one forced these people to sign these mortgages . 
I did not read the entire document is a common defense . 
How did you get through elementary school ? 
Where were the DEMS several years ago when the Bush Admin proposed systemic banking and market reforms ? 
The fellow travelers within the DEM Party were accusing the Republicans of denyinng people the right to own homes . 
Warren Buffet supports Bernake 's plan . 
What is the hold-up ? 
In that light , I call for John McCain to send Sarah Palin to stand in for him in a debate on Friday . 
Obama can send Joe Biden , freeing Biden to go help John McCain 's endeavor to save America in its hour of need . 
We need all of John McCain 's economic know-how and focus on this issue , and can not allow a debate to distract him . 
A perfect opportunity for Palin to step in and show her tenacious , shake-up-Washington ways . 
What say you , Senator McCain and supporters ? 
How convenient , quitting when you 're behind . 
Way to big of a prize for Mr. Deregulator to pass on . 
This guy is desparate . 
She can really `` shake things up ! '' 
We 've waited a long time for this debate , and there 's no reason to delay it for a grandstanding political ploy . 
They can both fly to DC on Saturday . 
Why now because NOW there is a proposal before Congress that needs to be reviewed , and possibiliy changes made to it before acted on or there could be an economic meltdown . . 
THAT 'S WHY NOW !!! Posted by : rss | September 24 , 2008 4:41 PM | Report abuse What crisis is McCain eluding too ? 
Did n't he just say the economy was fundamentally sound ? 
What on earth can he offer as a solution to this non-existing `` crisis '' ? 
His attempt to make it seem he can lead this country is almost comical . 
Others are calling the proposed legislation the Authorization for Use of Financial Force , after the Authorization for Use of Military Force , the infamous bill that gave the Bush administration the green light to invade Iraq . 
There s justice in the gibes . 
Everyone agrees that something major must be done . 
But Mr. Paulson is demanding extraordinary power for himself and for his successor TO DEPLOY TAXPAYERS MONEY ON BEHALF OF A PLAN THAT , AS FAR AS I CAN SEE , DOESN T MAKE SENSE . 
Some are saying that we should simply trust Mr. Paulson , because he s a smart guy who knows what he s doing . 
But that s only half true : he is a smart guy , but what , exactly , in the experience of the past year and a half a period during which Mr. Paulson repeatedly declared the financial crisis contained , and then offered a series of unsuccessful fixes justifies the belief that he knows what he s doing ? 
He s making it up as he goes along , just like the rest of us . 
So let s try to think this through for ourselves . 
I have a four-step view of the financial crisis : 1 . 
The bursting of the housing bubble has led to a surge in defaults and foreclosures , which in turn has led to a plunge in the prices of mortgage-backed securities assets whose value ultimately comes from mortgage payments . 
These financial losses have left many financial institutions with too little capital too few assets compared with their debt . 
This problem is especially severe because everyone took on so much debt during the bubble years . 
Because financial institutions have too little capital relative to their debt , they haven t been able or willing to provide the credit the economy needs . 
Financial institutions have been trying to pay down their debt by selling assets , including those mortgage-backed securities , but this drives asset prices down and makes their financial position even worse . 
This vicious circle is what some call the paradox of deleveraging . 
The Paulson plan calls for the federal government to buy up $ 700 billion worth of troubled assets , mainly mortgage-backed securities . 
How does this resolve the crisis ? 
Well , it might might break the vicious circle of deleveraging , step 4 in my capsule description . 
Even that isn t clear : the prices of many assets , not just those the Treasury proposes to buy , are under pressure . 
And even if the vicious circle is limited , the financial system will still be crippled by inadequate capital . 
Or rather , it will be crippled by inadequate capital unless the federal government hugely overpays for the assets it buys , giving financial firms and their stockholders and executives a giant windfall at taxpayer expense . 
Did I mention that I m NOT HAPPY WITH THIS PLAN ? 
The logic of the crisis seems to call for an intervention , not at step 4 , but at step 2 : the financial system needs more capital . 
And if the government is going to provide capital to financial firms , it should get what people who provide capital are entitled to A SHARE IN OWNERSHIP , so that all the gains if the rescue plan works don t go to the people who made the mess in the first place . 
That s what happened in the savings and loan crisis : the feds took over ownership of the bad banks , not just their bad assets . 
It s also what happened with Fannie and Freddie . 
-LRB- And by the way , that rescue has done what it was supposed to . 
Mortgage interest rates have come down sharply since the federal takeover . -RRB- 
But Mr. Paulson insists that he wants a clean plan . 
Clean , in this context , means a taxpayer-financed bailout with no strings attached no quid pro quo on the part of those being bailed out . 
Why is that a good thing ? 
Add to this the fact that Mr. Paulson is also demanding dictatorial authority , plus immunity from review by any court of law or any administrative agency , and THIS ADDS UP TO AN UNACCEPTABLE PROPOSAL . 
I m aware that Congress is under enormous pressure to agree to the Paulson plan in the next few days , with at most a few modifications that make it slightly less bad . 
Basically , after having spent a year and a half telling everyone that things were under control , the Bush administration says that the sky is falling , and that to save the world we have to do exactly what it says now now now . 
But I d urge Congress to pause for a minute , take a deep breath , and try to seriously rework the structure of the plan , making it a plan that addresses the real problem . 
DON T LET YOURSELF BE RAILROADED if this plan goes through in anything like its current form , we ll all be very sorry in the not-too-distant future . 
He says : `` I am calling on the President to convene a meeting with the leadership from both houses of Congress , including Senator Obama and myself . 
It is time for both parties to come together to solve this problem . '' 
Um , hate to break it to you , Johnny , but Congress is quite capable of addressing grave economic issues without your oh so wise input -LRB- `` the fundamentals are strong '' , eh ? -RRB- . 
You might actually pay attention to what is going on - there is a bipartisan effort going forward at this moment and you are n't crucial to that effort . 
And tape the David Letterman show ???? And trot the Lil ' Alaskan Lady around the UN to get more photo ops ???? Are you kidding me ???? Why does n't the WaPo report ALL of these facts ???? Please do n't fall for this Barack ... this LIAR is chicken ... bwack bwack bwack !!! And is trying to further politicize the already difficult bailout negotiations . 
He should stay in NY with Sarah and help her meet even more `` heads of state . '' 
It 's an outrage . 
If he had wanted to do something to avoid or mitigate this crisis , he 's had eight years in which to do so . 
Now he simply wants to limit being held accountable . 
Well , forget it , Johnny . 
You 're in this up to your eyeballs . 
Maybe you wo n't have to debate Obama on Friday , but you 'll have to debate him sooner or later , and when you do , expect to be held to account for your tax cuts for the well-off , your massive deficits , your borrowing of money to fund an unnecessary war , and your total lack of oversight of the crooks and scoundrels in investment firms and banks who have made millions by fleecing ordinary citizens . 
Coward , Coward , Coward , McCain has no plan so he want 's to steal someone elses plan and he needs time to do it . 
Addressing the National Inquire about her affair with Todd 's business partner ? 
Reckless McCain - not vetting Palin and now the GOP right-wingers have an Adulterous on their hands to boot . 
I say , go on with the debates and go on with the campaign . 
This just goes to show what kind of soldier he really was . 
And leave the Republicans in power until the crisis is over ! 
We do n't need no stinkin ' election ! 
Get rid of these clowns , NOW ! 
Nothing fancy , and no crowds in the studio . 
Of course , if on Friday night a vote is being held on a bailout package , or if delicate negotiations are underway , then the two candidates should stand by and hold their debate on Saturday night , or within 24 hours of a definitive vote . 
But McCain should not be allowed to weasel out of a debate , or to postpone it until he has more time to bone up on economics and to memorize his one-liners , which is what I suspect the real reason he 's asking for this time out . 
McCain said he wanted to `` RESCHEDULE '' not cancel the debate people . 
Think for a second here . 
All you Obama lovers have to ask the question what is more important RIGHT NOW - the debate over foreign policy -LRB- which Obama has ZERO foreign policy experience -RRB- or the American financial structure . 
If you lose your job and your house because congress failed to act I doubt this debate or anything else will matter much at that point . 
Obama is always more concerned with politics than country and this proves it ! 
If Obama were any sort of leader he would IMMEDATELY agree to work in a BI-PARTISAN manner to resolve this crisis . 
Funny , Obama talks a big talk about working across the isle and now the time comes for him to do just that and he is going to vote `` not present '' . 
You Wo n't Believe These Results ! 
They even include a write-in for Ron Paul ! 
And leave the Republicans in power until the crisis is over ! 
We do n't need no stinkin ' election ! 
Get rid of these clowns , NOW ! 
He can only win as long as he keeps the focus of the country is on celebrity , lipstick on pigs or some other -LRB- could this be ? -RRB- 
McCain knows an economic question will be asked on Friday and he 's not ready to field it . 
Perhaps instead of talking about foreign policy , the candidates should talk about how they would handle the bailout and the economy in general . 
Senator McCain , a president is supposed to find 90 minutes to talk about issues when so many of the citizens do care ! 
The polls show him losing on this issue , his advisor is under fire , and he wants to call a truce ! 
Do n't fall for it ! 
If Obama does not suspend the campaign he will call him selfish and unpatriotic . 
John McSame is a gambling again . 
any truth to that ? 
It 's the problem . '' 
No one watches TV on a Friday night , and the Senate is rarely in session on Fridays in general . 
WHAT EXACTLY is Johnny Mac AFRAID OF ? 
That seems to always get in the way , especially for the Republicans . 
John McCain has announced that America is finally confronting a crisis that he does n't feel he can be absent for . 
Some fun facts about John McCain : Of all Senators , John McCain has been the most absent . 
There have been 643 votes taken in the current Senate session : McCain has missed 412 of them . 
McCain has not voted in the Senate since April 8th . 
Since March , he has missed 109 of the last 110 votes . 
He missed votes on the GI Bill , energy policy , and in 2007 he missed `` all 15 critical environmental votes in the Senate '' -- giving him a 2007 rating of 0 % from the League of Conservation Voters . 
I do n't think that 's fair . 
I think they should have given him an `` incomplete '' , and told him that he had to stay for summer session if he wants to graduate from the Senate . 
So welcome back , John McCain . 
If I were the Senate Democrats , I would now completely rejigger the Senate schedule in order to put things up that America would really , really like to see John McCain cast a vote on . 
It seems the least we could do . 
Obama should show up on Friday whether McCain does or not . 
Let our potential presidents-to-be stand up in the face of disaster . 
We ask that of our children when we send them to die in immoral wars that they never started . 
McCain needs to quit this facade of patriotism and accept the role of the President : to inspire the people with ideas that will lead them to peace and prosperity . 
So far all we 've heard is `` be afraid of Russia '' and `` postpone the convention '' and now `` postpone the debate . '' 
Since McCain must suspend his campaign and run to Washington , he should just send his brilliant VP candidate , Palin , to stand in for him . 
She can debate Obama . 
Or maybe they can just turn the debate into a moose-shooting contest and send Palin ? 
The debates can wait . 
If the financial crisis is as bad as everyone says it is -LRB- still not convinced of that -RRB- than they should hold off on the debate - not cancel , postpone - the debate . 
If Congress has to act , the two Senators who want to run the country should be there to work with congress and the current administration to work on this problem and then be held accountable for their votes . 
I do n't really care who had the idea of a joint statement first . 
I think this is the first good idea McCain has had in a very long time . 
He needs to learn how to multi-task . 
That 'll stop the poll #s from tanking . 
It s getting a mite crowded in there with both McCain and Palin holing up , hiding from the cameras , questions , and accountability . 
Our once proud happy warrior , and died-in-the-wool certified war hero doesn t seem so heroic today . 
More like a caviling coward cowering behind Sarah s skirts ! 
Maybe now that Sarah s met actual world leaders and SEEN Wall Street from her hotel room she s prepared to debate foreign policy and talk about economics on his behalf . 
Give me a break ! 
There s not an ounce of honesty , integrity or a scrap of straight talk , left in the old goat . 
Perhaps it s time for the geezer to throw in the towel once and for all ! 
When Obama suggests privately that they do something responsible together -LRB- which makes sense since one of them will inherit the mess -RRB- , McCain responds with this cheap stunt . 
That 's the smell of desperation coming from Camp McCain . 
Obama is too decent for McCain . 
Hopefully he 's not too decent for America . 
If you are really serious about the economy , the debate is the best place to talk about with the American people . 
Good try ; `` yes , but no yes '' according to Sarah Paling . 
Both he and Palin are great at yelling at a crowd -LRB- so are cheer leaders -RRB- but to present in such a manner , that they unable to take any pressure !!! -- just what we need right now in America -- I hope Obama does not let him off the hook !!! I 'm also scared that a big part of this `` crisis '' is a red herring !!! Posted by : Liz1234 | September 24 , 2008 4:36 PM | Report abuse Transparent in the least . 
, Obama should press forward with the debate . 
McCain will get no traction on an Obama refusal . 
This walks and quacks like the gimmick that it is . 
The best thing McCain could do is not intervene in the fiscal crisis , as this is the product of all his good years in Congress . 
Better yet , let VP Palin spearhead the response . 
The crisis will not be solved in the hours of the debate so full steam ahead . 
Obama has the same constraints as McCain . 
A huge misstep by McCain and it will let Obama to continue to seize the momentum . 
What people do believe is McCain is putting politics first and that IS a trick . 
Let the Republicans show us what the ` BABE ' is all about . 
I 'm sure Biden could stand in for Obama if necessary . 
C'mon , show us Palin 's ready . 
The media needs to ask McCain every day what exactly he personally is doing on the crisis in order to show that . 
McCain is just 1 of 100 in the Senate , and he is n't the expert . 
The most important people in the Senate right now are Chris Dodd , Richard Shelby , and Harry Reid , in that order . 
And if you are n't on the Banking Committee -LRB- McCain 's not -RRB- , then you are n't important . 
All this `` we must meet as American , not as Democrats and Republicans '' is nonsense . 
Has he not been paying attention ? 
Congress has been acting bipartisanly for a week . 
Are you saying Senator that your `` Friday night special '' , the plan you pulled out with not a bit of data to back it up , is to be preferred to anyone else 's ? 
Or , that anyone not agreeing with your version of reality is unpatriotic ? 
Or that the Paulson Concept is the wrong one , because it does n't have your name on it ? 
And why is it that you ca n't make it to Mississippi ? 
Did n't have teleprompters ? 
When was the last time you voted in the Senate ? 
If you ca n't make it to Mississippi , how can we be sure you will make it to the next cabinet meeting , assuming you were lucky enough to be elected ? 
Suppose , for the sake of argument , that you really could n't make it - could the Obama Campaign provide an empty chair to represent you ? 
Could you phone it in ? 
Must you denigrate others who may want to attend , or want to watch the debate ? 
Do you expect to get votes if we do n't know what your views are except through your surrogates ? 
You call yourself a Reagan Republican - follow his lead and get yourself a chair , even if it is an empty one . 
It will all work out . 
After all , we are all `` Georgians '' , I mean `` Mississippians '' . 
So we have no idea what he would do ? 
So we just have to vote for him because it 's what he wants us to do ? 
Is n't that just what Secretary Paulson proposed with the bailout ? 
MCCAIN AND THE REPUBLICANS WILL HAVE YOU UP AGAINST THE WALL IF THE DEBATE IS POSTPONED . 
DO N'T LET MCCAIN AND THE REPUBLICANS HIGHJACK THIS ECONOMY AND THIS ELECTION . 
THIS IS A RUSE !!! OBAMA FIRST INITIATED A DIALOGUE BETWEEN HIM AND MCCAIN . 
MCCAIN UNILATERALLY WENT ON TV CLAIMING IT AS HIS OWN . 
LIBERMAN IS ON THE NETWORKS RIGHT NOW USING THIS RUSE TO CAMPAIGN ON MCCAIN 'S BEHALF . 
A TRUE LEADER WILL ANSWER OUR QUESTIONS DIRECTLY THIS FRIDAY . 
HE ONLY GAVE US 60 DAYS TO KNOW PALIN . 
NOW WITH ONLY 40 SOME ODD DAYS LEFT HE IS TELLING THE AMERICAN PEOPLE HE CA N'T MULTI-TASK AND DOES N'T WANT TO SPEAK TO US DIRECTLY . 
WE WANT SOME ANSWERS . 
HANDLE YOUR BUSINESS AND DO BOTH . 
MCCAIN , IF YOU CA N'T HANDLE THE HEAT , GET OUT OF THE POT !!! Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 4:35 PM | Report abuse Why do n't they just teleconference ? 
The whole computer thing . 
Well ... McCa n't can use a telegraph and Obama can use his Iphone . 
Is n't this thing nearly resolved anyway ? 
If you are pro Obama your post is accepted . 
If you are pro McCain , your post is not acceptable . 
Is Putin running the WAPO ? 
The National Enquirer has more journalistic integrity that the WAPO . 
In fact the WAPO has NO journalistic integrity . 
Reading your comment made the old saying '' LIKE FATHER LIKE SON '' pop into my mind . 
Guess he feels the need to pull a stupid stunt after reading today 's poll results . 
But I am not in ` their campaign , ' and so I can say this : JOHN MCCAIN , show up for a debate on the economy . 
Otherwise you will look like a wimp -LRB- which you are -RRB- . 
Or have Sarah fill in for you . 
She has about as much sense -LRB- and worth -RRB- on the economy as a wolf does when she shoots it from a helicopter . 
In other words : Bow out at your pleasure . 
It will be your undoing . 
See You Friday , or Good Night Gracie ... Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 4:34 PM | Report abuse First off Obama called McCain FIRST . . 
so he clearly does n't know what to do either . 
They should get BACK TO WORK for a few days until they can figure what the heck to do . 
And besides there 's going to be a DEBATE . . 
McCain just wants a DELAY for a few days until this bailout proposal is worked out first . 
What 's the big deal anyway ? 
The debate was about foreign policy like anyone cares about that now . 
It can certainly wait a week . 
This crisis NEEDS to be handled FIRST . 
Remember McCain canceled the first day of his convention because of hurricane Gustav . . 
Well this is a ECONOMIC hurricane that could wreck the whole country , is n't that a little more important than having a debate this Friday instead of next Friday or a couple of days of campaigning ? 
While I 'll be the first to admit there is certainly linkage between the two topics , it is not exactly the best forum to talk about how to solve the country 's financial crisis . 
This issue accompanied with the present problems with the crashing markets hit too close to home with rubbing against another brain cell should know that McCain is a corp. lacky ... The problems we face today will be faced with the same lazy and deregulation that we 've seen Posted by : the . 
man_in_black -LRB- is back with a fury -RRB- | September 24 , 2008 4:33 PM | Report abuse Figures that Obama supporters think putting the country first is some sort of trick . 
This political stunt stinks !! Stop manipulating Americans . 
`` I 'm not particularly focused on Senator McCain . 
I really do n't care , '' he said . 
`` I guess if I wanted expertise there -LRB- from the GOP ticket -RRB- , I 'd ask Sarah Palin . '' 
While I 'll be the first to admit there is certainly linkage between the two topics , it is exactly the best forum to talk about how to solve the country 's financial crisis . 
This may have worked if he had not leveraged his honor on so many other lies and stunts . 
My advice : show up or be awol . 
Honestly , the guy is simply unprepared for the debate , realizing this after spending an hour in the library this afternoon . 
Apparently he had not even read Bush 's bailout plan until Friday , after he had made his comments and recommendations . 
This is a scary signal , a politician who would be president but does n't prepare himself for to vote based on the evidence , as he did for the Irag war , or allow the American people hear his views in a debate . 
Umm , could n't be lousy poll numbers ? 
Nah , that would be cynical and pathetic . 
Ancient China was often ruled by brilliant eunuchs . 
But David Axelrod Puppet has a wafer thin cerebral cortex , which is why he sounds like Zippy the Pinhead when he tries to talk off the top of his tiny brain . 
DC , MD , VA have plenty of venues to choose from . 
How about the National Press Club ? 
McCain is trying to run into his hole , we need to keep the foxhound on his tail to flush him out . 
bad move senator McCain , you sound scared and insecure . 
It 's Obama momentum and he is NOT going to give it up ! 
DEBATE , DEBATE , DEBATE Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 4:32 PM | Report abuse Do ya think McCain might be a little late to the party ? 
He wants to focus on the economy ? 
We just had the 100 year storm and all of a sudden he 's wants to see what 's up ? 
He might as well be going on tour of the Titanic . 
Or touring New Orleans two years after the It 's the same as showing up in the locker after the big loss and offering your cleats to the nose guard . 
He 's quit in my book . 
If McCain is too old , confused , and tired to do that , then he should not only skip the debate but withdraw from the contest altogether . 
He is obviously in poor health , and this announcement only underscores it . 
Obama should announce that he will be at the debate to answer questions , and that if McCain prefers to stay home and watch it on TV , that he 'll have his campaign send over a glass of buttermilk , a plate of cookies , an electric blanket , and a sleeping pill . 
But us Obama supporters are mad as hell that the Conservative Base put this Administration in Office , not 1 time , but 2 times and allowed this to happen . 
You know , it 's kinda like being molested by your uncle over and over again , then when he is on his death bed , he ask you for forgiveness . 
At least for this Obama supporter that 's how it feels to me . 
` The Great One ' Barack Obama has taken more money from Fannie and Freddie than any US Senator since he 's been in office . 
His two ` advisors ' , Franklin Raines and James Johnson -LRB- who was also head of Barackas Obamas ' VP search cmte -RRB- raked over Fannie and Freddie for nearly 200 million dollars combined . 
as long as we are being honest ... The total listed for Obama is $ 126,349 a tiny fraction of the approximately $ 390 million his campaign has raised , according to the Center for Responsive Politics . 
The list shows McCain has received a total of $ 21,550 from Fannie and Freddie employees . 
The list includes donations of at least $ 200 from those who receive paychecks from Fannie and Freddie . 
It also includes donations from political action committees pooled contributions from employees . 
Obama decided early in his presidential run not to accept PAC contributions , but the Center for Responsive Politics ' list includes all contributions for members of Congress dating back to 1989 including Obama and McCain 's Senate campaigns . 
The New York Times has published a separate list looking at contributions from `` directors , officers , and lobbyists for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac '' for the 2008 campaign cycle . 
That list using figures from the Federal Election Commission shows McCain receiving $ 169,000 , while Obama received only $ 16,000 . 
A list of employee contributions including lobbyists and directors shows McCain getting more . 
And far more important is this ... One of the giant mortgage companies at the heart of the credit crisis paid $ 15,000 a month from the end of 2005 through last month to a firm owned by Senator John McCain s campaign manager . 
Mr. Davis s firm , Davis & Manafort , had been kept on the payroll because of Mr. Davis s close ties to Mr. McCain , the Republican presidential nominee , who by 2006 was widely expected to run again for the White House . 
Franklin Raines has stated he never advised Obama about anything regarding policy . 
This has been fact checked . 
Bush speaks to the nation tonight . 
This is how coups look in their early stages . 
This is how bourgeois democracies die . 
He was a Whor @ then and he 's a whor @ now ! 
Without even opening his mouth ! 
Hassett is an outright liar . 
The S. 190 bill would have actually made the current situation worse . 
So , perhaps it is a blessing that the Republican chair and Republican majority in the committee killed the bill . 
Never believe a politician ! 
Do your own homework ! 
Let me see if the post will accept what my use to be boss always say it ... `` horse manure '' . 
He was so fond of saying horse manure when he smells something that is not right . 
Now I can agree when he says horse manure . 
This postponement of the debate is truly a horse manure . 
After changing all our plans , gather all people to watch the debate , bought all the foods to serve the people , now we are left with nothing to go for . 
We were looking forward to see where this two candidates has to say about the economic meltdown and what if any can they contribute to the resolution to the crisis . 
We know that Obama was in constant touch with Paulson , Bernanke , Cox , and the President of the United State . 
Obama understand the grieviousness of the situation . 
And his proposal to the bailout was clear ... that unless he sees a clause benefiting the American public on this bailout plan , he refuse to give Paulson a blank check on that $ 700B bailout plan . 
Looking forward to the debate , Obama was to unveil his plan to the resolution to our economic catastrophe . 
All of a sudden , McStupid bailed out with an alibi saying that the priority here is to look for the resolution to the crisis intead of having the debate ... calling out Obama on his bluff . 
Wonder how good McAncient is on Poker . 
McCain floundered around last week desperately looking for a coherent position on the economy , and nothing stuck . 
No , I meant American workers are strong . 
We should n't bail out AIG . 
Boy , am I glad we bailed out AIG . 
We need a commission . 
We need to fire Chris Cox . 
Now he is going to go work on the problem ? 
Give me a break . 
This is just McCain coordinating with the White House to ratchet up the financial crisis level to condition Blackwatch Plaid , so that the entire country will be so scared out of their minds that we will crap our pants and give the Administration $ 700 Billion to try to clean up their latest , greatest screw-up without asking any questions . 
Senator Obama is ready to face America 's challenges WHEN THEY ARISE , and not just when it is convenient . 
I hope Obama goes and stands at a podium in Oxford , Mississippi by himself if need be . 
What 's wrong with doing the patriotic thing ?! Posted by : John H. | September 24 , 2008 4:29 PM | Report abuse jdub : Yup , compare a man who received top marks at Harvard to a silver-spoon fed frat boy that got into Yale on his daddy 's heritage . 
Compare a man that has proven he can actually lead a massive nation-wide campaign against the Clinton machine AND WIN , to a guy who called McCain 's patriotism into question in 2000 . 
Compare a man who has a degree in Constitutional law to a guy with a useless MBA who managed to go bankrupt twice , only to be bailed out of utter financial doom by a buddy with a pro baseball team . 
I highly doubt someone with that level of intelligence can approach Bush 's incompetence -LRB- now go shopping ? -RRB- . 
So the debate is scheduled for this Friday , the perfect time for both candidates to address the issue and give details on what they think should be done to prevent it in the future , and McCain runs away . 
As if they need his input on what to do . 
Both can make it back in time for a vote , so do n't play that card ever again . 
It 's a bogus argument that holds no water . 
He wo n't let Palin talk to the press or to ordinary Americans and now he 's doing the same for himself . 
There used to be a party called the Know Nothings . 
That 's what the GOP is turning into here . 
Yup , those republicans are sure fiscally responsible ! 
The Republicans are propaganda masters . 
Obama calls McCain and suggests that they make a joint statement about the crisis . 
McCain waits until about six hours later , says he is canceling his participation in the debate -LRB- in which he knows he is about to get hammered -RRB- , sets up an agenda that makes him look like the ultimate leader in bipartisan decisions and that all of this was his idea . 
These guys are the ultimate image manipulators . 
McCain grabbed the news headlines with his withdrawal from Friday 's debate -LRB- clever news grabbing -RRB- but I am sure that Congress will not be in session during the scheduled debate . 
This ploy allows him to drop a few long legged phrases in future debates while delaying the debates until the public cools off -LRB- they hope -RRB- . 
This ploy one-ups the Sarah Palin photo ops with foreign dignitaries - as if she actually learned something in her fifteen minute chats . 
The Republicans must think that people are total idiots . 
This is Richard Nixon at his best - image is all . 
RAISE YOUR TWO HANDED VICTORY SIGN JOHN . 
He wants to divert attention from his fledgling campaign and his crooked campaign manager . 
Desperate move by a desperate , despicable man . 
Besides , he needs to get back to DC to find out what his buddies are going to do and whether they are going to vote for any proposal , or whether they have a definite proposal crafted . 
How else will he know what to say ? 
He might trip over his own tongue , trying to hew the party line . 
Walking while chewing gum sometimes causes a sudden GULP . 
Obama does n't seem so worried ... Posted by : Judy-in-TX | September 24 , 2008 4:28 PM | Report abuse Nice spin that McCain is the adult by quitting while he is behind to add his chatter to the debates in DC . 
Does anyone seriously think that when John McCain walks into the capital everyone will grasp at his sleeves for the magic solution to this crisis ? 
The self-avowed economics ignoramus ? 
McCain is just another senator where this issue is concerned . 
The American people are waiting to hear what he would do in the next administration , which is what a campaign is for . 
McCain was in free-fall . 
This move is 100 % about killing off the massive negative energy created by fumbling the response to the crisis -LRB- even George Will agrees -RRB- , by quarantining Palin from the press , the disclosure that his chief advisor 's firm is on the Freddie Mac payroll . 
Just like choosing Palin . 
As for being Rovian , I hope so . 
Rove never loses elections . 
Democraps are experts at failing . 
But if you believe , as Barack Obama does , that this campaign is about us and not the two of you , and that it should be focused on issues affecting the future of our country , then of course there should be a debate . 
The debate can take place on the floor of the Senate for 2 hours , and of course it should be focused on the future of the economy . 
Both of you guys are supposed to be ready to be President on day 1 , so you should be ready to go . 
But if you believe , as Barack Obama does , that this campaign is about us and not the two of you , and that it should be focused on issues affecting the future of our country , then of course there should be a debate . 
The debate can take place on the floor of the Senate for 2 hours , and of course it should be focused on the future of the economy . 
Both of you guys are supposed to be ready to be President on day 1 , so you should be ready to go . 
I fully expected him to pull a Lloyd Bentsen and tell Obama , `` Senator Obama , I remember Charles Keating . 
Charles Keating was a friend of mine and you sir , are no Charles Keating . '' 
The really weird thing is that it 's all so unnecessary . 
If the debate is delayed then we do not get to see how he functions under a crisis situation . 
I want to know how these men react to foreign policy issues when a financial crisis is going on . 
Are their tempers shorter are they less able to focus . 
Forget whether this is a political trick or not . 
I want to see them in action on Friday night and I do not want any excuse , even a good one , for the American people to see them in action . 
Or maybe we will wake up a year later and find out that no one shot the economy . 
It was all a dream . 
This smacks of political opportunism and showboating in all the wrong ways . 
If he was serious about this , he would have suspended his campaign days ago to make sure tomorrow 's deadline is met . 
McCain has pulled this straight out of the Bush playbook for starting the war in Iraq , and passing the Patriot Act before that . 
This is disgusting , vile , naked political ambition contrary to patriotic ideals . 
Bush 's men , and McCain 's actions today are nothing short of treason . 
A week ago there was no economic crisis according to them . 
Now there is , and it needs to be handled their way , right now , or America is doomed . 
That is tripe , and we Americans know it . 
Bush and McCain = Traitors to America . 
The debate is the opportunity for the American people to see these guys outside of their political adds . 
They can take a few hours out of one day of the week to handle that ; even relocating the debate to DC . 
McCain is dodging the debate , and exacerbating the crisis that he refused to acknowledge as recently as this week . 
He is a complete fraud . 
Millions of voters were hurt by this over the last year as their mortgages crushed them , and their jobs were shipped overseas . 
McCain clearly only cares now because Cindy 's vast fortune , and the fortunes of his top aids\/lobbyists took a hit this week . 
McCain will do ANYTHING to avoid talking about the issues - he is woefully unprepared for the debates , he used the selection of Sarah Palin as a smoke screen for weeks - let 's talk about Sarah , not the issues . 
Well , the jig is up . 
Now he 's trying to bill himself as `` the great unifier '' and solver of economic crisis . 
He needs to stop doing everything else so he can focus on the economy . 
We should just put the war and health care and everything else on hold so the doddering old fool can concentrate . 
The world is just WAY too complicated for poor old McCain to wrap his head around . 
He needs a rocking chair and a book of crossword puzzles . 
Surely there 's a large auditorium available somewhere . 
If not , the Mississippi debate should take place as scheduled . 
Ca n't you just hear her debating Biden ... trying to defend her interest in banning books and trying to recall what Kissinger told her during her 50 minute meeting with him ? 
What the country needs is for the two candidates to get up there and debate the issues , not hide behind some committee . 
This is so ridiculous . 
Reckless , impulsive , and desperate . 
The last thing we need in the White House . 
Do something !! Anything !!! January 20 , 2009 . 
The End of an ERROR ! 
bob | September 24 , 2008 4:26 PM | Report abuse Posted by : Commonsense | September 24 , 2008 4:26 PM | Report abuse Vote for REAL change Novemeber 4th . 
She can learn all that John McCain knows about the economy in a couple of hours I 'm sure . 
Why should n't the debate go forward ? 
It 's an opportunity to address the public in a time of crisis . 
And all McCain has to do is show up for the 90 minutes I 'm sure he 's ready . 
By asking for a time out , he once again is showing that he can not handle a crisis appropriately . 
Neither he nor Obama are leaders in Congress . 
They are rank and file senators . 
He just wants to get in the middle of it and act the bully . 
This is a fine opportunity for Obama to finish him . 
Is sure hope he does it . 
It should be the states call on that one except in dire cases -LRB- rape , incest -RRB- . 
The Republicans , true Republicans have not been in power . 
The party has been taken over and infested by Socialists . 
Case in point this bailout which is being steered by Secretary Paulsen -LRB- who is a Democrat -RRB- and the Socialist Republicans and the Leftist Democrats . 
They are ought to steal your money . 
What appalls me most about McCain is that on Sunday 's 60 minutes , he said he 'd appoint Andrew Cuomo as Treasury Secretary who is a liberal . 
McCain knows Obama is about to clean his clock on the economy . 
Like the others , McCain now has to reap what was sown during all his Keating Five adventures and his huge record of deregulating everything in sight . 
Or maybe we will wake up a year later and find out that no one shot the economy . 
It was all a dream . 
Ca n't he observe as it is happening and come up with a darn revision of plans ? 
Why halt the entire debate ? 
We only have just over 40 days . 
The ALL `` experienced '' John McCain is trying to buy time as a method to slide right into the White House , and I 'm ticked . 
We 've waited so long for this . 
Lets have the darn debate ! 
Well , one way to look at this is Obama was prepared . 
McCain looks off schedule and unprepared in the midst of events ; he seems as though he 's not keeping up or being ready during the events . 
This is quite disappointing . 
Cancel your campaigning if you want to . 
but the rest of us need to hear what you have to say if you want our vote . 
politically convenient once again , McCain . 
He should have mentioned the communication he had with Obama earlier on today before his decision . 
This all reeks of politics and as the saying goes , ` politics is a dirty game ' . 
I bet McCain 's decision is meant to make him look like he is more patriotic than his opponent Obama . 
I suggest the Friday debate goes on according to schedule so that the candidates can get an opportunity to articulate their thoughts and suggestions on how to solve the current precarious state of the financial system . 
This old man has no shame . 
He has decided that he will win this election come hell or high water , and there is no low to which he will not sink to do that . 
All of a sudden , the entire `` W '' administration and Congress ca n't do without him . 
He must postpone his losing campaign and the debate to come save us ! 
He 's running scared and wants a time-out . 
He knows he will get obliterated on Friday night ! 
The United States Presidential campaigns must continue ; to include the debates . 
We have lawmakers from every state in the Union here in Washington D.C. to work on a response to the President 's proposal . 
Both the McCain and Obama camps have private jets that have managed to get the candidates all over this country , sometimes in different cities in diffent states . 
This is 2008 , the candidates can work in washington and make campaign engagements as well . 
I hate to say it , but everything that comes out of the McCain camp has been about politics and I honestly do n't think that this is any different . 
Perhaps it is FEAR of having to answer tough questions . 
Perhaps it is a maneuver to avoid having to answer tough questions for as long as is humanly possible until election day . 
McCain has even suggested that this delay be indefinate . 
Is this the new and improved `` Let 's grip the country in fear '' maneuver of the GOP ? 
If so , I 'm not shaking . 
This is a bailout , plain and simple , and it is going to stink no matter how the lawmakers try and spin it , they can put as much lipstick on this pig that they like , and it will still be a pig . 
It will still STINK , American 's will still HATE it . 
There is no dressing this thing up . 
A campaign suspension is NOT going to fix this . 
There needs to be OVERSIGHT . 
No unelected official should have the authority to spend 700 billion tax dollars unrestrained . 
PERIOD !!! On thing is for certain , come rain or shine , there WILL be a general election in November , AS SCHEDULED . 
Thus , considering the monumental importance of this election , the campaigns must stay on schedule and move forward . 
BREAKING NEWS : The debates will go on as scheduled . 
Amazing how one man can not take few hours of his time to debate which of course will be prepared by bunch of advisors . 
What a scammer and if Obama falls for this trick , he doe not deserve to be in this race . 
This guy is worse than Chavez ! 
McCain is suspending his campaign due to Lack of Interest more than anying or McCain is afraid to appear at the debate without Palin . 
All McCain 's got are these cheap stunts . 
See `` Sarah Palin . '' 
In terms of the timing of this move : The only thing that 's changed in the last 48 hours is the public polling showing McCain tanking . 
That 's all his desperate campaign can come up with . 
Sorry , but the American people wo n't fall for it . 
We know the financial crisis is a direct result of the economic `` policies '' McCain has cheered his entire political career ! 
There have been 643 votes taken in the current Senate session : McCain has missed 412 of them . 
McCain has not voted in the Senate since April 8th . 
Since March , he has missed 109 of the last 110 votes . 
This is a Karl Rove stunt , nothing more , nothing less !! Posted by : campr | September 24 , 2008 4:24 PM | Report abuse I 'm tired of 50\/50 politics . 
Let 's divide the country . 
All the financially responsible , intelligent , self-sufficient people in one half ; all the Democrats in the other . 
It 's just the way I am : a Humble HERO on the RUN ! 
Busy busy busy ... Posted by : Chris Barrett | September 24 , 2008 4:23 PM | Report abuse I am beginning to thing that McCain ALLOWED himself to be captured to be a POW . 
He is a coward ... who is on the run . 
You simply can not say , `` I do n't understand economics , '' then suspend your campaign ... because only you can save America from economic collapse . 
Do you want a coward as Commander-in Chief ? 
| September 24 , 2008 4:23 PM | Report abuse In reading some of this rhetoric - I am so very proud and honored to be a McCain , Palin supporter . 
It is obvious to me that the Obama supporters do not have a clue how serious this economic crisis is , and see the need to put aside the backbiting until a fix can be agreed on . 
I am also convinced of one more thing , there is no fix to `` stupid '' . 
I feel sorry for you , and totally understand why our nation is in the crisis it is in when politics as usual , is more important to you than our country . 
For them it seems to be politics , politics , politics and seeking political advantage . 
They just do n't understand how a man like McCain can decisively put his country first . 
For them it 's a trick . 
For McCain , and the rest of America it 's all about serving your country and putting your country first . 
He did the right thing here . 
Politics ca n't possibly be as important as patriotism . 
Obama not accepting his challenge , or taking so long to do it , is pathetic . 
No one cares about polls '' Is that why the McCain campaign called the Washington Post today to complain about their most recent poll showing Obama surging ahead ? 
Yeah , we are soooooo stupid . 
Running from the debate ? 
I think he is still running from the Press . 
This move has underlined that McSame does not have the judgement to hold the highest land in the office . 
He picked a campaign manager that is DIRTY ! 
He picked a running mate that is UNQUALIFIED ! 
NO way , NO How , NO McCAIN and definitley NO PALIN ! 
However , if McSame would prefer , why not hold them in DC and allow both candidates to attend whatever meetings they 'd like . 
Like a broken record . 
Now he says it is in crisis , but it is a crisis he helped create by being a chronic de-regulator , and a crisis his chief economic adviser , Phil Gramm , is directly responsible for with Gramm-Leach . 
All McCain cares about is giving out $ 700 Billion in CORPORATE WELFARE so that the Treasury Department , unchecked , can buy these mortgages for 50 cents on the dollar , transfer it to other large corporations , and a few people get incredibly rich and the American tax payers get the bill . 
And no relief for American citizens , unless you are very rich already . 
Why is it that McCain has been at the center of the last 2 financial melt-downs ? 
The failed S&L scandal in the 1980s , and McCain as one of the notorious Keating 5 , and now this ? 
Just when you think McCain ca n't go any lower , he cheapens his own cheap politics even more . 
It is essential to our democracy that we hear from the candidates about all the issues . 
If Senator McCain wants to suspend his campaign , he should drop out of the race and let someone who wants to answer to the American people run in his place . 
That would rule out Sarah Palin as a presidential candidate , as well . 
The debate would require about 8 hours , start to finish -LRB- max - including round trip travel -RRB- approx a third of one day to participate in . 
earl | September 24 , 2008 4:22 PM | Report abuse McCain looks very genuine and concerned . 
Again , he is willing to put his country first . 
Obama should do the same if he really cares - this IS a big economic crisis that needs to be solved . 
He 's ducking the debate because he 's not prepared to discuss the economy . 
This guy is absolutely pathetic . 
The fundamentals of the economy are sound , remember ? 
Nothing but a gimmick . 
This could be a smart move on McCain 's part . 
What 's he got to lose ? 
His campaign is tanking . 
Roll the dice - like he did with Palin . 
Keep her in containment . 
Avoid the scheduled debate . 
The forked tongue express rolls on ... Posted by : Tancred | September 24 , 2008 4:21 PM | Report abuse CA N'T YOU CHEW GUM AND SKIP ROPE AT THE SAME TIME , JOHN ? 
Mr. Davis s firm , Davis & Manafort , had been kept on the payroll because of Mr. Davis s close ties to Mr. McCain , the Republican presidential nominee , who by 2006 was widely expected to run again for the White House . 
` The Great One ' Barack Obama has taken more money from Fannie and Freddie than any US Senator since he 's been in office . 
His two ` advisors ' , Franklin Raines and James Johnson -LRB- who was also head of Barackas Obamas ' VP search cmte -RRB- raked over Fannie and Freddie for nearly 200 million dollars combined . 
The last time Obama voted was in June . 
If he uses this ploy to avoid the debate , he is a fool and a coward . 
I hope Obama won t fall for this swill . 
McCain is drowning and he wants someone to toss him a life line ? 
It s time he paid for his mistakes . 
This little gambit is just another . 
As more and more of his connections to those responsible for pillaging the economy come to the light of day he 's now scrambling to appear as the concerned statesman when he is neither . 
McCain 's fingerprints are all over this crime scene . 
HE IS N'T EVEN PART OF THE FINANCE COMMITTEE WHO DOES THE HEARINGS , BECAUSE HE DO N'T KNOW ECONOMICS . 
SO HE THINKS THAT THE PUBLIC ARE STUPID ? 
IF GOP HAS ANY HONESTY LEFT , THEY SHOULD REPLACE `` J. McCAIN & S. PALIN CLOWNS '' . 
Sure did n't take him long to try to stop the debate altogether ! 
I agree - let Joe and Sarah step in for their debate a little earlier than originally planned . 
Joe is likely well-prepared now and preparation would n't help Sarah anyway . 
You do not have the temperament to be president . 
Look at how you make decisions . 
The debate takes 2 hours on Friday night . 
Debate the economy and your plans for it instead or send your vice-presidential candidates to the debate on Friday with the same rules that were set for the presidential candidates . 
You are going to shower , get dressed , give useless speeches etc. . 
over the next 3 days . 
If we see you so much as attend another event other than the crisis , you are doomed . 
This is the week that McCain ' campaign collapsed . 
The only thing that changed was the polls and the revelation that his campaign manager was paid to lobby for Freddie Mac until last month . 
This is cynical weasel politics . 
Why change leaders in the middle of a -LRB- terrorist attack\/war\/economic crisis -RRB- ? 
The last person we need back in DC to `` solve the problem '' is `` Cobwebs '' McCain , who has admitted he knows nothing about the economy . 
Let 's get this election over with so we can start putting the new leaders under the microscope . 
I am looking forward to watching The Senile Senator justify his choice of VP , choice of economic advisors and choice of campaign manager , under the glaring headlights of this financial catastrophe . 
Good Lord , we are in trouble if he wins this election . 
Our ex-Keating crony -LRB- not to mention dumper of his car crash disfigured wife who badly needed you after waiting 5 yrs for you ` big hero ' John I 'll remember that longer than your so often repeated & dubious ` Pilgrims progress ` story of finding salvation from self-infatuation ! -RRB- 
They need his input like a hole in the head in D. C ! 
He & his pals in greed -LRB- beginning way back when that slime-bag Keating jetted him around on golf junkets ! -RRB- 
strongly helped create the current situation ! 
Perhaps you need time to go get the count straight on your luxury homes - before any debate ! 
Which one do you want to make your Western White House ?? -RRB- Naaaaah ! 
comeon lets get real folks ! 
If you want another ` seat of the pants ' Presidency by a hot-head reactionary with -LRB- in this case -RRB- a perpetually flip-flopping ` opportunistic ' history -LRB- at least Bush\/Cheney Axis of Purile is doggedly persistent -RRB- then go ahead & assist the anti-Obama crowd in - -LRB- lets be honest here folks -RRB- - their main under-lying ` racist ' reasons for not giving Obama the well-deserved huge boost in polls he should now be getting !! Posted by : neilo1 | September 24 , 2008 4:19 PM | Report abuse McBush is hoisted on his own deregulating petard and hopes some of Obama 's credability will rub off on him . 
Seems the Neocons have co-opted the name . 
Then SPENT far worse than any LIBERAL of their definition ... but kepted bashing what they are . . 
right in front of their Supporters . . 
WOW do they have them fooled . 
Guess it must be the super Strength KOOLAIDES . 
No one cares about polls . 
Obama talks about the economy and yet he wants to have the debates . 
McCain is temporarily suspending his campaign because the economy is more important than a debate . 
This shows why Obama is not fit to lead . 
John McCain is showing Presidential leadership while Obama is `` studying '' for a debate . '' 
Well Ken , we know McCain is n't studying ... remember he graduated 5th from the bottom of his class ... hardly studious and Sarah Palin ... 6 years\/6 colleges . 
If you think this is the reason for you to vote for McCain-you are a prime reason why an IQ test should be required for all eligible voters ! 
What 's he going to do when he gets to Washington ? 
He has missed 60 % of the votes in the last year . 
Now he wants to change the rules : probably have Bush get him a seat beside Paulson looking like he knows something about the economy . 
Put your Country First McCain . 
Face the nation you think you 're ready to lead . 
This is not time for stunts . 
But no worries , under the Constitution in that case the House of Representatives gets to decide . 
President Obama - you 'll need to get used to it cons . 
Neither of them is on the committee , and they 'd prefer to be left out at this time to finish the work with Paulson and Bernanke . '' 
So stay away and campaign , guys . 
A Palin\/Biden VP campaign sounds perfect . 
Let 's see ... I bet Biden will jump on it , but Palin ? 
Forget it folks , there will be NO debate . 
Cancelling 1 debate to do HIS JOB is the right thing to do . 
He asked B H Obama to join him in a dozen town hall meetings where no-hype questions could be asked by average americans and B H Obama ran and hid . 
McCain is n't into all this technology stuff . 
He still thinks you have to send a letter by pony express to communicate back and forth with Washington . 
I ALREADY GOT MY POP-CORN , MY SODA , AND A FEW FRIENDS COMING OVER . 
SOMEBODY PLEASE MAKE JOHN MCCAIN HAVE HIS ARSE IN MISSISSIPPI ON FRIDAY . 
We are ready to host the debate , and we expect the debate to occur as planned . 
`` At present , the University has received no notification of any change in the timing or venue of the debate . 
`` We have been notified by the Commission on Presidential Debates that we are proceeding as scheduled . 
`` We will keep you posted as information becomes available . '' 
I do think McCain wants to stop the debate because he wants to strengthen his economic issues . 
But to say this mess is the blame of democrats is someone not doing all their homework . 
McCain is not for regulations . 
He has spoke out against them time and time again till this crisis . 
Now we need to watch what is going on . 
Where was this concern before ? 
In the beginning of article you will notice it was Obama who called McCain in the first place . 
The debate needs to go on . 
It is not like a vote will take place Friday night or sessions then . 
I wish I could believe McCain but he flip flops policies to fit the times . 
I do n't want 4 more years of Republicans ! 
Making a strong case to the US citzens about his vision and why he should be elected is also enormously important . 
It is more crucial than ever that we hear from our potential leaders what they think about the current economic crisis , and what they want to do about it . 
Once again , the American populace is ignored and disrespected by the politicians . 
We deserve better , plain and simple . 
THE REPUBLICANS HAVE MADE A MESS OF OUR PARTY ... TOTAL MESS OF OUR COUNTRY , GOVERMENT , POLITICS , ECONOMY , AND ITS PEOPLE ... I HOPE OBAMA SAYS NO TO THIS , AND GIVE US '' THE AMERICAN PEOPLE '' OUR DEBATES ... ENOUGH . 
I 'LL BE VOTING FOR SENATOR OBAMA . 
Partisanship , cynicism , paranoia and blind hate can only lead to ruin ... and we are doomed . 
Cancelling 1 debate to do HIS JOB is the right thing to do . 
He asked B H Obama to join him in a dozen town hall meetings where no-hype questions could be asked by average americans and B H Obama ran and hid . 
Also it discounts the thousands of vote he did cast which is more important . 
I know , the explanation is wasted , but I tried . 
I ca n't quite figure it out . 
He would have been much more successful , politically , to propose a campaign suspension until the debate , a guarantee that he will vote one way or the other -LRB- not abstain -RRB- on the bill and request a change in the debate content to reflect the crisis . 
This would have made him look like he wanted to both work on the problem and address the nation as to the progress . 
Obama would have been forced to agree to these conditions and would also have been forced to vote on the bill . 
I wonder if he is n't setting the stage for an attempted postponing or cancellation of the VP debate . 
He clearly can not participate Friday and then attempt to change the VP debate . 
We should all be questioning the over-protection of Palin . 
Is she really so slow on the uptake as to need this cloak of secrecy around her ? 
This move , however , makes it look like he has joined the protective cloak surrounding Palin . 
Do his advisers really think all is lost and that this Hail Mary is his only chance for a bounce under these conditions ? 
this is definitely the most bizarre election campaign of my life to date . 
I thought hanging chad was going to be it but this one has that passed by leaps and bounds . 
No one cares about polls . 
Obama talks about the economy and yet he wants to have the debates . 
McCain is temporarily suspending his campaign because the economy is more important than a debate . 
Since he does n't , is n't your argument pretty much pointless ? 
I can tell you want to paint McCain as a hero very badly , but it just does n't hold water . 
Unless , of course , he 's been wrong all along . 
No more sexism by McCain ! 
No one cares about polls . 
Obama talks about the economy and yet he wants to have the debates . 
McCain is temporarily suspending his campaign because the economy is more important than a debate . 
This shows why Obama is not fit to lead . 
John McCain is showing Presidential leadership while Obama is `` studying '' for a debate . 
Fit to lead means actually having an opinion on the bailout . 
Something McCain has yet to do . 
Fit to lead means being able to multi-task , like walking and chewing gum at the same time . 
This is why McCain doesnt want to debate . . 
McCain wants to DELAY the debate on Friday . 
Because of the economic crisis . 
You mean the crisis he will NOT comment on ? 
The crisis he will not say one way or the other if he supports the bail out ? 
The crisis his deregulation caused ? 
The crisis that his supply-side economic friends caused ? 
The crisis he is already very familiar with given the Keating five scandal ? 
The crisis that shouldn t exist because the `` economy is fundamentally strong '' The crisis that according to Phil Graham is a figment of our imaginations ? 
Please by all means cancel the debate . 
God only knows we cant have a debate AND deal with this crisis . 
That would be like walking and chewing gum at the same time . 
Because it distracts us from this ... One of the giant mortgage companies at the heart of the credit crisis paid $ 15,000 a month from the end of 2005 through last month to a firm owned by Senator John McCain s campaign manager . 
Mr. Davis s firm , Davis & Manafort , had been kept on the payroll because of Mr. Davis s close ties to Mr. McCain , the Republican presidential nominee , who by 2006 was widely expected to run again for the White House . 
He needs a strong position on the rescue package to have a chance of resurrecting his candidacy . 
Its easy to see why Obama would prefer to continue his campaign without any disruption . 
But there is a danger to him in that course . 
It is obvious that the rescue package is a very big deal to the electorate . 
If he allows McCain the position of appearing more concerned and more central to the outcome , it could wind up costing Obama dearly . 
McCain is a coward who offers to suspend his campaign simply because he is falling further behind every day and wants to change the subject . 
The simpleton has nothing of substance to add to the debate in Washington and is merely hiding from Obama , the media , and the American people . 
My suggestion for Obama 's response : No to suspending the national dialogue on the pressing issues of our economic future . 
No to calling off the debates . 
We should change the subject of Friday 's debate in Mississippi to the domestic economy rather the original topic of foreign policy . 
McCain is fleeing to washington for cover ! 
It 's a time for a grownup , not a gaseous poseur like the good professor . 
Let him go back to his navel-gazing , his planet-healing , and his puzzling over exactly who it is he has been waiting for . 
| September 24 , 2008 4:16 PM | Report abuse Anyone who does n't smell the soiled and putrid hand of Karl Rove in this purely political ploy to cancel the debate should get some smelling salts or nitro pills immediately . 
You 're obviously approaching brain death . 
The answer is the democrat\/socialist party that depends on the fear of racism and poverty in order to maintain control over their slaves . 
A true conservative believes in the ultimate minority , the minority of the individual . 
A vote for Obama is a vote for racism , poverty , slavery , and death . 
Do n't worry , I 'm still not going to vote for Obama , but now I just as surely will not vote for you . 
SO ARE WE SUPPOSE TO UNDERSTAND THAT IT IS MORE IMPORTANT FOR MCCAIN\/PALIN TO ATTEND UN MEETINGS THAN TO ADDRESS THE BAILOUT SITUATION . 
IF THIS IS SUCH A CRITICAL MOMENT WHY WAIT UNTIL NOW . 
MCCAIN IS UNPREPARED AND THIS IS JUST A PLOT TO SKIP THE DEBATES . 
ARE WE TO SKIP THE ELECTION ALSO , IF MCCAIN FINDS ANOTHER ISSUE ON NOV 3RD Posted by : April | September 24 , 2008 4:16 PM | Report abuse McCain made a smart move : break the momentum Obama is enjoying in the polls . 
This will get him a few points . 
I applaud him for this move at the perfect time , if he did n't do it , he 'd be losing even more points in the polls . 
They are going to go way down now . 
Allow me clue you in ! 
Obama is ready to debate . 
Obama can work and take one evening to debate McCain ! 
A president that can deal with a crisis and be true to the people of this country . 
In just 8 years , you forgot that was possible . 
Bush is the one who has to take care of the economy crisis . 
All plans should continue . 
Postponding one debate will also affect the other debates , and time is not in our side . 
All in all the problem did not start today . 
If McCain was serious he could acted immediately when the problem started . 
Putting a country in an halt is making every citizen feel paralysed . 
AS for Senator McCain ~ you 're not even a chicken . 
You are a wimp . 
What an ignorant idea : The economy is in trouble , and I am running for president against someone who is smarter than me . 
Run , Johnny , Run . 
The guy is a cardboard cutout . 
Voting for him is like voting in the Bud bowl at halftime of the Superbowl . 
It 's what Hillary would have done . 
McCain issued his challenge a long time ago . 
Why is it taking so long for Obama to make the same patriotic gesture ? 
He should be ashamed of himself . 
Desperate people will do desperate things . 
The Republican party cares about winning . 
The GOP Bus says Victory ! 
Not A Change we can Believe In ! 
They will do anything and say anything to keep power in the White House . 
I do n't see them changing their stripes . 
John McCain is losing his creditbility even among some of his voters . 
The Economy is not his strong point and he has to suspend campaigning and the delay the debate to concentrate on it ? 
It does n't say Country First , it say GOP winning first ! 
Do n't be fooled people . 
Especailly you Hillary voters who still can not get over her not getting the nomination . 
You are so not getting over it so much that you are supporting a person who in no way shares the Democratic point of view . 
And Sarah Palin is just a trick to pull you in and you fell for it . 
This man is gambling , rolling the dice at whatever idea sound good . 
Somebody convince him to put the pitbull with lipstick on his ticket . 
Well that tricked worked for a minute . 
But now they are keeping Sarah Palin under raps . 
Everyday goes by , the American people find out more and more about her . 
What we are hearing is not good . 
Even Laura Bush said her foreign policy was weak . 
She also said she was a quick study . 
I 'm sorry we do n't have time for someone to be a quick study . 
Meeting foreign leaders in the UN is crash course but not what we need for someone who God forbid if McCain wins may end up running the country . 
But people give no thought to that . 
Again , people need to look at the issues . 
They need to ignore the color of someone skin and see who really has Americas interest at heart . 
I think if the Democratic nominee were n't an African American McCain would be further behind in the polls than he is . 
Because the Republican party is not popular with America thanks to President Bush . 
Those that vote GOP are the old party faithful that will blindly go for anything the GOP puts out . 
Why else would 8\/10 people are their convention think that President Bush has done a good job ? 
You must be among the 30 % of America that approves of him . 
Many Americans just are not ready . 
They are willing to risk our country to do have 4 more year of the same when we clearly need a change . 
I 'm sorry Republicans you all have had 8 yrs to get it right . 
Electing someone who votes with Bush more than 90 % of time is not it . 
We need a change . 
Obama may not have the experience . 
He has the intelligence to do it . 
If he did n't he would not be putting his reputation on the line and putting his wife and family in the spotlight . 
People with experience have been running Washington for years including McCain . 
He has had over 25 years in Washington to get it right . 
Yet he asks the American people for 4 more years to fix what is wrong with America when he had a chance to fix before all of this started . 
Now he wants to delay things , now he wants to delay the debate . 
I personally think the GOP is using this as an excuse to regroup and launch an attack . 
Do you notice this comes on the tail of the controversial Washington Post\/ABC news poll that shows Obama ahead ? 
Obama stay on your guard ! 
The GOP and McCain is not giving up the White House without a fight . 
Lord knows this country can not survive 4 more years of them . 
If McCain does n't want to attend the event - Send Palin to Oxford MS. Posted by : mister . 
earl | September 24 , 2008 4:14 PM | Report abuse As a former Richardson supporter , I respect John McCain for suspending his campaign for a few days until the peoples business is finished . 
It is becoming more and more apparent who the politician is and who the leader is in this campaign . 
Obama is 100 percent politician . 
He and Biden criticized Palin for the Bridge to Nowhere , when they had the power thru their Senate votes to kil it and they did not . 
I am finished with Obama . 
I flirted , i dated , I am breaking up . 
He is a joke . 
NEXT , HE 'LL GET A NOTE FROM HIS MOMMMY AND STAY HOME SICK FROM THE DEBATE Posted by : Tom Renda | September 24 , 2008 4:14 PM | Report abuse McCain 's campaign controllers have rolled the dice and it is a near Machiavellian game . 
They so callously tout McCain 's superior credentials as a pragmatic statesman over Obama , run to join Republican Robber Barons to get a rushed bill through and pretend that there is just no ability to attend to Congressional work and campaign at the same time ? 
Johnny Boy ... hang it up ! 
The BailOut is a SellOut of the American middle class and your running from a debate with a more capable leader is laughably sophomoric and incompetent . 
You are disgusting and Pallin needs to go back to Alaska and face court charges honestly ; so does her dude husband . 
It is time to end both Republican and Wall Street rule . 
My portfolio was in positive territory on the day until you pulled this cute little stunt . 
McCain knows that he can not stand toe-to-toe with Obama in a real debate on the `` real '' issues , so he is off to Washington to pretend to work as he has done for the last twenty odd years . 
McCain needs to leave the problem solving to the young boys ! 
he 's for the American worker ... a middle class kinda guy . 
Talk about a flip-floper ! 
ANYTHING TO GET ELECTED - ANYTHING !!! Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 4:13 PM | Report abuse Today , Presidential candidate Sen. John McCain demonstrated real leadership in announcing the temporary suspension of his Presidential campaign to return to Washington D.C. to work toward a bipartisan solution to the nation 's economnic problems . 
It 's the right thing to do . 
Sen. McCain looks like a President today . 
What say you Sen. Obama to Sen. McCain 's calls for you to do the same ? 
Sen. McCain , once again , puts his country first and politics second . 
THE PRESSURE OF THE CAMPAIGN IS GETTING INTO HIM ! 
THE 72 YEARS OLD MAN IS WORRIED ABOUT HIS HEART ! 
I WILL NOT BE SURPRISED THAT HE WILL BE TAKEN TO HAWAI TO RECUPERATE TO KEEP HIS HEART PUMPING FOR ANOTHER DAY . 
ISNT IT IME FOR THIS OLD MAN TO RETIRE GRACEFULLY AND LET THE JOB OF A PRESIDENT TO A MORE COMMITTED DYNAMIC YOUNG COMPUTER LITERATE WHO IS WILLING TO ADVANCE THE CAUSE OF THE MIDDLE CLASS BEFORE IT WILL EROSE ANY FURTHER . 
Plenty of dems on these pages and your comments are hateful and pathetic . 
Everyone know that Bush screwed things up , but where was your democratic Congress with the witch Pellosi at helm for the last two years ? 
Trying to get approval rating over 20 % ? 
Before writing your hatred , you may want to tray to take an IQ test and see how many points you owe !!! Posted by : fedupwithdems | September 24 , 2008 4:13 PM | Report abuse why do n't people who criticize obama for voting ` present ' go google up why one votes ` present ' in the illinois legislature ? 
It is often done as a means of signaling disapproval of a bill you would support - ordinarily because someone has attached something objectionable to it . 
Oftentimes it is done by the sponsor of a bill to object to attachments and riders gumming up an otherwise good bill . 
Most legislatures do n't permit ` present ' votes , but illinois does - and there 's nothing wrong with it . 
Poor girl gets blasted on a daily basis . 
I would drop out if I was the laughing stock of the country . 
I do n't feel any sympathy though , she is lying cheating nimrod who is in way over her head . 
Died in the wool liberals will say he is just ducking the debate , but those independents who will decide the election will see McCain as the maverick he is and give him numerous brownie points for putting America and the economy first and the election second . 
Just watch the polls . 
Very smart move indeed ! 
It would lead to a more intelligent and meaningful debate ! 
He 's got nothing left . 
A week ago he was saying that the `` fundamentals of the economy are strong . '' 
Today he suddenly needs to rush back to Washington to save the economy , and his VP running mate is yakking about averting another Great Depression . 
It would be hilarious if it was n't so sickening . 
Now panic by McCain . 
His drop in the polls , the fading of Palin , and now McCain has a sense of urgency ? 
How about McCain suspend his campaign for good and concede defeat to Obama ? 
It 's only a matter of time . 
Afterall the preparation we did awaiting this debate he got the nerve to ask for postponement . 
And leave us hanging high and dry . 
What a freaking stud . 
Most other polls have it 48-46 Obama -LRB- average -RRB- . 
McCain will win 2\/3 to 3\/4 of the independent and undecided vote . 
This election is going to be a horse race . 
I do n't believe for a minute that the 2008 version of John McCain is `` putting country first '' by suspending his campaign to work on the economic crisis . 
He is putting his own a \*\* first . 
McCain is tanking in the polls , so he thinks he can put Obama back on the defensive with this move . 
As my son says -- this is complete bull \*\*\* \* Posted by : lennie | September 24 , 2008 4:12 PM | Report abuse Here is a thought , postpone the debate and have Palin give her first news conference instead , Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 4:12 PM | Report abuse With 11 states already doing early voting , we need this debate on Friday . 
That 's exactly why McSame wants it postponed . 
They 're hoping the sheeple will fall for Queen Sarah and him with no questions asked . 
This is plain stupid . 
Why would someone who admittedly has no knowledge of economics be a help to this process ? 
Give me a break ! 
The debates should go forward as planned . 
However , if McSame would prefer , why not hold them in DC and allow both candidates to attend whatever meetings they 'd like . 
Where was McCain the past 26 years when he was championing deregulation which created this mess ? 
What could he possibly add which would be relevant to the negotiations . 
| September 24 , 2008 4:11 PM | Report abuse McCain is getting crushed in the latest polls , and does n't trust his VP to have an actual interview with the media other than staged sit-downs with Charles Gibson of Dem Primary debate ignominy and moron hack Sean Hannity . 
It 's not surprising that McCain wants to suspend a campaign that is going down in flames . 
I guess he never learned to multi-task ? 
If Obama had made this request the Republicans would say he is ducking the issues , but if McCain does it it is Presidential . 
I thought that a president should multitask , so I guess that McCain can not deal with more than one crisis at a time . 
Obama should not blink . 
This is to defuse the polls and to regain a lead . 
Obama do not blink , the country must go on . 
No one cares about polls . 
Obama talks about the economy and yet he wants to have the debates . 
McCain is temporarily suspending his campaign because the economy is more important than a debate . 
This shows why Obama is not fit to lead . 
John McCain is showing Presidential leadership while Obama is `` studying '' for a debate . 
This is nothing more than a desperation stall by McCain . 
He has no clue about how the economy works . 
He has no clue about what to do to fix it . 
Even George Will and the Wall Street Journal noted the recklessness McCain showed when he said he would fire SEC Chairman Cox -- without noting a single offense Cox has committed to draw McCain 's displeasure . 
McCain wants to delay debating economic policies forever if he can . 
Maybe his internal polls reveal the evidence that his Palin insult has faded fast and recognizes he is falling faster than a rocket leaving orbit altitude . 
Obviously he can not multitask ... ... Well actually it is obvious he is a coward . 
If he pulls a stunt to get out of debating , that helps Obama . 
What is left to try ? 
He said he called Obama and Bushism + Congress to tell them that he wants to postpone the debate and return to Washington for the bailout bill . 
Why the hell he did not wait for Obama 's response until he made his announcement . 
Is this the way you act Diplomatically . 
So we have no idea what he would do ? 
So we just have to vote for him because it 's what he wants us to do ? 
Is n't that just what Secretary Paulson proposed with the bailout ? 
Funny how this timing coincides with today 's Washington Post\/ABC poll . 
I just ca n't respect this man ... this is pure political games at its worst . 
Please America , ca n't you see through this man ? 
First Sarah Palin -LRB- a blatant and pathethic attempt to solicit the white female vote -RRB- and now this ?! People are truly hurting right now and we need to hear what EACH candidate plans to actually do about it if we entrust them with our vote ! 
He 's scared and he knows he ca n't stand the debate heat . 
I , for one , would like to see them debate in Washington , DC ... ON FRIDAY NIGHT ... ON THE ECONOMY !!!!! It 's time the country heard what these men have to say ... NO EXCUSES ... John McCain ... when ANY excuse will do . 
Those securities in question causing all this also have credit card and auto loans written into them . 
So you should do a little research and stop your finger pointing . 
This is the result of ALL political parties being asleep of directly involved . 
You ignoring the deregulation drive by GOP lawmakers is absurd . 
Without the monolithic support of the David Axelrod Puppet 's dead-weight-on-the-economy constituency , McCain would be far out ahead . 
And if it were n't for Democrat mortgage deadbeats there would be no subprime mess . 
We do n't care to be left in the dark by the GOP any longer . 
Obama should be clear that the American people deserve to hear them debate and hear them this Friday . 
-LRB- Among other reasons for the need to debate now rather than later is early voting . -RRB- 
At the same time , Obama can suggest that they move the debate to Washington D.C. and , given the financial meltdown , change the topic to the economy . 
-LRB- Back at ya McCain ! -RRB- 
That look on John 's face is not because he care but because old people get those from aging . 
He has more cronies on the payroll of thses failing comapnies then a high school band . 
He has 26 years to work on the problem so hop on Cindy 's plane , pick up Obama go to the discussing back to the debate and return again on the same plane . 
The taxpayer might know it yet but we are paying for the fuel anyway . 
Now all of a sudden right before the election they are in a hurry and want to dodge a debate ? 
This is another trick play from the smear campaign of John McCain . 
Senator `` I want 10 town hall meetings '' McPalin is suddenly `` choking '' . 
Keep the debate on schedule and discuss the economy . 
This smacks of political opportunism and showboating in all the wrong ways . 
If he was serious about this , he would have suspended his campaign days ago to make sure tomorrow 's deadline is met . 
McCain has pulled this straight out of the Bush playbook for starting the war in Iraq , and passing the Patriot Act before that . 
This is disgusting , vile , naked political ambition contrary to patriotic ideals . 
Bush 's men , and McCain 's actions today are nothing short of treason . 
A week ago there was no economic crisis according to them . 
Now there is , and it needs to be handled their way , right now , or America is doomed . 
That is tripe , and we Americans know it . 
Bush and McCain = Traitors to America . 
The pressure is getting to hot for him and the poll numbers are showing it . 
The lies are starting to catch up with him and he has no answers . 
We all know how much of an economic leader that he is , not ! 
These are the games that socialist-republicans play to take the pressure off them when they are in the wrong . 
\* OK , so let 's have a VICE Presidential \* debate on Friday instead . 
Palin 's supposed to be able to fill in for McCain if he 's unable to serve , right ? 
OK , let 's see some filling in , Sarah ! 
Obama contacted John McCain at 8:30 am this morning to come up with a joint statement on the financial crisis . 
John McCain returned Obama 's call at around 2:30 PM . 
The two spoke and John McCain suggested that they suspend their campaigns . 
However , Obama did not AGREE or DISAGREE . 
About an our later , John McCain was making announcement that he was suspending is Campaign . 
He is trying to make him self look like man of Truth and Convictions . 
John McCain needs to be escorted immediately off any stage when he starts talking about the economy . 
All this talk about chicken is giving me a taste for KFC . 
Having lost significant ground to Obama on the issue of the economy , and facing a potentially defining and withering debate on Friday where he would be confronted on his statements on the economy that have led to this sharp decline , McCain has attempted to change the rules of the game , to erase many past errors through a putatively `` unpolitical '' move -- something we have seen before . 
A simple question : Under the same economic conditions , if McCain had been leading , does anyone believe that McCain would have `` suspended '' his campaign ? 
This is the ultimate in cynicism -- using the current conditions in order to attempt to blunt a sharp decline and try to control the media dialogue , through a political act designed to avoid a potential political debacle . 
He is continuing his campaign -- which was leading to loss in all directions -- by `` suspending '' it . 
McCain is avoiding the debate in the face of this decline . 
His poll numbers are plummeting , and he is desperate to try to seize back the initiative . 
Is n't that what Vice-Presidents do ? 
No more sexism by McCain ! 
McCain gets to play at being `` bipartisan '' , at a time his campaign is getting pummeled . 
And he has yet another excuse to keep Palin hidden away in Cheney 's undisclosed location . 
suggestion to McCain : grow a pair and chew your bubblegum and keep peddling the big wheel at the same time . 
you are a senator , not a financial wizard who needs a leave of absence . 
You can do two things at the same time . 
Palin 's supposed to be able to fill in for McCain if he 's unable to serve , right ? 
OK , let 's see some filling in , Sarah ! 
This is another slick move by McCain to steal Obama 's thunder , just like announcing Sarah Palin the day after Obama 's nomination speech . 
It 's very clever and cunning , and I am impressed . 
It 's like the coach calling Time Out when the opposing team 's kicker is already in stride to kick the game-winning field goal . 
John McCain would be legendary as Secretary of Defense . 
Neither of them is on the committee , and they 'd prefer to be left out if the presidential campaign at this time to finish the work with Paulson and Bernanke . 
What is Obama waiting for ? 
How long does it take for his aides to write a speech and get it on a teleprompter ?! Posted by : BruceMcDougall | September 24 , 2008 4:05 PM | Report abuse Oh please . 
Can McCain be anymore transparent . 
Can you say Keating Five . 
Can you say deregulation ? 
Give me a break for crying out loud . 
Instead he did it as a PR stunt , in synch with the White House , clearly trying to grab headlines and harm Obama at the same time . 
My friends , that 's not patriotism we can believe in . 
What is he going to do in Washington about this that is not being done already ? 
If anything , he is the last person needed to ` help ' resolve this issue . 
As far as priorities , he should take his place in the debate , but then again , he WILL get hammered on how he thinks that the principles of our economy are strong ! 
Obama will have to accept his challenge . 
It is , of course , a load of garbage , but you repeat it anyway . 
What difference will McCain make in all of this ? 
He 's got no economic chops . 
The only thing he has to contribute is his one vote . 
Granted , he should be there to provide it and show bipartisan support , but to make this out as some kind of herculean effort by McCain to save the country from despair is utterly ridiculous . 
McCain is not prepared . 
I wonder out loud if he was ahead in the polls would he suspend his campaign . 
I hope this stunt , let people see this man for what he is . 
I HOPE HE DROP HIS CAMPAIGN ALTOGETHER . 
His campaign ads are full of distortions and lies . 
He has proven to me that he will do and say anything to get elected as president . 
The good news is that he is self destructing on his own through his words and actions . 
It is becoming very clear that he is nothing more than a slippery lying politician . 
I 'm not thrilled about Obama either , but McCain is making him look like a saint . 
Suspend his campaign for the `` good of the country ? '' 
If you people really believe that , you are the same people that voted for Bush TWICE . 
Why should McCain debate ? 
Right , let 's cut the American public completely out of the loop . 
WE AMERICANS ARE NOT THAT STUPID JOHNNY BOY . 
Riiiiiiiiight ... cause calling for panels , committees , and the firing of someone you ca n't fire is so specific . 
This is nothing more than a desperation stall by McCain . 
He has no clue about how the economy works . 
He has no clue about what to do to fix it . 
Even George Will and the Wall Street Journal noted the recklessness McCain showed when he said he would fire SEC Chairman Cox -- without noting a single offense Cox has committed to draw McCain 's displeasure . 
McCain wants to delay debating economic policies forever if he can . 
Maybe his internal polls reveal the evidence that his Palin insult has faded fast and recognizes he is falling faster than a rocket leaving orbit altitude . 
... and all you obamacons who think he is afraid to debate Obama on foreign policy ... get real !! Posted by : Cassandra Washington | September 24 , 2008 4:03 PM | Report abuse Thank you , Sen. McCain , for your selfless service . 
You are a hero and an inspiration . 
| September 24 , 2008 4:03 PM | Report abuse PUBLIC IS GETTING WISE TO THE PAULSON SCHEME TO : `` STICK UP '' the American taxpayer , so tonight , bush is yelling FIRE FIRE FIRE !!!!! PURE UNADULTERATED MANIPULATION !!! THE ARMED ROBBERS ARE SCARED !!!! Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 4:03 PM | Report abuse McCain needs to DEFER his NAPTIME and speak to the people ! 
A Commander-in-Chief needs to MULTI-TASK ! 
The rest of America has to juggle priorities , miss a few zzzzs , and make a few sacrifices all the time , so man up and hop to , `` my friend '' ! 
By throwing it out to the media , he has made this nothing more than a political ploy , since he is getting his butt handed to him by the polls . 
Maybe he could have Palin stand in for him ? 
It is on foreign affairs , and she has seen Russia ! 
Banks had been required to obsere the regulatory rules of the New Deal up into the 1990 's . 
It was in the 1990 's that a Democrat , Bill Clinton , signed the bill that de-regulated the banks . 
The debate goes on as scheduled . 
The presidential debates will have a freewheeling format , so I 'm sure there will be a discussion about this issue at some point . 
... WHAT MCCAIN ASK FOR ... Suspend the bickering for FOR THE TIME BEING , and join hands to solve a major problem affecting everyone . 
Change the focus of the debate to economics and the current crisis . 
Do the next debate on foreign policy . 
The American people understand that you are the one being political here . 
Stop putting yourself and your campaign ahead of our country . 
Now more than ever the American people need to know where you and Senator Obama stand . 
Debate !!! And suspending your campaign , by the way , is a cheap gimmick . 
Who would you want to look after the cookie jar . 
But let 's make it personal - since the McCain campaign already has . 
It 's first names only . 
That is a game changer . 
He knows he would not have fared well in the debates . 
Typical GOP - when things go badly for you , just avoid the press . 
Go big or go home ; looks like Johnny is going home . 
Let 's hope he takes trickle-down economics with him . 
She 's supposed to be ready to fill in for Granpa Simpson when he croaks . 
Let 's see how ready she is for this . 
These guys have every reason to lie and Bush tonight will have every reason to lie to the American people . 
The Bush administration has run the biggest con game on America for eight and now it 's all unraveling . 
Try googling ` Community Reinvestment Act ' and educate yourself . 
The ` crisis ' being referred to is the world markets . 
They need to act soon before the world markets begin to crash . 
Our economy is about $ 14 trillion dollars . 
The Dems , with this plan , are trying to take about a trillion dollars -LRB- of your money - mine too -RRB- out of it . 
Bush has been trying to rework the CRA and reform the financial system since 2003 -LRB- look it up -RRB- but has been blocked at every attempt by the Dems . 
The Dems have trashed the financial system in this country and are now trying to nationalize it . 
That 's the scary part . 
I am not voting for either of these idiots . 
I will write in the name of Moses from the Bible . 
McCain and Obama both are liars and will not do the will of the people . 
Both will give 20 million illegal aliens amnesty and citizenship . 
Both black and white citizens in this country will be finished , because Central\/South Americans-Mexicans\/Dominicans\/Cubans have out numbered black citizens and they will out number white citizens by 2042 . 
What a mess this country is in with too many foreigners . 
Has anybody seen SARA PALIN , or is she still on hold too ? 
The Community reinvestment Act FORCED banks and lenders to give loans to people who could n't afford them in the first place . 
Bush shares some of this blame but let 's be honest . 
The US economy is around 14 trillion dollars and they 're trying to take a trillion dollars -LRB- of your money ! -RRB- 
of it out of the economy . 
This is being directed by the Dems who have for years blocked any attempt by the Republicans to reform and fix this problem . 
They -LRB- the Dems -RRB- have trashed this system and now want to nationalize it . 
This is the scary part . 
Just wait till they get around to bailing out Social Security and Medicare . 
Sen. Gramm was the driving force behind the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act , as he had received over $ 4.6 million from the FIRE sector -LRB- Finance , Insurance and Real Estate donations -RRB- over the previous decade , and once the Act passed , an influx of `` megamergers '' took place among banks and insurance and securities companies , as if they had been eagerly awaiting the passage of Gramm 's Act . 
Add to this the GOP supply side economics platform and you have the current disaster . 
Blaming the dems for this is not only ignorant its downright stupid . 
DEREGULATION is the GOP party platform . 
As for your `` nationalizing '' statement ... Oh i get it . 
Privitize the profits and socialize the losses . 
Guess what that sounds like ? 
Do me a favor . 
Show ME ANY source , any bill , anything at all to bolster your case that the Dems are responsible for the current crisis . 
Guess being in power for 8 years has had no impact ? 
I would even go one step further and let Palin debate Obama , LOL . 
I got all the confidence in the world and oh yes , I sign MY name to my comments . 
\* OK , so let 's have a VICE Presidential \* debate on Friday instead . 
\* Palin 's supposed to be able to fill in \* for McCain if he 's unable to serve , right ? 
\* OK , let 's see some filling in , Sarah ! 
The economy is n't McCain 's strong suit . 
He 's slipping in the polls . 
So what better way to try to salvage some semblance of the bi-partisanship he was once known for and try to neutralize the economically-based slips in the polls ? 
Does n't make it any less obvious though . 
Of course he does n't want to debate given that he and his party members has put the country in such a sad state . 
There is nothing McCain is going to do in Washington . 
Hence , there is absolutely no need to be in Washington . 
And if there is , McCain has a private jet and a limo that can get him where he needs to be in an hour or so . 
McCain is just afraid to debate Obama . 
There is nothing to it beyond this . 
Obama does n't need to suspend his campaign because he can just send back his usual `` not present and not voting '' . 
: -RRB- What a cop out . 
He basically quitting because he sees the poll numbers . 
Then he tries to get Obama to be just as stupid . 
hahahahaha !! McShame is trying to quit !! What a punk . 
I can see if he were some expert on economics but , this idiot does n't have a clue about the economy so why does he think he 's the one to save it All By Himiself . 
Delusional ... cop out . 
This should ... should clinch it for Obama . 
Republicans are so extreme and stubborn who knows . 
Get out and vote folks . 
McShame is sced !!! I hope Obama does n't follow suit . 
Anyone with a half a brain could figure out it 's a stall tactic ... slow people need more time to get ready for a debate ... maybe the GUILTY PARTY is finally feeling GUILTY !!! Posted by : Sonia | September 24 , 2008 4:01 PM | Report abuse I 'm sure ads are being prepared by the McCain campaign as I type this that will accuse Obama of trying to win an election over saving his country . 
The Obama campaign has all the momentum and what better way to let the dust settle than to rally a cry to tend to the needs of the country ! 
That 's what McCain thinks about the presidential election ... a big fat joke . 
Nothing McCain is going to do in DC warrants him shutting down his campaign because his people are already dealing with it , he just needed an excuse to slow down the uproar over this matter and hopefully get it over with as quickly AS POSSIBLE so that he can continue his campaign without this looming over his campaign and him having to face ANGRY , OUTRAGED CITIZENS EVERYWHERE HE GOES ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL . 
got $ 2 million dufas . 
Their collective greed has brought this upon the economic markets . 
Lets start with Reagan and move forward . 
Calls for deregulation in all forms have Failed . 
Please refer to CA energy crisis -LRB- deregulation my a-s ! -RRB- 
Lest we forget that McCain of the 80s was so honest in his work in the Keating Five . 
maybe that contributed to our current crisis . 
we all know your numbers are down -LRB- according to the polls -RRB- and want to buy time . 
you 'd better go and buy something else like wall street stuff , the ones you helped deregulate . 
Steve Schmidt has him running for cover ... right next to Sarah Palin . 
McCain is a coward . 
Schmidt knows he needs to get his puppets off the campaign stage before either of them say something not scripted . 
somebody other than www.straightrecord.com ought to take a good look at just how mccain has handled these things in the past and what his role has been in previous meltdowns . 
not a pretty sight . 
W - I - M - P. He 's to scared to be stupid . 
He 's in over his head , and Governor Moose is not ready for ` prom time . ' 
HOLD THE DEBATES , AND FOCUS ON THE ECONOMY JOHN . 
Otherwise you are just a WIMP . 
David Axelrod Puppet is cramming for an exam in a subject where he 's really weak , and two days before , McCain postpones the test . 
All that info in the Puppets tiny short term memory will go Phut ! 
When read the headline , I thought it was about McCain abandoning his runfor the presidency . 
I can dream ca n't I ? 
Obama will have to accept his challenge . 
Obama could keep making speeches on the campaign trail-it 's what he does best . 
If he accepted McCain 's challenge and went back to Washington he 'd probably just vote - Posted by : BruceMcDougall | September 24 , 2008 3:58 PM | Report abuse I guess it 's going to be hard for Obama to even vote `` not present '' on this one . 
This is serious and they are both U.S. Senators and should be in Washington for this crises . 
He has missed two-thirds of the Senate votes during the past two years , far more than anyone else , even the SD senator who had a brain hemorrhage . 
The straight shooter McCain should call this what it is , a desperate attempt to boost his rapidly sagging poll numbers . 
They 'd better start having some debates , and sooner rather than later . 
Our next President will have to walk and chew gum at the same time . 
I wondered what kind of circus act McCain would pull to to get the focus back on himself . 
I thought he might announce that he would appoint Britney Spears as Chairman of the Federal Reserve . 
But instead , he ducks the debates . 
I knew it was coming , but I just did n't know how it was coming . 
The Community reinvestment Act FORCED banks and lenders to give loans to people who could n't afford them in the first place . '' 
... The Community reinvestment Act was put before Clinton as veto proof . 
He had little choice but to pass it as he wanted to get bipartisan agreement to kill the deficit spending . 
Bush wanted to privatize social security just like everyone 's declining 401Ks are . 
Putting everyone out of their hard earned money - or do you forget that we pay into it every paycheck ? 
Obama - what an idea ! 
He 's the pathetic one . 
We can wait a week for a debate where Obama is going to ramble on with no clear direction and get people excited about his lack of ideas with any real substance . 
Blame McCain all you want - it 's the Democrats who blew it as the previous article shows . 
Some of you posters should get more educated on the facts rather than blowing smoke like everyone else . 
At least McCain wants to put the priority of the U.S. economy in the forefront and deal with the issue rather than debate about issues . 
Every time something has come up during this presidential campaign , McCain has given specific steps and reasons for his actions while Obama talks in generalities about what should be done with no clear definition of how to do it . 
That is why John McCain wants to suspend his campaign . 
John McCain is WRONG for AMERICA ! 
John McCain is a LIAR\/DESPERATE Barack Obama wants to continue the Debates as planned , but Scared McCain does n't . 
This is a crisis folks , and yes the sky is falling . 
Both McCain and Obama are US Senators . 
Their votes are needed to resolve this crisis and one of them is going to be the next President who will have to shovel out this stable . 
Put party politics aside . 
Does McCain actually think not debating will solve the financial meltdown ? 
Debate you washed-up coward ! 
That is what matters to the American people right now . 
Seeing as how neither candidate has been in DC dealing with the crisis so far , I do n't see how them taking 90 minutes to debate on Friday would be an issue . 
earl | September 24 , 2008 3:57 PM | Report abuse Obama continues airing LIES about McCain . 
McCain does support stem cell research ! 
Obama is very sleazy - and yet another reason our Dem family is supporting McCain . 
McCain 's been absent from Senate votes far more frequently and far longer than Obama this year . '' 
Obama missed about 45 percent of Senate votes during this Congress , which is regrettable but understandable given the length of the Democratic primary . 
McCain missed about 64 percent of Senate votes during this Congress , even though he sewed up his party 's nomination months before Obama . 
And now suddenly , as he sinks in the polls , he gets the urge to be a productive member of Congress again ? 
McCain goes out and makes it all about McCain instead , then says its not about politics ... Posted by : AM HV | September 24 , 2008 3:57 PM | Report abuse 1 . 
`` At 8:30 this morning , Senator Obama called Senator McCain to ask him if he would join in issuing a joint statement outlining their shared principles and conditions for the Treasury proposal and urging Congress and the White House to act in a bipartisan manner to pass such a proposal . '' 
This afternoon John McCain announced to the press that , `` he would suspend his presidential campaign tomorrow to return to Washington and help reach agreement on a plan to solve the financial crisis on Wall Street , and called for a delay of Friday night 's presidential debate . '' 
\* Since Obama had the consideration to contact McCain , not the media , about joining together to solve the problem , why did McCain turn around and announce the idea to the media as if it had been his idea ? 
\* Why is McCain assuming on Wednesday afternoon that working on the bail-out will preclude the Friday night debate , especially since McCain had n't shown any signs of taking time out to prepare for the debate anyway ? 
I suppose that is why Obama got $ 160,000 to McCain 's $ 20,000 in contributions . 
Is that too much truth for you ? 
The sad thing about all this is you leftist Obama supporters DESERVE exactly what you say you want . 
Had we had it McCain 's way , they would have been in front of all of us discussing the issues much more often . 
Things are going to stick to both candidates during the mud-slinging ... but now really is a time to set aside politics and lead . 
This , to me , demonstrates that McCain still has the fire in his record I came to respect - a record he actually HAS that Obama can only talk about creating . 
He 's willing to be unpopular and even not be in the limelight at a critical point in the election and his career . 
How many of US would actually have that sort of courage ? 
Obama wants to issue a statement and keep campaigning . 
McCain wants to quit campaigning and go get some work done . 
Gee ... words or results ? 
A pretty clear choice to me . 
Why would we want the people responsible for the mess to try to fix it ? 
They should pay for it , then step aside as more-learned and more-ethical people try their hands at cleaning it up . 
FDR cleaned up after Hoover . 
Clinton tidied up after Reagan-Bush . 
Do n't give these crooks and cronies another bite at the apple . 
There is no legitimate reason for postponing it . 
McCain and Obama are running for president . 
Solution : Move the debate to Washington and squeeze in a few hours for this important event . 
His campaign is tanking , and the Palin stunt is wearing thin , so time for another Hail Mary . 
Since the Great Depression Americans have learned to weather a boom and bust cycle in our economy that mirrors the feast and famine nature of God 's creation . 
Now , America , with millions of millionaires , is too wealthy to have another Depression . 
However , because of the political risks of recession -LRB- and the corrupt influence of campaign contributions -RRB- we have become accustomed to the Fed and our lawmakers going to illogical ends to try to avert what is normal -- an economic downturn . 
Greenspan 's policies had nothing to do with compassion and the health of the overall economy . 
It was all about image , PR and the Dow Jones average . 
Too many have grown used to only making a lot of money and never losing it . 
The rest of us have forgotten what sacrifice is . 
Grow up and face reality . 
After hundreds of billions of dollars in bailouts , and hundreds more contemplated , this new mega-bailout is an ill advised travesty . 
So much for the culture of responsibility . 
Our leaders have flip-flopped , and flipped back again . 
For a half a trillion dollars the Feds could just as easily buy the houses and then give them back to those who risk foreclosure . 
If the government can sit on these investments for years until they become viable , why ca n't Wall Street ? 
Whenever the poor in this country need help we are told there is no money available . 
Whenever children need funds for education we are told there is no money . 
Whenever we hear reports of America 's crumbling infrastructure ... no money . 
Perhaps more importantly , when many people propose dramatically increasing our foreign aid in order to have compassion on the world 's poor -LRB- who are much worse off than here at home -RRB- with the possibility of significantly impacting the root causes of Islamic terrorism we are told that there is n't enough money . 
Well , now we all know for sure that THIS WAS ALL A LIE . 
Our government and banks across the globe suddenly getting up off of hundreds of billions of dollars ! 
There was , and always has been , plenty of money to `` love our neighbor as we love ourselves . '' 
We just have n't wanted to . 
Now we are spending hundreds of billions at the drop of a dime , not to mention the money spent on this bogus `` war on terror . '' 
And are we doing this to help the least among us ? 
Do n't fool yourselves . 
The working class in America is tough , and they can survive Wall Street tumbling , this is for the fat cats and upper middle class people . 
They 're always for the free market and the `` invisible hand ; '' except when it 's them that 's getting swatted like a fly . 
These are people who will not have to depend on the social security program , which is essentially bankrupt . 
Working class people do what they always do . 
They settle for less and they share more of what they have . 
Whole multi-generational families pitch in to save the homestead . 
Those that have one . 
Many in this country do n't own homes , they do n't even have credit cards or bank accounts even ; and they already live paycheck to paycheck . 
They 'll clean toilets , work at McDonald 's and take second jobs if they have to . 
No , this bailout is n't for them . 
So Congress , now that you are back in the game : DO N'T FOLD AGAIN . 
Do n't let this garbage be rammed down your throats before you have time to contemplate what you are doing . 
I do n't care how much Bush whines for a `` clean bill '' or how they threaten you with elections coming up . 
If you are going to change bankruptcy rules FORCE judges to modify mortgages , don t make it optional . 
If you do n't stand up and get some concessions for the poor low income working man and woman , for the homeless , for the sick , for the children and for the world 's poor you will show yourselves to be cowards . 
Worse , you will tie the hands of the next president . 
There will be nothing left for future generations . 
The result is that Bush , with his flawed vision and incompetent team , will be allowed to ruin not just 8 but 12 or 16 years . 
Although I believe McCain 's decision to suspend his campaign shows leadership I have heard no one in leadership , on either side of the aisle , even approach a righteous and just solution to the current situation . 
Call your friends and family nationwide and urge them to barrage Capitol Hill with e-mails . 
We want to help real ordinary people not inanimate things . 
No to the GROTESQUE trillion dollar corporate welfare bailout giveaway . 
And there is One who judges . 
If McCain ca n't handle a campaign and legislation at the same time , how the heck could he be president ? 
And if the fundamentals of the economy are strong , then ca n't he allocate a few hours for voters to hear them debate ? 
Bad move by McCain . 
People are going to read it as fear on his part , and that s a bad perception . 
In the Jack London short story `` The Law of Life , '' this old Indian dude is sitting against a tree dying , having been left behind by the tribe , and he thinks back to when he saw two caribou square off , and when one spotted injury and weakness in the other , he was merciless . 
McCain now has that appearance of being the old moose , tired , spent , weak , senile . 
The `` maverick '' is starting to look like a loose cannon and not much more . 
Somebody take his car keys away , quick . 
You mean Obama , right ? 
Because he was the one who reached out to McCain this morning asking if they could issue a joint statement of principle on the bailout . 
Then McCain responded with this cheap political stunt . 
America understands intuitively that this is just plain cowardice . 
It 's a debate fer cryin out loud ... either you are prepared or not . 
Perfect time to talk about what exactly they would each do . 
Perfect test for President . 
Not what I want in a President . 
Palin is terrified of the Media . 
First he hides his VP from making an idiot of herself and now wants to use stall tactics out of fear of being shreeded into a pulp by obama 's superior command and grasp of foreign policy . 
This is a typically stupid republican move and serves only to increase doubt , distrust and tpotal incompetence . 
obama is so far ahead in the polls i dont know why the old man does n't just concede now and get it over with !!! Posted by : John | September 24 , 2008 3:55 PM | Report abuse good one john !! that is probably the best thing he could do for his campaign anyway . 
-- hey , wait a minute , did he plan this wall street crash ?? Posted by : beth | September 24 , 2008 3:55 PM | Report abuse McCane is a D-bag , a weasel , a manipulator . 
He was not born that way . 
The Repubs and the Neocons have got his soul . 
I just read from USA Today online that he wants to cancel the the debate and go to Washington to vote on the bailout bill . 
He had a bad week with Davis and all his lobbyists friends he is now trying to cut and run . 
He does not put country first , he only have his self interest at heart . 
Though one might think that someone who understand the economy would be more help . 
After all the crap he gave Obama about voting `` present '' , McCain has n't voted on anything since , what ? 
So this will give him a good chance to catch up . 
He 's going to have plenty of Senatorial work to do next January , anyhow . 
This will get him a few points . 
I applaud him for this move at the perfect time , if he did n't do it , he 'd be losing even more points in the polls . 
good thing mccain will be in washington - right where he should be when they indict him & his sneaky staff , who smell opportunity & want to get their hand into the pot - Senator Obama ought to just laugh off mccain , refuse to change or cancel the debate , & remind old John that his priority at the moment is his committment to the campaign , not a cursory visit to his D.C. office for a photo op ... Debate Baby , Debate !!!! Posted by : Ron Sampson | September 24 , 2008 3:55 PM | Report abuse He 's too old to do 2 things at once . 
These guys have every reason to lie and Bush tonight will have every reason to lie to the American people . 
The Bush administration has run the biggest con game on America for eight and now it 's all unraveling . 
There 's no reason for Obama to run to DC like McChicken Little . 
The sky is not falling ! 
It 's just the sound of plutocrats hitting the floor ! 
If anything , Senator McCain needs to go to the White House and talk directly with his President Bush convincing him to accept what the majority of House and Senate are both demanding to be included in it . 
And or course this can be accomplished without delaying the debate . 
omg , not again ! 
didnt obama say that about visiting the hurricane that hit New Orleans during the Republican convention . 
is this how he is going to govern as president ? 
we need a doer , not a telepromter reader . 
Let 's start by identifying Mr. Hassett as the co-author of `` Dow 36,000 '' . 
Nuff said about Mr. Hassett 's credentials . 
Now onto Mr. Hassett 's motivations . 
Mr. Hassett was an economic adviser to Bush 43 and is currently an adviser to the McCain campaign . 
That 's about all that needs to be said of Mr. Hasset 's motivations for this laughable piece . 
Much like the Republican 's have tried depserately to convince themselves that 9\/11 -LRB- in 2001 , mind you -RRB- was Clinton 's fault , they are now trying to muster the faithful into swallowing the mind-numbing concept that the recent financial crisis is the actually the Democrats fault -LRB- apparently with a razor thin majority in Congress they drove economic policy - including all of the -LRB- in -RRB- action by the Executive agencies -RRB- . 
`` We were in charge , but nothing 's our fault . '' 
The simple fact of the matter is that the two of the worst calamaties - one economic and the other national security - have happened when Republicans had clear control of the government . 
And now , unable to run away from the facts , it appears that Mr. McCain 's solution is just to run ... period . 
We should ask ourselves why any Presedential candidate would duck an opportunity to stand before the American people - in the midst of the worst financial crisis since the Depression - and demonstrate his ability to lead or explain his path through the current hardships ? 
Moreover , we should also ask why Mr. McCain , given his numerous , repeated and unapologetic declarations that he does not understand the economy -LRB- despite having served in the Senate for 26 years -RRB- , suddenly feels that his presence is so strongly required in the Senate that he must forgoe the opportunity to stand before the American people and lead ? 
All of a sudden the Senator that understands little about the economy is essential to developing the government 's position in remedying the crisis ? 
This posturing by Mr. McCain , is quite simply , embarassing and pathetic . 
The McCain camp has made that slogan a punchline . 
You wingnuts crack me up ! 
So the NY Times reports the other day that the lobbying firm owned by John McCain 's top dog and closest adviser , Rick Davis , was for years getting paid $ 30,000 a month by Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae to for the the sole purpose of fighting further government regulation . 
What was the response ? 
The usual , `` we have no response , but , um , the NY Times is liberal ! '' 
So this just in from Newsweek.com ... Davis continued to get paid by Freddie Mac $ 15,000 a month up until last month ! 
This was confirmed by Freddie Mac executives . 
But I suppose you wingnuts will just dismiss all of this as just another part of the Liberal Media Conspiracy -LRB- insert scary music here -RRB- , right ? 
Since 2006 , the federally sponsored mortgage giant Freddie Mac has paid at least $ 345,000 to the lobbying and consulting firm of John McCain 's campaign manager , Rick Davis , according to two sources familiar with the arrangement . 
Freddie Mac had previously paid an advocacy group run by Davis , called the Homeownership Alliance , $ 30,000 a month until the end of 2005 , when that group was dissolved . 
That relationship was the subject of a New York Times story Monday , which drew angry denunciations from the McCain campaign . 
McCain and his aides have vehemently objected to suggestions that Davis has ties to Freddie Mac an especially sensitive issue given that the Republican presidential candidate has blamed `` the lobbyists , politicians and bureaucrats '' for the mortgage crisis that recently prompted the Bush administration to take over both Freddie Mac and its companion , Fannie Mae , and put them under federal conservatorship . 
But neither the Times story nor the McCain campaign revealed that Davis 's lobbying firm , Davis Manafort , based in Washington , D.C. , continued to receive $ 15,000 a month from Freddie Mac until last month long after the Homeownership Alliance had been terminated . 
The two sources , who requested anonymity discussing sensitive information , told NEWSWEEK that Davis himself approached Freddie Mac in 2006 and asked for a new consulting arrangement that would allow his firm to continue to be paid . 
The arrangement was approved by Hollis McLoughlin , Freddie Mac 's senior vice president for external relations , because `` he -LRB- Davis -RRB- was John McCain 's campaign manager and it was felt you could n't say no , '' said one of the sources . 
-LRB- McLoughlin did not return phone calls -RRB- . 
When asked about his own campaign mana Posted by : Mike from Virginia | September 24 , 2008 3:54 PM | Report abuse I as an american was looking more forward to these debates BECAUSE of the massive bailouts to see in the debates where each candidate stood ! 
I am tired of grandstanding for political gain ! 
Maybe i am wrong i have been before , but the american people might not take this news lightly because i think they were looking forward to these debates for weeks like me . 
I hope obama does n't go along with this . 
He has proven yet again that he is n't capable of handling the pressures he would need to in order to be President . 
To those who do n't see it , too bad . 
He has a tainted campaign manager who has been accepting 15,000 per month from Fannie\/Freddie . 
Caught red-handed with their hand in the cookie jar while preaching something else on the campaign trail . 
Unfortunately , someone who is vying for the highest office in the land should know that \*\*\* t happens ! 
McSame is showing more poor judgement . 
Time-outs are for LOSERS !!! Posted by : Women for Obama | September 24 , 2008 3:54 PM | Report abuse One hell of a October surprise - Wall Street finally falling apart under its own greed . 
Suspending the campaign -LRB- and presumably the election to follow -RRB- is Rovian bullsh \* t ! 
earl | September 24 , 2008 3:54 PM | Report abuse If this gambit does n't work , next step is to withdraw Palin 's nomination and add Mitt Romney to the ticket . 
McCain keeps forgetting that he said he did n't know anything about economics and needed a VP who could help him with economic and Wall Street issues . 
CLOWN SHOES Posted by : WTF | September 24 , 2008 3:53 PM | Report abuse McCain is feeling the heat with the recent Freddie Mac lobbying drama How about the fact that Barackas Obamas has taken the most money from Fannie and Freddie of any Senator . 
Chris Dodd has taken $ 4.6 million dollars from them in his career . 
Obamabots are just mad , that O-Nitwit did n't think of this move first . 
This happens after 8 yesr of Bush coupled with 6 years of Republican control and then two years of filibustering . 
Fortunately , the American people `` wo n't be fooled again '' and will vote out the Republicans in record numbers in November . 
Look for Obama to have a filibuster proof majority and name the next three SC Justices . 
I love it when a plan comes together ! 
This proves `` Country First '' is much more than a slogan . 
John McCain deserves the country 's respect . 
The other guy -LRB- I forget his name -RRB- cares only about himself . 
I suspended my campaign to address the crisis , Senator Obama wanted to press on . 
Is that change we can believe in ? '' 
-LRB- all in front of a green background -RRB- He will spin it to his favor and the dumbfounded will follow him . 
He was afraid that Senator Obama has been going to `` debate school '' in Florida while he was being cavalier about it and ensuring his gimmick running mate does n't have a political spasm . 
He was also afraid of the fact that Obama was sounding tougher these days and was expecting a heck of a fight Friday night . 
McCain needed something to stop his polling from tanking and this is the stunt he needed . 
I really hope America sees through this . 
What happen to firing the SEC Commissioner ? 
Everybody said Obama responded too slow . 
How do you respond fast to a matter as grave as this ? 
Rushing to a decision does not mean you make the right one , just a RUSHED one ! 
`` That 's not change you can believe in '' Posted by : CitizenAJ | September 24 , 2008 3:53 PM | Report abuse OK , so let 's have a VICE Presidential debate on Friday instead . 
Palin 's supposed to be able to fill in for McCain if he 's unable to serve , right ? 
OK , let 's see some filling in , Sarah ! 
Chris Cox too since calling for his firing . 
McCain has had door shut on this . 
He burned bridges calling for firing Cox during the crisis and suggesting changes at the Treasury department GROWING GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND STAFF inside there . 
Treasury officials do n't want to hear that nonsense now . 
Next week though , McCain after photo ops are taken will say he dived into this mess and made a difference . 
He 's no more important than Obama and Biden , each Senator has one vote . 
Gov. Sarah Palin is out to the loop on this American lifestyle changing moment , those 5 years , 6 colleges Journalism degree does n't help at this critical time . 
Nice try , but it is n't going to work ! 
Bring on the debates ! 
He is n't on the banking committee and he himself admits he knows little about economics . 
There are 533 other representatives to handle this matter . 
Taking two hours out to show the American people that he is fit to be President is more important than milling around Washington where he has no set duties . 
And if McCain is n't ready to debate Obama at this point , then he is n't ready to be President in a few more months . 
You can not create a competent President with a Sarah Palin style two month crash course . 
Debate his crotchety behind and mop up the floor with him . 
It 's nothing but a stall tactic . 
Has this ever happened before ? 
I believe that campaigns went on during the darkest days of WWI and WWII , the depression , the Korean War , the Viet Nam War , and during many other crises . 
The two candidates should focus on presenting their case and themselves to the voters who have to decide which one of them will lead us for the next four years . 
There are 97 other senators and 435 congress persons to wrestle with the administration on this legislation . 
It is too close to the election to suspend the campaign ; there is barely enough time for the two candidates to reveal themselves and their ideas on the issues . 
I do n't really think McCain is doing this because he and Obama can substantially add to the outcome at this time ; neither one of them is currently in a leadership position for either of them to be the final decision maker ; that will come after one of them is president . 
I think McCain is in trouble . 
His advisers are probably telling him , `` John , you have a lot of negative baggage related to the economy and a lot of ` splanin to do . 
First they sequester Palin and now McCain . 
I guess they are operating on the principle that absence makes the heart grow fonder . 
When there is a mass casualty incident , it is regarded as foolish to simply move the disaster from the scene of the incident to the hospital . 
I see parallels in McCain 's tactic here . 
His campaign is a disaster . 
And , the last thing our country needs right now , is his disaster is in the halls of Congress . 
I see McCain 's actions today as supremely unpatriotic , no matter what kind of spin he throws at us . 
He 's the only one left standing . 
Palin hides from the media , and McCain ducks the debate . 
COWARDS !! Posted by : VAforObama | September 24 , 2008 3:52 PM | Report abuse Clever move by the old fellow . 
If Obama accepts he gets pulled off of the campaign trail . 
If he does n't accept he looks like he cares more about getting elected than helping the country . 
Obama has been making inroads in battleground states -LRB- including Florida , where he is now -RRB- , and McCain probably wants to put the brakes on that . 
It is silly to say that McCain is going to walk in there and arrange some settlement for everybody , and the same is true for Obama . 
It is a campaign tactic , but at the same time , it is also their job to be working on the problem right now . 
I do n't disagree with what McCain is saying , but you are just kidding yourself if you think he 's doing it selflessly . 
It is always about the campaign . 
No. this is what his lobbyist\/marketeer managers get big bucks for . 
I hope he gags on this stunt . 
We have a crisis in every department of this run into a ditch by republicans and he wants to pull a pub stunt to delay the election . 
It wreaks of desperation and shows his complete lack of leadership ability to run and hide from a debate with Obama . 
When the media continues to play along with McCain 's game of smoke-and-mirrors - that is , giving all candidates and their campaign tactics equal weight at the expense of hard factual reporting and sound moral accounting - perhaps media empires should be regulated in the same way many are now calling on Wall Street to be . 
This came after a morning call from Obama . 
Was that the first discussion they had about any joint statement or action ? 
I am an Obama supporter and while I wo n't claim there was no strategic motive on his part , given the recent polls and Palin 's crash I have to be cynical about McCain 's announcement . 
I just do n't see the advantage for him . 
The FACT is , McCain is the one that ducked out of the town hall meetings when Obama would n't agree to `` scripted Q&A sessions '' rather than true debates . 
The fact is , he embodies all the bankrupt Republican values that got us into this mess -- namely , blind allegiance to wreckless libertarian style policies . 
If I were Obama , I would reject this transparent political ploy and demand that McFraidy Cat go on the road for town hall meetings every day until the election . 
Wear that old bastard out . 
What 's McSimple going to do when he 's president ?? Tell problem # 1 that it 's just been pre-empted by crisis # 2 and then emergency # 3 . 
What a ridiculous , politically motivated response ! 
Obviously he does n't want to have to face the public and answer questions on the economy . 
Have the debate and let the voters decide who 's more capable of dealing with the multiple complex problems that face America right now . 
The Repubs controlled the House and Senate when McCain co-sponsored his bill so THEY were the ones who killed it , not the Dems . 
If the Repubs truly wanted it , they would 've gotten it through but no , the Repubs killed it from advancing to a floor vote . 
It 's amazing how quickly people forget their history . 
McCain has been Mr Champion Deregulator during his entire career and now he 's repudiated that . 
Now I wonder if he has any beliefs left . 
Should n't Presidents be able to multi-task ? 
earl | September 24 , 2008 3:51 PM | Report abuse Ya gotta hand it to Republicans ... they 're sly . 
McCain saying he needs to suspend the campaign to get new dentures ? 
Even though he resigned 2 months ago for no given reason cut and paste the link Posted by : Neil Bush | September 24 , 2008 3:51 PM | Report abuse Unbelievable comments here . 
This is a crisis folks , and yes the sky is falling . 
Both McCain and Obama are US Senators . 
Their votes are needed to resolve this crisis and one of them is going to be the next President who will have to shovel out this stable . 
Put party politics aside . 
The Community reinvestment Act FORCED banks and lenders to give loans to people who could n't afford them in the first place . 
Bush shares some of this blame but let 's be honest . 
The US economy is around 14 trillion dollars and they 're trying to take a trillion dollars -LRB- of your money ! -RRB- 
of it out of the economy . 
This is being directed by the Dems who have for years blocked any attempt by the Republicans to reform and fix this problem . 
They -LRB- the Dems -RRB- have trashed this system and now want to nationalize it . 
This is the scary part . 
Just wait till they get around to bailing out Social Security and Medicare . 
This just demonstrates that McCain is not ready to lead and is only willing to engage in cheap political ploys . 
This effort will be an attempt to be partisan and at the same time go on with business as usual . 
Thus giving the best of both worlds . 
You can run , but you ca n't hide . 
Sorry , John , this stunt is going to backfire big time . 
It 's like he is trying to panic the markets . 
Can you say desperation ? 
But I do n't know who that old man out there is anymore . 
McCain does n't do anything that has n't passed by Rove and the pre-polsters running his dog and pony show . 
So I just do n't believe him anymore . 
This then proceeds immediately to why , why is McCain doing this ? 
Most Americans know that this financial crisis is primarily the fault of the republicans , with the usual feckless connivance of the democrats . 
Even if McCain 's debating skills are superior to Obama 's , does McCain really want to stand there in front of America at a time like this and say : 4 more years of republican rule . 
I do n't think so . 
I doubt seriously this decision to avoid this debate had anything to do with Obama whatsoever . 
Not sure he will be able to do much in this case but it shows a willingness to put first things first . 
DRAFT CRAZY MITT OR HUCKBERRY HOUND , MCSENTILE TAKE A NAP Posted by : BO | September 24 , 2008 3:50 PM | Report abuse McCain is feeling the heat with the recent Freddie Mac lobbying drama and week-long blunders on the economy . 
Obama is now stuck between the proverbial rock and a hard place if he does n't do the same . 
A shrewd move ... A candidate running for president is a job in and of itself . 
They both set aside their jobs as senator to pursue the presidential job , and it 's irresponsible for both of them to quit the job they signed up for in a presidential candidate run . 
There are plenty of people on both sides in Congress that can handle the job of passing . 
I never realized his decisionmaking was this erratic . 
McCain and Obama owe it to the American people to stay the course and continue with their campaigns . 
... yeah so McCain is going to Washington to do what ? 
... oh yeah , _ talk _ ! 
Give me a break . 
America needs a president that can walk and chew gum at the same time . 
McCain 's assertion that he wo n't -LRB- ca n't ? -RRB- 
campaign and be involved in the bailout negotiations simultaneously smacks of a would-be leader who ca n't delegate . 
Not a good characteristic for someone who wants to be `` America 's CEO . '' 
Big surprise that John - I do n't know much about economics and never saw anything I did n't want to deregulate - McCain does n't want to be under the lense at a time like this . 
Shameless , truly shameless . 
Eight years of this b.s. has been MORE than enough . 
I 'm just surprised that the McCain Campaign has n't claimed that it would be ` unpatriotic ' to debate Friday , lol . 
The republicans own candidate wants to delay debates to attend to the financial crisis we are in , although less than a week ago he proclaimed `` the fundamentals of the economy are strong '' ? 
Well , not buying it . 
He and Palin are clearly not of sound mind to run this country . 
So , I will continue to throw my support behind the candidate that had it all along . 
Why is McCain trying to be slickRick ? 
I really hope that America does n't fall for this . 
This is absolutely ludicrous ! 
Did n't McCain think of this the day the financial crisis occurred ? 
What is this man up to ? 
- If this is n't a prelude of what 's to come if this man is elected , I do n't know what is . 
If Obama accepts he gets pulled off of the campaign trail . 
If he does n't accept he looks like he cares more about getting elected than helping the country . 
# 1 - The American workforce made a hell of a airplane in the sixties . 
# 2 - Tell the bad guys what they want , but make them promise not to tell anyone that you told them . 
# 3 - Someone should have trained the ground units to shoot staighter . 
Mr. `` I do n't know much about economics , '' just off recent grandstanding of half-truths and lies , will assure public trust of this decision is further undermined . 
He needs to do his dealing in the full light and opportunity afforded by the presidential campaign and debates . 
Claiming and dishing credit and conflict from business conducted behind closed doors will supply more than sufficient fog and lies for the remainder of the campaign and is the lowest and most loathesome of politics singularly disqualifying him from the Office . 
Obama and McCain can take time out to have the debates and then return to Washington . 
The debates have been scheduled at a specific time and I for one want to see how both men behave under current stress in a debate . 
It will allow us to see the men talking about a non emergency issue at a time of emergency . 
It will be a window into how they react to crises . 
If Obama agrees with McCain then they are both wrong . 
Since Mr. McCain has already said he knows nothing about economics I doubt he will add anything worthwhile to the discussions . 
McCain could get some credibility if he were to admit that his knee-jerk votes over the last couple of decades for deregulation have been sometimes a bad mistake . 
It would be a step toward his enlightenment and redemption . 
No chance in that . 
This situation with the markets is no place to pretend that he has suddenly discovered the wisdom to solve the problem . 
There are others who have a clue who are working on it . 
Besides it is out of his pay-grade . 
He is not President yet . 
If he wants to show up and vote on it that is what he gets paid for . 
Little old men tend to be belligerent and go off half cocked . 
Here is just another example of McCain s poor judgment . 
He is either being over medicated or forgetting to take his meds at all . 
He is not presidential material . 
I thought he said last week that the economy was fundamentally sound ? 
John , you did n't lie to America , did you ? 
You are not making a transparent attempt to keep away from the debates , are you ? 
So this would be his strength . 
He would not be chickening out where he is strongest . 
Obama want to issue a statement , while McCain wants to fix the problem . 
Today , Obama called Mccain first concerning the state of the crisis . 
The FBI is investigating the ivestment sector and CONGRESS for fraud . 
I think Mccain is scurring back to D.C. more because of # 2 than # 1 . 
Lets see who roll 's over first , and how many fingers are pointed at the good old boys in congress . 
This 1st debate is in regards to national security and foreign affairs ... McCain is better at debating than Obama , and he 's better in National security and foreign affairs -LRB- Even 65 % of the people who voted for polls say McCain is better qualified than Obama in this -RRB- . 
We need a rigorous president who can perform on complex debates , and vote on or resolve crises . 
A president must do both . 
If s\/he ca n't , they are not fit to run a complicated country . 
We need a rigorous president who can perform on complex debates , and vote on or resolve crises . 
A president must do both . 
If s\/he ca n't , they are not fit to run a complicated country . 
Now McCain thinks he is God and we need him in this financial crisis . 
I do n't know why McCain even bothers to have Obama suspend Obama 's campaign also , as he certainly does n't need the hopelessly inexperienced Obama . 
Next thing , he 'll ask Bush to declare presidential debates unconstitutional or dangerous to our country 's national security -LRB- revealing too many of our leaders ' top secrets -RRB- . 
This guy is so out of it -LRB- and half of the Americans still want him to rule our country !!! -RRB- that maybe Palin should really head up the GOP ticket instead . 
I guess Palin must know something that we do n't , having been under his personal guardianship for a few months now . 
McCain has n't cast a vote in the Senate since what , April ? 
And he does n't sit on the finance committee . 
This is a political stunt , designed to give McCain some type of edge in an area where his campaign is clearly being hurt , the economy . 
Why else would McCain give up a golden opportunity to debate Obama on foreign policy , an area where McCain is supposed to have an advantage ? 
McCain knows that everyone in the country is focused on the economic meltdown . 
But the last time I checked , that guy named Bush was still occupying the WH . 
And what 's the first thing McCain will do when he arrives in DC ... why hold a press conference of course and tell us he 's going to save us all ! 
Romney is looking pretty good in McCain 's rearview mirror about right now ... is n't he ? 
McCain 's been absent from Senate votes far more frequently and far longer than Obama this year . 
This is another example of how out of touch McCain is with the American people . 
We want and need to hear Senator Obama and Senator McCain speak to the issues ... Now ! 
ENOUGH of McCain 's attempts at hiding behind the skirts of Sarah Palin and his inadequacies as a leader . 
Enough of his attempts at controlling the media by limiting their access and lying to the public . 
Face the people ... face this nation ... be a leader for God 's sake ... is n't that what you are running for ? 
If you want to be the president of this nation ... be Presidential . 
Every day we grow to distrust you more and more . 
First it was the hurricane that `` forced '' postponement of Bush 's appearance at the R 's convention . 
He 's been going to Washington for 26 years ! 
Does he think we believe that if he shows up NOW everything will get better ? 
Read his statment -- the sky is falling ! 
Companies wo n't have money to pay their employees ! 
The more he opens his yap the more he PROVES he knows nothing about economics . 
It 's clear HE ca n't multi task , but now it 's obvious his staff ca n't either . 
He had the best hand dealt to him for the debates -- first and ususally the biggest audience -- on foreign policy and national security -- and now he wants to walk away . 
Confused , dottering old man . 
I guess he will lie about this whole thing and his role\/no role too . 
Why am I not surprised that so many are attacking McCain for his stand when you refuse to UNDERstand what is happening to you ? 
I do n't know ; I can not say . 
Personally , I am of the opinion to let it all fall . 
All that is going to happen is you will continue to vote yourselves an ever increasing piece of my paycheck anyways , so , hey , either way is fine by me because you all are so hellbent on DEMOCRACY that you refuse to understand why we were founded as a republic . 
I present TODAY as evidence of why they made the correct decision . 
It would just about be worth it to live on Ramen noodles and rainwater for five years to keep from giving the Federal Reserve any more of my money , or continuing to engage in wars driven by the socialist bankers , completely misunderstood by the middle class , and always attributed to the right , AS IF all conservatives were Republicans . 
God help us all if you ever finally get rid of the electoral college . 
I still do not know much about his proposed policies and would like to see him in a debate with Senator Obama but I guess Senator McCain is just not up for it or it is his way of backing out of it , knowing he is not ready for the debate or ready to lead this country . 
He knows the debates are going to kill his campaign , so he thinks he found a way out . 
Sorry , we did n't suspend presidential campaigns during World War II , for Pete 's sake . 
Is he going to ask to delay the election next ? 
McCain will cancel the debate , go to Warsh-ing-ton and rubberstamp this horrendous bill like the rest of them . 
McCain is a willing and active participant in the symbiotic relationship between liberals trying to create `` affordable housing '' and conservatives wanting to turn the free market into a free-for-all . 
He knows nothing of the economy and barely understands this crisis . 
The last person we need to go to Washington right now is John McCain . 
We , the People , are owed a debate on Friday . 
There 's never been a better time , and there 's no such thing as being to busy for the American people . 
he crushed him in the saddleback forum and the back-to-back conventions . 
There are 2 possible reasons he is doing this . 
Possible Reason 1 : he really does care about the looming economic crisis , and , as a senator , longs to fulfill the duties he has been called to perform . 
Possible Reason 2 : He is aware that most Americans view Democrats -LRB- and as a result , Obama -RRB- as stronger with the economy and wants to use this opportunity to prove he cares more about this country and its economic welfare than campaign tradition , hopefully evening out the playing field or giving him the upper hand with this topic . 
LOL OK if you say so . 
McCain wants to DELAY the debate on Friday . 
Because of the economic crisis . 
You mean the crisis he will NOT comment on ? 
The crisis he will not say one way or the other if he supports the bail out ? 
The crisis his deregulation caused ? 
The crisis that his supply-side economic friends caused ? 
The crisis he is already very familiar with given the Keating five scandal ? 
The crisis that shouldn t exist because the `` economy is fundamentally strong '' The crisis that according to Phil Graham is a figment of our imaginations ? 
Please by all means cancel the debate . 
God only knows we cant have a debate AND deal with this crisis . 
That would be like walking and chewing gum at the same time . 
Because it distracts us from this ... One of the giant mortgage companies at the heart of the credit crisis paid $ 15,000 a month from the end of 2005 through last month to a firm owned by Senator John McCain s campaign manager . 
Mr. Davis s firm , Davis & Manafort , had been kept on the payroll because of Mr. Davis s close ties to Mr. McCain , the Republican presidential nominee , who by 2006 was widely expected to run again for the White House . 
This is a hundred times worse . 
You ca n't see it , you ca n't touch it , it impacts black , white , rich , poor , male and female unless its fixed . 
And unless its fixed it will change this planet forever . 
And so far it has n't been fixed . 
People have talked about it , debated it and blamed each other but no one wants to fix it . 
This is a very very serious matter . 
Sen. McCain at least wants to take a stab at fixing it . 
Its time for Sen. Obama to do the same . 
Get this crisis fixed now . 
If this crisis does n't get fixed , it wo n't matter who is President , because chances are very good that this will be a country in a depression that will rival 1932 . 
Give McCain a chance , maybe he can make the Senators see some sense . 
Give Obama a chance to go to Washington and hopefully they can fix this thing . 
Attack the one who attempts to help the USA . 
Just like criticizing McCain 's military sacrifices for the country . 
What a bunch of shallow irresponsible people . 
And McCain does n't show up for the debates at all . 
Looks like the Republicans are serving up couple of Bush style flunkies again . 
Which one would we put on hold since since our Commander in Chief can not multitask ? 
w | September 24 , 2008 3:46 PM | Report abuse Canceling the debate is all about his political ambitions ... has nothing to do with the economy . 
Whom we elect for President has everything to do with the economy . 
McCain is sinking in the polls and he knows it . 
It 's a cowardly ploy which plays upon patriotism for a political end . 
He looks to have finally sold the last bit of his soul . 
Obama hardly remembers his way back to the senate and wants to issue a statement rather than do anything , like say - lead ? 
The choice to vote for McCain could not be more clear . 
It 's ACTUALLY POSSIBLE for them to campaign AND vote at the same time ! 
He did not have to ask Obama to join him . 
That is simply calling him to the carpet . 
He would have looked better if he had simply just gone to Washington without making a formal announcement . 
They could also move the debate to Washington to cut down on travel fatigue . 
Just something for the McCain campaign to ponder . 
This is another example of how out of touch McCain is with the American people . 
We want and need to hear Senator Obama and Senator McCain speak to the issues ... Now ! 
ENOUGH of McCain 's attempts at hiding behind the skirts of Sarah Palin and his inadequacies as a leader . 
Enough of his attempts at controlling the media by limiting their access and lying to the public . 
Face the people ... face this nation ... be a leader for God 's sake ... is n't that what you are running for ? 
If you want to be the president of this nation ... be Presidential . 
Every day we grow to mistrust you more and more . 
Using the current economic crisis for BS campaign posturing and decrying UNITY ! 
I can so easily picture the McCain of years past slamming his fists onto a fold-out table in some dank room with drop-ceilings while screaming at everyone around him , `` DEREGULATION ! 
This guy is such a political stooge . 
Oops , sorry , I mean MY GOSH ! 
Willing to put aside his campaign to go back to Washington and lead our economy back from the brink ! 
`` I was non-partisaned first , dammit ! '' 
McCain knows he 'll look like an idiot in a face to face debate with Obama . 
So McCain does what he does best . 
Cower in fear and pray the threat -LRB- debate -RRB- will go away . 
Just another example of McCain 's cowardice . 
He is tanking in polls . 
He canceled David Letterman becuase he ca n't be funny in such a situation . 
If all the 97 other senators -LRB- 100 - obama-mccain-biden -RRB- are not able to figure out how to solve this crisis how is McCain going to change it by going to Washington ? 
Also why is he talking at the Clinton global initiative ? 
I thought Clinton would have invited Obama instead of McCain to talk at his global initiative ? 
The whole thing smells like the local fish market . 
McCain basically wants Sarah Palin to keep her mouth shut , and he himself wants to go hide somewhere until the whole financial fiasco is masked by some other juicy news . 
But by the looks of it McCain will be forced to cancel his whole campaign till November 4th . 
The debate must go on ... Part of being an American is the electoral process . 
At this time suspending his campaign is the un-patriotic thing to do . 
If he were President would he suspend all his other duties and responsibilities to focus on this crisis ??? Obama should show up and step up to his responsibility as a candidate and give America the opportunity to hear what he thinks . 
If McCain thinks that is unpatriotic he has no idea what patriotism is . 
McCain is a tyrannical coward . 
What you fail to understand is that we the people did not F@*CK IT UP ! 
And if God is willing , I pray that Congress does not GIVE IN to this CORRUPT Administration and their RICH CORRUPT LOBBYIST who did F@*CK it UP ! 
Now what this ADMINISTRATION needs to do is GIVE THE HARD WORKING AMERICAN TAXPAYING FOLKS of this COUNTRY what they DESERVE . 
If they ca n't do that ... THEN BURN BABY BURN ! 
This also ignores the fact that , by McCain 's own estimate , they should be able to hammer out a deal by Monday . 
Unless McCain has some secret plan to become the great debater by Monday in between Senate sessions , it will make no appreciable difference . 
Just as when he stood athwart of public opinion to push the surge , McCain is taking a huge risk to his political future to do what he thinks is neccessary ! 
I also have no doubt that if Obama takes McCain up on his offer , there will , unfortunately , be those amoung McCain 's supporters who will try to paint Obama as a ` follower ' . 
I will not be one of them . 
If Sen. Obama takes McCain up on his offer , he will deserve every bit as much credit as McCain for putting his nation ahead of his political aspirations . 
Both men have a rare opportunity to put aside the stupid , corrosive partisan rancor that has poisoned public discourse and show their selflessness , patriotism , and leadership ! 
After the gov ' t sorts this out to the best of their ability , and hopefully to the benefit of all citizens of all political stripes , McCain and Obama can go back to rolling around in the mud and lying about each other ! 
He said , ` look , here 's what happened . ' '' 
-- Sen. Joe Biden , in an interview with CBS News . 
Of course , as Reason points out , Roosevelt was n't president in 1929 and televisions were still experimental . 
McCain wants Americans to believe he is now the great mediator and will achieve a consensus in the Congress just by gracing the Senate with his presence . 
Obama should refuse to fall for this nonsense and inform McCain he will be there for the debate at the appointed place and time . 
He should also inform McCain that in his absence he will debate the empty chair . 
Truth to tell , debating McCain would be very much like debating an empty chair . 
Where McCain is concerned , there is no there there . 
Is something so profound going to happen in those 2 hours ? 
They do n't really care how the next President feels about this bailout bill . 
Obama , do n't fall for this garbage . 
The debates were going to be a publicity stunt anyway . 
You do n't think they were going to actually clash on issues , do you ? 
If they can go back to Washington and do some real work for a week , that 's fine by me . 
I do n't think for a minute it 's not a calculated maneuver , though . 
Either they want more time to prepare , they want more time to train Palin , or they want to appear ` above it all ' and thump on their ` country first ' bible a little . 
Whatever the reason though , I 'm certainly not going to complain about senators going to work to do their jobs . 
This is a crisis folks , and yes the sky is falling . 
Both McCain and Obama are US Senators . 
Their votes are needed to resolve this crisis and one of them is going to be the next President who will have to shovel out this stable . 
Put party politics aside . 
At best it 'll turn out that 99 percent of his `` campaign '' goes on , especially the dirtiest parts . 
At worst , it 's another step to reduce the amount of exposure he and Palin have to the public until after they somehow fake winning the election in November , then it 's police state time . 
Already holding interviews is not permitted . 
McCain says he will return to Washington to help reach agreement on plan to solve Wall St. crisis . 
`` Economics is not something I 've understood as well as I should , '' ~ `` Gigolo John '' McNoBrain Posted by : pali2500 | September 24 , 2008 3:44 PM | Report abuse jt - Hassett works for the McCain campaign . 
Of course he would fail to mention that 1 -RRB- McCain added his name to the bill about a year and a half after it was drafted by the original 3 sponsors ; 2 -RRB- the bill was for more privitizing and deregulation - wanted to put control in a Corporation and exclude Fannie\/Freddie from certain securities reporting requirements . 
Look at the bill yourself , not some BS the McCain camp puts forth . 
What , in Gob 's name , does an imbecile -LRB- McCain -RRB- who said `` the fundamentals of our economy are strong '' a week ago and admitted that the economy is n't his strong suit have to contribute to solving this crisis ? 
Not a damn thing . 
And is McCain going to drag his powerpuff girl -LRB- Palin -RRB- -- `` our nation 's leading expert on energy '' , according to him -- along with her ? 
Obama should respond by saying that a president needs to be able to multitask and count on other smart people as well . 
If McCain ca n't walk and chew gum at the same time , that 's his problem . 
McCain did n't say he was suspending Palin 's campaign . 
This would be a good test for her since world crisis do n't always show up on the schedule that your campaign handlers would like . 
Since it 's on foreign policy and that 's what Biden-Palin 's debate is on anyway , no ground is lost . 
It 's only 90 minutes , for god 's sake . 
It wo n't hurt that bad . 
Then you can just slink home and try to get a life . 
Give 'em heck Barrack , kick 'em while they 're down ! 
| September 24 , 2008 3:43 PM | Report abuse Posted by : Ian-Paul Guzman-Escobar | September 24 , 2008 3:43 PM | Report abuse This was Obama 's idea that they works together . 
Obama called McCain well before his press release saying they should work together on a joint statement . 
Yes , the financial crisis is critical , but it is being addressed by a , literal , army of legislators and staffers . 
Mr. McCain 's physical presence in DC is not absolutely critical to whatever resolution is finally decided upon . 
Indeed , it could be argued that if he does embroil himself in the hearings and final details of the package , it would politcize the process even more . 
Would Republicans in the House and Senate look to Mr. McCain for a veto ? 
If McCain decides not to show up in Mississippi I hope Barack Obama does and clearly communicates that while he agrees that this problem needs to be addressed , it is just as imporant the American people have all the facts before them as to which of the two major candidates is best prepared to represent us on the total array of issues and problems a President must deal with . 
And , the cynic in me says that McCain 's campaign team in the wake of all the bad news and bad polling trends is using this crisis tactically to hide their candidate and to reduce the scrutiny of his record . 
They have used misdirection and obfuscation well so far and this latest announcement is consistent with that strategy . 
So , Barack go to Mississippi and stand behind your podium and be prepared to answer what you would do about Iraq , Iran , Pakistan and all the other crisis facing the nation . 
Mr. McCain 's absence will speak volumes about exactly what he thinks and what we could expect from a McCain Administration : four more years of hiding the truth and not trusting the American people to be capable of making intelligent decisions on our own . 
Wonder if McCain is hoping this budget deal can be strung out til November ? 
Might be great for him , but it would be a disaster for the rest of us . 
There are 2 possible reasons he is doing this . 
Possible Reason 1 : he really does care about the looming economic crisis , and , as a senator , longs to fulfill the duties he has been called to perform . 
Possible Reason 2 : He is aware that most Americans view Democrats -LRB- and as a result , Obama -RRB- as stronger with the economy and wants to use this opportunity to prove he cares more about this country and its economic welfare than campaign tradition , hopefully evening out the playing field or giving him the upper hand with this topic . 
A would-be president should be able to walk and chew gum at the same time . 
`` We are losing big '' said MCCain 's campaign neocons last night . 
Obama is nine -LRB- 9 -RRB- points ahead . 
Let 's throw everything up in the air ! 
To hell with American Eelections . 
We proved that in 2004 . 
McCain will pose -LRB- when he 's not QUIVVERING -RRB- as the savior of us all in congress . 
A PUTSCH IN PROGRESS . 
-LRB- MCain is so far gone he 's almost innocent . 
It 's his zionist neocon campaign -RRB- . 
Right wing ` family values ' , my arse ! 
No less than three members of the man s family including one by sworn affidavit have claimed that Sarah Palin engaged in an extramarital affair with hus band Todd s former business partner , Brad Hanson . 
`` McCain Aide s Firm Was Paid by Freddie Mac WASHINGTON One of the giant mortgage companies at the heart of the credit crisis paid $ 15,000 a month from the end of 2005 through last month to a firm owned by Senator John McCain s campaign manager , according to two people with direct knowledge of the arrangement . '' 
Let 's just slow this whole thing down , he says . 
Ca n't expect the old guy to do two things at once . 
Hope all our problems will take a number so he 'll be able to deal with them . 
Phony excuse for a losing campaign ... what will he do next , claim he 's also running as a Democrat and Republican so Obama can just go home ? 
I want to hear the debates . 
We need leadership and not a stunt . 
I 'd suspend my campaign too if it were going down the toilet . 
Palin refuses to allow the media to ask her questions while she tours the UN and McCain refuses to debate Obama . 
I only wish my college prof gave me such a break . 
I do n't see how participating in the debate would throw the economy into a tailspin . 
AIG is so entrenched in many foreign economies and if it had failed so would their economies . 
John McCain has missed countless votes in the senate during this campaign , including those debates and votes necessary for the support of our troops fighting overseas . 
This is a cynical political ploy to avoid a debate until he can find his economic voice , which Obama has already done . 
If the candidates want to go back to DC and involve themselves in crisis resolution , great ... but the debate must go forward . 
The country deserves to measure the resolve , intellect , and intellectual stamina of these men against the backdrop of a moment of crisis ... since that 's what we 're electing them for . 
He does really care about the people and not his own personal ambition . 
I am a Hillary supporter , and was not sure who to vote for . 
This seals my vote for McCain . 
I believe in his slogan now , Country First . 
He 'd let his VP pick face the public and answer questions from the Media . 
But instead he 's more interested in the headlines and the spin than the real world . 
His campaign manager gets outed for STILL taking money from Freddie Mac -LRB- although he has n't withdrawn any of it from his company yet . -RRB- 
and what does McCain do ? 
Suspend his campaign for the `` good of the nation . '' 
Country first my ass . 
If he put his country first he would 've talked to Obama first , not made a PR stunt out of it . 
Why do the Republicans insist on government-by-crisis ? 
Because they detest the way democracy is supposed to work . 
Bush , et al , are trying to scare us . 
We must pass this quickly , they say , or disaster ensues . 
Why not let the billionaires buy up this bad debt , the result of Washington and Wall Street greed and deregulation . 
Why not use the money , instead , to shore up the FDIC or make a minuscule dent in the national debt ? 
And McCain himself admits that economics is n't his strong point . 
But tonight Letterman will ask him about his campaign managers $ 15,000 per month job lobbying for Fannie Mae . 
And Obama will mop the floor with McCain on Friday . 
Suspending his campaign simply allows McCain to run and hide . 
I think America is going to be very disappointed in this news . 
The guy has n't gone back to Washington to vote since APRIL but now he remembers he has a job !?!? It 's pathetic . 
He 's running scared . 
They SHOULD debate , but on the ECONOMY !!!!! Posted by : Sarah | September 24 , 2008 3:40 PM | Report abuse McSame reminds me of Bush on 9\/11 - hiding in an elementary school . 
LMAO Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 3:40 PM | Report abuse WE THE PEOPLE -LRB- hey , remember us ? -RRB- 
have a right to see this debate between our candidates . 
This choice for president is probably one of the most important in the history of this country . 
I never thought I 'd say this about Mr. McCain , but he is a coward . 
What is missing here , like is there a reason for doing this ? 
Because of the bailout ? 
Do I just put this in my file `` John McCain - Mental Case '' and let it go ? 
Get real , this is interfering in a presidential election , it does n't fly . 
And every Republican who 's running for office should do the same . 
Your party has destroyed our country , it 's the least you could do to repay it . 
Come on John , show some patriotism . 
The answer is no. . 
Should they delay these debates when they have so much of an impact on the economy ? 
The answer is still no. . 
This should not be tollerated , it should be considered a forfeit . 
Rules are rules , the way this is being handled makes a mockery of the process . 
do you think that all these heads in washington including Bush and all the CEO 's , the Congress , the Senate , etc getting together and calling special meetings is about something that you can do on the side between juming on\/of stage and answering reporters ' questions , and preparing speeches , etc. ? 
you are as naive as obama . 
this is anohter clear vision of how politically immature obama really is . 
This proves `` Country First '' is much more than a slogan . 
John McCain deserves the country 's respect . 
The other guy -LRB- I forget his name -RRB- cares only about himself . 
With virtually no knowledge whatsoever on economic issues , im surprised he didnt call it off because of coming down with the flu . . 
NOT READY TO LEAD Posted by : JulieVA | September 24 , 2008 3:40 PM | Report abuse To Alex H : You lost any and all credibility when you continued to refer to Obama as Hussein . 
You 've just professed that any of your arguments against him are actually based on racism . 
You have no objectivity ... why would anyone listen to the opinions of a racist ? 
| September 24 , 2008 3:39 PM | Report abuse I can not believe that people still believe anything the Bush administration says or does . 
This whole chicken little `` the sky is falling save it now or else '' routine is not working on me . 
Can you say eminent danger from weapons of mass destruction . 
This is a ruse . 
I hope Obama does n't fall for it . 
The neo cons will stop at nothing and this is a play for McCain to look like our savior . 
They can debate and take care of this bailout quite well . 
If McCain wanted to help America , he would volunteer to have Friday 's debate about the economy . 
What can he possibly do in those few hours that would be more important than holding a presidential debate ? 
One of the skills of a country 's leader is to be able to handle a crisis and still continue to manage the other functions of running a country . 
So if he ca n't handle this `` crisis '' and participate in a debate what will he do if he 's faced with another crisis while in office ? 
Let everything else go to pot ?! Obama do n't fall for it , he 's just using this as an excuse to postpone the debate . 
McCain says `` We ca n't go out and play until we 've done our homework . '' 
It 's McCain and his ilk who have gotten us into this mess in the first place ! 
Let 's have the ELECTION Friday if he does n't want to do the Debate ! 
I think I 'm actually convinced now that my life is like `` The Truman Show . '' 
both candidates probably would n't vote for this bail out . 
to little too late for McCain ... just quit ... Posted by : McduffusSuporter | September 24 , 2008 3:39 PM | Report abuse This is a clear attempt to delay a debate he knows he is going to lose , wrapped in a faux-patriotic cover . 
California had no power , the grids were failing and the sky is falling etc - it turned out to be a scam . 
Then in 2003 - there were WMDs in Iraq to blow us off the face of the map - the sky is falling - we must act very very soon - it turned out to be a scam . 
My point is - history proves this is not a viable solution , but is simply just another GOP scam ! 
By history I mean - on Oct 26 , 1998 per Business Week - Under enormous international pressure , Japan 's Prime Minister Keizu Obuchi is embarking on a massive bailout of its banking system . 
Some $ 510 billion will be set aside to cover depositors , inject capital into ailing banks , and effectively nationalize the insolvent ones . 
The up-front money for the salvage operation represents about 12 % of Japan 's economic output -- a commitment that dwarfs the money spent on the U.S. savings and loan crisis . 
How will the plan work in practice ? 
And will it restore Japan 's crippled banking sector to health ? 
businessweek dot com - 1998 - 43 - b3601106 - htm - the answer was - No , the bailout did not work , just a morphine injection for a sick banking system . 
What do you expect McCain to do ? 
He is doing WHAT HE SHOULD DO FOR THIS COUNTRY ... does anyone get that here ? 
All of these rediculous criticisms for DOING THE RIGHT THING . 
Amazingly stupid if you ask me . 
Can MaCain not multi-task !!!! If not , how does he imagine he will function as the President of the United States , w\/out the ability to delegate and manage multiple crisis at once ? 
Better yet , Bush should resign in disgrace and let a more competent group attempt to solve this crises . 
Can MaCain not multi-task !!!! If not , how does he imagine he will function as the President of the United States , w\/out the ability to delegate and manage multiple crisis at once ? 
He 'd let his VP pick face the public and answer questions from the Media . 
But instead he 's more interested in the headlines and the spin than the real world . 
His campaign manager gets outed for STILL taking money from Freddie Mac -LRB- although he has n't withdrawn any of it from his company yet . -RRB- 
and what does McCain do ? 
Suspend his campaign for the `` good of the nation . '' 
Country first my ass . 
If he put his country first he would 've talked to Obama first , not made a PR stunt out of it . 
Why do the Republicans insist on government-by-crisis ? 
Because they detest the way democracy is supposed to work . 
The GOP , not content with playing `` hide the VP '' , now wants to ditch the top of the ticket as well . 
Guess Mitt Romney would have been the better bet , at least he knows what a dollar bill looks like . 
The Pubs ran the Congress with an iron fist for six years . 
If they wanted to regulate -LRB- Republicans regulate ? 
give me a break -RRB- , they could have regulated . 
It is amazing how Pub trools are now trying to have us believe that the Pubs really in control or Congress from 1996 to 2006 and Fearless leader really was JK in drag !! Posted by : A Hardwick | September 24 , 2008 3:38 PM | Report abuse There is absolutely NO REASON to delay the debate !!!! Everything is crashing down around him and it 's a tremendous sign of how he would be as President . 
If Obama and McCain want to fly off to Washington and mix it up . . 
But it would be a huge mistake to delay the debate . 
A president has to be able to multitask and this shows that McCain has no interest in debating Obama . 
The Repos are falling apart . . 
If he gets involved , it would show he would n't know what to do anyway . 
McCain 's attendance record is worse than Obama 's . 
And the `` present '' vote issue relates to time as a state senator . 
This bailout will prevent either candidate , if they are elected President , from enacting any sort of Tax cuts or Tax increases the country will need . 
Instead , of course , for having to answer in a debate for having always been on the wrong side of regulation . 
Another cynically brilliant tactical move such as choosing Palin . 
Obama must say no , I do n't agree to delay the debate , I ca n't force McCain to go forward , but this is another way to avoid the democratic process , to shun answering to the people , and akin to Palin 's avoiding the media and citizens . 
This delayed debate will mean taking one of the other debates off the table all together -- canceling Palin 's , maybe ? 
McCain is a damn coward . 
He has not a shred of honor left . 
This smells like a ploy . 
Something is behind this scam on the American people . 
I 'm so tired of the lies . 
Is Obama willing to do the same ? 
Obama called McCain first thing this morning to issue a joint statement abou this bailout ... great idea Mr. Obama . 
This election and this debate are of paramount importance - two nights from tonight . 
Let Mr. McCain lay out his economic proposals to the American people . 
I 'm curious what his definition of the ` fundamentals of the economy ' will be . 
This is an obvious ploy by the McCain camp to show leadership and bipartisanship . 
I guarantee this strategy had its genesis with Obama 's call this morning . 
Best line of the bunch ... I guess the `` Straight Talk ... errrr Flip-Flop Express '' has started staying at Holiday Inn Express hotels , maybe that 's where the McSame\/Shrub ` brain trust ' is getting their intellectual motivation Posted by : petemc | September 24 , 2008 3:38 PM | Report abuse Great , so that McCain can take credit for whatever consensus is achieved , claiming that he took the initiative , he had the vision , he has the economic understanding , he brought both parties together , and he led Obama by the hand . 
Instead , of course , for having to answer in a debate for having always been on the wrong side of regulation . 
Another cunically brilliant tactical move such as choosing Palin . 
Obama must say no , I do n't agree to delay the debate , I ca n't force McCain to go forward , but this is another way to avoid the democratic process , to shun answering to the people , and akin to Palin 's avoiding the media and citizens . 
This delayed debate will mean taking one of the other debates off the table all together -- canceling Palin 's , maybe ? 
Come on , McCain , man your battle station . 
I do n't see how participating in the debate would throw the economy into a tailspin . 
This is the second time that McCain has tried to run both campaigns , before `` challenging '' Obama to town hall meetings and now forcing the country to delay the debates . 
Is n't this something that should have been discussed with both campaigns prior to making a unilateral decision ? 
I wonder if Al Qaeda will wait their turn too ? 
This is the second time that McCain has tried to run both campaigns , before `` challenging '' Obama to town hall meetings and now forcing the country to delay the debates . 
Is n't this something that should have been discussed with both campaigns prior to making a unilateral decision ? 
Nice way to change the subject -- although -- I think there 's a history in McCain 's actions and statements that call for not taking his statement at face value . 
After all , as McCain has said again and again throughout 2008 , the fundamentals of our economy are strong . 
Call off the election entirely because the world economy `` depends '' on it ? 
You are a craven coward and you know you will be creamed if you actually have to go head-to-head with Mr. Obama . 
I tell you what : if you really feel that the economic crisis is so critical that we can not afford a Presidential debate , why do n't you just drop out of the race entirely ? 
You 've been a prime culprit in getting us into this mess and as President you will certainly continue to drive America into the ground . 
The right thing for you to do would be to drop out now . 
Yeah , a rational person would see this as a stunt , but for the Palin-huggers and their like , this looks like ` True Leadership ' . 
He 's not just suspending his campaign , he 's directing both congress and the president to react to his demands . 
It 's a no-lose move for him because he looks self-sacrificing in the midst of a crisis that has to be immediately acted upon anyway ! 
Do n't underestimate the power of the American public to be so easily swayed like you did the Saturday after he picked Sarah P. to be his running mate ! 
It all has to do with where he is at in the polls , he wants to capitalize on this like he did with our money . 
He knows this will come up in the debate on Friday and he wont have the answers and his telepromter wont be feeding him his answers either . 
Obama TELL him NO !!!! See you on Friday Posted by : Joanne | September 24 , 2008 3:37 PM | Report abuse If he ca n't handle both , he has no business being President . 
And it obviously puts Obama in a tough spot . 
If he agrees to delay , he falls for this obviously political tactic . 
If he does n't agree , he looks like the bad guy . 
| September 24 , 2008 3:37 PM | Report abuse McCain has been in Congress most of my life and has done nothing to stop runaway CEO pay or regulate speculators . 
Now all of a sudden he needs to get to work on it and he 's too busy to answer questions about how he would manage the presidency ? 
Here we go again ... Posted by : Chuck | September 24 , 2008 3:37 PM | Report abuse Gee John , you left out one simple fact , Obama contacted you first . 
So is the depression Palin eluded to going to be the Great Great Depression ? 
Talk about not thinking before answering . 
I can see all of her small minded worshipers running to the banks . 
There is ZERO that he our McCain can do in Washington to move this process along , and all a `` suspension '' will do is bog his campaign down while the Congress continues its slow slog through the process . 
Kinda weak , there , sure he 's up to the job of President ? 
HE HAS NO INDEPENDENT THOUGHT ! 
Obama has never won an election without running unopposed , either because of a sexual scandal on the other side or by getting his lawyers to get the other contenders kicked off the ticket . 
Obama does not deserve to be in this position , and thats why I will be so happy when he loses . 
And why not the election while you 're at it . 
The GOP has done just about everything else to subvert the US Constitution . 
Face it , McCain is a tired old party hack who knows he and his bimbo running mate are going to get clobbered in the debates so they run for cover and wrap the flag around themselves . 
As Samuel Johnson said , `` patriotism is the last refuge of the scoundrel '' Posted by : LJC | September 24 , 2008 3:37 PM | Report abuse It sounds like McCain is trying to find a way to get out debating Obama , especially if questions involving the economy are on the table . 
I was for McCain , but now I am for Obama . 
McCain has been there for over 20 years and now at the last minute , he wants to do something . 
Let the debate go on as scheduled . 
So why is McCain making it seem like it 's his idea ? 
Where is the joint press release ? 
It 's an obvious stunt for McCain to seem like it 's his idea because he 's low in the polls - again . 
Papers just released by the University of Illinois-Chicago , after much public pressure , show that Obama and Ayers collaborated as members of the board of the Woods Fund to funnel money to the Rev. Jeremiah Wright 's Trinity United Church of Christ and the Arab American Action Network - founded by Rashid Khaldidi who supported Yassir Arafat and the Palestinians against Israel . 
In fact , by 1997 Obama and Ayers were collaborators on a far more significant level . 
They sat together for several years on the board of the Woods Fund , a left-wing Chicago charitable organization . 
Ole McCoward at age 72 ca n't do multi-tasking . 
Bad news for an ole guy who want to be President of the United Stated . 
If you ca n't lay politics aside for awhile for the good of the country in a crisis of this magnitude then , please , please , bow out of the process and quit insulting us with your ignoranance and vapid speeches . 
To talk about `` who 's going to be President '' or `` who 's to blame '' when our nation 's very vitality is clearly at stake is not only unseemly and innappropriate , but those who do it reveal that they have lost all credibility . 
This is a time for leadership and not politics . 
Do we really need a President who can only cope with one issue at a time . 
Mom , Obama pushed me ! 
Where was McCain the last 26 years ? 
Where was he since April 9 , the last time he saw fit to vote in the Senate ? 
America DO NOT Fall for this ! 
Yeah , like a timeout . 
McCain is crashing harder than the market , and he wants an out . 
Talk about playing politics - he 's using the economic crisis to get some political breathing room for his failing campaign . 
It is precisely at a time like this that we need the candidates to do what candidates should do - make proposals , enunciate plans , and come up with good ideas . 
Yes , do your job as US Senators , but that does n't mean you can shirk your responsibility as a candidate . 
Senator McCain , do n't run to the safe confines of closed-door legislative negotiations at the precise moment the American people need transparency and access to you and Senator Obama . 
| September 24 , 2008 3:35 PM | Report abuse YO , JOHNNY MAC ! 
YOU CAN RUN , BUT YOU CA N'T HIDE ! 
Obama called McCain FIRST . . 
he does n't know what to do either . 
Yeah they should get BACK TO WORK for a few days until they can figure what the heck to do . . 
And DELAYING the debate Friday . . 
what 's the big deal ? 
It was about foreign policy anyway like anyone cares about that now . 
They can hold that debate anytime . 
This crisis NEEDS to be handled first . 
McCain canceled the first day of his convention because of hurricane Gustav . . 
This is a ECONOMIC hurricane that could wreck the whole country , is n't that a little more important than a couple of days of campaigning !!! Posted by : rss | September 24 , 2008 3:35 PM | Report abuse It 's a shame this old republican tactic to deceive stupids and idiots in USA . 
McCain showing totally worried with the crisis when Obama has a advantage 9 % . 
They want to win the confide and votes mainly of undecided voters there . 
McCain do n't will solution anything on the crisis because he do n't know nothing on modern economy . 
This is more a dirty game to win voters ... BIG SHAME ! 
HUGS FROM BRAZIL FOR ALL CONSCIOUS CITIZENS IN USA !!! Posted by : Dalmo | September 24 , 2008 3:35 PM | Report abuse So much for touting his POW experience . 
McCain is a typical coward chickenhawk ... Pawk , Pawk !! Posted by : playa | September 24 , 2008 3:33 PM Posted by : LeeHInAlexandria | September 24 , 2008 3:35 PM | Report abuse So McCain is telling us he 's not ready to be president ? 
He 's right , the country is more important than either campaign . 
You can always trust John McCain to do the right thing for the United States . 
No doubt Obama will follow his example , just as he followed Hillary 's examples in the debates . 
Lining the pockets of fat cat Wall Street CEO 's who benefited from John 's constant call for Deregulation , Deregulation , and more Deregulation ! 
Listen to the latest youtube video of the 2008 Republican Convention ... speaker after speaker railing about the need for MORE deregulation ! 
This is where John McCain has been ... working against Main Street , working for Wall Street . 
He is down in the polls and was going to get creamed . 
Maybe Palin will blame her lack of media appearances on the economy somehow too . 
THE OLF FART CA N'T DO ANYTHING HIMSELF ! 
HE HAS NO INDEPENDENT THOUGHT ! 
For those of you idiots talking about how wonderful he is , forget it . 
Why speak at Clinton 's forum if things are so bad , why not just go back to Washington , and now after almost a week , he is going to interject himself into the discussion in the senate . 
Please This is a political ploy , only for his political purposes . 
John McCain continues to show his lack of understanding with regard to the economy ... hopefully the American voter will see through this faux-patriotic smokescreen and understand what is really at play here : A candidate who is thoroughly outmatched and looking for a way out . 
McCain 's attendance record is worse than Obama 's . 
And the `` present '' vote issue relates to time as a state senator . 
he 's runnin ' scared , kids ! 
So if you postpone the PRESIDENTIAL debate on Friday , how about having the VP debate instead . 
Palin 's scared of something . 
Because Bush is the crisis . 
Just when I thought John McCain could n't sink any lower . 
This is one more proof to add to the long list of why McCain is too incompetent to be President . 
Why does he need to suspend his campaign and cancel the debate ? 
The economy was fundamentally great last week ... Posted by : AsperGirl | September 24 , 2008 3:34 PM | Report abuse What else will McCain suspend when sh ! 
t hits the fan ? 
This is totally going to bite him in the a $ $ . 
Ca n't take the heat get out of the kitchen . 
| September 24 , 2008 3:33 PM | Report abuse When your getting the XXXX beat of you its a great time to call for a time out . 
The smartest thing McCain has done yet . 
Kind of sounds like the Lone Ranger to me . 
The only thing that he needs to do is show up when the Bailout Bill is ready to be voted on . 
Sounds like to me the man is n't ready for the debates on Friday . 
Obama do n't suspend your campaign ! 
Where has he been the last 26 years ? 
Plus by suspending his campaign , he is suspending spending his campaign funds . 
This would be great , if he had the heart to put the country first , instead of his party . 
Visualize Steve Schmidt pulling the strings of The Oval Office fingerpuppets and Sarah Palin mouthing the words . 
Earl | September 24 , 2008 3:33 PM | Report abuse Obama should propose moving the debate to Washington , DC and discuss the economic crisis . 
He should tell voters that the next president is going to have to deal with this , so it 's incredibly important that the voters have ample time to weigh the two candidates against each other . 
The campaign sees disaster on the horizon . 
In addition , in the current atmosphere , the US public is more likely to make the connection between what the cost of war is costing Main Street and how it is affecting our financial security . 
The campaign sees disaster on the horizon . 
In addition , in the current atmosphere , the US public is more likely to make the connection between what the cost of war is costing Main Street and how it is affecting our financial security . 
Because of the requirements of the Presidential Debate Commission , the city of Oxford and the University of Mississippi have been planning for 10 months , have spent close to $ 8 million , and have had thousands of people working toward that 90 minute moment . 
The disruptions to the City and the University daily workings , not to mention the inconvenience to students and citizens have been enormous . 
And have been gladly tolerated by the generous people of that town . 
He has no idea what he is doing to that town and that university if he cancels . 
McCain is a typical coward chickenhawk ... Pawk , Pawk !! Posted by : playa | September 24 , 2008 3:33 PM | Report abuse I can see the shrub with a bottle of Jack Daniels pronouncing that we are all F \* cked ! 
Well I give Bush credit for being consistent . 
He bankrupted every company he ran and how he bankrupted the country . 
That would have made it perfectly clear that there was no purely partisan , political motive involved . 
But he chose instead to make a unilateral announcement , at a moment when any sane person can see there is a huge advantage to him is somehow postponing the upcoming debate . 
I do n't know , but over the last few weeks he 's largely lost whatever credibility he ever had . 
It 's clear he 'll do absolutely anything to win . 
I do n't buy it . 
Because of the economic crisis . 
You mean the crisis he will NOT comment on ? 
The crisis he will not say one way or the other if he supports the bail out ? 
The crisis his deregulation caused ? 
The crisis that his supply-side economic friends caused ? 
The crisis he is already very familiar with given the Keating five scandal ? 
The crisis that shouldn t exist because the `` economy is fundamentally strong '' The crisis that according to Phil Graham is a figment of our imaginations ? 
Please by all means cancel the debate . 
God only knows we cant have a debate AND deal with this crisis . 
That would be like walking and chewing gum at the same time . 
Because it distracts us from this ... One of the giant mortgage companies at the heart of the credit crisis paid $ 15,000 a month from the end of 2005 through last month to a firm owned by Senator John McCain s campaign manager . 
Mr. Davis s firm , Davis & Manafort , had been kept on the payroll because of Mr. Davis s close ties to Mr. McCain , the Republican presidential nominee , who by 2006 was widely expected to run again for the White House . 
Postponing the debate by a few days so that Obama and McCain can focus on this legislation makes a lot of sense . 
I think McCain is right , and I hope that Obama agrees to the short delay . 
The reasons are obvious : 1 . 
hussein has NEVER enacted or crafted ANY meaningful legislation during his entire `` career '' as a senator . 
He is n't likely to start now . 
hussein is an artificial creation of the loony-left liberal media with no more substance or depth than a Daffy Duck cartoon . 
Whenever there are no mirrors and no cameras , hussein ceases to exist . 
His existence therefore REQUIRES that he remain in front of a camera campaigning . 
It is best to let competent leaders work on solving this crisis . 
Let `` sweetie '' hussein do the only thing he knows how to do : promote himself . 
If he ca n't spare two hours to show the American people that he is qualified to represent us before the world , then he does n't deserve to be President . 
If McCain 's as good as he says he is on foreign policy , taking a break from the bailout plan should be a welcome change for him . 
Obama ca n't speak in clear , concise sentences without a teleprompter . 
So , now America is OWED this debate ? 
Where was this when McCain was suggesting a series of debates ? 
Here is the difference : McCain has been a multi term senator . 
Right or wrong , he understands what the title means . 
Obama , on the other hand , has not a clue . 
His idea of a senate seat was to be able to spend taxpayer dollars to run for president . 
Obama pledged to complete his term - any of you Obamarats remember that ? 
He never intended to do that . 
So , now that there is a crisis - McCain goes back to work - Obama goes on the View . 
Its what we can expect . 
It is clear that most of you do n't have a clue about this Wall Street mess . 
Most of you are so full of hate that with these comments you show how stupid you really are . 
If Obama is so far ahead he should go back to Washington and help work out this mess with all the other Senators , What is he afraid of ? 
As for the debates I do n't see why they ca n't be postponed because history has shown they do n't make much difference . 
McCain = Yellow War Hero Posted by : bob From an Elite State | September 24 , 2008 3:32 PM | Report abuse The debates should be held . 
People need to see the candidates . 
The notion to stop everything is wrong and anti-democratic . 
I was getting tired of McSame . 
Then , he moves to protect Sarah from public scrutiny , pushing to keep the press away from her in New York so no one can ask her how many amendments there are to the U.S. Constitution . 
Then the little weasel tries to hide from Obama by claiming an urgent need to return to DC to handle the economic crisis . 
My God , less than two weeks ago he said the fundamentals of the economy were fine . 
What 's the big deal now , Johnny ?????? Truth of the matter is you 're running scared , and so is your small-brained campaign . 
Come out and take your whipping like a man . 
McCain is a chicken . 
He is running a campaign of hiding and not answering questions or engaging in debates hoping that 51 % of American is just stupid enough not to realize he pulled a fast one . 
Hey John , why not sell some of your excess homes and cars and send each taxpayer a check . 
That would help the economy more than anything else you can do . 
He can support a plan from afar or have his aids work with Republicans in the Senate to back a particular plan . 
Obama 's been working with Dodd all week . 
If Obama is needed for an actual vote he 'll be there . 
He 's even said that . 
A better solution would be to turn the debate into a town hall session over the financial crisis . 
Let voters ask questions in a relaxed setting . 
Obama and McCain grandstanding on Capitol Hill wo n't make a difference . 
On a day when McCain 's poll numbers dropped he did something bizarre . 
This is an engineered crisis ! 
They injected , dubious fragile and fraudulent transactions into the bottom of the food chain and shepherded them as moved their way up and finally channeled them into the Fed , where they knew the big payoff would come . 
John McCain s advisors knew this , know this , and participated in it . 
That plus the obvious weakness of his impulsive myopic decision making style and own collusion in deregulation put him at such a disadvantage in the debate , that he has no choice but to find cover . 
How much you want to bet Palin finds a way to bail on the VP debate too . 
Obama\/Biden 2008 !!! Posted by : caliguy55 | September 24 , 2008 3:31 PM | Report abuse Was n't it the Bush Administration who , just earlier this year , was pushing Fannie and Freddie to expand their portfolios ? 
Was it not the same Administration also pulling back on requirements for the two underwriters ' cash reserves ? 
How you can attempt to pin this on the Democrats is beyond me . 
To paint the Republicans as the party more in favor of market regulation is absolutely ridiculous . 
The tanking housing market has more to do with than simply Fannie and Freddie . 
It had reached an unsustainable point , yet our country 's monomaniacal obsession with homeownership , the American Dream and the money to be made from it pushed well beyond the critical mass that could yield a return . 
One could argue that the hobby horse of an ownership society -- alla Bush and the Republicans -- has ghettoized our exurbs and exiled our inner city neighborhoods , especially in the age of $ 4-a-gallon and shrinking transit and infrastructure dollars . 
This entire country overreached , which is entirely symptomatic of its culture . 
Glad McCain finally decided to show up to the senate after not voting since April . 
What about Barackas Obamas ? 
He was in office only 143 days and has been on the road over 19 months . 
And during those 143 days he voted more times ` Present ' than ` Yes ' or ` No ' . 
| September 24 , 2008 3:30 PM | Report abuse The fact that Obama sold out on campaign finance and has taken WAY more money from these groups than McCain raises the question : Where has Obama been for the last 3 years in the Senate ? 
Where were his speeches against these lending practices in 2004 ? 
You ca n't show up AFTER the crisis began in 2007 and play Monday-morning quarterback . 
McCain is at least on record for raising the alarm in 2003 that we had a looming problem . 
He 's down in a major way in every poll so now he wants to ` bow out ' for a bit . 
This is a stunt to appear more ` Presidential ' , which he clearly is not . 
What will be resolved in reference to the economic crisis in 2 days ? 
I do n't know who makes up the rules as to whether or not the debate be canceled , but I hope they say no. . 
Silly , but sadly , I 've come to expect such tomfoolery from this guy and his campaign . 
This is only an emergency to him , and the filthy rich beneficiaries of the government bailout . 
For the rest of us , it is business as usual , barely scraping along . 
What the heck can he do about the economy , other than stuff his pockets full of hundreds from the pallet drop from Helicopter Ben ? 
Then , he moves to protect Sarah from public scrutiny , pushing to keep the press away from her in New York so no one can ask her how many amendments there are to the U.S. Constitution . 
Then the little weasel tries to hide from Obama by claiming an urgent need to return to DC to handle the economic crisis . 
My God , less than two weeks ago he said the fundamentals of the economy were fine . 
What 's the big deal now , Johnny ?????? Truth of the matter is you 're running scared , and so is your small-brained campaign . 
Come out and take your whipping like a man . 
NOW IS THE MOMENT TO DRAFT RUSH -LRB- KIDDIE PORN -RRB- LIMBAUGH TO DEBATE OBAMA . 
he is your real leader can that sissy debate the issue with us . 
About palin and rush double team obama , Can the fat ffol be a real man , and stand up for his believe 's with out hiding in some wine\/porn cellar , he have all the answers to the world and us problems , he is thir leader now STAND UP AGAINST THE ONE YOU SAY IS A LIBERAL AND A SOCIALIST , show the world how smart and brave you are and obama if he Man up , just do n't knock the crap out that Bit@@h,just throw a water on his dirty tail and watch him have a meltdown , for the REVEALATION OF THE ANTI CHRIST FOR ALL MAN CAN SEE ! 
None of this `` Obama did n't want to stop campaigning '' crap either when you get creamed in the debate . 
Tell them he 's busy with the economy ? 
Ask for a time out ? 
Guess what , you 've been called out . 
McCain has a worse attendance record than anyone else in the senate except for Johnson , who had a brain hemorrhage . 
He admitted himself that he 's not strong on the economy . 
What kind of leadership can he offer ? 
HE AND HIS MANAGERS ARE TERRIFIED ABOUT THE PROSPECT OF A DEBATE . 
Quits now that Obama is leading !! America is on the brink . 
And AIPAC and the neocons in the mcCain campaign are stomping on the near corpse . 
Bush is going to declare martial law ... no Elections now that McCain is losing ? 
Please use it in the next 30 minutes : `` Senator McCain has asked that we postpone the first of only three presidential campaign debates in order to work on the bailout . 
`` The United States Congress has 533 other members who can work Friday evening . 
Only two of us are running for president . 
And only one of them is a big fat chicken . '' 
What 's next -- postpone the election ? 
I say no way . 
If McCain 's not ready and he 's sinking in the polls , let him face it like a man . 
Not like the coward that he is . 
His camp already admitted that this year 's elections are n't about the issues so why even bother have debates . 
Take a time out to regroup and still lose on what he and his boys have done for the past eight years -LRB- nothing -RRB- . 
Trickle Down that McSame . 
You ca n't change without changing yourself first . 
One would have to be living in a parallel universe to believe the Senate and House need a partisan political hack in bed with the financial sector to generate a bipartisan solution to this problem . 
The markets are figments of our imagination anyway . 
He 's worried he 's going to lose the race on Friday . 
I firmly believe that this is not a time to politicize a critical junction in US history . 
This is why I phoned McCain this morning to suggest that we put out a joint statement . 
Our visiting and setting up a dysfunctional meeting with current administration is clearly not what is needed . 
We have one administration at a time , and while I disagree with many things that it has done , I believe we have to let it do its job . 
Time is of the essence . 
We can not show up on Friday and slow this entire process down when they 're trying to accomplish something possibly before then . 
This is not a time for showboating . 
We do n't need a photo-op meeting with myself and McCain with Bush and Congress . 
We need to let people do their jobs instead of mucking it up with this sort of photo-op . 
I 've been in very close contact with Paulson , Bernanke , leaders of Congress . 
We need to work through this in calm and confident manner . 
Hysterical actions like calling of the debate and running back to DC would only strike chaos and panic . 
We need leadership that is measured . 
The markets need that . 
The people of this country need that . 
POLITICIZING THE CRISIS He 's UNFIT to be president if he can not take on both !! GOP know this is a short election season , so they want to postpone as much as possible . 
The sage bipartisan moderate does it again , forging a compromise when all hope appeared lost . 
My first thought was it was a pathetic attempt to look Presidential . 
Then the announcer said Obama called him 8:30 a.m. to suggest they issue a joint statement . 
Like he 'll tell the American people the truth about anything . 
He wants to suspend the debate ? 
Come on , nobody is buying his rhetoric anymore . 
While Obama is in FL preparing deligently for the up coming debate McCain was running around flapping his gums about one flip-flop or another . 
The guy is out of touch . 
He is not prepared . 
He did not see this coming . 
His campaign had the game plan of swift-boating Obama . 
Their plan was working with the Paris Hilton ad , the lip-stick stunt , and the Palin post-convention bump factor . 
Now that real issues are on the forefront the campaign is in complete disarray . 
Their only gameplan now is to lash out at the media for critical stories about McCain and his cronies . 
They 're still jealously guarding Palin from the `` vicious '' media elite . 
McCain is sputtering something different every day . 
His aids are being exposed for their ties to Wall street . 
It 's been a very bad week and a half for that gomer . 
That is the debate that McCain 's people must be petrified about and it will be easier to call that one off if if the top = ticket people have not met Posted by : oakdan | September 24 , 2008 3:28 PM | Report abuse Considering that McCain has n't bothered to actually make it to a Senate vote since last April ... this is a big deal ... for him . 
He can not have the debate Friday and use the weekend for his `` save the day '' economic strategy . 
Is this because he is down in the polls ? 
Stop all political talk until the crisis is over . 
Since he 's totally TANKING during this economic disaster , that would be nice for him , would n't it ? 
Obama is now supposed to NOT talk about how GODAWFUL McCain has been these past 10 days ? 
McCain would prefer to have a debate when he 's not down in the polls . 
Sounds like McCain is really , really running scared . 
And delaying the debate , now that voting has begun in some states , is not good for the country . 
McCain needs to squeeze out a few hours Friday night to go through with that debate . 
Let 's see , McCain needs more time to brush up Economics 101 for the debate while Palin crams for Foreign Policy 101 . 
Guess who is n't ready to lead ? 
Electing these two clowns would be the ultimate folly and would lead to disaster for our country . 
The phone rings in the White House . 
It 's an international crisis . 
John McCain answers and says , `` call me back in the morning . 
I 'm too sleepy to deal with it now . '' 
Biden and Palin debate on Friday . 
The results of the the VP debate will probably eliminate a need for further debates anyhow . 
As of this week , not so hot . 
Obama was already bouncing before the crisis hit , and Palin 's popularity has slid to the worst position of the four . 
McCain 's given back his gains among women and lost ground among college-educated voters . 
Trying to ram-rod this legislation through Congress is the same as the run-up to the war and the Patriot Act . 
Do n't be fooled ! 
If I were Obama , I would gut him right now for being a fraud . 
If you fall for this you do n't deserve to be President . 
Then he wants to suspend the campaign because things are n't going so well in the polls ? 
Obama looks more Presidential by the minute . 
Does n't even know how to email . 
Does n't know how many houses he has -LRB- 7 -RRB- , how many cars he owns -LRB- 13 -RRB- ... is suspending his campaign to fight this economic crisis ? 
A crisis partly of his own making . 
How dumb does he think the American Public really is ? 
... oops , it might work . 
I hope neither the Obama campaign nor the American public fall for this malarkey . 
If McCain ca n't handle a campaign and being senator at the same time , he 's clearly not up to being president and answering those 3 a.m. phone calls . 
And heaven help us if Palin ever has to answer that phone ! 
The only reason he wants to `` delay '' the debate is because he does n't want to be made a fool on national television . 
McCain heavily involved with the deregulation of Wall Street , which has led us into the economic mess that we 're in now . 
McCain should not just stop campaigning , he should do America a favor and retire from Congress . 
Obama was in office for 143 days and has n't been back in the Senate chamber since . 
He 's been on the road for 19 months . 
This current crisis is what they should be discussing in the debate for which it is VERY apparent Johnny is not even remotely up to it . 
The debate will last last MAYBE 2-3 hours . 
Surely congress wo n't have an active session at 8:00 pm . 
This also conveniently marginalizes the sliding in the polls for him as well . 
Well I always said they would come up with something , and they did . 
Good new for us Dems though is that it wo n't help him in the end . 
Like most Americans , McSame realizes that he is a very dim bulb , when compared to Sen. Barack Obama , and his desperation is showing . 
McSame just attempting to look `` Presidential '' in this time of crisis , resulting mostly from policies he 's supported over the years in Washington . 
In this day and age of immediate and constant communication , I do n't believe that McSame needs to be in Washington for one second to deal with the crisis started by the G.O.P. 's policies of deregulation and laissez faire economics . 
Obama\/Biden 2008 !!! Posted by : caliguy55 | September 24 , 2008 3:27 PM | Report abuse Senator McCain should be able to multitask -LRB- campaign and work on solutions to the financial crisis -RRB- . 
If he ca n't he is unqualified for the job he is seeking . 
He does really care about the people and not his own personal ambition . 
I am a Hillary supporter , and was not sure who to vote for . 
This seals my vote for McCain . 
I believe in his slogan now , Country First . 
What 's McCain gonna do ? 
Bring his calculator for others to use ? 
man up and do the friggin ' debates . 
Do you wa n't to postpone the election too ? 
He wants to suspend the debate ? 
Come on , nobody is buying his rhetoric anymore . 
While Obama is in FL preparing diligently for the up coming debate McCain was running around flapping his gums about one flip-flop or another . 
The guy is out of touch . 
He is not prepared . 
He did not see this coming . 
His campaign had the game plan of swift-boating Obama . 
Their plan was working with the Paris Hilton ad , the lip-stick stunt , and the Palin post-convention bump factor . 
They were going to focus on trivial things the whole way . 
Now that real issues are on the forefront the campaign is in complete disarray . 
They are lashing out at the media . 
They 're lashing out at Obama . 
They 're still jealously guarding Palin from the media `` elite . '' 
Palin has yet to give any more substantive interview after her Gibson interview debacle . 
McCain is sputtering something different every day . 
His aids are being exposed for their ties to Wall street . 
It 's been a very bad week and a half for that gomer . 
If I were McCain I would see this as a godsend because it basically takes the economy off the table , i.e. Sen Obama and I agreed about how to handle this crisis . 
Obama should be painting McCain as out of touch , a crony of Bush and wall street and hammering his way to victory . 
I am beginning to think Obama is a flat out fool . 
Negotiating with Republican 's can only be done through a position of strength . 
If he gets into office and gets all cozy with the republican 's he wo n't get one damned thing done . 
It sounds like Johnny -LRB- no pun intended -RRB- comes lately to me . 
We DESERVE to hear this debate . 
McCain is using the crisis to run and hide behind his mother 's apron . 
Cancelling the debate would prove counterproductive . 
Who really wants McCain 's help resolving an economic crisis anyway ? 
Paulson , Bernanke , Dodd ??? I 'm at a loss . 
That 's a scary thought . 
McCain loves Bush so much , why does n't he follow his example - two minutes to talk about the economy -LRB- as he leads his nation down the path of destruction -RRB- and 15 minutes to toast some despot from a little nowhere island nation at dinner ? 
Little Johnny is taking his ball home because he is , once again , getting creamed . 
And he 's babbling about 9\/11 . 
Sarah Palin will follow up when she is called for a debate , except she 'll call it `` nine hundred eleven . '' 
The worst team in history just lost the election by a landslide . 
` That is probably the most disturbing element of this and the campaigning on the Bridge to Nowhere , ' said Bill Allison of the Sunlight Foundation , a taxpayer watchdog group . 
` Because , yes , they had a chance to vote specifically against the Bridge to Nowhere in Alaska to redirect the money to people , to bridges and infrastructure damaged by Hurricane Katrina going in to New Orleans , and they chose not to . ' '' 
Earl | September 24 , 2008 3:25 PM | Report abuse Stunt . 
Glad McCain finally decided to show up to the senate after not voting since April . 
Why not move the debate to DC and make it over the economy ? 
It 's only a couple of hours . 
Or ca n't McCain walk and chew gum at the same time ? 
McCain is afraid to debate Obama because he knows he 'll get his clock cleaned . 
He 's just putting it off with this phony move . 
Tonight , Letterman would ask him about his campaign manager 's $ 15,000 per month connection with Fannie Mae . 
That just came out last night - after the GOP spent a week and several million dollars getting the goobers riles about Obama 's alleged connections to Fannie Mae . 
On Friday , Obama would have mopped the floor with him in the debate . 
So what is an incompetent , partially senile candidate to do ? 
What to do when the light of day is about to enter ? 
Like any Republican would do . 
He does really care about the people and not his own personal ambition . 
I am a Hillary supporter , and was not sure who to vote for . 
This seals my vote for McCain . 
I believe in his slogan now , Country First . 
This is an attempt to delay the debate because he 's not ready and he 's down in the polls . 
He 's playing to his base and trying to make himself look like he 's taking the high road . 
I hope this backfires on him in a major way . 
Run and hide in DC with your crooked GOP friends and try to make America believe that it 's for the good of the people . 
I would n't be surprised if he did n't get scared by the fact that the FBI is starting an investigation of Fannie and Freddie which will of course include the head of his campaign . 
This gets more and more interesting and the deception stinks to high heaven ! 
I have no doubt that Sen. Obama will make a wise decision and clear statement regarding this development , as he has always done so . 
Let 's see this for what it really is . 
America has had enough of the lies , deception and manipulation of the current administration . 
John McCain is truly more of the same in so many ways . 
This along with everything that we 've seen of him this past week proves it . 
This sounds like the same ridicule McCain got when he chose Palin . 
How did that turn out ? 
It 's another bold move from McCain . 
You can not change the rules of the game , just because you are down in the polls , and use this as a ploy to undermine the presidential campaign . 
You did n't care about the direction Wall St. was headed in all of these years , and now you 're suddenly concerned and sympathetic ? 
You probably are n't even ready for the debates . 
You know that Obama is going to hammer you on the economy . 
You 're running scared . 
Be a man and stand up to it . 
Either agree to suspend the campaign and `` work on the economy '' via phone\/video conferencing along with Obama and then debate , or the Debate Committee should reschedule and have the VP debate first . 
Biden would be ready , I 'm sure . 
You ca n't always have your way , John ! 
After McCain has repeatedly suggested that Obama is avoiding meeting him face to face , now McCain wants to back out . 
It is partly because of this financial crisis that the debate should go on . 
It will only take a few hours of your time John , we the people want to hear you - do n't try to wiggle out of it . 
This is cowardly behavior . 
Is this a set-up to get Palin out of the VP debate , too ? 
Let the debates go on or let McCain drop out of the race . 
Either he 's willing to present himself and his running mate to the voters or he is n't . 
Besides , McCain is hardly the source of `` leadership '' on a technical financial matter . 
Let the Senate work with the President and let the candidates debate . 
The American people have the right to demand answers from the two people who would presume to become their leader . 
The debates provide this opportunity . 
John McCain should not be allowed to move the campaign into the shadows . 
HE KNOWS HOW TO MULTI-TASK By Michael D. Shear and Robert Barnes NEW YORK -- Republican presidential nominee John McCain this afternoon said he would suspend his presidential campaign tomorrow to return to Washington and help reach agreement on a plan to solve the financial crisis on Wall Street , and said he wants to delay Friday night 's presidential debate . 
`` It has become clear that no consensus has developed to support the Administration 's proposal , '' McCain said in a brief statement to reporters . 
`` I do not believe that the plan on the table will pass as it currently stands , and we are running out of time . '' 
McCain said he is calling on President Bush `` to convene a meeting with the leadership from both houses of Congress , including Senator Obama and myself . 
It is time for both parties to come together to solve this problem . '' 
The Obama campaign said that the two candidates had spoken by phone this morning about releasing a joint statement on principles to govern the financial sector bailout , but that it had no plans to suspend campaigning . 
`` At 8:30 this morning , Senator Obama called Senator McCain to ask him if he would join in issuing a joint statement outlining their shared principles and conditions for the Treasury proposal and urging Congress and the White House to act in a bipartisan manner to pass such a proposal , '' Obama spokesman Bill Burton said in a statement . 
`` At 2:30 this afternoon , Senator McCain returned Senator Obama 's call and agreed to join him in issuing such a statement . 
The two campaigns are currently working together on the details . '' 
America this week faces an historic crisis in our financial system . 
We must pass legislation to address this crisis . 
If we do not , credit will dry up , with devastating consequences for our economy . 
People will no longer be able to buy homes and their life savings will be at stake . 
Businesses will not have enough money to pay their employees . 
If we do not act , ever corner of our country will be impacted . 
We can not allow this to happen . 
Last Friday , I laid out my proposal and I have since discussed my priorities and concerns with the bill the Administration has put forward . 
Senator Obama has expressed his priorities and concerns . 
This morning , I met with a group of economic advisers to talk about the proposal on the table and the steps that we should take going forward . 
I have also spoken with members of Congress to hear their perspective . 
It has become clear that no consensus has developed to support the Administration 's proposal . 
I do not believe that the plan on the table will pass as it currently stands , and we are running out of time . 
Tomorrow morning , I will suspend my campaign and return to Washington after speaking at the Clinton Global Initiative . 
I have spoken to Senator Obama and informed him of my decision and have asked him to join me . 
Why use that as a means to postpone the debate ? 
It 's clear that the `` America 's Hero '' is scared to debate . 
I could understand if he has been speaking to the press to get an idea on where he stands but he lied and took back his `` transperency '' theme , obviously it was too transparent to the american people that he is far from change and far from what this country needs . 
But I never thought he was chicken . 
If McCain attends a debate the world will end as we know it ? 
How narcisistic to imply that if McCain does n't go back to Washington , everything will fail - and why did he wait until now ? 
Its not like this issue happened overnight - this problem has been culminating for almost a decade . 
While it has now come to fruition - there is no discernable reason to avoid the American public which is one of the useful tools Americans use to help educate us about candidates and decide which moron is the lesser of two evils . 
I am disgusted with McCain . 
I am disgusted with his campaign and their most recent objective of shielding Palin from the press . 
He has gone TOO FAR . 
I am tired of the secrecy . 
I am tired of political ploys such as this which are a despicable testament to political strategies and how stupid the candidates think average Americans are . 
What 's his next excuse going to be for the VP debate ? 
Palin snagged her hose and can not possibly attend due to the economic crisis which invariable affected Hanes stock and due to her American patriotism refuses to buy another pair from a company that is passing the costs onto average Americans instead of owning the problem . 
That said , she could not possibly attend a debate because her naked legs would not be Christian and her eternal salvation would be subsequently put into jeopardy . 
I will not be shocked to read any further ridiculous excuses McCain comes up with . 
I am barring his use of the above excuse and claiming copyright privileges , although he seems to be having no trouble coming up with some whoppers . 
Sounds like John McCain is running scared from actually debating Barack Obama face to face , and is looking for an excuse to get out of it . 
How does having a debate in Mississippi on Friday night keep either candidate from being as involved as he wants to be in helping to craft solutions to our current economic fix ? 
Will a couple of hours of debating really keep a bailout package from being agreed upon ? 
This is a sad , pathetic distraction from a flailing campaign . 
Really , does Congress , Paulson or Bernanke need advice from a man who thought the economy was just fine last Monday , before he decided it was in a mess three hours later ? 
I do n't think that a debate or lack of one will change one thing for McCain other than maybe give him time to take credit for any fixes that might be made . 
I do n't think that not having a debate will help the crisis one bit either . 
This is all about Johnny . 
This guy is running amuck . 
One more reason to confine him and Palin to the farm . 
The sad , old man must have spent all morning trying to figure out some way to turn this to his political advantage . 
Too bad that his chief economic adviser , Douglas Holtz-Eakin is such a hapless , hopeless idiot . 
Douglas Holtz-Eakin is the clown who said that , on economics , McCain does not speak for the McCain campaign . 
He 's also the clown who claimed , last Tuesday , that McCain -LRB- a self-proclaimed computer illiterate -RRB- was responsible for the invention of the BlackBerry . 
Asked what work John McCain did as chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee that helped him understand the financial markets , Holtz-Eakin produced ... a BlackBerry . 
`` He did this , '' Douglas Holtz-Eakin told reporters , holding up his BlackBerry . 
`` Telecommunications of the United States is a premier innovation in the past 15 years , comes right through the Commerce Committee . 
So you 're looking at the miracle John McCain helped create and that 's what he did . '' 
The BlackBerry is a Canadian invention . 
Douglas Holtz-Eakin is typical of the kind of idiot with which the senile old fool McCain surrounds himself . 
Phil Gramm , the individual most responsible for the current financial meltdown , is another . 
Carly Fiorina , the failed Hewlett-Packard executive who said that both McCain and Palin were incapable of running a corporation , is another . 
Obama 's campaign manager , Rick Davis , a lobbyist who was on the take from Freddie Mac until last month -LRB- and lied about it , as did McLame -RRB- is another . 
Bill Kristol , Randy Scheunemann , Gary Schmitt , Robert Kagan , Robert Zoellick , Eliot Cohen -- all part of the PNAC cabal of neo-cons and Zionists that planned , sold and promoted the war in Iraq -LRB- even before Bush took office -RRB- . 
Now all advisers to `` Gigolo John '' McLame . 
And the list of fools , incompetents and grubby , greedy , dangerous little weasels goes on and on and on ... In the meantime , the McManiac plays for time . 
What is the big deal ? 
Remember to vote McChange on 11\/4 ! 
Everyone knows colored people do n't show up to events on time ! 
McCain thinks it will make him look like he 's the really serious one about the bailout -LRB- and economy -RRB- , even though his deregulating is what caused it in the first place . 
It 'll be interesting to see what Team Obama comes up with in reply . 
Like McCain 's Palin stunt I do n't think its going to work . 
It looks too political . 
| September 24 , 2008 3:22 PM | Report abuse Obama called McCain earlier today and asked McCain to join him in a joint statement . 
McCain agreed , but then pulled this PR stunt . 
Good luck to him . 
We 're all watching for McCain to demonstrate his expertise in matters of the economy . 
It is hard for me to believe a canidate for Presidency can not campaign , debate , and address the economic crisis . 
There is no Time Outs in the real world . 
Chalk one up for the old man . 
Besides , what idiot came up with the idea for a Friday night debate in the first place ??!!??!! Posted by : beegrace | September 24 , 2008 3:22 PM | Report abuse I guess that 's because the economic situation is so much worse today than it was yesterday . 
Just more grandstanding by the party that made it an art form . 
Congrats Obama and Dems . 
You won the first debate ! 
Mr. Deregulator , Mr. `` Economics is not my strong suit '' suspending his campaign and rushing to Washington to save the day ! 
This crisis is a train wreck for McCain and his lobbyist friends and he knows it . 
Look at the polls . 
An act of sheer desperation , plain and simple . 
Other TrueMajority members have already started 75 rallies in their towns , will you join them ? 
ATTEND AN EMERGENCY RALLY AGAINST THE BAILOUT Thanks to the thousands of you who participated in the Million Doors for Peace weekend ! 
Reports are still flooding in , but here 's a typical one : `` Thanks for organizing this event and giving me the opportunity to participate ! 
I enjoyed the experience -LRB- and -RRB- I appreciate the simplicity and organization of the event . 
Thanks for your hard work ! '' 
This video from our partners at Connecticut Opposes the War gives the flavor of the day . 
If you were n't able to join us this time , be sure to sign the petition online , below : Senator Feingold Says Thank You Thank you for all your work to stop the Democrats from caving in on telecom immunity . 
Last week , we won yet another improbable victory . 
Members like you sent over 29,000 emails and made over 15,000 calls to your Senators opposing immunity for phone companies that spied on Americans . 
Senator Feingold has recorded a special thank you message to TrueMajority members for all your work . 
Send a message to your Senator in support of Senator Feingold 's efforts to strip telecom immunity from the final FISA legislation . 
The Palin pick began my switch to Obama , and ever since then , my estimation of McCain the man has been lowered due to how he , Palin , and his campaign have comported themselves . 
If you 'd asked me yesterday if my opinion of McCain could go lower , I 'd have said no. . 
But this stunt does the trick . 
McCain has a campaign office within walking distance of me . 
If I ever chanced to run into the Senator , I would n't even want to shake his hand . 
Have you no shame , Senator ? 
While I am not suprised to see the partisans who put party ahead of country pilloryig McCain for this bold and noble move , it is not a stunt or a ploy : he is intent on doing his job as a Senator ! 
There is no reason that Sen. Obama can not take up Sen. McCain on his offer and go back to Washington with him to work on the problem . 
If Sen. Obama does so , he will deserve every bit as much credit as McCain ! 
This need not be turned into a partisan issue ; rather it is something that all citizens of all political stripes can take heart from : our leaders actually leading ! 
This could truly be a new beginning for our nation ; a new age wherein all citizens put aside their petty squabbling and party rancor to address the serious problems facing the Republic in a clear-minded and realistic fashion instead of our typical hurling of invective at each other and petty-fogging until nothing at all is accomplished and the ship of state is becalmed in a sea partisan rancor and obstructionism ! 
He is a wily politician indeed . 
But , in all honesty , this is just a smokescreen . 
Sort of like visiting a Hurricane site right after it passes through . 
It 's just a distraction . 
We do n't need a photo-op meeting with Obama and McCain with Bush and Congress when we know that the current authority lies with Bush and Democratic leaders -LRB- Pelosi and Reid -RRB- . 
Let people do their jobs instead of mucking it up with this sort of photo-op . 
Let 's keep the photo-op for the UN and sideshow visits with `` world leaders '' . 
Mr. Town Hall Meeting is looking for a way to get out of the debate and this is his only chance , aside from hospitalization or something . 
If the negotiations on the agreement bleed into next week , the world will not end . 
It makes him appear to be a coward . 
He will say that Obama had the oppty to have these Town Hall meetings which were on McCain 's own format and comfort zone . 
But to bow out now for one evening 's debate to `` work '' on the crises is a complete insult to the intelligence of the American people . 
Given the new polls showing Obama regaining the momentum , McCain has no choice but to chicken out . 
He no longer has three or four points to fork over after Obama makes an ass out of him in the debates . 
Take McCain 's ducking of tail and running from the debates as confirmation that he is not up to par with Obama . 
More games from dodging and weaving McCain is not good for American voters . 
The debate should go on -- as should Obama and McCain 's involvements with Creating an Economic solution for America . 
Mc Cain says `` no consensus '' has developed -- that in itself was yesterdays news . 
Already , Obama 's 4 guiding principles have been embraced by supporters of the Bailout\/Rescue . 
As usual , McCain is a day late , a dollar short -- and hiding in plain sight ! 
So call the trickle down voodoo economy is actually a way to privatize the profit for a few , but socialize the risk to 95 % of Americans . 
Pitifully , now , you want me to believe the assessment of a Republican hack Kevin Hassett . 
I am not lot brain dead !! Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 3:21 PM | Report abuse He can speak at the Clinton Global Initiative tomorrow when the Senate and the government bailout will be discussed with Paulson and Bernanke - but not debate on a Friday night at 9:00 p.m. ??? What kind of political move is this - trying to leverage the financial crisis to his advantage is unpatriotic , cowardly and a true insult to the American people . 
its a blow to McCain 's campaign though . 
Any time McCain has gotten free media or been presented side by side with Obama -LRB- Saddleback forum , back to back conventions -RRB- McCain has always won out and gained support in the polls . 
especially since the debate is on Obama 's biggest weaknss and McCain 's biggest strength . 
Obama will be lucky if he gets to avoid national examiation over his flip flops on the surge , Iran and Russia , or not knowing that Russia had a security council veto ! 
Take his name off the ballot . 
Similarly surprising as his VP pick . 
The deeper question for me , is what kind of bold unpredictable moves would he pull as president ? 
If this scares him off , how can he deal with any kind of crisis as President ? 
George Will was right - McCain is unfit to hold the Presidency . 
As the movie titled stated , this is `` No Country for Old Men . '' 
| September 24 , 2008 3:20 PM | Report abuse This is good news ! 
I am sure that once John McCain focuses his energies on our financial mess , it will be straightened out by Monday . 
It is too bad he did n't share his financial wisdom with us during the prior 26 years so this whole thing could have been averted , but I am sure there were many other things occupying his mind back then . 
In any event , it seems that Help Is On The Way ! 
Oh and jt Senator John McCain was one of the three cosponsors of S. 190 , the bill that would have averted this mess , but his campain manager stopped the bill because he was a lobbiest for freddie and fannie . 
What a bunch of b.s. ! 
If the media keeps letting him pull this crap without calling it what it is , we 'll all be sorry . 
its a blow to McCain 's campaign though . 
Any time McCain has gotten free media or been presented side by side with Obama -LRB- Saddleback forum , back to back conventions -RRB- McCain has always won out and gained support in the polls . 
especially since the debate is on Obama 's biggest weaknss and McCain 's biggest strength . 
Obama will be lucky if he gets to avoid national examiation over his flip flops on the surge , Iran and Russia , or not knowing that Russia had a security council veto ! 
McCain is scared to debate because Obama is pulling ahead in the polls . 
I agree that Obama and McCain should participate in the bailout discussions , but they can still debate on Friday night . 
He 's has n't shown up to cast a vote since he began to campaign , not even to vote for his beloved Vets and now , suddenly he wants to look like he 's concerned . 
He 's only trying to take some heat off himself and Obama should insist that the debates go on as scheduled . 
It seems McCain uses events to escape his responsibilities or uncomfortable situations -LRB- Like the Hurricane during the GOP convention -RRB- . 
I ca n't go up against Obama . 
What a wimpy little guy he turned out to be after all . 
Where the hell was McCain 's concern when he was pushing radical deregulation through the senate that caused this mess ? 
This is a pure political stunt designed to distract people from understanding just how culpable McCain is for the financial disaster this country faces . 
| September 24 , 2008 3:20 PM | Report abuse This is just another political stunt to halt Obama 's rise in the polls Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 3:20 PM | Report abuse This is just another political stunt to halt Obama 's rise in the polls Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 3:20 PM | Report abuse Hey , if I were John McCain , I 'd look for some excuse to weasel out of the debate , too . 
There is nothing that the economic ignoramus John McCain can accomplish by this grandstand ploy other than to keep his inadequacies as a presidential candidate out of the television spotlight a little longer . 
This ridiculous bailout thing , which seems to be going down in flames -LRB- thank GOD ! -RRB- 
, will not be helped with that befuddled old coot bloviating from his Senate seat . 
SB 190 would have restricted Fannie and Freddie 's ability to hold individual mortgages , and instead would have forced them to hold concntrated positions in mortgage-based securities . 
The reasoning behind this was that the restriction would protect the institutions against interest rate fluctuations . 
It would have done nothing to protect the institutions against credit risk , which is the problem that triggered the crisis . 
In fact , it conceivably would have made the problem worse . 
Oh , one other thing . 
McCain did n't actually join as a co-sponsor until 2006 , a year after the bill died in committee . 
His `` sponsorship '' looks to me like a sham , designed to give him some CYA protection when he ran for President . 
No one believes McCain has any ideas on the economic crisis . 
Obama should reject this stunt -- Americans need to hear from our next President . 
If McCain ca n't show up , the networks should give Obama the 90 minutes to speak . 
No one believes McCain has any ideas on the economic crisis . 
Obama should reject this stunt -- Americans need to hear from our next President . 
If McCain ca n't show up , the networks should give Obama the 90 minutes to speak . 
McLiar must have just read the latest polling data . . 
nothing like a stall to reestablish your position . 
elected in Nov. of 2006 , took oath of office and Senate seat in Jan. of 2007 . 
So what impact did he have on a bill voted out of committee in 2005 ? 
Did Obama impersonate another Senator and take his\/her place in 2005 ? 
If this bill was SO GREAT then even with party-line vote in committee the Senate majority was REPUBLICAN . 
Dodd was not chairman of the banking committe in 2005 . 
Gee facts do seem to get in the way of the story . 
And yes by dollar amount Obama & Dodd since 2007 got most contributions . 
Obama 's from individual employees NOT MANAGEMENT . 
It makes him appear to be a coward . 
He will say that Obama had the oppty to have these Town Hall meetings which were on McCain 's own format and comfort zone . 
But to bow out now for one evening 's debate to `` work '' on the crises is a complete insult to the intelligence of the American people . 
elected in Nov. of 2006 , took oath of office and Senate seat in Jan. of 2007 . 
So what impact did he have on a bill voted out of committee in 2005 ? 
Did Obama impersonate another Senator and take his\/her place in 2005 ? 
If this bill was SO GREAT then even with party-line vote in committee the Senate majority was REPUBLICAN . 
Dodd was not chairman of the banking committe in 2005 . 
Gee facts do seem to get in the way of the story . 
And yes by dollar amount Obama & Dodd since 2007 got most contributions . 
Obama 's from individual employees NOT MANAGEMENT . 
elected in Nov. of 2006 , took oath of office and Senate seat in Jan. of 2007 . 
So what impact did he have on a bill voted out of committee in 2005 ? 
Did Obama impersonate another Senator and take his\/her place in 2005 ? 
If this bill was SO GREAT then even with party-line vote in committee the Senate majority was REPUBLICAN . 
Dodd was not chairman of the banking committe in 2005 . 
Gee facts do seem to get in the way of the story . 
And yes by dollar amount Obama & Dodd since 2007 got most contributions . 
Obama 's from individual employees NOT MANAGEMENT . 
I think the McCain campaign knows they are in huge trouble based on the new polls , the major media backlash over the `` handling '' of the VP nominee , and the fact that most people know the VP candidate is very inexperienced . 
I think they know that the debates are going to go very poorly , so any mechanism to stall the Obama\/Biden `` surge '' is fair game . 
It 's interesting though , the media will get ` played '' again by having to move the debate -LRB- in conjunction with the `` rules '' set forth by the McCain campaign regarding the VP debates , and recent UN visit -RRB- . 
| September 24 , 2008 3:20 PM | Report abuse Lets get Sarah Palin on that ... Posted by : robert26 | September 24 , 2008 3:19 PM | Report abuse As an Obama supporter and lifelong Democrat , I have to admit , this is a shrewd and admirable move by McCain . 
I still hope we beat you in 40 states . 
It 's a nice symbolic but empty gesture . 
The fact that he admits he knows nothing about economics means he 'll just go back to his hometown of the past 28 years and just make speeches and accomplish nothing . 
Since McCain has been in Washington for sooooooooooooooooooo loooooooooooooooong , should n't he have been adverting this crisis before it happened ? 
Why do n't you just concede the election , old man ? 
This is a sign that McC is cracking under the tremendous pressure he 's under . 
His poll numbers are dropping , he picked the wrong VP , the faltering economy is dragging his addlepated candidacy down to certain defeat . 
Good luck Grampy , on fixing the economic disaster you and your pal Bush created . 
There are n't any do-overs in real life politics . 
McCain ca n't handle the debates because he does n't have an answer for all the real time lies he 's been telling . 
The Rick Davis lie is a doozy . 
McCain does n't have an answer to give about his former pro-regulation stance . 
If he stays in the ring and fights -- there 's still an opportunity for McCain to win . 
If he does n't -- he 's toast . 
Nobody likes a quitter . 
McCain needs to lead the fight against it . 
McCain also needs to come out and say exactly who is at fault here : the Democrats . 
Chucky Schumer , Chris Dodd -LRB- HOW is this guy not in jail ? -RRB- 
, the Clintons -LRB- especially Bill who jump started this mess in 1995 -RRB- , and the rest of them . 
But , of course a Republican has to be at fault here . 
What is lost in the debate also is that if this bailout goes through , neither candidate will be able to enact tax cuts or tax increases . 
Why ca n't he multitask ? 
Once again , McCain pulls another stunt that will benefit only him and thinks we ca n't see through it . 
You are trying to fix the entire mess , not vote for a band-aid . 
Is n't McCain up to the job ? 
Is it possible that he believes that his insights into the financial mess -LRB- created in large part by the very deregulation he struggled so hard to implement -RRB- are so indispensible that the nation ca n't spare him for a couple of hours on Friday evening ? 
I think that , when push comes to shove , Mr. McCain is trying to chicken out of a serious exchange of views , in front of a national audience , with a far superior opponent . 
It seems as though his plan is to join Ms. Palin in hiding . 
The debate certainly need not be postponed . 
What a lame pretext ! 
This is just another stunt . 
I thought McCain was a `` happy warrior '' and was looking forward to engaging in a debate with Barack Obama about the future of America . 
I think that McCain is running scared and hopes that the American people will buy his lame story . 
Suck it up , McCain , troubles do n't last always . 
McCain , the more I think about this stunt , the less water it holds . 
Keep the debate preparations and the pollsters working . 
The GOP position just began to appear a whole lot more desperate . 
What a perfect opportunity to hear what the candidates ideas are on the mess we are in . 
I wanted a town hall meeting , not a real debate . 
Say it would be in the best interest of all concerned ? 
No wonder the boys at Freddie Mac liked you . 
He 'll leave that one up to Bush and his October Surprise . 
Sounds like a desperate attempt to halt his skid in the polls . 
Unfortunately many Americans are probably stupid enough to fall for it . 
I look for another poll bounce for McCain , similar to the post convention bounce . 
This is just another attempt to control the message at a time when McCain is out of his league . 
Here is an idea . 
Move the VP debate up to this Friday . 
Keep the rules the same and let Palin actually answer a question for a change . 
Chicken-sh % t. Posted by : GOP-but not a sheep | September 24 , 2008 3:13 PM | Report abuse Its time to hear from the Candidates directly , enough of you bloggers ! 
I hope congress does n't fall for the phony `` crisis '' campaign , and shelves the plan Bush sprung in the last legislative week after planning it for six months . 
Let President Obama clean up this mess , like all the others Bush has left behind . 
Do n't make it $ 700B worse ! 
Why do that gig ?! Posted by : JakeD 's shadow | September 24 , 2008 3:12 PM | Report abuse In one word `` Distraction '' . 
He will be a distraction to the serious folks on the hill who are trying to resolve this situation . 
This is also a ploy to distract the public from a presidential campaign that he has started losing ground in . 
Hey , maybe he should take Sarah with him to help solve the financial crisis ... did n't she help balance the books in Wasilla ? 
the market did n't crater when the govt made explicit its implicit backing for FNM & FRE . 
it cratered over a week later once LEH went chp13 , ML was rescued by BoA , and finally when AIG was about to implode . 
every economist knows the credit crunch is from one toxic mix : leverage + deregulation . 
every i-bank -LRB- AIG and others included -RRB- was drinking this koolaid . 
last time we saw this toxic mix was in the 1930s . 
and coincidentally , the GOP ruled all 3 branches of govt at the time tnen too ! 
the author of the bloomber article is both biased , and wrong Posted by : rhyno | September 24 , 2008 3:11 PM | Report abuse Oh I see , Sen. Obama is rising in the polls and now McCain pulls another Rove tactic to cancel the debates . 
I do n't know how to tell McCain this , but there are going to be times during a President 's time that he will have to do more than one thing at a time . 
What another lame excuse from the McCain campaign . 
America needs to see what you are truly made of . 
Now , I think we see . 
John McCain is a coward . 
Run away , John . 
McCain needs to step up and debate - be a man . 
He wants to play leader of the nation and put on a show doing it . 
Six months ago I would n't have written that . 
But given the Palin decision , plus McCain 's `` market-based '' approach to health care , I see the man as ambitious as Lucifer , as a cynical opportunist , and nothing more . 
Rover IS the master ! 
So , by bailing on the debate -LRB- which everyone knows McCain will lose -RRB- , hw appears to care about his `` role '' in the senate . 
If Obama calls his bluff and insists the debate go on ... slower minded folks may take it as McCain caring more than Obama about the economy . 
Here 's a solution . 
Both campaigns stop for three days . 
Both Senators work on `` economic issues '' and carry on with the debate as scheduled . 
Basketball fans , this is no less than a `` timeout '' at a critical moment by the McCain team . 
They just watched the Obama team score like ten unanswered points . 
That type of momentum -LRB- even political -RRB- could not be allowed to go on . 
I wonder how Obama will respond . 
I hope he agrees to work with McCain , but insists the debates go on as scheduled . 
There is NO REAL reason they should not . 
YOU ARE RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT TO FIX THIS MESS ONCE-AND-FOR-ALL . 
Oh , that 's right ! 
He was in the Senate for 143 days and decided he needed a change ! 
Shrewd move on McCain 's end to pull something like this . 
However , I doubt that the Obama camp will want the debates pulled . 
I 'm a huge Obama supporter but man , McCain just threw yet another Hail Mary and it just might work this time . 
Obama , what will you do ? 
Gee , who is he ? 
Think I 'll just look him up in Wikipedia . 
Hmmm ... `` He advised President Bush in his campaign , and he currently serves as a senior economic adviser to the John McCain 2008 presidential campaign . 
Hassett is coauthor with James K. Glassman , of Dow 36,000 : The New Strategy for Profiting From the Coming Rise in the Stock Market . 
It was published in 1999 before the dot-com bubble burst . 
The book predicted that the Dow Jones industrials index would rise to 36000 within three to five years -- i.e. , 2002 or 2004 . '' 
Call me when the Dow gets to 36000 , ok ? 
It 's too little , too late now . 
The next President will have to clean up the 8 year old mess , no bailout plan can save this boat from sinking ! 
What difference is this going to make ? 
He should debate the economy in front of the American people . 
He is just a scaredy cat . 
No less than three members of the man ? 
s family including one by sworn affidavit have claimed that Sarah Palin engaged in an extramarital affair with hus ? 
s former business partner , Brad Hanson . 
These sources have named Hanson as Palin ? 
s secret love , and say their affair nearly wrecked both their marriages . 
Hanson owned a snowmobile dealership with Palin ? 
s husband Todd , who immediately dissolved the partnership after he heard stories about the affair , which occurred around 1996 , according to the sources . 
At the time , Palin was mayor of Wasilla . 
Hanson family insider , Jim Burdett , has gone on the record and passed a rigorous polygraph test , revealing de ? 
tails of the affair to The NATIONAL ENQUIRER in a world exclusive interview . 
Burdett is a former brother-in-law of Hanson ? 
s estranged wife Carolyn 's brother , Craig Batton , and still speaks with many family members . ? 
ve known about Brad having had an affair for a long time , but it wasn ? 
t until just recently that I learned his affair was with Sarah Palin , ? 
Burdett told The NATIONAL ENQUIRER . 
Obama supporters , be careful what you wish for lest it come true . 
This guy is going to be a disaster , even worse than Bush . 
Why not cancel that ? 
The Republicans are just a bunch of clowns . 
We have spent the past 8 years lurching from crisis to crisis , and now they want to suspend the campaign . 
Why not put off the election while we are at it ? 
Not completely convinced ... Posted by : John C. | September 24 , 2008 3:09 PM | Report abuse Posted by : jm | September 24 , 2008 3:09 PM | Report abuse This is absurd . 
Obama and his advisors have been actively engaged with the Senate negotiations while McCain has been spinning out one contradictory line after another . 
Now McCain is pulling a stunt and dodging the debate . 
His campaign is one Hail Mary pass after another . 
I think this is enormously disrespectful to the University of Mississippi and to the American people . 
What does McCain want to do next , postpone the election , too ? 
Does he really believe he has anything whatsoever to contribute to the current negotiations ? 
I certainly do not . 
If this were sincere and nonpartisan he would have approached the Obama campaign privately to seek a joint announcement . 
Imagine making a political stunt out of this crisis . 
Mr. Deregulator jumps into phone booth to save the day and out comes ... MR REGULATOR ! 
I guess anything to distract from the Palin\/media meltdown and his campaign 's ties to Fannie and Freddie . 
McCain wants to postpone the election too ? 
I guess anything to distract from the Palin\/media meltdown and his campaign 's ties to Fannie and Freddie . 
Let 's have the candidates debate on the economy . 
This will serve the country a lot better . 
Just like Palin , all McCain is doing is throwing darts . 
If Obama was smart he would say , `` I am running for President to fix these problems ... and I am going to keep on running . '' 
At least there is one adult running for the highest office . 
How the Democrats Created the Financial Crisis : Kevin Hassett Enough cards on this table have been turned over that the story is now clear . 
The economic history books will describe this episode in simple and understandable terms : Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac exploded , and many bystanders were injured in the blast , some fatally . 
Fannie and Freddie did this by becoming a key enabler of the mortgage crisis . 
They fueled Wall Street 's efforts to securitize subprime loans by becoming the primary customer of all AAA-rated subprime-mortgage pools . 
In addition , they held an enormous portfolio of mortgages themselves . 
Take away Fannie and Freddie , or regulate them more wisely , and it 's hard to imagine how these highly liquid markets would ever have emerged . 
This whole mess would never have happened . 
It is easy to identify the historical turning point that marked the beginning of the end . 
Back in 2005 , Fannie and Freddie were , after years of dominating Washington , on the ropes . 
They were enmeshed in accounting scandals that led to turnover at the top . 
At one telling moment in late 2004 , captured in an article by my American Enterprise Institute colleague Peter Wallison , the Securities and Exchange Comiission 's chief accountant told disgraced Fannie Mae chief Franklin Raines that Fannie 's position on the relevant accounting issue was not even `` on the page '' of allowable interpretations . 
Then legislative momentum emerged for an attempt to create a `` world-class regulator '' that would oversee the pair more like banks , imposing strict requirements on their ability to take excessive risks . 
Politicians who previously had associated themselves proudly with the two accounting miscreants were less eager to be associated with them . 
The time was ripe . 
The clear gravity of the situation pushed the legislation forward . 
Some might say the current mess could n't be foreseen , yet in 2005 Alan Greenspan told Congress how urgent it was for it to act in the clearest possible terms : If Fannie and Freddie `` continue to grow , continue to have the low capital that they have , continue to engage in the dynamic hedging of their portfolios , which they need to do for interest rate risk aversion , they potentially create ever-growing potential systemic risk down the road , '' he said . 
`` We are placing the total financial system of the future at a substantial risk . '' 
What happened next was extraordinary . 
For the first time in history , a serious Fannie and Freddie reform bill was passed by the Senate Banking Committee . 
The bill gave a regulator power to crack down , and would have required the companies to eliminate their investments in risky assets . 
If that bill had become law , then the world today would be different . 
In 2005 , 2006 and 2007 , a blizzard of terrible mortgage paper fluttered out of the Fannie and Freddie clouds , burying many of our oldest and most venerable institutions . 
Without their checkbooks keeping the market liquid and buying up excess supply , the market would likely have not existed . 
But the bill did n't become law , for a simple reason : Democrats opposed it on a party-line vote in the committee , signaling that this would be a partisan issue . 
Republicans , tied in knots by the tight Democratic opposition , could n't even get the Senate to vote on the matter . 
That such a reckless political stand could have been taken by the Democrats was obscene even then . 
Wallison wrote at the time : `` It is a classic case of socializing the risk while privatizing the profit . 
The Democrats and the few Republicans who oppose portfolio limitations could not possibly do so if their constituents understood what they were doing . '' 
Now that the collapse has occurred , the roadblock built by Senate Democrats in 2005 is unforgivable . 
Many who opposed the bill doubtlessly did so for honorable reasons . 
Fannie and Freddie provided mounds of materials defending their practices . 
Perhaps some found their propaganda convincing . 
But we now know that many of the senators who protected Fannie and Freddie , including Barack Obama , Hillary Clinton and Christopher Dodd , have received mind-boggling levels of financial support from them over the years . 
Throughout his political career , Obama has gotten more than $ 125,000 in campaign contributions from employees and political action committees of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , second only to Dodd , the Senate Banking Committee chairman , who received more than $ 165,000 . 
Oh , and there is one little footnote to the story that 's worth keeping in mind while Democrats point fingers between now and Nov. 4 : Senator John McCain was one of the three cosponsors of S. 190 , the bill that would have averted this mess . 
The comments to this entry are closed . 
