Syria crisis : ` Nearly 200 lives lost ' in last two days The BBC 's Jim Muir : `` It certainly seems there is a big flare-up of violence '' Almost 200 people have died in two days of clashes in Syria , activists say , as the violence there intensifies . 
Two activist groups put Tuesday 's toll at 84 - the majority in Idlib province in the north-west . 
Video has emerged of a young boy , whose body was apparently torn in half by shelling in the city of Homs . 
The bloodshed comes a day before an advance group of Arab League monitors is due to arrive to oversee the implementation of a peace initiative . 
The UN said earlier this month that more than 5,000 people had been killed across Syria since protests against President Bashar al-Assad erupted in March . 
Damascus says it is fighting `` armed terrorist gangs '' , who want to destabilise the country . 
The BBC 's Jim Muir in Beirut says the swelling violence could be Syrian authorities `` clearing up unfinished business '' ahead of the arrival of the Arab League monitors - or it could be unrelated . 
In violence on Monday , activists said as many as 110 people may have died in fighting across the country - including 60-70 army deserters apparently gunned down by machine-gun fire close to a village called Kafrouaid in Idlib province . 
Activist groups reported more violence in this region of the Zawiya mountains on Tuesday , with the Local Co-ordination Committees saying 25 people had died close to the same village by heavy machine-gun fire and shelling . 
Syria 's armed forces said they were ready to repulse any foreign aggression Our correspondent says reports suggest security services are acting against army deserters and civilians trapped in a valley . 
Many of the towns and cities in Idlib are without internet and mobile phone connections , and some towns are without electricity , the LCC says . 
In addition on Tuesday , it says , another 34 people died in Idlib province , 14 in Homs , and 11 elsewhere - bringing the total toll to 84 . 
Another activist group reported the same toll . 
But some reports have given much higher death tolls for the recent violence . 
The BBC spoke to Wissam Tarif , a well-known activist based in Beirut , who said accounts from hospitals and witnesses suggested 269 people had been killed in Idlib province on Tuesday alone - mostly defecting soldiers but also 93 loyalist soldiers and six civilians . 
Because the Arab League had `` called on the Syrian army to stop obeying its political leadership ... therefore now we see a high number of defections in the army '' , he said . 
In the local town of Jabal al-Zawiya alone , more than 3,000 soldiers had defected , he claimed - and 10,000 had defected across Syria . 
The opposition umbrella group the Syrian National Council -LRB- SNC -RRB- , meanwhile , said 250 had died over Monday and Tuesday . 
It urged the international community to act against the `` horrific massacres '' . 
Activist images apparently showed protests in the center of Damascus on Monday and Tuesday None of the casualty claims has been independently verified , as foreign media are banned from reporting in Syria - but all the activist groups reporting agree that there has been a surge in violence , our correspondent says , with particular concentrations of bloodshed in mountainous parts of Idlib province and the country 's third city of Homs . 
Video footage emerged on Tuesday , allegedly showing the body of a young boy torn in half in the ruins of two houses hit by army shelling in Homs . 
Syria 's air and naval forces conducted live-fire maneuvers aimed testing their readiness to repulse `` any aggression against the homeland , '' the official Sana news agency reported , with state TV pictures reportedly showing warplanes and helicopters firing missiles at targets in a desert area , as well as surface-to-air missiles hitting targets in the air . 
Sana reported a new decree under which anyone found guilty of distributing weapons `` with the aim of committing terrorist acts '' would be sentenced to death . 
Pictures supplied to Reuters news agency by activists apparently showed demonstrations hitting the center of Damascus on Monday and Tuesday . 
League officials have said that the first monitors could be in the country as early as Thursday . 
This follows the announcement that Damascus had agreed to the observer mission on Monday . 
Syrian Foreign Minister Walid Muallem said the country 's sovereignty would be protected because the Arab League had agreed to amendments to the deal , which also calls for all violence to be halted , for the withdrawal of troops from the streets , and the release of detainees . 
The observers would be `` free '' in their movements and `` under the protection of the Syrian government '' , Mr Muallem added , but would not be allowed to visit sensitive military sites . 
The observers will have a one-month mandate that can be extended by another month if both sides agree . 
The leader of the SNC has dismissed the government 's decision as `` just a ploy '' . 
Activists say that if the government does withdraw the army , many areas will immediately fall out of its control . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
