Mr Galloway goes to Washington No new revelations - but do not expect the controversy to go away Wednesday 18 May 2005 01.13 BST George Galloway , then a Labor MP , first went to Iraq 10 years ago . 
Up until then he had been identified as a campaigner for the Palestinian cause . 
After his visit to Baghdad he became the most prominent campaigner in the west on behalf of the Iraqi people . 
That zeal has brought him seemingly endless controversy and yesterday led him to appear in front of a senate hearing . 
The senators questioned whether he or an Iraq charity he founded had benefited financially from that involvement with Saddam 's regime . 
The question raised by the senate sub-committee on investigations , led by a Republican , senator Norm Coleman , can be boiled down to a single issue : was Mr Galloway 's 10-year campaign on behalf of the Iraq people motivated , as he says , by his shock at the state of the Iraqi people 's suffering under sanctions or did he become caught up in an intricate financial network set up by Saddam to buy influence in the west ? 
Mr Galloway , a newly elected MP for the anti-war Respect party , insists it was entirely altruistic . 
What is the background to the hearing ? 
Mr Galloway campaigned vigorously on behalf of Iraq from the time of his first visit through to the outbreak of the war two years ago . 
In 1998 he established the Mariam appeal , initially to help a four-year-old Iraqi girl suffering from leukemia but which broadened into a campaign against sanctions . 
Two years later a Jordanian businessman , Fawaz Zureikat , was appointed to chair the appeal . 
Mr Zureikat had extensive business dealings with Saddam 's Iraq . 
The Iraq Survey Group published documents last year , which were reproduced again last week by the senate sub-committee , suggesting that Mr Zureikat and Mr Galloway had been allocated millions of barrels of oil by Saddam 's government . 
Mr Galloway reiterated yesterday that while his name may have appeared on the documents , he never received anything , not `` even a slim dime '' . 
Did we learn anything new from the senate hearing ? 
The short answer is no. . 
Mr Galloway pointed out various errors in the senate report , such as the investigators mixing up allegations made by the Daily Telegraph with those made by the Christian Science Monitor , which the paper later admitted were based on forgeries . 
Mr Galloway also pointed out that he had never met the former vice-president of Iraq Taha Yassin Ramadan , who was quoted in the senate sub-committee report as saying Mr Galloway had been allocated the oil because of his opinions about Iraq . 
The MP questioned the cred-ibility of Mr Ramadan as a witness , given he was a US prisoner possibly facing a death sentence , and of another unnamed Iraqi source . 
Mr Coleman focused on the crux of the allegations : the relationship between Mr Galloway and Mr Zureikat . 
The Jordanian businessman gave # 375,000 to the Mariam appeal , but there is no evidence that this money came from the oil allocations . 
Mr Galloway said he had never received a penny from the Iraqi government or from Mr Zureikat . 
He knew that Mr Zureikat had business dealings with Iraq but did not know that these involved oil until 2003 . 
Mr Coleman challenged Mr Galloway on whether it was credible that he had not discussed the source of the donation to the Mariam appeal with Mr Zureikat . 
Does the senate hearing mark the end of the affair ? 
Mr Galloway is regarded as a minor player in the senate sub-committee 's investig-ation . 
The main purpose of the investigation is to demonstrate the weakness of the United Nations . 
Mr Coleman has already called for the resignation of the organization 's secretary-general , Kofi Annan . 
But , with so many US Congressional inquiries into Iraq 's finances under Saddam under way and with so many British journalists sore that they have failed to nail Mr Galloway after two decades of controversy , the issue is not going to go away . 
The relationship between Mr Galloway and Mr Zureikat will continue to be explored , especially if , as Mr Galloway hinted yesterday , his friend is prosecuted . 
Mr Coleman , at a press conference after yesterday 's hearing , said there would be `` consequences '' if Mr Galloway was found to have lied to the hearing . 
But the bottom line , as Mr Galloway pointed out , is that neither the senator nor anyone else was able to provide any evidence in the form of bank accounts or any other pieces of paper to show that Mr Galloway had received any money from Saddam , Mr Zureikat or anyone else linked to Iraq . 
