Surrounded by journalists and politics students , Respect MP turns Washington hearing into an indictment of the invasion of Iraq George Galloway testifies to a US Senate committee . 
Photograph : Dennis Cook\/AP George Galloway confronted his accusers in the US senate yesterday , denying any involvement in Iraqi oil trades and using the occasion to unleash an indictment of the war with a stunning ferocity . 
Mr Galloway , the newly elected MP for Bethnal Green and Bow , was appearing before the senate investigations sub-committee examining sanctions-busting oil deals in Iraq before the war . 
In a lengthy preamble before his appearance , senate staff presented a series of documents , enlarged and printed on huge white boards , which they said were Iraqi government memoranda naming Mr Galloway as the recipient of highly lucrative allocations of cheap Iraqi oil under the UN-administered Oil For Food program . 
Senator Norm Coleman , the Republican committee chairman who has taken the lead in making allegations against Mr Galloway , repeatedly insisted that the hearing was `` not a court of law '' . 
But the early stages were nothing if not lawyerly , with Mr Coleman very much in the role of chief prosecutor . 
In a low businesslike voice , the senator from Minnesota read out an indictment of Mr Galloway running through the evidence against him . 
`` Senior Iraqi officials have confirmed that you , in fact , received oil allocations and that the documents that identify you as an allocation recipient are valid , '' Mr Coleman said . 
`` If you can provide any evidence that challenges the veracity of these documents or the statements of former Iraqi officials , we 'd welcome that input . '' 
Then it was the Respect party leader 's turn and any sense of judicial propriety was instantly shattered . 
The courtroom became a vaudeville theater , as the MP lampooned his interrogators , accusing them of making `` schoolboy howler '' mistakes . 
Mr Galloway insisted that he was entirely innocent . 
`` Senator , I am not now nor have I ever been an oil trader and neither has anyone on my behalf , '' he declared , in language that deliberately echoed that of Joe McCarthy 's anti-communist witch-hunt conducted half a century ago just metres from the chamber used for yesterday 's hearing . 
`` I have never seen a barrel of oil , owned one , bought one , sold one , and neither has anybody on my behalf , '' he said . 
The wide , wood-panelled room was packed with journalists and spectators . 
A group of politics students stood at the back . 
The turnout among senators was less spectacular , however . 
Only four appeared for the start of the hearing . 
By the time Mr Galloway took the microphone , there were only two left , Mr Coleman and Carl Levin , the leading Democrat on the panel . 
Witnesses in this August setting , a little below and surrounded by the horseshoe bench of powerful senators , are usually awed and almost always on the defensive . 
Mr Galloway was on the attack from the first moment . 
He entered the hearing room with guns blazing , telling journalists his inquisi tors were `` crazed '' , `` pro-war '' , `` lickspittles '' of the president , and predicting he would turn the tables on them . 
`` I want to put these people on trial . 
This group of neo-cons is involved in the mother of smokescreens , '' he said . 
That was the common theme in a feat of bare-knuckled rhetoric not often witnessed by the senators , who are accustomed to considerably more reverence for their positions . 
CNN called it a `` blistering attack on senators rarely heard or seen on Capitol Hill '' . 
Mr Galloway deflected every charge against him and flung it back at the Bush administration and the US congress . 
For example , he denied the committee 's claim that he had met Saddam many times , claiming there had only been two such meetings - and that the US defense secretary , Donald Rumsfeld , had met the then Iraqi president the same number of times , to sell arms , Mr Galloway said . 
`` Now , you have nothing on me , senator , except my name on lists of names from Iraq , many of which have been drawn up after the installation of your puppet government in Baghdad . '' 
The senators mostly soaked up the punches , reserving judgment until a press conference later , when Mr Coleman claimed Mr Galloway 's credibility was `` very , very suspect '' . 
In the hearing , however , the senators struggled to pin Mr Galloway down with Iraqi oil sales documents with his name on them . 
`` What counts is not the names on the paper ; what counts is where is the money , senator ? '' 
`` Who paid me hundreds of thousands of dollars of money ? 
`` The answer to that is nobody . 
And if you had anybody who ever paid me a penny , you would have produced them here today . '' 
A jubilant Mr Galloway later told an American television interviewer that it marked a victory for the `` British parliamentary style '' over the more sedate senate . 
Mr Galloway used anti-war rhetoric far more raw than most politicians are accustomed to in America , where shared patriotism normally trumps outrage . 
He said that 100,000 people had paid with their lives for false assumptions on Iraq , `` 1,600 of them American soldiers sent to their deaths on a pack of lies ; 15,000 of them wounded , many of them disabled forever on a pack of lies '' . 
In their cross-examination , the senators focused on Mr Galloway 's relationship with Fawaz Zureikat , a Jordanian businessmen with extensive dealings in pre-war Iraq who served as chairman of and as principal contributor to Mr Galloway 's charity , the Mariam Appeal . 
They suggested Mr Zureikat had been oil trading in his name , and the MP must have known about it . 
Once more , the accused sought to turn the tables on his accusers . 
When Mr Coleman asked how he could have failed to be aware of Mr Zureikat 's oil deals , Mr Galloway turned the attention to Mr Coleman 's campaign fundraising . 
He said : `` Well , there 's a lot of contributors , I 've just been checking your website ... '' `` Not many at that level , Mr Galloway , '' the senator interjected . 
`` No , let me assure you there are , '' Mr Galloway went on . 
`` I 've checked your website . 
There are lots of contributors to your political campaign funds , I do n't suppose you ask any of them how they made the money they give you . '' 
Mr Coleman stuck to his task . 
`` If I can get back to Mr Zureikat one more time , do you recall a time when you specifically had a conversation with him about oil dealings in Iraq ? '' 
`` I 've already answered that question , '' Mr Galloway replied . 
`` I can assure you , Mr Zureikat never gave me a penny from an oil deal , from a cake deal , from a bread deal or from any deal . '' 
He danced around many of the questions , frequently responding , `` I can do better than that '' and answering a slightly different question . 
His biggest stumble came when he mistakenly assumed Mr Levin had backed the war . 
Mr Levin 's investigation of the US government 's own failure to police sanctions provided Mr Galloway ammunition for his counter-attack . 
But he made no more headway than his Republican counterpart in his cross-examination of the witness . 
When Mr Levin invited Mr Galloway to say whether he was alleging the documentary evidence was forged , the British MP replied : `` Well , I have no way of knowing , sir . '' 
`` That 's fine . 
So you 're not alleging , '' Mr Levin persisted . 
`` I have no way of knowing . '' 
`` Is it fair to say , since you do n't know , you 're not alleging ? '' 
`` Well , it would have been nice to have seen it before today , '' Mr Galloway said . 
The minuet of exchanges played on for another few minutes before the senators gave up frustrated . 
They had come equipped for a trial and found themselves in the role of stooges for a man accustomed to playing to the gallery . 
