George Galloway addresses the US senate subcommittee for homeland security and governmental affairs in Washington . 
Photograph : Dennis Cook\/AP Whatever else you made of him , when it came to delivering sustained barrages of political invective , you had to salute his indefatigability . 
George Galloway stormed up to Capitol Hill yesterday morning for the confrontation of his career , firing scatter-shot insults at the senators who had accused him of profiting illegally from Iraqi oil sales . 
They were `` neo-cons '' and `` Zionists '' and a `` pro-war lynch mob '' , he raged , who belonged to a `` lickspittle Republican committee '' that was engaged in creating `` the mother of all smokescreens '' . 
Before the hearing began , the Respect MP for Bethnal Green and Bow even had some scorn left over to bestow generously upon the pro-war writer Christopher Hitchens . 
`` You 're a drink-soaked former Trotskyist popinjay , '' Mr Galloway in formed him . 
`` Your hands are shaking . 
You badly need another drink , '' he added later , ignoring Mr Hitchens 's questions and staring intently ahead . 
`` And you 're a drink-soaked ... '' Eventually Mr Hitchens gave up . 
`` You 're a real thug , are n't you ? '' 
he hissed , stalking away . 
It was a hint of what was to come : not so much political theater as political bloodsports - and with the senators , at least , it was Mr Galloway who emerged with the flesh between his teeth . 
`` I know that standards have slipped in Washington in recent years , but for a lawyer , you 're remarkably cavalier with any idea of justice , '' he told Norm Coleman , the Minnesota Republican who chairs the senate investigations committee , after taking his seat at the front of the high-ceilinged hearing room , and swearing an oath to tell the truth . 
`` I 'm here today , but last week you already found me guilty . 
You traduced my name around the world without ever having asked me a single question . '' 
The culture clash between Mr Galloway 's bruising style and the soporific gentility of senate proceedings could hardly have been more pronounced , and drew audible gasps and laughs of disbelief from the audience . 
`` I met Saddam Hussein exactly the same number of times as Donald Rumsfeld met him , '' Mr Galloway went on . 
`` The difference is that Donald Rumsfeld met him to sell him guns , and to give him maps the better to target those guns . '' 
American reporters seemed as fascinated as the British media : at one point yesterday , before it was his turn to speak , Mr Galloway strode from the room , sending journalists of all nationalities rushing after him - only to discover that he was going to the lavatory . 
By condemning him in their report without interviewing him , the senators had already given Mr Galloway the upper hand . 
But not everything was in his favor . 
For a start , only two senators were present , sabotaging Mr Galloway 's efforts to attack the whole lickspittle lot of them - and one of the two , the Democrat Carl Levin , had spent much of his opening statement attacking the hypocrisy of the US government in allegedly allowing American firms to benefit from Iraqi oil corruption . 
Even so , Mr Galloway was in his element , playing the role he relishes the most : the little guy squaring up for a fight with the establishment . 
For these purposes , Senator Coleman served symbolically to represent all the evil in the world - the entire Republican party , the conscience of George Bush , the US government and the British government , too : no wonder his weak smile looked so nauseous . 
`` I gave my heart and soul to stop you committing the disaster that you did commit in invading Iraq ... senator , in everything I said about Iraq , I turned out to be right and you turned out to be wrong , '' Mr Galloway told him . 
And yet for all his anti-establishment credentials , Mr Galloway is as practiced as any of his New Labor enemies at squirming away from awkward questions . 
Under scrutiny by Senator Levin , he deployed a classic example of the bait-and-switch technique that is the government minister 's best defense in difficult questioning . 
But Mr Galloway Goes To Washington had never really been an exercise in clarifying the facts . 
It was an exercise in giving Norm Coleman , and , by extension , the Bush administration , a black eye - mere days after the bloody nose that the Respect MP took credit for having given Tony Blair . 
And it went as well as Mr Galloway could have wished . 
Like a MacBook Pro '' says @Mister_Solomon : Westminster Dog Show - live ! 
