AMMAN | Sat Apr 30 , 2011 6:33 pm EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Women and children in the besieged Syrian city of Deraa chanted `` God is greatest against the tyrant '' from rooftops in the night after troops backed by tanks intensified a crackdown on the city , a resident said . 
Troops stormed into Deraa , cradle of a six-week-old uprising against President Bashar al-Assad 's authoritarian rule , a week ago to try to crush protests that have spread across the country of 20 million . 
Power and communications have been disrupted . 
On Saturday , tanks shelled the old quarter of the southern city and security forces stormed the Omari mosque , a focal point for protests . 
`` The shelling has intensified . 
It is the worst night . 
Women and children are on their rooftops chanting ` God is Greater ' against the tyrant , '' one resident , who lives in the Manshia neighborhood in the old quarter told Reuters by telephone . 
He said security forces were entering homes and dragging men onto buses . 
The chants echoed the calls of Iranian protesters who took to rooftops in Tehran chanting ` Allahu Akbar ' -LRB- God is Greatest -RRB- during post-election unrest in 2009 . 
Foreign correspondents have largely been excluded from Syria since the protests escalated and the crackdown began . 
A Syrian rights group said at least 560 civilians have been killed in the six-week-old uprising in support of demands for greater political freedom and action against corruption that has flourished under the Baath Party , in power since 1963 . 
The uprising , unthinkable only months ago , flared after mass protests toppled authoritarian leaders in Egypt and Tunisia . 
Demonstrations spread in Bahrain and escalated to civil war in Libya . 
Newly appointed Prime Minister Adel Safar was quoted by state news agency SANA as saying his government would in the coming weeks draw up a `` complete plan '' of political , judicial and economic reforms . 
The pledge was unlikely to dampen the intensity of protests . 
A severe crackdown followed the once-unthinkable gesture of lifting a decades-old emergency law this month . 
The government also has little influence as Assad , his family and the security apparatus has a stranglehold on power . 
Syria blames armed groups for the violence . 
On Friday soldiers killed 19 people when they fired on protesters who were trying to enter Deraa from nearby villages in a show of solidarity , a medical source said . 
Syrian rights groups put Friday 's death toll at 62 . 
SANA quoted an official military source as saying on Saturday that army and security forces units had been chasing `` armed terrorist groups '' who had attacked properties in Deraa . 
The source said six members of the group were killed in the operation , 149 wanted people were arrested , and a large cache of weapons and ammunition had been seized . 
Two members of the security forces were also killed and seven wounded . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Where are NATO jets protecting civilians from oppressive regime ? 
Apparently busy bombing Libyans who had a misfortune to be in Gaddafi-held areas . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
