George Galloway , the British MP and anti-war campaigner , was labeled a `` disgrace '' last night by pro-war journalist Christopher Hitchens , who was himself branded by Mr Galloway as a `` slug '' leaving a `` trail of slime '' . 
The two rhetorical heavyweights clashed in a rousing debate on Iraq in New York , both landing painful political blows among the insults , although Mr Galloway , Respect MP for Bethnal Green and Bow , came unstuck when he referred to the September 11 attacks . 
Mr Hitchens , the British Vanity Fair columnist who has strayed from his left-wing roots , began by imagining what would have happened had the policies of the `` so-called anti-war movement '' been followed over the last 15 years . 
`` Saddam Hussein would be the owner and occupier of Kuwait . 
He would have succeeded in the annexation - not merely the invasion - but the abolition of an Arab and Muslim state that was a member of the Arab League and of the United Nations . 
And with these resources , as we now know , because he lost that war , he was attempting to equip himself with the most terrifying arsenal that it was possible for him to ... '' Mr Hitchens was unable to finish as a comment from Mr Galloway drowned him out . 
Mr Hitchens gave short shrift to the incident on which Mr Galloway 's reputation principally rests in the US , his famous - or infamous - visit to the US Senate this May , during which he put the anti-war case with a forceful , and , for US politicians , somewhat unaccustomed , lack of deference . 
`` It is a disgrace that a member of the British House of Commons should go before the United States Senate sub-committee and not testify , but decline to testify , and to insult all those who tried to ask him questions with the most violent , cheap , guttersnipe abuse . 
I think that 's a disgrace , '' Mr Hitchens said , to cheers from the 1,000-strong crowd . 
Mr Galloway used colorful language of his own . 
To laughter and applause , he brought up Mr Hitchens 's support for the 1991 Gulf war , noting : `` What you have witnessed since then is something unique in natural history : the first ever metamorphosis from a butterfly back into a slug . 
I mention ` slug ' purposefully , because the one thing a slug does leave behind it is a trial of slime . '' 
But Hitchens claimed that he had simply changed his mind . 
`` I might not have been invited here in this battle of the titans if it was n't tolerably well known that I think I was probably mistaken on that occasion . '' 
And he took issue with Mr Galloway 's anti-war credentials . 
`` To hear him speak you would think - would you not ? 
- that he was a pacifist , that he defines himself as anti-war . 
Now how can this be said in good conscience by someone who has just , standing by the side of the dictator of Syria on the 30th of July , referred to the 154 heroic operations conducted in Iraq by the so-called resistance ? '' 
Mr Galloway 's comments following his visit to Syria were among his most controversial . 
He told al-Jazeera : `` The Iraqi resistance is not just defending Iraq . 
They are defending all the Arabs and they are defending all the people of the world from American hegemony . '' 
He added , speaking to Arab News Broadcasting : `` Most of the operations which they carry out are against the occupying forces and their collaborators and this is normal in every liberation struggle . '' 
And he told Syrian television : `` Two of your beautiful daughters are in the hands of foreigners : Jerusalem and Baghdad . 
The foreigners are doing to your daughters as they will . 
The daughters are crying for help and the Arab world is silent . 
Some of them are collaborating with the rape of these two beautiful Arab daughters . 
Because they are too weak and too corrupt to do anything about it . '' 
Mr Galloway stirred the crowd when he brought up the case of Cindy Sheehan , the anti-war protestor whose son died in Iraq last year and who has become the focus of fierce debate in the US . 
Repeating Mr Hitchens ' scathing criticisms of Ms Sheehan , Mr Galloway said : `` You are covered in the stuff you like to smear onto others . 
Not just me ... but people much more gentle than me , people like Cindy Sheehan ... who gave the life of her son for the war that you have come here to glory in . '' 
Referring again to the Syria episode , Mr Hitchens asked : `` Is it not rather revolting to appear in Damascus by the side of -LRB- Bashar al - -RRB- Assad -LRB- the Syrian president -RRB- and to praise the people who killed Casey Sheehan , and then to come to America and appeal to the emotions of his mother ? '' 
But Mr Galloway hit the wrong note with his comments on September 11 . 
`` You may think that those aeroplanes in this city on 9\/11 came out of a clear , blue sky . 
I believe they emerged out of a swamp of hatred created by us . '' 
A crescendo of booing cut him off as he continued to speak , and Mr Hitchens commented : `` Mr Galloway , you picked the wrong city to say that in , and arguably the wrong month , as well . '' 
After the debate , Mr Galloway told Radio 4 's James Naughtie : `` I think it 's amazing that so many people came and so many people were turned away , so much interest in two British guys debating Iraq in New York . 
There do n't appear to be figures in the American anti-war movement and in the American pro-war movement that are able to draw an audience , so maybe we 'll have to take this show to the west coast , I do n't know . '' 
But Mr Hitchens said he was `` depressed by the ease with which a cheap point can get applause in the mouth of a really unscrupulous person . 
When I turned my head - which I tried not to do - it was like looking straight into the piggy eyes of fascism . '' 
Mr Galloway is on a speaking tour of America to promote his new book about the Senate hearings , Mr Galloway Goes to Washington . 
