A scene from Mike Mackey 's Liberality for All . 
Photograph : Mike Mackey\/ACC Studios What would a world run by antiwar liberals look like ? 
That 's the premise of a new comic book , Liberality for All , set in an alternate future in which Al Gore won the 2000 US election and liberals went on to create a dystopia where a corrupt UN , led by the French president , Jacques Chirac , has appeased Islamist fundamentalists and invited Osama bin Laden to give the memorial address on the 20 anniversary of the September 11 attacks . 
Needless to say , the comic 's author , Mike Mackey , is a conservative fed up with liberal protests against the war in Iraq . 
In his story , Chelsea Clinton is the president , Michael Moore is vice-president and the Department of Political Correctness has curtailed freedom of speech . 
It 's up to a trio of neo-con cyborg superheroes , including Oliver North , to free the US from `` ultraliberal extremism '' . 
The series opens with the heroes attempting to stop Bin Laden - who has been appointed the UN 's Afghan ambassador - from detonating a nuclear bomb at the September 11 memorial service . 
The nuke has come courtesy of Saddam Hussein 's son , Uday , who is now the president of Iraq because the liberal Gore government did n't have the balls to invade the country . 
Tasteless , tacky - or just a wind up designed to push people 's buttons ? 
Online previews of Liberality , published next month , have provoked both outrage and praise on blogs and internet talkboards , with posters divided over whether it is neo-con propaganda or a send up of rightwing fears . 
Mackey , a 37-year-old comic book dealer from Kentucky -LRB- `` what Michael Moore refers to as Jesus Land '' -RRB- , says he wrote the book partly in response to the liberal view that the occupation of Iraq was misguided . 
`` One thing that embodies liberalism for me is that bumper sticker saying ` war is not the answer ' . 
The idea is war is never the answer . 
Well , there were 17 UN resolutions on Iraq . 
What would have been enough before taking action - 25 , 40 ? 
So the book imagines the consequences of not going to war . '' 
Does he consider the antiwar movement unpatriotic ? 
`` I hear people on the left saying ` do n't question my patriotism ' - but you do n't see a -LRB- US -RRB- flag in sight at the antiwar protests , '' he says . 
Unsurprisingly , Mackey 's own assessment of the occupation is at odds with that presented in most of the world 's media - bar , perhaps , Fox News . 
`` It 's going fantastically well in a way that 's not being reported in the news , '' he says . 
`` I understand 3,000 schools have been built and women have the right to vote and not to be raped by Uday Hussein . '' 
Given his views , I ask him whether he 's concerned about being interviewed by a liberal website like Guardian Unlimited ? 
`` You 're liberal ? 
That 's not what I 'd heard , '' he says . 
`` A friend of mine said you were like Fox News on the web . 
Maybe it was Sky News . '' 
I suddenly imagine the sound of my editor-in-chief choking on her lunch . 
Some critics argue that Liberality is so far-fetched it does n't work as satire . 
Given her father 's shenanigans while in office , would Chelsea really be likely to want to go back to the Oval Office ? 
`` She 's a moderate in the book . 
I think she 's a sympathetic character , '' he says . 
Mackey admits it was `` almost too ridiculous to use him '' until he saw Moore sitting in the place of honor next to Jimmy Carter at the Democratic party national convention during the US election campaign . 
`` Then it almost became dangerously prophetic , '' he says . 
`` But the book 's meant to be fun . 
It 's not propaganda . 
It 's not like I 've made a movie and called it a documentary like Michael Moore did . '' 
The furore has attracted coverage from newspapers including the Boston Globe and talk radio , helping the Liberality website notch up 500.000 hits in two months . 
Not bad for a self-published comic with a print run of just 10,000 copies . 
It 's doubtful Mackey will find a big audience outside the US , though . 
UK readers are probably aware of Oliver North , given his involvement in the covert sale of arms to Iran during the Reagan administration . 
But would they recognize his other two heroes ? 
Maybe a few will recall G Gordon Liddy , who was involved in the Watergate break-in that led to Richard Nixon 's resignation , but Sean Hannity , a rightwing talk show host , is unheard outside of the US . 
Comics , in London , have ordered just one copy - and only out of morbid curiousity . 
But we Brits should perhaps be grateful we come off lightly in this nightmare vision of the future . 
The UK is noticeably absent from the countries applauding Bin Laden 's UN address in the first issue . 
`` That was me tipping my hat to you guys , '' Mackey says . 
`` I 've got a lot of time for Tony Blair . 
I tried to envisage where the UK was in my reality . 
I think the British government would be very conservative . '' 
Perhaps Liberality is n't so far-fetched after all . 
