Obama hopes oil spill boosts support for climate bill President Barack Obama speaks in the Rose Garden of the White House in Washington , Tuesday , June 1 , 20010 , after meeting with the BP Oil Spill Commission co-chairs . 
-LRB- AP Photo\/Pablo Martinez Monsivais -RRB- -LRB- Pablo Martinez Monsivais - AP -RRB- President Barack Obama departs the White House in Washington , Wednesday , June 2 , 2010 , for a short helicopter flight to Andrews Air Force Base then on to Pittsburgh where he will speak at Carnegie Mellon University . 
Scott Applewhite -RRB- -LRB- J. Scott Applewhite - AP -RRB- Explore all of our oil spill graphics to track the spill , see its effects , and learn its possible solutions . 
President Obama tried Wednesday to channel public outrage about the Gulf of Mexico oil spill into support for a climate-change bill , seeking to redefine an issue that threatens to tarnish his presidency . 
In a speech at Pittsburgh 's Carnegie Mellon University , Obama made one of his strongest pitches for comprehensive climate legislation , arguing that the case for breaking the nation 's addiction to fossil fuels has been made clearer by the environmental catastrophe in the gulf . 
The president vowed to gather votes for the climate bill in the `` coming months '' and repeated his intention to roll back billions of dollars in tax breaks for big oil companies , to tap natural gas reserves as an alternative to coal , and to increase reliance on nuclear power -- although energy experts said that such a program would leave the country just as dependent on offshore oil . 
`` I will make the case for a clean-energy future wherever I can , and I will work with anyone from either party to get this done . 
But we will get this done , '' Obama said . 
`` The next generation will not be held hostage to energy sources from the last century . '' 
Allies of the president have argued for weeks that the administration should stop talking about BP , the oil company responsible for the spill , and instead tap into the public attention to the catastrophe in hopes of giving it at least some redemptive value in the long term . 
`` The oil disaster adds new urgency and a new opportunity for connecting with the public , '' said Daniel J. Weiss of the Center for American Progress . 
`` The administration was going to do it anyway , but this gives it a new way to talk about it . '' 
Those urging action have sent White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel briefs that argue for a final push on the climate legislation , and others have had conversations with climate adviser Carol M. Browner and legislative director Phil Schiliro . 
In an online column posted Wednesday , Weiss and CAP President John D. Podesta argued that `` the horrible BP oil disaster has reminded Americans that we must reduce our oil use , '' adding : `` We share the view that this presents an unprecedented opportunity to take bold action to achieve this goal . '' 
Energy experts warned that climate legislation would have little impact on the need to search for oil in the Gulf of Mexico to meet U.S. demands . 
Offshore oil provides a growing portion of U.S. oil production , and deep-water wells account for a rising share of the offshore output . 
The gulf provides about 40 percent of U.S. oil production . 
Obama 's earlier mandate to improve automobile fuel efficiency will do much more than a climate bill to cut oil use , but even a sharp drop in U.S. consumption would leave the nation a net importer and thus dependent on offshore oil . 
The president made this point when he endorsed an expansion of offshore drilling weeks before a drilling rig exploded April 20 and triggered the spill . 
`` The president is correct that we need more -LRB- renewable energy -RRB- , but we need more oil , too , '' said J. Robinson West , chairman of PFC Energy , a Washington consulting firm . 
The leading supporters of climate-change legislation on Capitol Hill cheered Obama 's remarks as a clear step up from his rhetoric in recent months , when he often left unclear whether he was going to push for energy reform this year . 
