Explore all of our oil spill graphics to track the spill , see its effects , and learn its possible solutions . 
Thursday , June 3 , 2010 ; 3:26 PM BATON ROUGE -- For some people , a giant underwater oil leak is n't solely an environmental disaster . 
It 's also a delicious , once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for research . 
`` I was praying for a small oil spill and I ended up with this , '' said Sonia Gallegos , an oceanographer at the Naval Research Lab at Stennis Space Center in Mississippi . 
Last year Gallegos received funding from NASA to study spills . 
This year she received a terrible , awesome gift from BP , and -- like 100 other scientists gathered at Louisiana State University on Thursday -- is now playing mediator between the brain and the heart . 
`` I 'm very happy to have something to work with , but at the same time I live here , '' said Gallegos , who 's working on automated detection of oil spills . 
`` It breaks my heart . 
It 's my home , and I understand the impact on people . '' 
`` I live two blocks from the beach in Bay St. Louis -- we smell the benzine , '' said her lab colleague Allen Reed , a geologist . 
`` It 's an opportunity , but it 's very unwelcome in many ways . '' 
Early Thursday morning the scientists and federal officials wolfed down danishes , mini doughnuts and coffee before engaging in a day-long mind meld . 
Curiously , the summit took place in a campus building named after LSU alumnus Lodwrick M. Cook , former chairman and chief executive of ARCO , an oil company that was acquired by BP in 2000 . 
`` We 're here to find out what we know , what we do n't know and what we need to know , '' said Robert Gagosian , president of the District-based nonprofit Consortium for Ocean Leadership , which organized the event . 
What they know : The oil will be a matter of concern and study for generations . 
What they do n't know : Where exactly the oil is going , how much there is , and what exactly it will do to wildlife and industry . 
What they need to know : How to choreograph dozens of state , local and federal players , and how to harmonize streams of data into an accessible , coherent set that guides future action . 
From a dais in front of round , white-clothed tables , Jane Lubchenco , administrator of NOAA , updated the crowd on the federal response , which in the next two months will remain focused on both the movement and immediate impact of the oil from the Deepwater Horizon leak . 
Within six months , the government hopes to calculate the impact of dispersants , conduct seafood surveys and quantify the injury to natural resources . 
In the longer term , it plans to study the impact on and the possible restoration of ecosystems , as well as the socioeconomic fallout in coastal states . 
Lubchenco skipped through a PowerPoint presentation of charts with tiny numbers and swaths of color that depicted , by turns , the location of pre-impact assessment sites , the coordinates of data-gathering stations at sea and the forecast of surface oil movement over the next 72 hours . 
She also referenced the Interior Department 's pre-impact assessment along the coast , and a `` flow rate technical group '' that had been assembled to determine the volume of oil . 
The brisk rundown irked at least one scientist . 
`` The big problem is so far there 's no central database where we can actually get hold of '' this data , said Piers Chapman , head of the department of oceanography at Texas A&M University , during the question-and-answer session that followed . 
`` The public feels there is a conspiracy to hide data . '' 
`` It 's probably going to be a challenge to have all that available in one place , '' Lubchenco replied . 
`` We are working on a collaborative effort to put all data together -- a product most likely to emerge is a spatially explicit Google-driven map so you can find what 's where ... No one 's hiding anything . 
It 's a data management issue . '' 
But the passion to share research and knowledge -- one of the prime reasons everyone gathered in the Lod Cook Alumni Center -- should take a back seat to cleanup efforts , said Edward B. Overton , an LSU chemist and professor emeritus . 
`` There 's massive amounts of oil on the surface that is eminently skimmable , '' Overton said from the dais before attendees broke into smaller group discussions that were closed to the media . 
`` If there 's a skimmer in the world , it ought to be in the gulf today ... I 'm happy we 're studying it but we have to make sure we keep as much oil as possible off the shore . 
BP needs to stop the bloody well and the rest of the community needs to make sure that oil does not get to the shoreline . '' '' 
