Explore all of our oil spill graphics to track the spill , see its effects , and learn its possible solutions . 
The gargantuan blob of light Louisiana crude floating in the Gulf of Mexico has already closed oyster beds , shut down shrimpers , canceled fishing tournaments and panicked beach hoteliers from New Orleans to Key West . 
With the vast majority of the oil floating offshore , where it will land and whom it will affect have become a guessing game fraught with worry . 
Wherever the oil goes , it threatens to obliterate billions of dollars for the region 's tourism and fishing industries . 
`` It 's like waiting for a hurricane to hit , '' said Mike Voisin , owner of Motivatit Seafood , which harvests oysters from the gulf . 
`` We do n't know where it will go . 
Every day we look at the forecasting maps . '' 
`` We 're praying hard , '' said Ed Schroeder , director of the tourist bureau in Pensacola Bay , Fla. , where people are wishing away an oily sheen about 10 miles off the coast . 
A report of tarballs on the beach led the news in the local paper last week , though it is uncertain whether the tar came from the spill . 
`` If we were picking a time for something like this to hit , it would n't be now , '' Schroeder said . 
`` Our season just started . '' 
At stake are industries that employ tens of thousands of people and generate billions of dollars in economic activity for coastal areas stretching hundreds of miles . 
Beyond fishing and tourism , the offshore oil business is likely to feel the effects soon , too , as some exploration halts under a federal moratorium , analysts said , and new safety measures are required . 
`` It 's clearly going to make deep-water exploration more costly , '' said Edward Morse , a Credit Suisse oil analyst . 
`` My rough estimate is that it will have at most a 10 to 15 percent increase in costs developing crude from deep water . '' 
For gulf regions from Texas to Key West , commercial fishing contributes $ 1 billion to GDP , tourism and recreation contribute $ 13 billion , and oil and gas contribute $ 11 billion , according to figures from Charles Colgan of the National Ocean Economics Program . 
As the slick slides toward Mississippi , Alabama and Florida , the damage could spread . 
At the Mariah Jade Shrimp Company in Chauvin , La. , Kim and David Chauvin have watched as the closing of about a quarter of the gulf to fishing has made the flow of shellfish to their dock just a trickle . 
The company has three of its own shrimping vessels , which have been enlisted to help contain the spill . 
`` Our dock is pretty much closed , '' said Kim Chauvin , 42 . 
`` At this point , we are going to be looking for other jobs ... What 's really scary is wondering how much marine life will be left when this is all over . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
