Explore all of our oil spill graphics to track the spill , see its effects , and learn its possible solutions . 
NEW ORLEANS -- At first , it seemed that a British company might be trying to keep an American journalist off an American beach . 
Ted Jackson , a staff photographer for the Times-Picayune , drove two hours to Port Fourchon , La. , to shoot photos of tar balls on public property but was stopped 100 yards from the surf by harbor police . 
After 30 minutes of phone calls to higher authorities , Jackson said , the police allowed him 15 minutes of obstructed photographing , out of view of workers who were taking samples from the beach . 
Last week , Jackson was also unable to book a flight over Grand Isle from a charter plane company in Belle Chasse , La. , because the owner could not obtain permission from BP 's command center to enter restricted airspace . 
BP , the Federal Aviation Administration and the Coast Guard were refusing access to planes carrying media , according to Southern Seaplane 's secretary-treasurer , Rhonda Panepinto , who fired off a three-page letter to Sen. David Vitter -LRB- R-La . -RRB- 
`` We strongly feel that the reason for this massive -LRB- temporary flight restriction -RRB- is that BP wants to control their exposure to the press , '' she wrote . 
`` We are all at the mercy of BP , a British-owned company . '' 
This week , things got better . 
The FAA sent two special operations managers to the Gulf Coast on Tuesday to oversee flight access , according to Panepinto , whose company flew Jackson around Chandeleur and Ship islands on Wednesday and is fielding requests from other media outlets , with no grief from authorities . 
`` It 's almost like there 's a new sheriff in town , '' Jackson said . 
Perhaps the gulf operation is smoothing itself out after a month and a half of oil gush and media crush . 
Authorities had weathered criticism for a series of minor run-ins that gave the impression that BP was calling the shots . 
Last week a Mother Jones reporter was told she could n't see Elmer 's Island without being accompanied by a BP representative , because it 's `` BP 's oil . '' 
Two weeks ago Coast Guard officials cited `` BP 's rules '' when demanding that a CBS News crew leave a beach area . 
-LRB- Representatives from CNN , ABC and local CBS affiliate WWL-TV in New Orleans said last week that their journalists had not encountered significant obstacles while covering the oil story . -RRB- 
`` Neither BP nor the U.S. Coast Guard , who are responding to the spill , have any rules in place that would prohibit media access to impacted areas and we were disappointed to hear of this incident , '' said Rob Wyman , a lieutenant commander for the Coast Guard , in a statement responding to the CBS episode . 
`` In fact , media has been actively embedded and allowed to cover response efforts since this response began , with more than 400 embeds aboard boats and aircraft to date . '' 
On Saturday , a University of North Carolina energy blog titled Powering a Nation posted images of a BP contract that barred owners of vessels it chartered from making `` public statements . '' 
A BP spokesman said the company has standard contractual language designed to protect proprietary information , and that it has allowed media to cover its Vessels of Opportunity program , which employs local boat owners in cleanup efforts . 
The FAA responded to initial criticism over air traffic restriction by citing security concerns and asserting that BP employees and contractors were not involved in those decisions . 
Hundreds of media outlets are demanding access to a highly mutable , complex situation , and local , state and federal officials say they are working together -- under the majestic heading of Deepwater Horizon Unified Command -- to streamline the responses to both reporters and the public . 
`` With regards to media , we follow an incident command system , a tried-and-true way of responding to crises , '' said a spokesman for BP from the Unified Command 's headquarters in Robert , La. `` You have public information officers and you have a joint information center that includes the responsible party , BP , as well as government agencies who have involvement and oversight for this spill , the Coast Guard being the federal on-scene coordinator . 
We have state people , NOAA , representatives from Transocean -LRB- the company that owned the rig that created the spill -RRB- . 
We 've had MMS . 
What we do is use information that comes in through our operations and create , if you will , the message to share . '' 
That message , right now , is that the authorities want to provide access to the story while maintaining the proper safety parameters for both cleanup workers and the environment itself . 
But there might be more obstacles down the road if the situation intensifies , according to Chip Babcock , a trial lawyer specializing in media and First Amendment cases at the Houston legal firm Jackson Walker , which brought suit against FEMA when it blocked journalists from covering the removal of dead bodies in the weeks after Hurricane Katrina . 
`` There 's going to be , I think , a natural hesitancy to let journalists show images of the horrific scenes that are going to happen purely in the next few weeks , '' Babcock said . 
`` You 'll see these beaches clogged with oil , and animals suffering , and I think -- human nature being what it is -- there 's going to be some people who do n't want those images shown . '' '' 
