` These are the people we never see on TV ' A new film reveals how the war hit a corner of Iraq the world had overlooked : Kurdistan . 
Michael Howard meets its director Turtles Can Fly : ` An anti-war movie without slogans . ' 
As a Kurd , Bahman Gobadi knows that opportunity can grow out of tragedy . 
That belief helps to explain why , two weeks after the fall of Saddam Hussein in the spring of 2003 , he slipped across the border from his native Iran and headed for Baghdad . 
With him he carried a copy of his second feature film , Marooned in Iraq , a road movie about a group of Iranian-Kurdish musicians seeking lost love in Saddam 's benighted land . 
Turtles Can Fly -LRB- Lakposhtha Ham Parvaz Mikonand -RRB- `` I wanted to be the first to screen a film in Baghdad after the removal of the great dictator , '' he said last week in Arbil , the main Iraqi Kurdish city . 
`` Being caught watching such a movie under the former regime would have almost certainly meant death . 
I was so delighted that Saddam had gone . '' 
But Gobadi had also packed a small video camera , which whirred away as he passed through scores of impoverished Kurdish villages en route to the capital . 
Back in Tehran after the screening , he looked at the footage . 
`` What I saw was startling : a land full of mines and refugee tents and disabled children ... arms sellers , abandoned tanks , mortars . '' 
He could n't sleep . 
`` Every time I closed my eyes , I was haunted by those images . 
There was something telling me to go back and make another movie . 
So I smuggled myself back over the border and started work . '' 
This was the beginning of Turtles Can Fly , the first feature film to emerge from post-Saddam Iraq . 
It is a powerful cry on behalf of children everywhere caught up in despotism and war . 
Filmed on location last winter , using minimal equipment in the mountainous terrain of Iraqi Kurdistan , Turtles paints a radically different picture of life in Iraq from the one most western audiences have seen on their news channels . 
Gobadi is a deeply political film-maker , but his nuanced approach skillfully avoids the naive blustering of many on the anti-war left . 
`` It is an anti-war movie without slogans . '' 
He chose the title in part , he says , because `` people might think it was some kind of Disney film '' . 
As with A Time for Drunken Horses , his acclaimed first film , the central characters are children . 
They are all first-time actors , some with serious physical disabilities , from whom Gobadi has coaxed astonishing performances . 
The story follows a group of Iraqi Kurdish orphans in a refugee camp on the Turkish border on the eve of the US-led invasion . 
The children carry the physical and mental scars of life under Saddam 's regime with stoicism and not a little humor . 
Gobadi 's aim , he says , was to present a portrait of the `` pain and surrealism '' of war and its effects on Iraqis with `` naturalness and honesty '' . 
`` These are the people we never see or hear from on TV , '' he says . 
`` President Bush and Saddam had become the superstars on the satellite channels . 
Iraqi people were just extras . 
So I wanted my stars to be the children , with Saddam and Bush in the background . '' 
Turtles Can Fly is as bold a presentation of the Kurdish experience as has appeared on the big screen since the great Turkish Kurdish director Yilmaz Guney made Yol . 
And it has clearly touched a nerve among Iraq 's Kurds . 
A week after the film 's premiere in Arbil , Gobadi still bore the bruises from what he described as `` the astonishing reaction '' of the audience . 
`` They almost hugged me to death , '' he said . 
`` I was telling a part of their pain and their memories . 
I take it as a compliment . 
If they had not believed what was in the film , they would not have reacted like that . '' 
It is Gobadi 's biggest production to date , involving thousands of Kurdish villagers as extras , as well as real US soldiers and helicopters . 
And he admits that without the help of the Kurdish Regional Government , led by Nechirvan Barzani , the film would never have been made . 
`` We did n't have the money , or any sophisticated equipment , so their help made the difference . '' 
Filming was tough , he says . 
`` We endured hours of freezing weather , filming in the mud and the mountains . 
And believe me , what these children did in my film and put up with for my film , the Hollywood children could never do . 
The children were acting their lives . 
That 's why they seem so real . '' 
Gobadi was born in 1969 in the border town of Baneh in Iranian Kurdistan . 
As a student , he worked for a radio station before joining a group of amateur film-makers in the city Sanandaj . 
With their help , he directed his first short films . 
In Tehran , where he had moved to attend film classes -LRB- he dropped out before graduating -RRB- , Gobadi directed a number of award-winning short films . 
In 1999 , he was Abbas Kiarostami 's first assistant on The Wind Will Carry Us , which proved a crucial stepping stone . 
For Turtles he teamed up once more with cameraman Shahriar Assadi - `` He 's a Kurd at heart '' - and persuaded Hussein Alizadeh , one of Iran 's leading composers , to provide the eerily beautiful soundtrack . 
Variety magazine recently dubbed Gobadi `` the poet laureate of the Kurdish cinema '' . 
Yet he dismisses talk of a Kurdish cinema as premature . 
`` When we have cinemas in every Kurdish town , and when Kurdish language and culture on film is no longer viewed as a rare and exotic bird by the film community , perhaps then we can talk of a Kurdish cinema . 
I want to register the Kurds on the cultural map . '' 
Gobadi now lives in Tehran , because that is where the Iranian film industry is based . 
`` But it 's just my body that lives there , '' he says . 
`` My spirit and my heart are in Kurdistan . '' 
Turtles Can Fly is released tomorrow . 
