By Wyre Davies BBC News Some Syrian Kurds have fled to Iraq , but the many remaining are asserting autonomy as the Assad regime becomes embroiled in conflict Like Iraq , Jordan and Lebanon Turkey has already absorbed - almost without hesitation - thousands of Syrians fleeing the fighting , in particular from the northern cities of Hama and Aleppo . 
Turkey is understandably concerned that the number of civilians fleeing across its relatively open southern border will increase as the fighting intensifies in Syria . 
Some of those refugees also bring their own political baggage with them and there have already been disturbances in the border camps . 
Occasionally ethnic and regional tensions spill over as thousands of displaced Syrians live cheek by jowl in tents under the blisteringly hot summer sum . 
But for Turkey , the refugee issue is a mere inconvenience compared to what it thinks will be the biggest fall-out of the Syrian crisis - the Kurds and Kurdistan . 
In an almost mirror image of what happened in Iraq after 1991 , Kurdish nationalists in northern Syria are making the most of the turmoil and violence in the rest of the country to strengthen their own identity and position . 
For Turkey , it is like a red rag to a bull . 
As the Assad regime pulls in regular Syrian troops from peripheral areas for the military assault on Aleppo , there is clear evidence that others are almost seamlessly moving in to the vacuum left behind . 
And in some Kurdish parts of northern Syria the opposition forces of the Democratic Union Party -LRB- PYD -RRB- and other smaller factions have all but taken over . 
The leader of the PYD , Salih Muslim , spoke to the BBC in recent days about his movement 's strategy and aspirations . 
`` We are able to govern ourselves - we have the power for it , '' he said . 
Mr Muslim was careful to insist , at this stage at least , that he was n't calling for an independent Kurdistan but an autonomous region within a new , democratic Syria . 
It is thought that Kurdish militias now control at least four main towns and cities in northern Syria . 
They reportedly include at least parts of Qamishlo , Efrin , Amude , Terbaspi and Ay El Arab . 
More remarkable is that although there were sporadic clashes and some loss of life many of them appear to have been secured without much of a fight . 
`` We warned them to leave the Kurdish areas , otherwise we would resort to different measures , '' says Muslim , referring to civil administrators and officials from Damascus who used to run the towns . '' 
They were aware of the people 's demands and that 's why they gave in without blood being spilled . '' 
Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan sees a Kurdish enclave in Syria a direct threat to Turkey Quite deliberately choosing to describe the region of northern Syria as `` West Kurdistan '' the PYD leader said most people in the region stood with the movement and supported their aims . 
Those aims are certainly not supported by the Turkish government , which has , for decades , fought its own often bloody battles with Kurdish separatists and nationalists of the PKK - the Kurdish Workers ' Party . 
In a blunt message at the end of this week , Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan made it abundantly clear he saw the creation of a separate Kurdish enclave in northern Syria as a direct threat to his own country 's interests and security . 
Mr Erdogan said that Ankara would not accept the creation of a `` terrorist '' structure in the region . 
`` It is our most natural right to intervene -LRB- in northern Syria -RRB- since those terrorist formations would disturb our national peace , '' said the Prime Minister in a television interview . 
Turkey , a one time ally of the Assad regime in Syria for pragmatic and economic reasons as much as anything , has all but given up on Damascus . 
On more than one occasion Mr Erdogan has called on President Bashar al-Assad to stop the onslaught against his own people and to step down before more lives are lost . 
Some in Turkey also believe that a desperate President Assad has deliberately abandoned , or handed over , the northern regions to the PYD in order to create tensions with Turkey and also divide the already fractious opposition movements in Syria . 
The crisis has emboldened Syria 's Kurds but some analysts say their relationship with the FSA is tense `` In the North , -LRB- Assad -RRB- has already allocated five provinces to the terrorists -LRB- Kurds -RRB- , '' Mr Erdogan was quoted as saying by a Turkish news agency last week . 
Ankara simply regards the Syrian PYD as a branch of its own , outlawed PKK . 
But the criticism and allegations of trying to create regional instability are n't limited to the pariah that is the regime in Damascus . 
The autonomous Kurdish administration in northern Iraq has now admitted it has been training Kurdish-Syrian fighters on its territory . 
In a recent interview the regional leader , President Massoud Barzani , openly confirmed the presence of a military training camp where `` a good number of young Kurds '' have been trained . 
With as many as 20million Kurds in Turkey alone , watching their brethren to the east quite literally marking out their territory , the famously nationalist Turks are , to put it mildly , concerned . 
Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davatoglu is being dispatched to northern Iraq in the coming days where , according to reports , he will talk with Kurdish officials there about the situation in Syria and Turkish `` sensitivities . '' 
Many things are still unclear ; relations between the Syrian Kurds and other opposition groups -LRB- the Free Syria Army -RRB- are said to be tense . 
In some Syrian Kurdish towns under the de-facto control of the PYD , pro Assad troops have remained in their barracks , raising questions about a deal , of sorts , between Damascus and the Kurds . 
And , the biggest question of all , will Turkey carry out its threat to intervene militarily in northern Syria to prevent the creation of a Kurdish `` entity '' . 
One thing is certain . 
If and when President Assad is driven from power , the country he leaves behind will for some time be divided , damaged and violent . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
