NALUT , Libya | Sun Aug 7 , 2011 8:10 pm BST NALUT , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan rebels said on Sunday they were firmly in control of the town of Bir al-Ghanam , a staging post about 80 km -LRB- 50 miles -RRB- south of Tripoli , rejecting a government assertion they had been pushed back . 
A small settlement in the desert , Bir al-Ghanam is also the closest point the rebels have come to Muammar Gaddafi 's stronghold in the capital , lending it a strategic role in the rebels ' six-month campaign to end Gaddafi 's rule . 
Rebel commanders in the region said on Saturday they had seized control of Bir al-Ghanam in an offensive in which four anti-Gaddafi fighters had died . 
Taking the town -- which lies on a highway leading north to the Mediterranean coast and on to Tripoli -- would break weeks of stalemate during which rebels have been unable to make big advances despite NATO air strikes on government forces . 
Libyan Prime Minister Al-Baghdadi Ali Al-Mahmoudi said on Sunday that rebels , under NATO air cover , had seized Bir al-Ghanam temporarily but they had been driven out by local volunteers and Libyan forces . 
`` This is exactly what happened in Bir al-Ghanam , which is back in the hands of the honorable and brave local tribes ... and under the legitimate control of the government of Libya , '' he told a news conference in Tripoli . 
But a local commander rejected that version of events . 
`` Gaddafi is a liar because Bir al-Ghanam is under our control , '' Colonel Juma Ibrahim , a rebel commander from the nearby town of Zintan , told Reuters . 
`` We are still in the same position we were yesterday . '' 
He said in the past 24 hours rebel forces had , in fact , pushed about 10 km -LRB- 6 miles -RRB- northeast of Bir al-Ghanam , and were now planning to push towards the coastal town of Zawiyah . 
Zawiyah , which lies 50 km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- west of Tripoli , has been the scene of two uprisings which were smashed by Gaddafi 's security forces . 
A large contingent of the rebels fighting around Bir al-Ghanam are from Zawiyah . 
It was not immediately possible to verify independently who was in control of Bir al-Ghanam . 
Most analysts say Gaddafi will eventually be forced to relinquish power if NATO states and their rebel allies maintain the pressure on him by starving him of weapons , fuel and cash and attacking his forces . 
However , some alliance members are unsettled by how long the Libyan campaign is dragging on and how much it is costing , especially at a time of economic uncertainty . 
If NATO wavers , this could give Gaddafi an opportunity to hold on to power . 
For now though , there is no sign of a let-up in the air campaign , led by French and British warplanes . 
A Reuters reporter in Tripoli said there were multiple strikes overnight in the southeast of the city . 
After the initial explosions , there were smaller blasts on the ground and flames shooting into the air , suggesting the target contained highly flammable material . 
Britain said on Saturday -- while rebels were attacking Bir al-Ghanam -- its aircraft had been in the area and attacked two ammunitions stores , a military headquarters and a position supporting government rocket launchers . 
In a separate operation on Sunday , British Apache attack helicopters took off from a warship in the Mediterranean Sea and fired Hellfire missiles at military vehicles in Al-Watyah , the site of a government air base 170 km south-west of Tripoli , spokesman Major General Nick Pope said in a statement . 
Potentially adding to pressure on Gaddafi , Tripoli has been experiencing power shortages in the past few days and these have been growing worse . 
Libyan state television appealed on Sunday to people to conserve energy by switching off air conditioners in mosques and offices when they are not in use . 
Because of the blackouts , many residents have no air conditioning during the peak summer heat and no refrigeration as they prepare for evening meals during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan . 
Some areas of the Libyan capital are getting as little as four hours of power a day , residents said this week . 
Mohamed Abu Ajeela Rashid , a former Libyan health minister who is now a senior hospital doctor , said power was cut while he was performing surgery . 
He said he had to complete the operation by the light of his cell phone . 
Libyan government officials have said the problems will be fixed within the next few days . 
They blame NATO for attacking electricity lines , but an official with the alliance denied there had been any such strikes . 
In eastern Libya , where rebels and pro-Gaddafi forces are fighting along another front , rebel commanders said they were making a big push to capture the coastal oil town of Brega , about 780 km from Tripoli . 
But they said progress was slow because Gaddafi 's forces had laid minefields around the town . 
`` We do n't want to lose anybody so we 're moving slowly but surely , '' said rebel spokesman Mohammad Zawawi . 
Pope Benedict , giving his Sunday blessing from the papal summer residence of Castel Gandolfo near Rome , appealed for an end to violence in the Middle East . 
`` My thoughts also go to Libya , where the use of arms has not resolved the situation , '' he said . 
`` I urge the international organizations and those with political and military responsibilities to relaunch the search for a peace plan for the country with conviction and determination , through talks and constructive dialogue . '' 
