By Hamid Ould Ahmed and Mariam Karouny ALGIERS\/TUNIS | Wed Mar 16 , 2011 4:21 pm EDT ALGIERS\/TUNIS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 's forces used tanks and artillery on Wednesday to try to retake the city of Misrata , the last big rebel stronghold in western Libya , residents said . 
But rebel fighters in Misrata , on the Mediterranean coast about 200 km -LRB- 130 miles -RRB- east of the Libyan capital Tripoli , said they had stalled a ground attack on the city and seized some tanks from pro-Gaddafi units . 
`` The fighters have defeated Gaddafi 's forces from the southern and western side -LRB- of the city -RRB- , '' a resident , who gave his name only as Mohammed , told Reuters by telephone . 
`` The shelling on the city stopped and the rebels have captured some tanks . 
The battle is continuing on the eastern side , but it is not a heavy one . '' 
It was not possible to call Misrata later in the day . 
On Wednesday evening , the online news website Brnieq quoted a telecommunications official in Tripoli as saying Libyan authorities had ordered all mobile and land services cut . 
Earlier , residents and rebel fighters who spoke to Reuters said Gaddafi loyalists had begun to bombard the city at 7:00 a.m -LRB- 0500 GMT -RRB- with tanks , artillery and rockets , in what appeared to be preparation for an assault . 
But they said that ground forces had yet to enter Misrata and were still in the outskirts . 
Accounts of fighting in Misrata could not be verified because Libyan authorities have barred reporters from the city . 
Libyan officials had no immediate comment on reports of an attack . 
A doctor at Misrata hospital said 11 people had been killed and 20 wounded in the fighting . 
He said the wounded were being brought to hospital in private cars because ambulance drivers were afraid of being hit by shells . 
`` We have enough medicine but we are short on staff , '' said the doctor , who gave his name as Muftah . 
A rebel fighter in Misrata , who did not give his name , said the city would make a stand . 
`` They are trying to enter the city . 
I do not think they will be able to do it , at least not today , '' he said . 
The assault on Misrata , Libya 's third-biggest city with a population of about 300,000 , coincides with a rapid advance by Gaddafi 's forces on rebel strongholds in eastern Libya . 
Gaddafi , in power since a military coup in 1969 , lost control of large swathes of Libya in a revolt last month , but since then his security forces have fought back . 
State television made an appeal to the people of Misrata to support the security forces and turn their back on the rebels . 
`` The armed forces are from you and for you , '' the appeal said . 
`` Avoid strife ... This is a call for stability and security for everybody . 
Do not listen to provocation and avoid discord . '' 
