Blog Guy , I rely on your blog for most of my international news , and I 'm wondering if you can help make some sense of this thing in Libya . 
Which side is right ? 
Well , I 'm only speaking for myself of course , but I 'll have to go with the rebels . 
You think Gaddafi is a bad leader , or it 's time for a change , or the rebels will be easier to deal with , or ... . 
The rebels have better taste in furniture , which is what it usually comes down to in a civil war . 
In this photo at the top , you can see a typical Gaddafi loyalist sofa . 
Baroque satin , gold paint . 
Tacky , tacky , tacky ... In contrast , check out the rebels ' sofa . 
Comfy , indoor-outdoor , well-worn enough so you do n't mind if your guests sit on it with a bayonet . 
Thanks Blog Guy , we always get a fresh perspective from you . 
How long has there been this bitter division in furniture taste in that part of the world ? 
Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 's most prominent son , Saif al-Islam , pauses during an interview with Reuters in Tripoli March 10 , 2011 . 
Libya is preparing full-scale military action to crush a rebellion and will not surrender even if Western powers intervene in the conflict , al-Islam said on Thursday . 
REUTERS\/Chris Helgren Rebel fighters sit on a sofa at a check point in Ajdabiyah , March 15 , 2011 . 
REUTERS\/Goran Tomasevic BG : I chairish your comments . 
I like how the one rebel dude managed to get a blanket that is sort of like camo against his sofa ! 
Top photo -- Andre now understood why the apartment directly beneath Charlie Sheen 's was so cheap . 
In addition to the constant noise , a weird stain was now coming through his ceiling . 
Guy on right of second photo : ` Hey , how 's the war going ? 
Guy on left of second photo : ` Sofa , so good ' If I may ask the opinion of those OEers with military experience , are bayonets still useful attached to an AK or is it just there to look badass ? 
I just get the impression that if one ca n't off a dude on the charge with an AK even by spray-and-pray then whipping around a bayonet all Wii controller style is n't gonna be much of a help either . 
I guess Gaddafi is the sofa king ? 
As for the comfy guys -- `` you go to war with the army you have , not the army you wish you had '' becomes very relevant . 
@ifly -- still nothing like cold steel on the end of a rifle to close the deal . 
We still train our guys on its proper use too . 
Usually , it 's just good to open MREs with . 
Arent we all feeling witty today ! 
Unfortunately my head is all foogged in , mirroring the weather outside so , I am gonna go couch potato ... . 
You 're the expert , Dave , but as I recall from my days in the National Guard , another option is to `` open '' the MREs on fully automatic , and then go eat at a nice restaurant ... Looks like the rebels have sold out of alarm clocks . 
Now they 're selling letter openers ... In the U.S. Army , I learned all about the parry , slash , strike , etc. . 
I also learned use of the M-16 in hand-to-hand combat : for example , I learned the `` vertical butt-stroke . '' 
-LRB- Everyone see why Ifly asked about this ? -RRB- 
We also learned unarmed defense , including judo . 
But that was the military police bootcamp and academy , which was its own little corps . 
Gives Rooms To Go a whole new meaning ... `` Buy a sofa this week , get a free RPG ! '' 
@Doc , yeah I totally asked that in hopes someone would say `` vertical butt-stroke '' . 
Thanks for obliging me . 
Now when I said `` whipping around a bayonet all Wii controller style '' I of course was not refering to military training but to Mr. Lay-Z-Rebel up there . 
From the actual MRE manual : Scroll down the the last picture . 
And yes the written instructions on the bag do say ` Place against a rock or something ' . 
@nosmo -- I knew guys who went crazy looking for those `` or somethings '' . 
Wait -- they may have already been crazy . 
We ate K-rations in the field . 
I remember sitting high on a snowy mountainside in Bavaria , opening a can of pork cutlets with a P-38 . 
When I got the can open , the cutlets and jelly were frozen . 
I was wearing long johns , M-1951 wool field pants -LRB- with liner -RRB- , M-1951 wool field shirt , an M-1967 field jacket -LRB- with liner -RRB- and an M-1951 fishtail parka . 
-LRB- It was one of the few made with real wolf fur on the hood . -RRB- 
My friend Robby was yelling `` I will trade anything for pound cake . '' 
@Doc , you opened a can of pork cutlets with a P-38 Lightning ? 
Wow , now that is way hardcore and badass ! 
Did you use the prop or had the pilots do a strafing run ? 
It was a wonky old P-38 can opener . 
We would n't use anything that was n't wonky . 
@Doc , oh . . 
a can opener huh ? 
Well hey is it coolio with you if I just stick with thinking you used an airplane ? 
And it will definitely be wonky ! 
A wonky airplane is what you used ! 
Unca ... is a family blog really the place to be talking about your unsheathed bayonet ? 
I believe one can still buy these over the Internet . 
My mountainside memory must be one of eating an MCI , because only the MCIs had pound cake as a dessert item . 
I think the meat item was supposed to be ham , but it did not look like ham . 
I can still see it . 
I think we used it as a hockey puck . 
Okay then , when we have the big OE Commenters Gala we will be serving C-Rations and K-Rations . 
Do n't forget to state your preference on the registration form . 
My preference will be a write in choice for the OE Gala menu ! 
I think I can fit a sandwich in my purse , and I so hope there will be doughnuts for dessert ! 
I want to donate a love seat to the rebels . 
Sent with lots of love . 
If Charlie leaves his stained apartment , he is NOT allowed to sit on it ... BG : you mentioned there is a `` bitter division in furniture taste '' there . 
Are they eating the furniture ? 
Can Lamar send the rebels some doughnuts ? 
Fresh ones , so they do n't have to get crumbs on their bayonets trying to cut them in half . 
Looks like we can get some good hotel deals in Yemen . 
@Spin : Vive le France ! 
Though what I really wish is that all the people in the world would play nicely with one another ... We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Now writes a humor blog and a reader feedback blog . 
