What began as a supposedly neutral intervention has become one-sided , analyst says NATO has continued to insist that its aim is to protect civilians from Gadhafi forces There appears to be growing coordination between NATO and rebel commanders France , Qatar interpret arms embargo more liberally than some parties -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Six months and more than 17,000 air sorties after it began , NATO 's Operation Unified Protector in the skies over Libya grinds on . 
What was envisaged in March as a rapid engagement to prevent Moammar Gadhafi 's forces from razing Benghazi to the ground has evolved into a long slog . 
And increasingly NATO operations have dovetailed with those of the rebels -- with the aim of making pro-Gadhafi forces incapable of offensive action . 
The initial mandate set out by the United Nations Security Council resolution 1973 was to protect civilians under threat or attack , to enforce an arms embargo on the country and implement a no-fly zone . 
`` What was initially supposed to be a neutral intervention to protect civilians that were threatened specifically in Benghazi has morphed into being largely a one-sided affair to support the Libyan rebel force to overthrow Gadhafi , '' says Micah Zenko of the Council on Foreign Relations . 
Throughout the conflict NATO has continued to insist that all its actions are aimed at protecting civilians from pro-Gadhafi forces , and that it has not `` taken sides . '' 
On Thursday , the Royal Air Force spoke of `` precision strikes on former regime facilities at Sabratah -LRB- west of Tripoli -RRB- , including a commando base which had been used by Colonel Gadhafi 's men to launch numerous reprisals against the local people . '' 
But such missions are invariably close to areas where the rebels are trying to break through . 
In recent weeks , sustained NATO strikes around Brega , Misrata and in the western Nafusa mountains have helped tip the military balance in the rebels ' favor , to the point that Gadhafi 's opponents have become reluctant to enter the fray until air power has softened up the enemy . 
Derek Flood , a journalist and analyst with the Jamestown Foundation , has just spent several weeks in western Libya . 
`` I found the rebels had become almost overly dependent on NATO to the point they would n't act without NATO actually softening up the targets first . '' 
Rebels gaining ground in Tripoli Libyan rebels claim critical victory Video : Libyan rebels free prisoners Most recently , rebel efforts to take the vitally important town of Zawiyah , just 30 miles west of Tripoli , were preceded by several days of NATO sorties . 
NATO lists about a dozen `` key hits '' around Zawiyah in the past five days . 
The Royal Air Force also targeted a boat commandeered by several Libyan soldiers to get out of Zawiyah , but a statement said that `` since it was clear from their actions that these troops continued to pose a threat to the local population , the RAF patrol engaged the ship , '' which was destroyed . 
There appears to be growing coordination between NATO and rebel military commanders . 
Video footage emerged at the beginning of this month of a column of rebel tanks and pickup trucks , outside the city of Brega in eastern Libya , daubed with orange paint to distinguish them from government forces and ensure they were n't erroneously bombed . 
In previous days , NATO planes had hit several pro-regime targets around Brega . 
On a fluid battlefield , where military assets are poorly marked and often hidden in civilian areas , NATO needs forward air controllers to help with targeting . 
`` Western air forces do n't bomb without that direct ability to visualize the battlefield , especially when the regime has placed so many of its assets within civilian protected areas , '' Zenko says . 
NATO spokesman Colonel Roland Lavoie was pressed on the issue at a news briefing last month . 
`` NATO does not have direct coordination with opposition forces or rebel forces in Brega , '' he said . 
But he added : `` We follow the situation through allied information sources that are in the area . '' 
NATO wo n't comment on such arrangements . 
The arms embargo has been liberally interpreted by some , with Qatar and France supplying the rebels with weapons and military advice . 
Qatar is reported to have supplied the rebels with antitank missiles , flying them into Benghazi . 
And Derek Flood said he believes Qatar was also getting weapons to the rebels via the Tunisian border . 
In the western mountains `` there was support on the ground from Qatari officials as well as Emirati officials , '' he said . 
Tunisian officials deny weapons are crossing their border . 
Neither Qatar nor the United Arab Emirates have commented on such involvement . 
France acknowledged in June that it had air-dropped assault rifles and ammunition to Berber militia groups in the western mountains but said they were to help civilians protect themselves . 
At sea , NATO has operated a blockade -- in accordance with U.N. resolutions -- to prevent any resupply of Gadhafi forces . 
But in one instance in May a Canadian frigate stopped a rebel tugboat carrying howitzer rounds , ammunition and `` lots of explosives '' from Benghazi to Misrata . 
NATO commanders allowed the vessel to proceed on the grounds that it was moving from one Libyan port to another . 
More recently , there was the murky case of the oil tanker Cartagena , a vessel owned by the Libyan government but stranded at sea with 30,000 tons of gasoline since May . 
Rebels boarded the ship in international waters and diverted it to Benghazi with NATO permission . 
The unknown : Did the rebels have help in seizing the ship ? 
It 's not the sort of operation they are used to . 
NATO 's mission has shifted in another way . 
After hitting more than 3,000 military targets -- from ammunition dumps to tanks to radar and command-and-control facilities -- there are not many more left . 
So it has turned to the regime 's infrastructure . 
The satellite dishes of Libyan state TV were bombed on the grounds that the broadcaster was being used to `` incite violence . '' 
The radar at Tripoli airport also was taken out , and the sprawling Gadhafi compound in Tripoli has been targeted several times . 
NATO officials say operations will continue for as long as it takes , though how long it takes to do what is an open question . 
NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen has said repeatedly that the conflict can only end with a political solution , but the outlines of such a solution are far from clear . 
Zenko says the goal from early on has been regime change , and the latest tactic is to try to cut off all economic and outside supplies to make it cease functioning . 
While the Libyan regime has lost access to much of the country and is losing critical routes to the east , west and south , Derek Flood says it appears to retain control of border crossings in the Sahara desert -- from Algeria , Chad and Niger . 
The military balance has tipped in the rebels ' favor . 
Flood says the capture by rebels of the important road junction at Gharyan 80 kilometers south of Tripoli can only further isolate the regime , cutting off fuel supplies from Algeria . 
Even so , it still controls large tracts of a vast country . 
NATO 's current mandate in Libya expires at the end of September . 
Its members may yet be asked to extend it once again . 
