The Arab League voted Saturday to back a no-fly zone in Libya and is asking that the U.N. Security Council impose the measure , officials of the regional body told reporters . 
`` It has one goal : To protect the civilian population , '' Amre Moussa , the body 's secretary-general said . 
`` We will inform the U.N. Security Council of our request to enforce a no-fly zone over Libya , '' Moussa said . 
`` The U.N. Security Council should decide how it will be enforced . '' 
Youssef bin Alawi bin Abdullah , Oman 's foreign minister who joined Moussa to answer questions , said the no-fly zone would be a preventive measure and would have to be stopped immediately when the Libyan crisis ends . 
He said Arab League members have reservations about military intervention , but said all countries agreed that a no-fly zone must be imposed urgently to protect civilians . 
`` We hope the Libyan authorities will respect a no-fly decision , '' he said . 
`` Be assured the Arab countries will not accept the intervention of the NATO coalition . '' 
Moussa said the league also voted to open channels of communication with the Transitional National Council , the Libyan opposition 's newly formed administration , and that any talks with that body would be on a humanitarian basis . 
`` We are giving them legitimacy but we 're not giving them political recognition , '' Moussa said . 
`` We are prepared to help evacuate any Arab nationals from Libya regardless of their nationality . '' 
The Arab League also called for immediate humanitarian assistance and an end to the bloodshed in Libya , where civil war has broken out between forces loyal to leader Moammar Gadhafi and a tenacious opposition movement . 
The White House cheered the League 's announcements and stressed it will continue to pressure Gadhafi , support the opposition and prepare for `` all contingencies . '' 
`` We welcome this important step by the Arab League , which strengthens the international pressure on Gadhafi and support for the Libyan people , '' White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said in a statement about the Arab League 's no-fly vote . 
Opposition forces made strides in the early days of the rebellion , but Gadhafi 's military has recently gained strong momentum . 
The military has been pounding the key oil port of Ras Lanuf , once in the hands of rebel forces , and has taken control of towns such as nearby Bin Jawad . 
The Gadhafi government appears intent on retaking all territory from the opposition despite growing international pressure . 
