From the CNN Wire Staff Rebel forces retreat in Libya NEW : The White House says it welcomes this `` important step '' by the Arab League The no-fly zone is needed to protect civilians , the Arab League says The League is to talk with the U.N. Security Council about humanitarian issues Demonstrators gathered in front of the Arab League headquarters Cairo , Egypt -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The Arab League voted Saturday to back a no-fly zone in Libya and is asking that the U.N. Security Council impose the measure , officials of the regional body told reporters . 
`` It has one goal : To protect the civilian population , '' Amre Moussa , the body 's secretary-general said . 
`` We will inform the U.N. Security Council of our request to enforce a no-fly zone over Libya , '' Moussa said . 
`` The U.N. Security Council should decide how it will be enforced . '' 
Youssef bin Alawi bin Abdullah , Oman 's foreign minister who joined Moussa to answer questions , said the no-fly zone would be a preventive measure and would have to be stopped immediately when the Libyan crisis ends . 
Reporter : Gadhafi has the momentum now Rebel forces retreat in Libya Are Libyan rebels losing momentum ? 
He said Arab League members have reservations about military intervention , but said all countries agreed that a no-fly zone must be imposed urgently to protect civilians . 
`` We hope the Libyan authorities will respect a no-fly decision , '' he said . 
`` Be assured the Arab countries will not accept the intervention of the NATO coalition . '' 
Moussa said the league also voted to open channels of communication with the Transitional National Council , the Libyan opposition 's newly formed administration , and that any talks with that body would be on a humanitarian basis . 
`` We are giving them legitimacy but we 're not giving them political recognition , '' Moussa said . 
`` We are prepared to help evacuate any Arab nationals from Libya regardless of their nationality . '' 
The Arab League also called for immediate humanitarian assistance and an end to the bloodshed in Libya , where civil war has broken out between forces loyal to leader Moammar Gadhafi and a tenacious opposition movement . 
The White House cheered the League 's announcements and stressed it will continue to pressure Gadhafi , support the opposition and prepare for `` all contingencies . '' 
`` We welcome this important step by the Arab League , which strengthens the international pressure on Gadhafi and support for the Libyan people , '' White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said in a statement about the Arab League 's no-fly vote . 
Opposition forces made strides in the early days of the rebellion , but Gadhafi 's military has recently gained strong momentum . 
The military has been pounding the key oil port of Ras Lanuf , once in the hands of rebel forces , and has taken control of towns such as nearby Bin Jawad . 
The Gadhafi government appears intent on retaking all territory from the opposition despite growing international pressure . 
The League was meeting at its headquarters in Cairo , while hundreds of demonstrators outside urged the international community to step up support for Libyan opposition groups . 
Pleading for international help as they continue to lose ground topro-Gadhafi forces , rebels are asking for a no-fly zone that would theoretically thwart airstrikes . 
No-fly zones are areas where aircraft are not allowed to fly . 
Such zones were put in place after the Gulf War in southern and northern Iraq as a check on the forces of the late Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein . 
Western powers have said any action by the international community , including a no-fly zone , would have to have regional support and a clear mandate from the United Nations . 
U.S. President Barack Obama said Friday that he `` wo n't take -LRB- the -RRB- decision lightly '' on whether to use military force , including helping to enforce a no-fly zone , saying it is critical to `` balance costs versus benefits . '' 
While France has recognized the National Transitional Council as the sole representative of the Libyan people , the European Union was more restrained Friday , saying it `` welcomes and encourages the interim transitional national council based in Benghazi , which it considers a political interlocutor . '' 
German Chancellor Angela Merkel was even more cautious in her approach to the council , calling it a possible interlocutor . 
Britain 's Foreign Office issued a statement after Saturday 's vote , saying , `` We welcome the Arab League 's decision to make contact with the Interim National Council , '' which the government sees as `` valid interlocutors . '' 
The statement also said that no-fly zones are `` one option being considered as part of international contingency planning to respond quickly to events on the ground as they develop . 
This planning does not pre-judge any particular outcome . '' 
French President Nicolas Sarkozy said in a news conference in Brussels , Belgium , Friday that `` we consider the National Council based in Benghazi as the proper interlocutors for Libya and they need to be recognized as such and encouraged . '' 
In another diplomatic development , the U.N. humanitarian coordinator for Libya , Rashid Khalikov , arrived in Tripoli on Saturday to discuss access for humanitarian aid . 
`` The international aid community has expressed concerns over the very limited access to various areas in Libya , including those places where heavy fighting is taking place , '' Khalikov said . 
About 260,000 people , mostly third-country nationals , have left Libya for neighboring countries , primarily Tunisia and Egypt . 
In response to the crisis , the United Nations and its partners launched a `` flash appeal '' seeking $ 160 million `` to assist both those leaving the country and those expected to need humanitarian assistance inside Libya , '' the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said . 
Meanwhile , the Libyan government on Saturday took journalists to the eastern city of Bin Jawad , where the government ousted rebels about a week ago . 
CNN 's Nic Robertson said he saw fighter jets in the sky but he did n't see them engage in strikes . 
He saw some structural damage , such as a blown-out police station and damage to a school and houses , including a Katyusha rocket embedded in the wall of a house . 
Some stores were closed and others had been looted . 
CNN 's Reza Sayah and journalist Mohamed Fadel Fahmy contributed to this report . 
