Monday 30 May 2005 23.59 BST Iraq 's religious leaders are intensifying efforts to heal the rifts between the country 's Sunnis and Shias amid a spate of sectarian killings that has raised fears of civil war . 
A weekend meeting between senior figures from the Sunni Association of Muslim Clerics and the Shia Badr Brigades - the militia of the Supreme Council of Islamic Revolution in Iraq , the biggest Shia party - sought to ease tensions caused by the killing of at least 14 Sunni clerics in the past month . 
Several Shia religious leaders and politicians have also been killed during the same period . 
It was the first of a series of face-to-face talks between the two powerful groups engineered by the Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr who is mediating in the crisis . 
Sheikh Hazem al-Araji , the head of Mr Sadr 's office in the Baghdad Shia district of Khadimiya , where the meeting took place , told the Guardian yesterday the two sides had agreed about the need `` to serve Iraq and to preserve its unity '' . 
He said another meeting would be held in the next few days and a national gathering of Sunni and Shia leaders would be called once the problems between the two organizations were resolved . 
Another of Mr Sadr 's aides , Sheikh Ghaith al-Tamimi , said : `` We want to bring about peace in Iraq and in all Iraqi cities . 
If that means organising a mass prayer of Sunni and Shia together , we 'll organise it . '' 
Relations have worsened following accusations by Sheikh Harith al-Dhari , the leader of the Sunni clerics ' association , that the Badr Brigades had orchestrated the killing of a number of prominent Sunni figures . 
Badr Brigades ' leaders denied that and in return accused Sunni clerics of failing to denounce the insurgency and of fomenting sectarian conflict . 
The fresh attempt at mediation came as news emerged of the killing of 10 Shia pilgrims as they were returning from Syria . 
At a funeral on Saturday for four of the victims in the mostly Shia city of Diwaniyah , about 100 miles south of Baghdad , mourners chanted `` revenge , revenge '' . 
It followed a week of violence across Iraq which saw a wave of car bombs , suicide attacks and assassinations aimed at mostly Shia targets . 
`` Ordinary Shia Muslims have been killed as they pray , as they marry , as they buy food , '' said Sheikh Araji . 
`` Enough is enough . 
We must defend ourselves . 
But we must not retaliate through violence . '' 
The country 's most senior Shia cleric Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani has also urged Shias to refrain from retaliation . 
A western diplomat in Baghdad said : `` Since the fall of Saddam Hussein there has been little to no attempt at national reconciliation from the political and religious leaders . 
And unless that happens soon we may see more of see this kind of revenge killing . '' 
The interior ministry said police accepted that the killings appeared to be on the increase . 
Despite the peace talks , the Sunni Arab minority , once all-powerful but now alienated and marginalised , remain angry . 
At Friday prayers in Hassanein mosque in the west Baghdad district of Amiriya the imam , Adnan Abdul Wahab al-Ani , said : `` Saddam oppressed all Iraqi peoples without distinction , but now there is just one group being oppressed - the Sunnis . '' 
After the sermon Sheikh Ani told the Guardian : `` We are not accusing the Shia people , just the Badr Brigades ... someone is killing Sunni religious people and politicians . '' 
He said that in recent months , 152 Sunni mosques had been raided , while 14 sheikhs and 62 worshippers had been killed . 
Outside the mosque young men distributed DVDs promoting the militant Abu Musab al-Zarqawi . 
In the nearby market , flyers were handed out that excoriated the `` bullshit Shia '' for cooperating with the Badr Brigades and for `` welcoming Iran into Iraq '' . 
The Badr Brigade was set up by Iraqi Shia exiles in Iran under the aegis of the Iranian government . 
One Sunni sheikh , Khalaf al-Aliyan , said Shia political parties had a hit-list targeting 4,000 Sunni Arabs but this was vehemently denied by Shia leaders . 
