An anti-Gaddafi soldier breaks a picture frame holding a photo of Muammar Gaddafi inside Ibn Sina hospital in the center of Sirte October 9 , 2011 . 
SIRTE , Libya | Sun Oct 9 , 2011 12:41 pm EDT SIRTE , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan transitional government forces said on Sunday they had captured landmark buildings in a thrust towards the center of Muammar Gaddafi 's hometown Sirte , but were holding off an assault on its main square to allow civilians to escape the chaotic fighting . 
Taking Sirte would bring Libya 's new rulers a big step closer to establishing control of the entire , sprawling North African country almost two months after they seized the capital Tripoli , but pro-Gaddafi snipers have slowed their advance . 
`` We have made good progress , '' said Mahmoud Bayu , commander of the Shohada Al-Manatair brigade , to the south of Sirte . 
`` We have entered the Ouagadougou -LRB- conference -RRB- center , there is some fighting going on , but it 's under our control . '' 
National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- forces also wrested control of the main hospital , a Reuters witness said , capturing more than a dozen pro-Gaddafi fighters who had used the complex to fire mortars and rocket-propelled grenades . 
`` We are trying to evacuate the sick and wounded , '' said Salah Mustafa , a commander of the government forces . 
`` Most of the Gaddafi militia fled , some of them have disguised themselves as doctors . 
We have to investigate . '' 
Some 15 Gaddafi loyalists were marched out of the hospital premises and one was punched in the back of the head when NTC forces found a picture of the deposed leader in his pocket . 
Bayu said NTC forces had reached the main square of the Mediterranean coastal city of 75,000 people , but could not move in yet as they were waiting for civilians to leave the area . 
A further important target for the new advance on Sirte , the university , had been seized overnight , NTC forces in the east of the city said , but they came under heavy fire there on Sunday morning and some fighters had fallen back . 
`` Last night , we were sleeping in the university and this morning we came under random strikes there , '' said a fighter who had withdrawn from the position . 
`` We have martyrs -LRB- dead -RRB- inside and we are trying to get them out . '' 
Two bodies lay in a nearby field hospital , one with his face blown off . 
They had been hit by fire from an anti-aircraft gun while trying to evacuate patients from a frontline hospital , their comrades said . 
Lines of pick-up trucks mounted with heavy weaponry waited to move up to take on a sniper who was slowing their advance . 
The prolonged struggle to vanquish Sirte and the other few remaining bastions of pro-Gaddafi loyalists has sidetracked NTC efforts to set up effective government over the sprawling North African country and rebuild oil production vital to its economy . 
Sirte holds symbolic significance because Gaddafi , who ruled for 42 years , turned it from a fishing village into a second capital . 
He built opulent villas , hotels and conference halls to house the international summits he liked to stage there . 
But taking Sirte carries risks for Libya 's new rulers . 
A drawn-out battle with many civilian casualties will breed hostility that will make it very difficult for the NTC to unite the country once the fighting is over . 
Thousands of civilians have fled Sirte as fighting has intensified , describing increasingly desperate conditions for those still inside the seafront city . 
There is no electricity while drinking water and food are running out , and there is the stench of rotting corpses at the city 's hospital . 
But Britain 's defense secretary told Reuters that NATO , which has carried out air strikes effectively on behalf of anti-Gaddafi forces over much of Libya 's civil war , had stayed within its U.N. mandate to protect civilians during the siege of Sirte . 
`` NATO has been extraordinarily careful in target selection . 
NATO has been very careful to minimize civilian casualties , '' Liam Fox told Reuters in an interview in the Libyan town of Misrata -- smashed up by pro-Gaddafi shelling during the war . 
`` NATO has stayed within its mandate throughout . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
