Only the aid agencies appear to be pitching tents in Haiti It 's midday in Port-au-Prince and the sun is beating down from a cloudless sky . 
It 's good news , another day without clouds means another day without rain . 
But it wo n't last . 
Everybody knows the rainy season is now only a few weeks away , and a million people have no proper shelter . 
A park on the edge of Port-au-Prince is sprouting what look like giant white field mushrooms . 
They are actually large white tents , hundreds of them . 
It 's the first proper tent encampment to be built since the earthquake . 
Along a high concrete wall workers are digging latrines , and building shower blocks . 
In a few days from now 3,000 refugees from the center of Port-au-Prince will start moving in here . 
But they will be the lucky few . 
Despite repeated calls from everyone - from UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon to Haitian President Rene Preval - only a few thousand tents have so far arrived in Haiti . 
Mr Gascon says there are simply not enough tents `` The priority for flights has been given to bringing in food and medical supplies , '' says Christopher Gascon from the International Organization for Migration -LRB- IOM -RRB- . 
He is in charge of building the mushroom tent camp . 
He has 40,000 more tents on their way from Panama , but by ship , not by air . 
And even when those do arrive , they will not be nearly enough . 
It seems extraordinary , but so vast are Haiti 's needs that there are simply not enough of the right sort of tents in the world right now to house all the refugees . 
`` We are talking about a huge number of tents , '' says Mr Gascon . 
`` These sort of tents are not widely available . 
They will have to be made , ordered from China . 
If you want 200,000 tents now its not going to happen , they are not there . '' 
There is also chaos and confusion . 
The aftermath of every natural disaster is chaotic . 
But Haiti is especially so . 
Every aid agency and non-governmental organization -LRB- NGO -RRB- in the world seems to have poured in to Port-au-Prince . 
In the UN compound next to the airport clean-cut young men and women strut around in T-shirts proclaiming `` Scientologist Volunteers '' . 
In a bar across the street a group of Belgian men are drinking beer . 
Outside their large white lorry has a banner draped across it with the name of their own tiny environmental NGO . 
`` We want to help , but the World Food Programme says they already have enough water trucks , '' they tell me . 
But if the UN base is chaotic , it 's nothing to the Haitian government compound . 
It 's housed in an old concrete police station just down the road . 
The car park is crammed with large four-wheel drives jostling for position and hooting loudly . 
We manage to track down Charles Clermont , the Haitian official charged with building the mass tent cities that will supposedly house the hundreds of thousands of refugees from Port-au-Prince . 
`` We started work the day after the earthquake , '' he assures me , `` the first camp will be up and running within the next few days . '' 
Surprised , I ask him where it is . 
`` It is on the outskirts of the city , there is running water and there will be electricity and spaces , it will be operational within a few days , '' Mr Clermont says . 
Intrigued , I take down the details of the location and head out of town . 
The place is an empty stretch of highway that runs out to the mountains north of Port-au-Prince . 
One thing is immediately clear , there is no camp . 
Instead on a stony hillside we come across one of the most extraordinary sites I have ever seen . 
Hundreds and hundreds of people , camping in the open . 
As soon as I get out of the car a crowd surrounds me . 
One young man speaks English . 
Broadcasting on FM radio daily in Haitian Creole at 0910 local time -LRB- 1410 GMT -RRB- , for 20 minutes Giving up-to-date information about where to get basic services and aid Also available on satellite and online , and via social media I ask him where he sleeps . 
`` On the ground , '' he answers , pointing to a patch of dirt further up the hill . 
I ask him if he has had any help , any food or water . 
`` No , '' he says , `` we have nothing . '' 
Further on I find a young mother and her seven children squatting in a tiny shack they have fashioned out of sticks and old blankets . 
One of her children has a huge bandage around his hand . 
`` He had two fingers amputated after the quake , '' the mother says . 
Nearby Salnar Devoisie is lying on a makeshift bed . 
Her daughter is platting her mass of gray hair . 
There is a white bandage around the stump of her left leg . 
`` I was trapped in the rubble of my home for three days . 
When the Israeli doctors got me out they said we will have to chop it off or you will die , '' she says . 
As we talk she rubs her hand against her chest as if in pain . 
`` It is gas . 
I have n't eaten for four days . '' 
Despite the massive response from the outside world these people are still waiting for help to arrive . 
And for nearly a million Haitians the coming night will be another night spent in the open . 
