UK to ship corrugated iron to build shelters in Haiti The DEC appeal has so far raised # 60m for Haiti 's earthquake victims The government has purchased all of the UK 's available corrugated iron sheets to provide shelters for victims of the Haiti earthquake . 
Gordon Brown announced the move , which should help some 2,000 families , at a charity poetry reading for Haiti in London on Saturday . 
The 5,700 sheets cost # 35,000 and were bought from the # 20m the UK government has allocated to the relief effort . 
They will be shipped to the stricken country next week . 
Between 100,000 and 200,000 people are thought to have died in the devastating earthquake which struck Haiti on 12 January . 
Up to 1.5 million people have been left homeless and humanitarian organizations fear for their safety with the hurricane season only a few months away . 
So far , the UK Disasters Emergency Committee 's -LRB- DEC -RRB- appeal has raised # 60m for the country . 
Mr Brown said supplies of corrugated iron from the UK would be used to provide Haitians with `` the hurricane-proof shelter that they so urgently need '' . 
The materials weigh more than 55 tons and will be transported on RFA Largs Bay along with other urgent relief supplies . 
The role of a poet is the extraordinary extent of your empathy The Department for International Development said in a statement it had `` worked with our suppliers to purchase as many of these sheets as could be manufactured to the required standard in the time available '' before the ship sails . 
The government said it was `` considerably cheaper '' to ship iron from the UK than purchase it in Haiti 's neighbouring country , the Dominican Republic . 
The prime minister announced the move as he told the Poetry Live fundraiser on Saturday that helping Haiti was `` the test of our humanity '' . 
The event at Methodist Central Hall in Westminster was organised by Poet Laureate Carol Ann Duffy and featured readings from 22 of the country 's leading poets , including Andrew Motion and Gillian Clarke . 
Christopher Reid , who won the Costa Book of the Year Award earlier this week with his collection of poems A Scattering , also took part . 
Duffy told the audience the world owed a `` duty of care '' to the population of Haiti and must do something `` more ample , more generous , more human '' to help . 
Former poet laureate Motion said : `` There 's an idea lurking somewhere in the background that poetry feeds itself by not being very practical , and in all sorts of ways that 's true . 
`` But if people will pay good money to hear poetry being read then of course it 's a good idea . '' 
Poet Laureate Carol Ann Duffy organised the fundraising event The prime minister , who was accompanied by his wife Sarah , thanked those taking part in the event . 
He said : `` People ca n't survive by words alone , or shelter in verse or place their children in the cradle of a sonnet . 
But the role of a poet is the extraordinary extent of your empathy . 
`` You know that poetry does what ordinary words can never do themselves alone . 
Instead of narrowing our view of the word , poetry broadens and deepens our understanding . '' 
He added : `` Wherever and whenever there is injustice , wherever and whenever there is unfairness , suffering , and wherever there is harm in the world , we will be there to help people around the world . '' 
The DFID said it was also giving # 1m in funding for the International Organisation for Migration and # 400,000 for relief agency ACTED to provide shelter and sanitation for earthquake survivors . 
