BP says it has spent more than $ 5 million a week on advertising since the Gulf Coast oil spill - more than three times the amount it spent on ads during the same period last year . 
BP PLC told the House Energy and Commerce Committee that it spent a total of $ 93 million on advertising from April to the end of July . 
The company says the money was intended to keep Gulf Coast residents informed on issues related to the oil spill and to ensure transparency about its actions . 
The increased spending was largely targeted at TV , newspapers and magazines . 
A small portion was directed to the Internet . 
BP said it aired fewer TV spots between April and July than during a similar period last year , but a greater percentage were on national TV and for 60 seconds instead of 30 seconds . 
Rep. Kathy Castor -LRB- D-Fla . -RRB- 
, who requested the report on BP 's spending , said Wednesday that she was disappointed that the company has spent more money `` polishing the corporate image '' than on helping Gulf Coast states recover from the April 20 Deepwater Horizon explosion and oil spill . 
BP said it has made $ 89.5 million in grants to Florida , Alabama , Mississippi and Louisiana to promote tourism since the spill . 
`` It feels like BP is overdoing it '' with its advertising , which has focused heavily on states directly affected by the oil spill , Castor said . 
`` It 's really making people angry . 
Every day , you get up and see these full-page ads in every newspaper and the TV ads . 
It 's really ticking people off . '' 
Scott Dean , a spokesman for BP , said large companies such as BP spend hundreds of millions each year to communicate about their activities and products . 
So far , the money spent on advertising is a relatively small proportion of BP 's total expenditures of about $ 6.1 billion relating to the oil spill , Dean said . 
Castor said the Gulf region was just coming out of the recession when the Deepwater Horizon blowout occurred . 
She called the oil spill `` a real shot in the gut '' for many businesses that depend on tourism , from hotels and restaurants to charter boat operators . 
BP 's ad campaign - in which U.S.-based employees vow to clean up and restore the Gulf Coast - appears to be having some effect . 
An Associated Press poll shows that the company 's marks for handling the oil spill more than doubled between June and August , rising to 33 percent approval among those surveyed from 15 percent in June . 
About 66 percent of those surveyed continue to disapprove of BP 's performance , down from 83 percent in June . 
`` Their ad campaign polishing the corporate image is going off like clockwork , '' Castor said . 
`` I wish they would do a better job of actually addressing the economic damage to my state and small-business owners . '' 
