Thursday , September 2 , 2010 ; 11:48 PM An oil and gas production platform in the Gulf of Mexico caught fire Thursday morning , reigniting the political debate over the safety of offshore wells . 
The fire began near an oil storage tank on top of the platform about 80 miles south of Vermilion Bay , La. , while 13 workers were painting and water-blasting , forcing them to evacuate as flames engulfed the facility , according to Mariner Energy , the platform operator . 
A dozen of the workers were able to don brightly colored survival gear known as `` Gumby suits . '' 
Clinging together in the water for two hours , they drifted about a mile before they were rescued by the Crystal Clear , a supply vessel that rushed over from a rig about 25 miles away . 
The blaze was extinguished in the late afternoon . 
It did not appear that the fire triggered a crude oil leak like the one that occurred after the April 20 blowout of BP 's Macondo well . 
That blowout , about 200 miles east of the Mariner platform , caused the worst oil spill in U.S. history and has forced BP to set aside billions to clean up the environmental damage and compensate gulf businesses and residents . 
A Coast Guard official initially said that Mariner Energy , which has a history of fires and safety violations , reported an oil sheen 100 feet wide and a mile long . 
But Patrick Cassidy , director of investor relations for the company , later said that automated equipment on the platform had shut down its seven producing wells and that `` in an initial flyover of the facility , no oil sheen was seen on the water . '' 
Over the past week , the platform , in the Vermilion block 380 , had been producing 1,400 barrels a day of crude oil and 9.2 million cubic feet a day of natural gas . 
Nonetheless , with the Gulf Coast still reeling from the massive BP spill , the fire brought new calls for tougher regulation just as the oil industry and the White House were hoping that public concerns would abate . 
House Energy and Commerce Chairman Henry A. Waxman -LRB- Calif. -RRB- and two other top Democrats on the committee sent a letter to Mariner Energy chief executive Scott D. Josey demanding a briefing by Sept. 10 . 
Rep. Edward J. Markey -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
issued a statement saying the incident shows `` that much is left to be done to keep America 's workers and waters safe from those risks . '' 
The Mariner Energy fire also occurred as the oil industry has been battling to stop tougher regulations in the wake of the BP accident . 
The American Petroleum Institute is planning to hold rallies nationwide next week to urge the Obama administration to lift its moratorium on deep-water drilling and to pressure Congress to back away from new tax and liability measures . 
Oil industry executives stressed the differences between the new incident and the BP blowout , but the differences also underline the magnitude of regulating the industry . 
The blowout that sank the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig on April 20 occurred at the bottom of an exploration well in water a mile deep . 
Thursday 's fire began on top of a production platform in about 320 feet of water . 
There are just under three dozen deep-water exploration rigs in the Gulf of Mexico but thousands of shallow-water production wells . 
The timing of the fire overshadowed positive developments on Thursday related to the BP spill . 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reopened 5,130 square miles of fisheries . 
NOAA administrator Jane Lubchenco said it was `` another signal to tourists that the northern gulf is open for business . '' 
Separately , BP removed the capping stack on the Macondo well , a prerequisite for retrieving the blowout preventer that failed . 
Like the BP well , the Mariner Energy platform was staffed almost exclusively by workers from oil service firms . 
Mariner 's Cassidy said that only one of the 13 was a Mariner employee . 
Unlike BP , Mariner is a relatively small , independent oil and gas company . 
Once part of Enron , it was caught up in the financial scandal that sent Enron into bankruptcy in 2001 . 
A group of private equity firms led by Acon , a firm with offices in Washington , bought Mariner in March 2004 and took it public later . 
The company has been exploring in the gulf since 1996 , and at the end of 2009 had interests in nearly 350 federal offshore leases , with more than 110 of those in development . 
The company has participated in more than 35 deep-water projects . 
It effectively doubled the size of its operations in 2006 , when it acquired Forest Oil , including the Vermilion field . 
In April , Apache Energy agreed to acquire Mariner , whose shares then more than doubled . 
The acquisition has not been completed . 
On Thursday , Mariner shares fell 60 cents , or 2.57 percent , to $ 22.75 a share on a day when the broader stock market rose . 
According to Bloomberg News , the largest shareholder is John Paulson , a hedge fund manager known for shorting subprime mortgage derivatives through Goldman Sachs before the housing market collapse . 
He owned 9.7 percent of the firm at the end of June . 
In its 2008 annual report , Mariner said that the Vermilion 380 field was its largest in the gulf 's Outer Continental Shelf . 
The platform was damaged by Hurricane Ike in 2008 and production was shut down for most of 2009 . 
Thursday 's fire is a new setback . 
`` We saw the fire from 20 miles away , smoke from it , '' said Dan Shaw , captain of the Crystal Clear supply boat that rescued the platform workers . 
As they got closer , the boat 's four-man crew saw a Coast Guard helicopter hovering over the 13 workers , a few of whom waved . 
Shaw said that 12 were wearing survival suits . 
They stayed in a pack and helped the one man without a suit . 
Shaw said his boat pulled alongside the group , in three-foot swells -LRB- `` a little bit lumpy , '' he said -RRB- , and a crewman hauled the 13 aboard one by one . 
They were dropped off at another rig about seven miles away , where they were picked up by helicopters for the trip to land . 
`` They were pretty calm . 
They were pretty tired , though . 
They 'd been treading water for a couple hours , '' Shaw said , speaking by satellite phone from the boat . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
