Thursday , September 2 , 2010 ; 7:16 PM A glossy `` Lessons Learned '' document released on Thursday by BP describes the Deepwater Horizon blowout and oil spill as a valuable spur for innovation in containing future oil rig failures . 
The 72-page document highlights new technologies , new work systems and a new spirit of collaboration that it says came out of the three-month-plus period when raw crude from the April 20 blowout flowed into the Gulf of Mexico . 
The report does not go into the corporate policies and oversights that might have played a role in the blowout and the company 's initial , much-criticized response to the spill . 
BP has set aside more than $ 20 billion to pay for damages and faces numerous lawsuits and a criminal investigation . 
The document says it is a `` continuation of discussions with the -LRB- federal -RRB- Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement -LRB- BOEMRE -RRB- in order to provide a preliminary outline of some of the important lessons learned in the course of responding to the explosion . '' 
l `` The proven capacity to engineer and construct closed systems allowing not only for the collection of hydrocarbons but also the control of flow and the introduction of well-control fluids . '' 
It is referring to the new way devised to control a blown-out well . 
l `` Safe simultaneous operation of a large number -LRB- 16 or more -RRB- Remotely Operated Vehicles -LRB- ROVs -RRB- in close proximity to perform a wide range of novel interventions on open and closed containment systems . '' 
`` Precise and effective application of dispersants driven by advanced surveillance technology and operational streamlining supported by a network of global experts . '' 
l `` From source to shore , existing systems were evolved and expanded and new ones developed to advance work flow , improve coordination , focus efforts and manage risks . 
The adoption of these systems will ensure the ability to respond more rapidly at scale with a clear direction as to personnel , resource and organizational needs . '' 
The BP report concludes : `` We are sharing our lessons , experiences and advancements through various industry mechanisms , and we are looking forward to making response leaders and experts available for additional activities in this regard . '' '' 
