Matthew Price describes the `` grim '' scenes at a Port-au-Prince hospital There is a body lying outside L'Hopital de la Paix in Port-au-Prince - but it is the sight that awaits you inside the hospital grounds that is most alarming . 
It is as if a massacre has been perpetrated here . 
Dirty white sheets cover some of the dead , others lie out in the open , some , their limbs entwined with another 's . 
Many are the bodies of adults , but here to the right , a baby on her back , her belly bloated and pronounced . 
She is wearing a silvery blue top , just lying by the curb , abandoned . 
A man stirs to the left . 
He unfurls a blanket that covers the ground and lies back down . 
The living are sleeping among the dead . 
Nearby , still outside , a woman lies on a hospital bed . 
Like many she is too scared of aftershocks to stay inside . 
That is why they are here , out under the dark , star-filled sky . 
A man with wide eyes stares at a passing stranger . 
The site of the MSF aid agency has become a makeshift hospital A relative moves to lift the sheet covering his two broken legs , as if there was any need to emphasise the suffering here . 
A woman lies on an unfolded cardboard box . 
There is a pool of her blood slowly collecting below her waist . 
She needs help - so does everyone . 
The screams and whimpers of those in pain echo down the corridors . 
There are few doctors , little medicine . 
One woman , a German it seems , says she has just stopped by to help . 
Her house , she says , was also damaged . 
A doctor gives her a small vial and she works her way gingerly over the other injured people to a man she has been trying to help . 
It is clear many brought to the hospital with injuries have since died here . 
One man with tears in his eyes pointed to his young daughter lying on the dirty tiled floor . 
She has two broken legs and a large gash in her head . 
Her sister is already dead . 
`` Ca va ? '' 
`` Oui , '' she replies softly - but she is not okay . 
In pockets there is barely anything left of this city , and so far the people are largely having to cope on their own . 
Hundreds of corpses are lying in the streets of Port-au-Prince Overnight a rumor went round of an approaching tsunami . 
Hundreds , it seemed , rushed from the coast and they came along dark , unlit streets carrying a few possessions . 
There was no tsunami of course , but it showed how scared and alone the people feel . 
Many are thought to remain trapped underneath the larger buildings that collapsed and Haiti has little in the way of heavy lifting equipment to reach them . 
The leadership here says tens of thousands of people have been killed . 
Some of the UN peacekeepers stationed here are among the dead . 
This country , so often in the past forgotten by the world , now needs its help more than ever . 
So , too , does another little girl lying on a table at the hospital . 
She stirs a little , almost looks asleep . 
It is not , though , a peaceful sleep - and by dawn she could well be dead . 
