The devastating effects of the tremors can be seen everywhere in Port-au-Prince As the plane began its descent into Port-au-Prince , the landing lights of the runway were nearly the only illumination that could be seen over the city . 
Normally the Haitian capital twinkles as night falls , the lights only dimmed by the regular power outages - but after the quake , the whole place lies in darkness apart from the few homes fortunate enough to be both still standing and equipped with a generator . 
At the airport , it is clear the relief operation has begun . 
A C130 military transport plane taxis before unloading its cargo . 
The airport is now a staging post for the international aid starting to arrive . 
The scenes outside the terminal , however , are chaotic - a shock to the senses , especially when an armored UN vehicle rolls through the car park as I struggle through a group of people demanding access to the airport . 
International aid has started arriving to Haiti As we begin the drive towards the center of the city , the devastating effects of the tremors can be fully seen - collapsed walls , a building that looks as if it has just been pulled apart from the middle , its flat roof laying on top of the foundations , a new hospital lying in ruins - a hole on the fourth floor where the operating rooms used to be . 
I had seen the pictures of the devastation - but they do not come close to the reality , it is much worse . 
Everywhere you look you see people on the street - walking about , sitting about , because there is nothing else to do . 
Scared of the aftershocks that have continued to shake the city , they stay outside because it is the safest place to be in case of more building collapses , and in many cases they do not have homes to which they can return . 
The night air is filled with the sound of singing and clapping as people gather to try and keep their spirits up , and from all across the city , voices can be heard . 
Next to living are the dead . 
Covered in blankets , their ash-covered limbs poke from beneath makeshift shrouds . 
Many city residents are spending the night outside , scared of new tremors There is no mortuary big enough for the numbers who have died . 
The only sign of anything being done is a commercial flat-bed van onto which police officers are stacking bodies . 
After winding our way through the hills in a 4x4 , past fallen trees and abandoned vehicles , we get close to where we are staying . 
It is in an upmarket part of Port-au-Prince , but the walls that kept Haiti 's poor out of the gated communities are no more . 
The razor wire is lying in the building debris alongside the steel supposed to keep it there . 
We eventually have to get out and walk . 
Someone warns me to look up and keep to the left - good advice , as the high wall next to me has concrete blocks hanging loose . 
The road is completely destroyed as we get closer to the house . 
Using my cellphone as a torch - its only use since nearly all communication is out , we clamber over tarmac ripped open by the quake . 
On this solitary road we find yet another body before making it to the safety of the compound , with its armed security guards . 
So I have light from a generator , even an internet connection , but I am spending the night outside . 
The building is too unsafe to sleep in because of the risk of further aftershocks . 
