Desperate earthquake survivors plead for aid Hundreds of thousands of Haitians are awaiting the start of a global rescue effort in the wake of the country 's devastating earthquake . 
BBC correspondents say the situation is increasingly desperate , with no coordinated rescue plan so far and aid only trickling in . 
The search for survivors continues but rescuers have little lifting equipment and are often using their bare hands . 
Tens of thousands are feared dead and up to three million affected . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has said the disaster is `` unimaginable '' and pledged long-term American assistance . 
Matthew Price , BBC News , Haiti It is clear that many who were brought to L'Hopital de la Paix in Port-au-Prince with injuries have since died here . 
One man with tears in his eyes pointed to his young daughter lying on the dirty tiled floor . 
She has two broken legs and a large gash in her head . 
Her sister is already dead . 
`` Ca va ? '' 
`` Oui , '' she replies softly , but she is not okay . 
In pockets , there is barely anything left of this city and so far the people are largely having to cope on their own . 
Aid groups say there is a race against time to find survivors under the rubble of the collapsed buildings - the first priority of the rescue effort . 
Heavy lifting gear and sniffer dogs are desperately needed to seek out trapped victims , with medicine , food and water also in short supply . 
Elisabeth Byrs of the UN 's Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs , said : `` The priority is to find survivors . 
We are working against the clock . '' 
The head of Medecins du Monde , Olivier Bernard , told AFP news agency that aid had to arrive by Thursday evening . 
`` To save lives , surgery must be available ideally within the first 48 hours . '' 
A few US aid planes and a 50-strong Chinese rescue team with sniffer dogs have landed at the airport serving the capital , Port-au-Prince . 
Other plane-loads of rescuers and relief supplies are said to be on the way from the EU , Canada , Russia and Latin American nations . 
A British rescue team with heavy lifting gear and dogs has landed in the Dominican Republic and will be in Haiti later on Thursday . 
We just do n't know what to do . 
You can see how terrible the damage is . 
We have not been able to get into all the areas International Development Secretary Douglas Alexander said : `` This is a tragedy on a massive scale . 
Britain is playing its part in the huge international response . '' 
US President Barack Obama said the `` people of Haiti will have the full support of the United States '' in an `` aggressive '' aid campaign . 
Mrs Clinton canceled a trip to Asia to deal with the crisis . 
She said there were tens of thousands of casualties in Haiti and that tens of thousands of buildings had collapsed . 
`` This is going to be a long-term effort , '' she said . 
Her husband , Bill Clinton , the UN special envoy for Haiti , told the Washington Post the quake was `` one of the great humanitarian emergencies in the history of the Americas '' . 
The USS Carl Vinson aircraft carrier will arrive on Thursday . 
The USS Bataan , carrying a Marine expeditionary unit , is also on its way . 
The Pentagon said it was `` seriously considering '' sending thousands of marines . 
The World Bank is funding $ 100m of emergency aid . 
Whole areas of the Haitian capital have been flattened The World Food Programme is working on supplying 15,000 tonnes of food and the Red Cross has begun a $ 10m appeal . 
The help is desperately needed as there is no coordinated rescue at present . 
Doctor 's assistant Jimitre Coquillon told Associated Press : `` This is much worse than a hurricane . 
There 's no water . 
Thirsty people are going to die . '' 
Haitian President Rene Preval could not give an official estimate of the dead , saying : `` I do n't know ... up to now , I heard 50,000 ... 30,000 . '' 
He spoke of how he stepped over dead bodies and heard cries of those trapped in the parliament building . 
Haiti is the poorest country in the western hemisphere and correspondents say it simply does not have the infrastructure to manage a rescue operation . 
A rescue team prepares to depart from Mexico City One Chilean UN peacekeeper told Reuters : `` We just do n't know what to do . 
You can see how terrible the damage is . 
We have not been able to get into all the areas . '' 
The UN peacekeepers , who played a key role in maintaining public order in Haiti even before the quake , have been deployed to control any outbreaks of unrest as reports come in of looting . 
The UN says 16 personnel are confirmed dead and more than 100 staff are still unaccounted for . 
They include UN mission head Hedi Annabi . 
Brazil says the death toll of its peacekeepers has risen from 11 to 14 . 
Medical aid agency Medecins sans Frontieres reported a `` massive influx '' of casualties at its makeshift clinics , many of them with severe injuries . 
Patients with `` severe traumas , head wounds , crushed limbs '' have been streaming into MSF 's temporary structures but the agency is only able to offer them basic medical care , spokesman Paul McPhun told reporters . 
Thousands of Haitians spent a second night in the open on Wednesday , too scared to sleep inside damaged buildings . 
Many sang hymns to keep up their spirits . 
The BBC 's Matthew Price visited the grounds of one hospital and spoke of seeing about 100 bodies - but there were many people bedding down for the night to sleep among the dead . 
The 7.0-magnitude quake , Haiti 's worst in two centuries , struck at 1653 local time -LRB- 2153 GMT -RRB- on Tuesday , just 15km -LRB- 10 miles -RRB- south-west of Port-au-Prince and close to the surface . 
Sydney Morning Herald World scrambles rescue teams , aid to quake-hit Haiti - 12 hrs ago Guardian . 
co. uk It became increasingly , brutally clear : Port-au-Prince is a tomb - 12 hrs ago Bangkok Post Race to find survivors in ruined Haiti - 20 hrs ago IAfrica.com Haiti : a race to survive - 21 hrs ago Yahoo ! 
