International aid efforts for Haiti gather pace International efforts to help Haiti in the wake of Tuesday 's earthquake are picking up speed , as governments around the world and aid agencies mobilise search and rescue teams and aid supplies . 
While the full scale of the disaster has yet to emerge , it is clear it represents a huge challenge . 
Haiti , the poorest country in the western hemisphere , is still struggling to recover from devastating hurricanes in 2008 . 
So far , only a trickle of aid flights have arrived in Haiti , which needs all kinds of help - from search and rescue teams and medical aid , to food aid and then longer-term rebuilding of infrastructure . 
The US is mobilising a huge military and civilian aid effort as President Barack Obama pledged a `` swift , co-ordinated and aggressive '' to save lives . 
He put the US international development agency - USAID in charge of co-ordinating the country 's aid effort . 
Military overflights have been assessing damage and civilian disaster assistance teams have begun arriving . 
The US military had ordered an aircraft carrier and three ships , including one which can carry up to 2,000 US Marines , to head for Haiti , officials said . 
The Americans are playing a key role in central co-ordination on the ground in Haiti - largely because they have more functioning infrastructure than anyone else . 
The US embassy in the capital Port-au-Prince is intact ; communications equipment for rescue teams has been flown in . 
Haitian communities in the US itself - including south Florida where an estimated 275,000 Haitians live - are also organising donations and relief efforts . 
Several international aid agencies have offices and staff in Haiti , usually working on long-term aid and reconstruction . 
It is already evident that this is an extremely serious situation , the long-term effects of which are going to need substantial support They began mobilising emergency teams in response to the quake . 
Oxfam says it has staff ready , including a public health , water and sanitation team in the capital , Port-au-Prince . 
The organization also had emergency supplies in Panama which could be taken in , a spokesman said . 
The International Red Cross says it is releasing emergency funds to help deal with the disaster . 
Red Cross warehouses in Port-au-Prince which survived the earthquake had basic aid for about 10,000 families and a further 20,000 aid kits are being transported from Panama , a spokesman said . 
The British Red Cross has launched an appeal in the UK and has released # 200,000 -LRB- $ 325,000 -RRB- from its disaster fund to ensure money is immediately available . 
The international humanitarian group , Medecins Sans Frontieres -LRB- MSF -RRB- , said many people in Port-au-Prince had sought medical help , and that it had set up makeshift clinics offering basic care as its buildings had been seriously damaged . 
MSF plans to send dozens more staff to Haiti to help workers based there . 
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said $ 10m would be released immediately from the world body 's central emergency response fund to assist aid efforts . 
He said an emergency appeal for additional funds from member states would follow . 
Bill Clinton : '' What we need now is food , water , supplies '' The UN World Food Programme - which already runs extensive feeding operations in the country - said it would begin distributing high energy biscuits , which require no preparation before being consumed . 
The WFP also said it would airlift 86 metric tons of food from its emergency hub in El Salvador , enough for 30,000 people in urgent need to be fed for up to seven days . 
`` In a normal day the World Food Programme will be feeding one or two million people in Haiti - and now we need to do even more , because the people have lost everything , '' a spokeswoman said . 
The UN stabilisation force in Haiti , Minustah , has said about 100 or more of its staff are still unaccounted for after buildings collapsed . 
The Minustah mission has more than 9,000 police and troops stationed in Haiti , as well as 488 international civilian staff and local staff . 
Its forces are drawn from more than 40 countries , including Brazil , China and Pakistan . 
Several Minustah nations have said they are preparing to send aid . 
The UN has set up a logistics center at Haiti 's main airport . 
France , which has historic links with Haiti and some 1,400 nationals living there , is sending two planes with rescuers and humanitarian aid , one from the Caribbean island of Martinique and a second one with aid experts from Marseille . 
It also plans to evacuate about 60 injured people . 
French civil safety authorities said a total of 130 rescuers , doctors and nurses as well as trained rescue dogs were due to arrive in Haiti , with 12 tonnes of aid and rescue material . 
Peter Stevenson is Operations Commander for the UK 's International Search and Rescue Team The UK government said it was `` deeply concerned '' by the earthquake and has a team flying out to Haiti . 
A 71-strong team of British firefighters is due in Haiti to help rescue efforts . 
Spain has pledged $ 4.3 m -LRB- 3m euros -RRB- and says it has 150 tonnes of humanitarian aid ready for delivery . 
The country has offered the EU the use of its humanitarian base in Panama to ferry in help . 
Germany has released $ 2.18 n -LRB- 1.5 m euros -RRB- in aid and has sent an immediate response team . 
The Netherlands has donated $ 2.9 m -LRB- 2m euros -RRB- and Belgium , Sweden and Luxembourg are offering water purification equipment , tents , medical help and search-and-rescue experts . 
Italy has prepared a military transport plane which will be used to take in a field hospital and emergency medical team . 
The European Union says it has activated all `` crisis and aid management mechanisms '' and the European Commission has released $ 4.3 m -LRB- 3m euros -RRB- in emergency assistance , the maximum for an emergency procedure . 
The President of the EU , Herman van Rompuy , said `` the EU stands ready to offer its assistance in any possible way '' . 
Israel is sending an army rescue unit , including engineers , doctors and other medical staff . 
China is to donate $ 1m , according to Xinhua News Agency . 
Venezuela said it was sending a military plane with food , medicine and drinking water , as well as a team of 50 rescue workers . 
Cuba , which also felt the quake , has sent 30 doctors . 
Cuban field hospitals in Port-au-Prince were already treating hundreds of injured , according to Cuban Foreign Minister Bruno Rodriguez . 
Canada has said it is sending a 20-person reconnaissance team to assess aid needs . 
Mexico , which has long experience of dealing with devastating earthquakes , is sending a team of doctors and search and rescue workers and infrastructure damage experts . 
The Inter-American Development Bank -LRB- IADB -RRB- is providing $ 200,000 -LRB- # 122,000 -RRB- in immediate emergency aid which can be used to provide food , potable water , medicines and temporary shelter . 
The World Bank , whose local offices were destroyed in the earthquake , is planning to send a team to assess damage . 
It has announced an extra $ 100m in emergency aid for Haiti , to help with recovery and reconstruction . 
