PLEASE NOTE : We are unable to offer transcripts for our program interviews . 
Today is broadcast live and the running order is subject to change . 
International aid has started to arrive in Haiti as people search for loved ones trapped in buildings flattened by Tuesday 's earthquake . 
And the National Audit Office says the government 's dementia strategy in England is not being given the priority it was promised . 
Seventeen United Nations staff have been killed in the Haiti earthquake . 
Another 150 personnel are still unaccounted for , including the head of mission in the country . 
Pete Garrett , of the British Red Cross , discusses how aid agencies are coping with the disaster . 
The government 's national dementia strategy is failing to deliver its commitments , according to the National Audit Office . 
The strategy , published by the Department of Health last year , promised to transform care for dementia sufferers - but the necessary funding and training have not taken place . 
Andrew Ketteringham , head of external affairs at the Alzheimer 's Society , discusses the strategy . 
Finland has extended its anti-tobacco laws , introducing a ban on cigarette displays in shops and restricting smoking in cars . 
Paul Henley reports from Helsinki . 
The future of pedigree dog breeding is to be published in a report this morning . 
The report comes in the wake of a BBC documentary on Crufts - Pedigree Dogs Exposed , which claimed that inbreeding had led to debilitating ailments . 
Beverley Cuddy , editor of Dogs Today Magazine , discusses the future of dog breeding . 
International aid agencies arriving in Haiti are counting their losses , after the UN announced that 17 of its staff were killed in the earthquake . 
Angus Stickler reports on the aftermath of the earthquake . 
Officials at the UN say between 100 and 150 people from its 9,000-strong peacekeeping mission in Haiti are still missing after the earthquake . 
Elisabeth Byrs , a UN spokesperson in Geneva , discusses how its workers are coping . 
Do you remember the Party 7 ? 
The huge can , that held seven pints of beer , was the staple of many drinks parties in the 1960s and 70s , and the Royal Society of Chemistry is offering a reward for perfectly preserved examples of the cans . 
Brian Emsley of the Royal Society , discusses its interest in the keg . 
Thought for the day with Dom Antony Sutch , a Benedictine Monk . 
Race and color are no longer a disadvantage in Britain , the government is to announce . 
In a speech to mark a decade of the race relations amendment act , Communities Secretary John Denham will say that the government has made significant progress in tackling racism and that poverty and class dictate disadvantage more than skin color . 
Mr Denham and Lord Herman Ouseley , chair of Kick it Out , debate whether racism in Britain is in decline . 
Thousands of people are expected to have died in Tuesday 's devastating earthquake in Haiti . 
Matthew Price reports from a hospital Haiti , and International development Secretary Douglas Alexander discusses how the UK will contribute to the relief effort . 
Some listeners may find parts of this report distressing . 
A fourth book in the Gormenghast series is to be published . 
Written by Mervyn Peake , the books describe the vast crumbling castle to which Titus Groan is lord and heir , and his battle with the Machiavellian character Steerpike . 
Originally published as a trilogy , a fourth book found in Peake 's attic was completed by his wife , the writer and artist Maeve Gilmore . 
Nicola Stanbridge met Mr Peake 's son to discuss the completion of the series . 
Stories of survival are emerging from the rubble in Haiti . 
Troy Livesay , of the Christian charity World Wide Village , lives with his family in Port au Prince and has written a moving account in the Guardian about his family 's survival . 
He begs people to prey for Haitians . 
Archbishop of York , John Sentamu , comments on how people turn to God during times of disaster . 
Diplomatic talks between the US and Middle East are to begin this week after previous talks stalled . 
Edward Stourton reports from Cairo . 
The fate of gay marriages in the US is to be decided this week . 
The outcome of a court case brought by two gay couples in California will determine whether states can ban same-sex marriage . 
US writer Armistead Maupin discusses how Americans view same-sex marriages . 
How can a country as poor as Haiti survive an earthquake disaster ? 
The Haitian President Rene Preval has said thousands of people are feared dead , including the UN mission chief . 
The 7.0-magnitude quake is the worst the country has seen in two centuries . 
Stephen Keppel , an expert on Haiti at the Economist Intelligence Unit , and Ian Thomson , author of A journey through Haiti , discuss how the country can recover . 
