The Caribbean is better known for its hurricanes The Caribbean may be better known for hurricanes but the region is also at risk from earthquakes . 
Experts say the region is a seismically active area . 
The Seismic Research Unit of the University of the West Indies says hundreds of earthquakes occur each year , in and around the Eastern Caribbean , the area it monitors . 
Not all are felt , however , but they are recorded by scientists . 
The first earthquake in the sub-region this year was recorded on 4 January at 11:36 p.m. local time north of Paria Peninsula in northern Venezuela - an area that separates the Gulf of Paria and Caribbean Sea . 
The earthquake was reported as felt in Glencoe , Westmoorings in Trinidad . 
No damage was reported . 
Tuesday 's huge magnitude 7.0 tremor in Haiti in the western Caribbean was the largest ever known to hit Haiti , according to the US Geological Survey . 
It was also the worst for 200 years and among the largest ever in the region . 
The death toll is still unknown but could run into the tens of thousands . 
That would dwarf the figures for other major quakes in the Caribbean , mostly from the distant past . 
For instance , in 1692 in Jamaica , a quake of an unspecified magnitude killed 2,000 ; in Leeward Islands in 1843 , an 8.3-magnitude quake killed 5,000 ; and another in Jamaica in 1907 , a 6.5-magnitude quake killed 1,000 . 
The Haiti quake occurred along a vertical fault line that runs from Montego Bay , Jamaica , to the southern part of Hispaniola , the island shared by Haiti and the Dominican Republic . 
Paul Mann of the University of Texas at Austin says the plates have been pushing against that particular fault since a major quake in 1760 . 
Earthquakes have not been a priority in the Caribbean when it comes to disaster planning . 
But that could change , according to Simon Young , supervisor of the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility . 
`` Coming off a slow hurricane season , there will be a lot more talk about earthquake exposure in the Caribbean , '' he told Business News Americas news service . 
`` This needs to be on the agenda all the time , but unfortunately it takes big events to bring it back to the forefront . '' 
Seismologist Joan Latchman told the Trinidad Express newspaper : `` We need to be prepared because it is better to prepare and it does n't happen , than we do n't prepare and it does . '' 
12 Jan 12 , 2010 : Port-au-Prince , Haiti . 
Number of dead unknown . 
29 Nov , 2007 : Martinique region , Windward Islands . 
Quake destroyed buildings , and much of the island lost electricity . 
4 Aug 1946 : Samana , Dominican Republic . 
Quake and resulting tsunami killed 1,600 11 Oct , 1918 : Northwestern Mona Passage , Puerto Rico . 
Quake killed 116 people and caused $ 4 million in property damage . 
8 Feb 1843 : Leeward Islands . 
At least 5,000 people died in a quake felt from St. Kitts to Dominica . 
This was the largest earthquake to hit the Eastern Caribbean . 
2 May 1787 : Puerto Rico . 
Possibly the strongest earthquake to hit the region . 
It caused widespread damage across Puerto Rico . 
