BP s chief executive Tony Hayward branded the most hated man in America may be surprised to find himself cast in the role of victim by a growing clan of web-based supporters on Facebook . 
One such group Support BP calls itself the defender of an undeservedly harassed institution and seeks to show that the public opprobrium BP faces over its now 60-day-old Gulf of Mexico oil spill is not universal . 
Members have been increasingly vocal since a succession of strong rebukes of BP by U.S. President Obama and lawmakers at Thursday s congressional hearing , which they are calling a lynch mob . 
The outburst of sympathy follows an apology to Hayward from Texas Republican Representative Joe Barton on Thursday , later withdrawn , for having to agree to a deal with President Obama to set up a $ 20 billion fund for Gulf claim damages . 
Some of the Facebook posts echoed this same spirit of regret : My apologies as an American to Tony Hayward for the rude and insulting conduct as well as the rush to judgement by U.S. politicians on 16\/7 , wrote George Gray , 50 , from Pennsylvania , referring to Thursday s hearing . 
BP shares jumped almost 9 percent at the opening of the London market on news the firm would pledge cash and assets worth $ 20 billion to meet future claims arising from the Macondo well blowout -LRB- excluding federal and state fines and penalties -RRB- . 
Investors hope the $ 20 billion sets an informal cap or target for how much the company may eventually be forced to pay -LRB- though the announcement makes clear it does not in fact cap the company 's legal liabilities -- as in fact it could not do by law -RRB- . 
It is also a bridge-building gesture towards the Obama administration . 
The company must hope the president will reciprocate by turning down the political heat and avoiding off punitive sanctions designed to cripple the company `` pour encourager les autres '' . 
Jun 16 , 2010 08:18 UTC Being a CEO should be one of the best jobs in the world , argue the authors of a new book . 
`` It offers the chance to make a real difference , '' Steve Tappin and Andrew Cave write in The New Secrets of CEOs : 200 Global Chief Executives on Leading . 
`` However , real life for most CEOs is tough and many are not enjoying it . '' 
The authors interviewed 200 CEOs for the book , which includes profiles of such leaders as Tesco 's Terry Leahy , Avon 's Andrea Jung , Xstrata 's Mick Davis , Kraft 's Irene Rosenfeld , Haier 's Zhang Ruimin and Cisco 's John Chambers . 
The catastrophic blowout at Macondo has sliced 40 percent off BP 's market capitalization , and led analysts to speculate about lasting reductions in deepwater drilling and the resulting impact on both long-term oil supply and the fate of climate change legislation . 
The underlying fear is that Macondo is the oil industry 's Three Mile Island , an accident that turned public opinion against nuclear power for three decades . 
Investors are right to fear the long-term impact on the company . 
But they exaggerate the impact on the wider industry and the prospects for climate change legislation . 
BP however faces a very changed operating environment in future . 
Jun 11 , 2010 10:15 UTC - Kees Willemse is professor of off-shore engineering , Delft University . 
The opinions expressed are his own . 
- The news that a huge metal cap has been successfully placed over several of the leaking oil vents at the Deepwater Horizon site marks a potential turning point in the Gulf of Mexico crisis . 
It is already estimated that each day some 10-15 ,000 barrels of the oil that are spilling out into the ocean are being captured and diverted to ships on the sea surface . 
May 14 , 2010 09:52 UTC - Kees Willemse is professor of offshore engineering at Delft University . 
The opinions expressed are his own . 
- Last month s explosion at the Deepwater Horizon rig continues to result in the leakage of an estimated 200,000 gallons -LRB- 910,000 litres -RRB- of oil into the Gulf of Mexico each day . 
According to U.S. President Barack Obama , we are dealing with a massive and potentially unprecedented environmental disaster . 
-- Neil Collins is a Reuters columnist . 
The views expressed are his own -- So you 'd like to work for BP ? 
A fine company , recognisably the same business as half a century ago , and likely to be around in half a century 's time -- yup , it 's a fine choice for a career . 
It 's going to be an even better one for the ambitious twenty-something , because no-one joining after next March will be able to join its final salary scheme . 
