WILMINGTON , Delaware | Thu Jun 10 , 2010 4:42 pm EDT WILMINGTON , Delaware -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The chances of BP declaring bankruptcy to deal with oil-spill claims are remote for now , bankruptcy professionals said , although that option would be open to the company if liabilities became overwhelming -- and that very much depends on when the oil stops gushing . 
BP 's shares plunged this week and investors scooped up insurance to protect against the possibility the company will default on its debt . 
For now , though , experts who sort out bankrupt companies say there is little likelihood that financially strong BP will need to seek protection from creditors . 
`` At this moment , the likelihood of BP filing for bankruptcy is probably remote because it has access to billions of dollars in credit , solid cash flow and a healthy balance sheet , '' said Brad Sandler , a bankruptcy attorney with Pachulski Stang Ziehl & Jones in Wilmington , Delaware . 
Jon Pack , a BP spokesman in Houston , said the company had not been in discussion with anyone regarding bankruptcy . 
The big question : How long will it be before BP finally caps the well that is spewing crude into the Gulf of Mexico , befouling shorelines and threatening fishing grounds ? 
Stephen Lubben , a professor at Seton Hall University School of Law in Newark , New Jersey said he did n't think BP would seek bankruptcy unless `` we 're still talking about this in 2011 and the price tag has reached $ 75 billion or $ 100 billion . '' 
BP has said it has the financial flexibility to deal with liabilities related to the spill , which to date have cost it about $ 1.4 billion . 
The financials tell the story of a trim company in peak condition . 
Its assets exceed its liabilities , a measure of solvency or shareholders ' equity , by more than $ 100 billion . 
It has had at least $ 24 billion in net operating cash flow for each of the last five years , according to financial filings . 
BP is no Lehman Brothers , which vanished into Chapter 11 virtually overnight in a market panic . 
Lehman 's reported liabilities exceeded its shareholder equity by 23 times . 
If Lehman Brothers was a tower of assets on a razor-thin foundation of equity , BP is virtually the opposite -- a squat structure of stability . 
`` In the pure economic world of bankruptcy , do they have enough money to pay their debts ? 
I do n't think any of us know that for a fact , '' said Robert Stark , a bankruptcy attorney with Brown Rudnick in New York . 
`` At least in the short term they have the capability to pay . '' 
The costliest U.S. oil spill was the 1989 Exxon Valdez accident , which cost about $ 4 billion for clean-up , fines and damages , although it spilled less than a third the oil leaked by the Deepwater Horizon accident . 
Hurricane Katrina , the worst disaster in U.S. history , ran up insured losses of about $ 41 billion . 
The bankruptcy talk was stoked on Wednesday by a report in Fortune magazine , which quoted Matt Simmons of boutique investment bank Simmons & Co , who said BP had a month before it would file for bankruptcy . 
BP shares traded in New York tumbled 16 percent . 
On Thursday , Simmons ' office said he would not be able to return calls until June 15 and that there were `` three pages of names '' of reporters who called for an interview . 
Legal liabilities related to asbestos have been forcing U.S. companies into bankruptcy for nearly 20 years , and their experience could be a blueprint for BP . 
Typically , a liability-dogged company files for Chapter 11 protection from creditors , establishes a process to value claims and sets up a trust to pay those claims . 
The bankruptcy immediately consolidates all legal action in one court , before one judge , eliminating the uncertainty of jury trials in varying jurisdictions . 
A bankrupt BP would look a lot like the current BP -- it would continue to be a major supplier of energy to the world and a major employer . 
As attractive as that might be , it is not something BP could or would do now , according to bankruptcy professionals . 
David Skeel , a law professor at the University of Pennsylvania Law School in Philadelphia said BP would be hard pressed to find a bankruptcy court that would accept a Chapter 11 petition . 
`` They are so obviously solvent , '' he said . 
Just last month , the Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware punished a subsidiary of Transocean Ltd , which owned the Deepwater Horizon rig , for trying to use Chapter 11 to limit its liability from an unrelated spill in Louisiana . 
Skeel said a bankruptcy might make sense in the next two years , once the spill is capped . 
`` One benefit to filing is to bite the bullet , swallow it and move on . 
They will have this continuing water torture of litigation , '' he said . 
Another option might be a trust established outside of bankruptcy , which would shield the company from the uncertainties of Chapter 11 , but this would probably need the involvement of the U.S. government . 
The best thing for Washington is to have a BP continuing to generate cash and earnings to pay claims . 
`` If BP declared bankruptcy it will be viewed poorly by investors and credit markets , '' said Robert Hartwig , the president of the Insurance Information Institute in New York . 
One sign of trouble : BP is already being forced to pay more for short-term debt and commercial paper , a form of borrowing that companies use to manage cash flow . 
The yield on its debt coming due next year has risen above its bonds due in 2019 , a red flag that could signal fraying market nerves . 
`` A company that is ` solvent ' on a balance sheet basis can end up in Chapter 11 if creditors panic and the company develops cash flow problems , '' said Lubben , the Seton Hall law professor . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
A little inside information for anybody still fool enough to be holding onto their BP shares . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
