Mike O'Berry , US Coast Guard : `` We 'll search until all likelihood of success has passed '' The US Coast Guard says that no oil appears to be leaking from a rig that sank off Louisiana on Thursday . 
Crews will continue to monitor the rig closely amid concerns over a possible environmental disaster . 
BP chief executive Tony Hayward vowed that the company would do everything in its power to contain any spills and limit the environmental impact . 
The Coast Guard is continuing its search for 11 missing workers , but hopes for their survival are dimming . 
Coast Guard Rear Adm Mary Landry told Associated Press news agency that there was no leak at either the water 's surface or the well head at the ocean floor . 
A visible sheen on the ocean 's surface is residual oil from Tuesday night 's explosion and the subsequent blaze . 
Fearing a major spill , BP PLC said on Friday that it had `` activated an extensive oil spill response '' , which included a 32-vessel clean-up flotilla and remotely controlled vehicles capable of assessing damage to the subsea well . 
In 2009 , BP PLC was fined a record $ 87m for failing to improve safety conditions following a massive explosion that killed 15 people at its Texas City refinery . 
But the US Mineral Management Services found no violations on the Deepwater Horizon rig when it carried out routine inspections in February , March and April this year . 
Built in 2001 by South Korea 's Hyundai Heavy Industries Shipyard Size : 396ft -LRB- 120m -RRB- long by 256ft -LRB- 78m -RRB- wide Designed to operate in water depths of up to 8,000 ft Should the rig leak , officials estimate that up to 336,000 gallons of oil a day could be released . 
At that rate , it would take more than a month for a spill to reach levels of the Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska in 1989 . 
President Barack Obama said on Thursday that the government was providing `` all assistance needed '' for both the rescue and clean up efforts in the troubled area . 
He described the crisis on the Deepwater Horizon , the BP leased rig , as his administration 's `` number one priority '' . 
The rig was carrying out exploratory drilling 84km -LRB- 52 miles -RRB- south-east of the Louisiana port of Venice when the blast occurred . 
Seventeen workers were injured and taken for treatment , and more than 100 were evacuated . 
The rig had been burning for 36 hours when it sank on Thursday in 5,000 ft -LRB- 1,500 m -RRB- of water , despite efforts to control the flames . 
