Obama plays golf during BP oil spill ! 
Surely even the president deserves -- and probably needs -- some downtime , even now . 
Weeks spent clearing brush back at the ranch in Hyde Park might be pushing it . 
But an afternoon on the back nine doesn t bother me . 
And whenever Obama does take a few hours off , there will always be enough going on in the world against which to juxtapose his leisure to enable the Jim Hofts of the Internet to take their cheap shots . 
It was unfair when Michael Moore did this to George W. Bush . 
And it s unfair for Hoft to do it to Barack Obama . 
Of course , the president might have expected this after comparing the oil spill to 9\/11 . 
His point -- that the spill will change the way Americans view relevant national policies -- is fair enough . 
But even in drawing a more apt analogy to the tragedy of 2001 , invoking that loaded pair of numbers practically invites rhetorical excess . 
What people fail to realize is that the Office of the President is no only in the Oval Office . 
It is where ever the President is ... Even on the golf course . 
If a President were not allow to rest until their are no crisis they would die of exhaustion . 
Let me add another one of Dick Cheney 's most famous words ... Mr. Hoft . . 
`` Go F@@@ Yourself '' Posted by : cavys | June 14 , 2010 12:48 PM | Report abuse From Day one , he has golfed . 
He does n't make any meaningful decisions anyway ! 
If gets the skimmer operation going that should have started weeks ago I do n't care if he goes on a month long cruise ! 
The problem is delegation ... he does n't know how to do it ! 
Get some stinking people in there and start working ! 
You have to concluded that the Obama Administration sabotage this catastrophe and allowed this to happen , to garner public outrage at oil use and assist in passing their STUPID Cap & Tax idea ! 
Then , he is n't hatching new leftist plots against our Constitution . 
That certainly is ... an opinion . 
He works his pointing finger to the bone . 
Who will he be pointing it at today ? 
Has he been told yet whose ass he 's supposed to kick ? 
September 11th was like Pearl Harbor , a day that defined the US and history for an entire generation . 
Perhaps the oil spill is something that will define the next generation 's commitment to protecting the environment the way we are committed to national security . 
However it seems that we have a propensity as Americans to fall in love with our political candidates when we elect them and then destroy them when they assume office . 
This seems sad to me . 
I have had leadership positions and know what the support of those I worked with meant to me . 
Has it really only been two short years since his prescient statements about the environment ? 
`` This was the moment when the gasoline odor of the oceans began to rise and our planet began to be blanketed in a thick , tar-like ooze ; this was the moment when we ended a war or maybe just continued it and a couple of others , and secured our nation and restored our image as the last , best hope on Earth to be led by terrible golfer who likes to insult the Special Olympics . '' 
-- Barack Obama , June 2008 Posted by : zippyspeed | June 14 , 2010 3:08 PM | Report abuse This well is 50 miles off the coast , and the fact that the federal government did n't use it 's international resources to get equipment to the area and collect spillage by skimming it off the top of water is great failure and gross negligence ! 
You have to concluded that the Obama Administration sabotage this catastrophe and allowed this to happen , to garner public outrage at oil use and assist in passing their STUPID Cap & Tax idea ! 
Is n't this an industrial accident ? 
Are n't the companies that cause industrial accidents responsible for the clean up ? 
The media continues its love affair . 
I do know it has not commented on the many vacations our current president has taken this year -LRB- Hawaii , North Carolina , Chicago , Camp David -RRB- along with numerous -LRB- not one -RRB- rounds of golf . 
I do n't disagree that a president needs some time of his own , but I tire of the hypocrisy of the press . 
There has to be something out here he 's good at . 
And he might as well enjoy doing it . 
Before the American voter takes away his presidential golf club bag , cart , and secret service caddys . 
Two and a half years from now . 
You have to concluded that the Obama Administration sabotage this catastrophe and allowed this to happen , to garner public outrage at oil use and assist in passing their STUPID Cap & Tax idea ! 
I 'm in no way instituting , that the government pays the cost or does n't collect it in the future . 
If a tanker of oil crashes and spills on the highway , the local government is prepared to send Haz-Mat crews to clean-up and bring health and safety . 
The owner of that tanker will still bear the cost ! 
The folks who are on the job and have something useful to do do n't have to drop what they are doing and take Obama 's calls just so Obama can look like he 's on top of it . 
At least Obama did n't promise not to play golf until the last drop was cleaned up and then go play anyway . 
That was the problem with Bush playing after promising not to -LRB- which was a silly thing to do in the first place -RRB- . 
does n't WaPo EVER get tired of carrying Obozo 's water ?? I mean ever ?? Posted by : morphy | June 14 , 2010 4:04 PM | Report abuse I think he should play golf all day , every day -- dawn to dusk . 
Watch sports all evening , smoke his last doobie of the day and go to bed . 
This should be his daily routine till November 2012 . 
The `` We ` reSickOfYou '' oath : Do no more harm . 
His vacations taken and personal time off are astonishing . 
As a comparison , I run my own business . 
Usually , that 's 7 days a week -- at least 10-12 hours per day , crises all the time to keep things going , and one massive headache after another . 
I chose this to be my life . 
Have n't had a vacation in years -- certainly no golfing , trips to the theater in New York , and so on . 
Obama chose to run for President . 
It would be good if he did the job before taking all the perks . 
Get rid of this guy and let 's really MoveOn . 
I understand that he keeps his total score versus multi-mulligan , pencil whipping Clinton . 
Obama 's score must be in the high triple digits . 
He must truly enjoy whacking at a ball several hundred times in four or five hours , but please do n't try and convince us that he needs the downtime because scheming to destroy our country is n't that tough for a socialist . 
`` Obama is not a hard-working man His vacations taken and per sonal time off are astounding '' ... no true . 
Matter of fact the award for most time taken goes to George W. Bush ... a total of 548 days while in office . 
That 's almost two years vacation . 
Obama will never match Dubya 's vacations . 
He 's a freemason , a member of the Illuminati , and a puppet of the dread OWO-sponsored foreign relations council . 
What 's worse , you probably remember how the rumor about McCain having a black child sank his presidential chances back in 2000 in S. Carolina , right ? 
Well , Barack Obama has TWO black children , and research shows that he openly admits that they 're his , but that he is a mongrel himself and not ashamed to admit it . 
A BOOGIE IN THE WHITE HOUSE ! 
Whhaaaa ... whaaaaa Posted by : roblimo | June 14 , 2010 4:57 PM | Report abuse Where were all you wise-a $ $ es when Bush was golfing , cutting wood and ruining the country ? 
I guess Obama is supposed to work 24\/7 even though Bush spent MOST of his term on vacation . 
You racist folk are such haters that if Obama walked on water , you 'd complain that he got his feet wet . 
Give it a rest , will ya !!!!!!!!!!!!! Posted by : Osupport | June 14 , 2010 5:03 PM | Report abuse As a comparison , I run my own business . 
Usually , that 's 7 days a week -- at least 10-12 hours per day , crises all the time to keep things going , and one massive headache after another . 
I chose this to be my life . 
Have n't had a vacation in years -- certainly no golfing , trips to the theater in New York , and so on . 
Obama chose to run for President . 
It would be good if he did the job before taking all the perks . 
Get rid of this guy and let 's really MoveOn . 
It would be really good if he had a real job before running . 
I recall reading that President Eisenhower golfed all the time . 
However , since no one questioned his competence no one objected to him hitting the course . 
Is he going to kick some ass ? 
Or does he only kick friendly companies Asses and use diplomacy with non-allies ? 
He should lift the Jones Act to allow ships to help with the clean up of the Gulf that do not have Union crews . 
Many countries have offered help but can not travel intercoastally because of that protection for our Unions . 
It 's the 24\/7 news cycle that is causing all of this consternation and impatience with the public . 
People do n't seem to have any patience anymore - want an instant fix for everything . 
He has done nothing but spend , blame , spend , spend , blame , whine , golf , vacation , whine , spend , golf , basketball , golf , golf , golf , vacation , golf , spend , whine , vacation , blame and golf since he took office . 
He has golfed more in 17 months than Bush did in 8 years . 
He has also outspent Bush , and everyother president combined . 
But what can you expect from an inexperienced loser like Obama who has never had a real job in his worthless life ? 
But that does n't make him a good golfer by any means . 
If he really knew how to play the game of golf , he would have invited the Consul General of the Netherlands to golf with him and conduct a little business -- like accepting the Netherland government 's offer of sending ships outfitted with more efficient skimmers to America 's Gulf Coast . 
Instead , Obama chose to go it alone and kick his ball out of the sand trap ! 
According to Obama today -LRB- in a comment that has been willfully ignored by much of the American media -RRB- , this spill `` echoes '' 9\/11 , and much as 9\/11 caused us to rethink our security policy , this spill will rewrite our energy policy . 
Some problems with this present themselves , however . 
9\/11 was not an accident . 
It was carried out by people who intentionally wanted to destroy the U.S. , or at least part of our country . 
Is BP now the new Al Qaeda ? 
Is the entire oil industry now turned into environmental terrorists ? 
Or , conversely , is Obama saying that much as this spill was an accident caused by oversight in regulation and greed for oil and profits , that 9\/11 was basically the same ? 
Even more importantly , what about the thousands who died on 9\/11 ? 
Are their deaths now weighed equally with the damaged incomes and lost wildlife in the Gulf ? 
Obama can play down his comment by arguing not to take the analogy to far , and that he did n't mean it in these ways , but this becomes a weak excuse for a comment that probably should not have been made . 
Of course , from the lack of reporting in the Washington Post and elsewhere , it 's almost like the comment was never made . 
Heck , even Media Matters issued a statement backing up Obama on the comments , and yet in the mainstream media ... crickets chirping . 
Why not write about a President `` of the people and for the people '' playing more golf in his 1.5 years of office than George Bush played in 8-years . 
Smells to me more like bourgeois than someone capable of empathizing with the unemployed , small business owners or fishermen in the Gulf . 
The alien lizard people of Sirius V had a President who dithered away most of his term playing intergalactic billiards , and then he went out for a long lunch break and never came back -LRB- his official portrait says `` missing - presumed fed '' -RRB- . 
Obama is even worse than that . 
Worst President in the local Galaxy cluster and the first ten dimensions -LRB- the 11th dimension , well we wo n't get into that -RRB- . 
And that 's not hyperbole , never in the history of the universe have Obama 's critics used hyperbole ; -RRB- Posted by : leftcoaster | June 14 , 2010 6:03 PM | Report abuse Posted by : pressF1 | June 14 , 2010 6:04 PM | Report abuse By god but you Yanks are crazy !?! In what way can the American President be held responsible for BP fouling the gulf waters ? 
How stupid do you guys think you look to the rest of the world ? 
-LRB- I 'll give you a hint - currently in Australia slime mould has a better PR status than does the American Republican Party . -RRB- 
Even the lack of controls guiding this disastrous venture are all down to the `` drill baby drill '' mob who occupied the white house prior to Obama s residence . 
Fr ` crissakes the well was started at about the same time as he was sworn in ! 
But from the outside looking in all that is visible is this crazy debate about President Obama being angry , or not being angry enough or , . . 
How stupid do you right wingers look ? 
What would you have the president do ? 
Just nip back in time and stop the Republicans from selling the environment to the highest bidder ? 
or Nationalize the oil industry ? 
or Walk out across the gulf and plug the hole with his finger ? 
The Republican Party might not realize it yet but this will be the last nail in their coffin . 
Even the US public will look back on the events of the last 60 odd days and will be unable to stomach the raw hypocrisy . 
The president lives at work . 
No matter where the president is , the job is with him . 
He can issue an executive order from the oval office or even the golf course . 
To complain if the president takes a few hours to do something he may find relaxing is petty . 
The job never goes away . 
George W. Bush took more vacations than any president in history . 
This president is far behind Bush in vacation days thus far and would have to do a whole lot of vacationing to catch up . 
In case no one noticed , every president that takes office may go in looking youthful , but will come out gray haired and much older . 
You can already see the age the office has added to President Obama . 
If he gets some enjoyment and stress relief from basketball and golf , you should be glad . 
I would think a stressed individual would have a greater chance of making a poor decision than a more relaxed one . 
This record will take some time to accumulate and disseminate , but it will be known . 
Obama 's every meeting , phone-call , social event , ball game , and vacation are on record . 
And this record will sink this president 's vaunted presidency , as it should . 
This chapter in American history will be titled , `` Asleep at the Wheel for almost two months . '' 
When he 's on the golf course he is not screwing up the economy , bowing and scraping to foreign potentates , making like he 's not in bed with BP and the oil lobbyists , or spinning more untruths about the healthcare plan that will save us all . 
Just remember what the moron said ... that the oil spill was the same as the 9\/11 terrorist attacks that killed 3,000 + Americans . 
Several of the enlisted men I have spoken to said they did not get a chance to play . 
Maybe the generals ... Posted by : charlesalaska | June 14 , 2010 8:03 PM | Report abuse Barry the incompetent boob Obama has already sent as many American soldiers to their deaths in Afghanistan -- 475 -- as were lost during the first seven years of the war , 2001-2007 . 
Barry the inept bungler has only been president for 16 months . 
George W. Bush gave up golfing forever during the Iraq war , he did not want to ever create a situation for some mother to learn her son was killed while the president was golfing . 
I agree with Stromberg that this is a cheap shot at Obama , but it 's his own fault . 
Comparing this to 9\/11 and stressing the urgency then hitting the back nine looks like he 's just another politician talking through both sides of his mouth . 
Some have brought up President Bush at his Crawford ranch . 
He did work there ; he met with heads of state and the cabinet reported to him there . 
Bush was n't escaping the job , he was escaping Washington . 
The guy seems like he 's never worked an honest day in his life . 
I 'd like to see him clearing brush for 2 days . 
He 'd probably hire an illegal to do it for him . 
But we got what we voted for . 
Jimmy Carter II . . 
Obama has to entertain himself since he has no real world experience outside the fact that he ran Acorn . . 
and you know the dishonest creeps that worked for that organization . 
Simply shamless ... Posted by : surfer1104 | June 14 , 2010 9:28 PM | Report abuse Its still hard to believe the magnitude of this oil spill . 
Maybe a round of golf will allow Barack to relieve the stress of a country run by greedy corporations caring less about the environment . 
I am outraged at his indifference and his lack of leadership . 
Maybe it is better he play golf since all he thinks he needs to do is blackmail this private company to set up this slush fund . 
Spacey as this administration seems to be , they still have not made any moves to clean this spill up . 
They want to milk this crisis for all its worth but from the anger I see expressed from my little sphere of reference , their goose is cooked . 
It really does not matter what he does anymore . 
He will be a one term President . 
There is no correlation to be made between the two events . 
Please explain again why Obama is supposed to be so intelligent . 
Did you see him golfing , playing basketball , partying weekly PRIOR to becoming POTUS . 
Nothing in his biography up to and including being a State Senator that said he spent HIS MONEY of all the partying , golfing , traveling around for one hour Photo Ops and etc. . 
However , it is well documented that the were more than willing to attend events WHEN THEY DID NOT PAY A DIME . 
Once he became POTUS ... it is as if they became King and Queen . 
Only the BEST for the First Black POTUS . 
His lack of concern , his lack of leadership , his total disregard for American Citizens has never been more evident than during the last 66 days . . 
He had the opportunity to LED . . 
but instead he sat on the Porch and let the leaders take care of the spill . 
No none can be faulted for the failure of the oil well EXCEPT for those who constructed the rig . 
Obama AND ALL those on the Hill can be faulted for dithering , and placing blame instead of attacking the oil spill from day one . 
The time to stop\/reduce the oil flow onto our beaches into our marshes ... was withing 72 hours after the explosion . 
Obama has yet to mobilize his power to STOP the arrival of oil onto our coast lines . . 
That was his responsibility . 
He failed and continues to be guilty of High Crimes and Treason Against the Constitution and the Citizens of the United States . 
Excuse me ... I forgot the Constitution does not apply to Obama ... because he is a Dual Citizen and not a Natural Born Citizen . . 
It 's like something crawling out of a sewer . 
Tomorrow evening our President will talk to the nation about the situation in the gulf , and I hope everyone listens to it with an open mind . 
You may not agree with or approve of everything he says , but at least you 'll know what he said , the whole context , rather than a snippet or two featured by some commentator , who then tells you his opinion . 
There are too many comments that display ignorance of the events and the President 's handling of the crisis to date . 
Let 's all inhale slowly and review the facts - The US gov ' t did n't cause this spill , BP did - focus the anger towards them . 
God knows they earned it . 
If President Obama had directed gov ' t resources to clean up the mess the same idiots that are decrying him now would be screaming that he is bailing out a corporate giant . 
Give it a rest fellas . 
Obama 's problem is pure and simply that he has forgotten that perception is reality and that he is perceived as putting fundraising , listening to Paul warble through yet another silly love song and long weekends ahead of the salvage operation . 
You can be sure that a lot of lower people were working on this problem out of sight of cameras . 
Sadly , Obama performing as Nero took center stage . 
Well apparently now that the President is a Democrat , he is only human and can only do so much . 
The left in this country and the media have themselves to blame for the unreasonable expectations and disdain for this president . 
After all it was the constant criticism of Bush that anything and everything was his fault . 
Add in the wonder of Obama 's specialness and it is hardly a surprise that people expected so much . 
Some of us , however are not surprised or disappointed by his failure to perform even competently , much less miracles . 
In 2002 - we got editorial after article about Bush playing too much golf when he should have been working on addressing a spate of suicide bombings in Israel . 
Obama has played more golf in 2 years than Bush in 8 and we have a huge disaster threatening industries and livelihoods of Americans in the Gulf of Mexico . 
And the Post says `` who cares '' . 
Please never again try to argue that the Washington Post is not biased to the left . 
We also know that the Washington Post took gread exception to President Bush playing Golf . 
Does this derogatory article by the Post ring a bell . 
Michael Moore used Bush 's golfing which was far less that Obama 's in a Movie to mock Bush . 
The leftists hacks at the Post are to the point of being cartoon characters in their excuse making and covering up for a failed President . 
You people are a joke . 
The gulf is being destroyed and obama plays and plays . 
A real leader would be on the front lines continually working on this . 
obama has proven himself to be completely inept . 
And so has this writer . 
Find something else besides opinion , because yours is worthless . 
It would keep him from flying his private 747 all over the country to fund raisers , rigged town hall shows and photo ops . 
At least Andrews is close to the people 's house , I mean 0bamba 's house , sorry . 
With the first ladies garden providing food for him and the family and Andrews Air Force Base so close we can only hope that he stops his takeover of our representative Republic . 
`` We the people '' will start the very difficult task of taking back America on November 2 , 2010 , bet on it . 
Instead of his daily state run media\/teleprompter speeches I can handle hearing `` FORE '' . 
Much less damage to the United States of America . 
The grounds keepers might get upset at Andrews but they have nothing to complain about , they are government workers , make a lot more than private sector workers so it 's works out better for everyone . 
WELL , except maybe for tax payers ... Posted by : kennethy692008 | June 15 , 2010 2:55 PM | Report abuse Stay on the golf course , Mr. President . 
You 're not doing us much good anyway . 
Fine , I 'll give you that Stromberg . 
But you just threw away your `` What an outrage , BP 's Hayward is yatching '' card . 
Sorry , ca n't have it both ways . 
Emanuel goes on ABC to start a whole wave of left wing K A stories about how horrible the BP CEO is for relaxing during the crisis and B O is at a MLB game and golfing the same week-end . 
HE HAS HIS LIFE BACK TOOOOOO !!!!! Posted by : left_aint_ever_right | June 21 , 2010 1:32 PM | Report abuse The comments to this entry are closed . 
