Four weeks after the nation 's worst environmental disaster , the Obama administration saw no need to accept offers of state-of-the-art skimmers , miles of boom or technical assistance from nations around the globe with experience fighting oil spills . 
In the past week , the United States submitted its second request to the European Union for any specialized equipment to contain the oil now seeping onto the Gulf of Mexico 's marshes and beaches , and it accepted Canada 's offer of 9,842 feet of boom . 
The government is soliciting additional boom and skimmers from nearly two dozen countries and international organizations . 
In late May , the administration accepted Mexico 's offer of two skimmers and 13,779 feet of boom ; a Dutch offer of three sets of Koseq sweeping arms , which attach to the sides of ships and gather oil ; and eight skimming systems offered by Norway . 
`` As we understand what we need and identify domestic and foreign sources , we will act , '' said State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley , who said the United States has received 21 aid offers from 17 countries and four international groups . 
`` We are maintaining contact with these countries , we are grateful for the offers , and we will take them up on these offers . '' 
But some lawmakers and outside experts are questioning whether the administration has been too slow to capitalize on these offers , lulled by BP 's estimates on the oil flow rate and on its capacity to cope with the aftermath of the April 20 explosion of the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
`` We 're clearly behind the curve because BP did not have the game plan to deal with this spill , '' said Sen. Benjamin L. Cardin -LRB- D-Md . -RRB- 
, who visited Louisiana on Friday . 
`` I do n't know if the federal government has the capacity it needs at this point . '' 
Anthony H. Cordesman , a national security and energy analyst at the Center for Strategic and International Studies , said the administration has been hampered because the spill is `` a rare case '' where the traditional emergency response routine does not apply . 
`` Most emergency relief is based on proven technology and precedence , '' he said . 
`` We are now confronted by something that does n't match any of the models . '' 
The State Department sent letters to some U.S. allies two weeks after the accident , and the Coast Guard initially sought to assess what supplies might be available overseas , but the administration 's public posture on aid has been inconsistent . 
On May 5 , Crowley announced that 13 international offers had been received and that decisions on what to accept would be made `` in the next day or two . '' 
Two weeks later , the State Department said the government saw no reason to accept any of the offers . 
Crowley said the Obama administration is well aware of what happened after Hurricane Katrina , when the U.S. government failed to capitalize on an unprecedented amount of foreign aid offers . 
Allies offered $ 854 million in cash and in oil meant to be sold for cash . 
In the end , only $ 126 million in cash from 40 donors was received . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
