BENGHAZI , Libya | Tue Jun 7 , 2011 12:37 pm EDT BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A Russian envoy in rebel-held Benghazi on Tuesday said Moscow wanted to help bridge the rift in Libya , stepping up Kremlin efforts to play a prominent role in resolving the conflict . 
`` Some are looking to Benghazi , some are looking to Tripoli . 
Russia sees its task as building a bridge between these two banks on which Libyan society now stands , '' said Mikhail Margelov , President Dmitry Medvedev 's special envoy to Africa . 
At a G8 summit last month , Medvedev joined Western partners in urging Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi to step down , offered Russia 's services as a mediator and said he was sending Margelov to Libya , initially to Benghazi . 
Analysts say Russia wants to preserve its influence in a country where it had billions of dollars in arms , energy and railroad deals . 
`` Russia has a unique situation in Libya now : We did not sever relations with Tripoli , we have established relations with Benghazi , '' Margelov told Russia 's state-run Rossiya-24 television upon arrival in Benghazi . 
`` We are ready , if it 's possible , to act as middlemen in establishing an internal Libyan political dialogue . 
Russia is ready to help politically , economically and in any possible way , '' Margelov told a media conference in Benghazi . 
`` We ... believe that Gaddafi has lost his legitimacy after the first bullet shot against the Libyan people , '' he said , adding democracy in Libya would be achieved through elections that would take place after the civil war ends . 
Medvedev had said he hoped Margelov would have the opportunity to speak with both sides , but that he did not travel to Tripoli on this visit . 
He left for Cairo after his talks , Russian media reported . 
Margelov met Mustafa Abdel Jalil , head of the rebel national council , Russian media said . 
He was also to have met Ali Tarhouni , the rebel minister of oil and finance , to discuss the financial situation and more effective aid . 
Russia supported an initial U.N. Security Council resolution imposing sanctions on Gaddafi 's government but abstained in the March vote on a second resolution that authorised military intervention . 
It has accused the Western coalition conducting air strikes of going beyond its mandate to protect civilians . 
Rebels fighting to end Gaddafi 's four-decade rule control the east of Libya from their stronghold in Benghazi , the western city of Misrata and the mountains near the border with Tunisia . 
They have been unable to advance on Tripoli against Gaddafi 's better-equipped forces . 
The Libyan capital and vicinity has come under increased attack from NATO bombing in recent days . 
In Oslo , Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said that Moscow is not seeking the leading role in Libyan mediation and emphasised the importance of African Union efforts . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
