BRUSSELS | Tue Jun 7 , 2011 10:17 am EDT BRUSSELS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The European Union said on Tuesday they had agreed to add six Libyan ports to the list of assets frozen in sanctions imposed on Muammar Gaddafi 's government . 
`` The council of the European Union adopted a decision today extending the assets freeze to six Libyan port authorities , in view of the gravity of the situation in the country , '' said a statement from the European Council , which represents all EU governments . 
The statement did not give any details of what form the sanctions would take , but EU officials say they will make it illegal for European-operated ships to do business with the port authorities . 
A one-month window has been left for existing contracts , one official said . 
The EU has already imposed a travel ban and wide-ranging asset freeze . 
An EU diplomat said last month that EU experts had agreed to put six ports -- Tripoli , Zuara , Zawiyah , Al-Khoms , Ras Lanuf and Brega -- on the sanctions list . 
Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 's government has been seeking to raise fuel imports by using a loophole in international sanctions after a campaign of Western air strikes against Libya . 
Civil war has crippled the refining industry and Gaddafi urgently needs fuel imports for his military and to keep civilian vehicles running in the areas he controls . 
British Prime Minister David Cameron said last month Britain saw scope for tightening sanctions on oil and oil products against Gaddafi and Britain has pushed the new sanctions initiative . 
European Union , U.N. and U.S. sanctions against Libya have been implemented via a list of companies that must be excluded from business transactions , but exports to western Libya or dealings with firms missing from the list are not forbidden . 
The idea to target ports follows a similar EU decision on the Ivory Coast in January , to pressure then incumbent Laurent Gbagbo to quit after a presidential election he was widely seen to have lost . 
The discussions may also involve the Libyan state-owned shipping company General National Maritime Transport Company -LRB- GNMTC -RRB- , which is not on the sanctions list and has managed to bring at least one fuel cargo into west Libya . 
-LRB- Reporting by Pete Harrison and David Brunnstrom ; Editing by Sonya Hepinstall -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
