Danger and anti-war stance keep celebrities away Shows now depend on Christian hip-hop groups During world war two American troops away from home for Christmas were entertained by Marlene Dietrich , Bing Crosby and the Marx Brothers . 
Even in Vietnam Bob Hope was guaranteed to put in an appearance . 
But soldiers in Iraq are more likely to get a show from a Christian hip-hop group , a country singer you have probably never heard of and two cheerleaders for the Dallas Cowboys . 
Just as the seemingly intractable nature of the war has led to a growing recruitment crisis , so the United Services Organisation , which has been putting on shows for the troops since the second world war , is struggling to get celebrities to sign up for even a short tour of duty . 
It is a far cry from the days following the September 11 2001 attacks , when some of the biggest names in show business , from Jennifer Lopez to Brad Pitt , rallied to the cause . 
`` After 9\/11 we could n't have had enough airplanes for the people who were volunteering to go , '' Wayne Newton , the Las Vegas crooner who succeeded Bob Hope as head of USO 's talent recruiting effort , told USA Today . 
`` Now with 9\/11 being as far removed as it is , the war being up one day and down the next , it becomes increasingly difficult to get people to go . '' 
Newton said many celebrities have been wary of going because they think it might be seen that they are endorsing the war . 
`` And I say it 's not . 
I tell them these men and women are over there because our country sent them , and we have the absolute necessity to try to bring them as much happiness as we can . '' 
Fear is also a factor . 
`` They 're scared , '' country singer Craig Morgan , who is in Iraq on the USO 's Hope and Freedom Tour 2005 , told USA Today . 
`` It 's understandable . 
It 's not a safe and fun place and a lot of people do n't want to take the chance . '' 
The USO was founded in 1941 as a way of boosting morale for the military . 
For most of that time Bob Hope , who made his first appearance in 1942 and his last in 1990 , was its most recognisable face , famed for putting on Christmas extravaganzas on aircraft carriers and American bases during the Vietnam war . 
Thousands of performers signed up to play the `` foxhole circuit '' during the second world war , but the USO has a much smaller list . 
Some of the entertainers still willing to travel are die-hard true believers - rock musician Ted Nugent carried a Glock handgun to shows in Iraq last year and said in a radio interview that he manned a machine gun on a Humvee . 
But many of the USO 's regular performers are fierce critics of the war , among them the comic and star of Good Morning Vietnam , Robin Williams , who told USA Today he would like to return to the Middle East in the spring for what would be his fourth tour since 2002 . 
`` I 'm there for the -LRB- troops -RRB- , not for W , '' he said in a reference to the president . 
`` Go , man . 
You wo n't forget it . 
You 'll meet amazing people , '' is his message to stars that ask him about the tours . 
But the comedian said he mostly tries to keep politics out of the show after he did a few jokes about Bush 's brainpower at a base in 2003 and got a chilly reception . 
Other critics of the war who regularly perform include the leftwing comedian Al Franken -LRB- who is headlining the current tour along with Christian hip-hop group Souljahz -RRB- and the punk legend and actor Henry Rollins , one of the Bush administrations most vocal critics . 
The tradition of beautiful women thrilling the troops has continued - although while Marilyn Monroe and Jane Russell showed up in Korea and Vietnam could boast Raquel Welch , in Iraq they have had to make do with sometime pop singer and reality TV star Jessica Simpson . 
