Bernanke Presses For Fiscal Restraint Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke testifies before the House Budget Committee . 
Bernanke said large deficits threaten financial stability . 
-LRB- By Joshua Roberts -- Bloomberg News -RRB- The nation needs to begin planning now to eventually bring taxes and spending in line , Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke said yesterday , arguing that large budget deficits , if sustained , could deepen the financial crisis and choke off the economy . 
Bernanke 's testimony to Congress reflected growing concern among economists and investors that the nation 's long-term fiscal imbalances could stand in the way of economic recovery by driving up the interest rates that the government , businesses and consumers pay to borrow money . 
The rate the government pays has already risen in recent weeks . 
The Fed chairman argued that even as the government spends massive amounts of money to contain the financial crisis , it must be prepared to move toward fiscal balance . 
`` Congress and the administration face formidable near-term challenges that must be addressed , '' Bernanke told the House Budget Committee . 
But `` unless we demonstrate a strong commitment to fiscal sustainability in the longer term , we will have neither financial stability nor healthy economic growth . '' 
The financial crisis is driving the country deeply into the red , with the national debt projected to double from about 41 percent of the economy last year to more than 82 percent by the end of the next decade . 
Thereafter , things will only get worse , budget analysts say , as the baby boom generation lays claim to benefits from Social Security and costly federal health programs . 
So far , President Obama has offered no plan to rein in those costs , though he has stressed the importance of reducing the deficit generally . 
Bernanke frequently delivers messages on the need for fiscal responsibility to congressional budget committees . 
But his comments yesterday carried more weight given recent swings in the market for Treasury bonds . 
In particular , the global investors who finance the nation 's large budget deficits have grown more antsy . 
The U.S. Treasury must now pay 3.5 percent to borrow money for 10 years -- low by historical standards , but up from about 3.1 percent a month ago and 2.9 percent three months ago . 
The increase has come even as the Fed has launched a program to buy up to $ 300 billion in Treasury bonds -- purchases designed to push down rates and did , when the program was rolled out in March . 
The higher rates for government borrowing have many likely causes , and some of those reflect improvement in financial markets . 
For example , as investors have become more comfortable investing in risky assets such as stocks , they have been willing to move money out of safe U.S. Treasury bonds and into other investments . 
But other reasons for the shift are less positive . 
Investors are also worried that Congress and the Obama administration will continue to rely heavily on borrowed money to fund the government and thus are demanding a higher premium to lend it money . 
`` These increases appear to reflect concerns about large federal deficits , '' Bernanke said in his testimony , before naming other causes that are also playing a role . 
Some analysts worry that the Fed will succumb to political pressure in the future to effectively print money to fund government borrowing -- a process known as monetizing the debt . 
Two congressmen raised that possibility explicitly in yesterday 's hearing . 
`` This can be a dangerous policy mix . 
The Treasury is issuing debt . 
And the central bank is buying it , '' said Rep. Paul D. Ryan -LRB- R-Wis . -RRB- . 
`` It gives the alarming impression that the U.S. one day might begin to meet its financial obligations by simply printing money . 
And we all know what happens to a country that chooses to monetize its debt . 
It gets runaway inflation , a gradual erosion of workers ' paychecks and family savings . '' 
Bernanke said that the Fed takes its political independence seriously , and while it is now focused on using all the tools at its disposal to ease the pain of the recession , it will respond aggressively if inflation becomes a problem . 
The Fed has given no strong indication of whether it will expand its purchases of Treasury bonds . 
Without doing so , though , the Fed would have less flexibility to stimulate the economy . 
It has already cut a key interest rate it controls to nearly zero . 
`` They definitely have less leeway '' to buy more Treasury bonds , said Michael Feroli , an economist at J.P. Morgan Chase . 
`` The Fed has n't done a stellar job of communicating its strategy '' with the bond purchases , which , he argued , has allowed the discussion to be dominated by people who argue that the Fed 's actions are effectively monetizing the debt . 
Doing so would increase the money supply , thereby weakening the dollar and leading to high inflation . 
One thing that would help assuage those fears would be for government leaders to signal that they will manage the nation 's finances well in the long run . 
That would tend to keep long-term interest rates low , which in turn would help encourage an economic recovery . 
Bernanke , as is his habit , did not recommend specific ways that Congress should aim to reduce long-term budget deficits ; he views tax and spending decisions as the domain of elected officials . 
`` In the end , the fundamental decision that the Congress , the administration and the American people must confront is how large a share of the nation 's economic resources to devote to federal government programs , including entitlement programs , '' Bernanke said . 
`` Crucially , whatever size of government is chosen , tax rates must ultimately be set at a level sufficient to achieve an appropriate balance of spending and revenues in the long run . '' 
