By Anthony Reuben Business reporter , BBC News London Mayor Boris Johnson has expressed concern about the `` anti-British rhetoric that seems to be permeating from America '' . 
Speaking on BBC Radio 4 's Today program , he said that he `` would like to see a bit of cool heads rather than endlessly buck-passing and name-calling '' . 
So why is there so much concern about the effect on the British economy ? 
BP is a huge company , but its shares have almost halved in value since the explosion that set off the spill in the Gulf of Mexico on 20 April . 
Its stock market value has fallen from about # 125bn to about # 70bn , which may make other oil companies think about making a takeover bid , although shareholders would be unlikely to accept an offer at the current levels . 
There is also a chance that BP will end up not paying dividends this year and it is almost certain that the amount BP is having to pay out for the clean-up in the US will eventually affect the dividend . 
`` When you consider the huge exposure of British pension funds to BP it starts to become a matter of national concern if a great British company is being continually beaten up on the airwaves , '' Boris Johnson said . 
UK pension funds do indeed have big holdings of BP shares and the company says that # 1 of every # 7 paid in dividends to pension funds by FTSE 100 companies last year came from BP . 
It is estimated that about 18 million people in the UK either own BP shares or pay into a pension fund that holds BP shares . 
BP paid # 930m in UK tax on its profits in 2009 , which was well down on the # 1.7 bn it had paid in each of the previous three years . 
The company employs 10,105 people in the UK . 
The employees paid # 490m in income tax and National Insurance on their earnings , while BP paid # 110m in employer 's National Insurance contributions . 
If you add together the corporation tax and production tax paid by BP , together with the National Insurance and income tax paid by its employees and the VAT and fuel excise duty paid by its customers , you get # 5.8 bn , which is about enough to fund the entire budget of the Department for International Development . 
It is not just the UK economy that is vulnerable to BP 's problems . 
The company employs 22,800 people in the US . 
BBC business editor Robert Peston points out that 39 % of the company 's shares are held in the US , about a third of them by individuals rather than institutions . 
He adds that those US shareholders might not be happy that every time the US president lays into BP , they find themselves a bit poorer . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
