Washington Post Book Club : Friedman , Ehrenreich , Singletary on the Financial Crisis Many months ago , before there was a scintilla of evidence that the global economy would take the nosedive that it did , we at Book World decided to invite Thomas Friedman -LRB- The World Is Flat -RRB- , Barbara Ehrenreich -LRB- Nickel and Dimed -RRB- and Michelle Singletary -LRB- Spend Well , Live Rich -RRB- to The Washington Post Book Club to talk about the financial state of the world . 
Thomas L. Friedman -LRB- Rich Lipski\/The Washington Post -RRB- Three months ago -LRB- still no evidence of the current money rout -RRB- Ehrenreich stopped by to see us after taping a podcast about her new book and declared , `` I 've got a thing or two to say to Tom Friedman ! 
, '' giving us a feisty look that told us we might get more than we 'd bargained for . 
And so , last week , when we finally gathered in The Post auditorium 's green room , we feared we were in for a mud fight . 
Would Ehrenreich -LRB- This Land Is Their Land -RRB- , who is famous for her working class defense , go up against Tom Friedman , who is famous for his `` let 's get beyond the class thing , '' and run full tilt into financial columnist Michelle Singletary , who just wants us to pay our bills and listen to Big Mama ? 
Barbara Ehrenreich -LRB- Jay Paul\/For The Washington Post -RRB- Minutes before the proceedings began , we suggested to our panelists that they might follow their presentations by asking each other pertinent and provocative questions . 
One of them said : `` Okay , so we ask each other stuff until we work ourselves up into a fight , right ? '' 
It sounded dangerous , and kind of thrilling . 
And yet , once the microphones were on , Barbara Ehrenreich spoke movingly about America 's infuriating blindness to our poor . 
Tom Friedman -LRB- Hot , Flat , and Crowded -RRB- spoke rousingly about our crucial need to be as imaginative about ET -LRB- environmental technology -RRB- as we 've been about IT -LRB- information technology -RRB- . 
And Michelle Singletary implored us to do the three basic things every responsible citizen should do : pay what 's owed , save the rest , and avoid credit like a bad disease . 
There was no fight . 
There was not even a hint of conflict or hostility . 
We heard from Ehrenreich about our urgent problems of class . 
We heard from Friedman about our urgent problems of the environment . 
We heard from Singletary about our urgent problems of personal responsibility . 
And the big news was : These are far more interconnected than we thought . 
If such different thinkers and authors can agree that we 're all in this financial thing together -- that there is much we can work cooperatively to fix , much we can still build -- why ca n't Wall Street ? 
Why ca n't our legislators ? 
Why ca n't our presidential candidates ? 
By Marie Arana | October 13 , 2008 ; 7:45 AM ET Marie Arana Please email us to report offensive comments . 
Judging by today , it looks as if the world IS going to get together to save this one . 
However , I did n't seen any evidence -LRB- from your post , at least -RRB- that the three speakers agreed on anything . 
Ehrenreich spoke on class , Friedman spoke on the environment , and Singletary spoke on personal responsibility for personal finances . 
Either you misrepresented their talks -LRB- and Ehrenreich 's comments at the beginning seem to indicate that -RRB- or else they just gave three separate and unrelated speeches and went home . 
I read `` Your money or your life '' years ago and followed its advice as best I could . 
It was a precursor to Ms. Singletary . 
We paid off all credit cards and mortgage . 
We pay any credit card charges monthly . 
I invested in tax-free municipal bonds over the years . 
The last one will mature when I 'm 91 . 
They can not be sold right now for par value but if I hold them until maturity , I get all my money back plus the interest collected tax-free over the years . 
Few municipal bonds default and usually they are insured . 
They are liquid if the need for money arises . 
I recommend municipal bonds . 
Ms. Ehrenreich made the point that credit keeps wages low because people live on future wages . 
If we stopped much of our frivolous consuming and refused to use credit , as Ms. Singletary suggests , employers will have to raise wages to create a cash consumer . 
Mr. Friedman points toward the pain of change necessary to develop the true Green Revolution he endorses . 
Governments are slow to change laws to encourage innovation in alternative energy , etc. . 
Can consumer action buying the limited green products available in most industries make a difference ? 
Again , it 's the consumers choice . 
Ms. Singletary 's eloquent summation of how much we already have available to us even with low incomes if we buy necessities first is a stab at defining `` Enough . '' 
News of multimillion dollar CEO annual salaries discourage limiting one 's own concept of `` enough . '' 
But financial freedom must come from individual commitment to escape the work & spend treadmill . 
