Deepwater Horizon worker claims oil rig leaking weeks before explosion Oil worker told the BBC 's Panorama program that both BP and Transocean , who owned the rig , were informed of the leak Monday 21 June 2010 09.18 BST An oil worker on the Deepwater Horizon rig said that it was leaking weeks before it exploded . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP An oil worker who survived the BP Deepwater Horizon explosion has claimed that the oil rig 's safety equipment was leaking several weeks before it exploded , triggering the huge spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Tyrone Benton says that he spotted a leak on the rig 's Blowout Preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- , the device that is meant to shut the well down if there is an accident . 
He told the BBC 's Panorama program that both BP and Transocean , who owned the rig , were informed of the leak , and the faulty part a control pod was switched off rather than being repaired . 
`` We saw a leak on the pod -LRB- and -RRB- we informed the company , '' Benton told the program , which will be broadcast at 8.30 pm tonight . 
`` They have a control room where they could turn off that pod and turn on the other one , so that they do n't have to stop production . '' 
Benton added that he was unsure whether the leaking control pod had been turned back on again before a huge gas explosion ripped through the rig on 20 April , killing 11 workers . 
The failure of the BOP was one key factor that led to the ongoing environmental disaster . 
The BOP is designed to clamp the well tightly shut , using cutting equipment to slice through the casing , but on 20 April it did not engage . 
After the explosion , BP sent robot submarines down to the seabed to try to trigger the BOP , but failed . 
The company has already admitted to a Congressional committee that the robots discovered a leak in the BOP 's hydraulic systems , which meant they could not generate enough force for its giant shears to cut through the pipe . 
Last week , BP chief executive Tony Hayward repeatedly cited the BOP as a major cause of the disaster , saying it was `` not as failsafe '' as BP had been told . 
Benton 's revelations will pile even more pressure on BP , at a time when its minority party in the leaking well is refusing to pay its share of the costs . 
Anadarko Petroleum Corporation argues that BP was `` grossly negligent '' or guilty of `` willful misconduct '' in the way it drilled the Macondo prospect , which some workers described as a `` nightmare well '' . 
Last week the Congressional committee accused BP of taking `` risky '' decisions to save time and money . 
And in another development , BP has been accused of lying after internal documents showed that it has estimated that the leak could reach 100,000 barrels a day , much higher than its public forecasts . 
The cost of the clean-up operation has now broken through the $ 2bn -LRB- # 1.3 bn -RRB- mark , BP told the City this morning . 
That is just a fraction of the total bill , though , with BP already committed to putting $ 20bn into an escrow account to cover compensation claims . 
That will not cap its liabilities , though , and there are suggestions that BP is now looking to raise $ 50bn . 
The company has said it will sell off some of its assets . 
This has raised concerns in several countries , including Russia , where the TNK-BP joint venture generates around a quarter of BP 's global production . 
Hayward is to fly to Russia to assure the Kremlin that BP can survive the oil spill disaster , the Financial Times reported today . 
BP 's chief executive took the decision to meet Russian president Dmitry Medvedev in the next few weeks following a weekend board meeting , and after Medvedev warned that the catastrophe could lead to BP 's `` annihilation '' . 
BP continues to insist that it will clean up the spill and pay `` all legitimate claims '' , and rejected Anadarko 's claims . 
`` These allegations will neither distract the company 's focus on stopping the leak nor alter our commitment to restore the Gulf coast , '' said Hayward . 
`` Other parties besides BP may be responsible for costs and liabilities arising from the oil spill , and we expect those parties to live up to their obligations . '' 
Shares in BP fell by more than 3 % this morning to 345p , making it the biggest faller on the FTSE 100 . 
Swiss bank UBS warned shareholders that it did not expect the company to resume paying dividends until 2012 . 
Last week it agreed to cancel payments for the rest of this year , but UBS believes that the cost of the Deepwater spill means a longer suspension is inevitable . 
City sources believe that BP may have to sell its operations in the North Sea as part of its drive to cut spending and raise funds . 
