The US used chemical weapons in Iraq - and then lied about it Now we know napalm and phosphorus bombs have been dropped on Iraqis , why have the hawks failed to speak out ? 
Did US troops use chemical weapons in Falluja ? 
The answer is yes . 
The proof is not to be found in the documentary broadcast on Italian TV last week , which has generated gigabytes of hype on the internet . 
It 's a turkey , whose evidence that white phosphorus was fired at Iraqi troops is flimsy and circumstantial . 
But the bloggers debating it found the smoking gun . 
The first account they unearthed in a magazine published by the US army . 
In the March 2005 edition of Field Artillery , officers from the 2nd Infantry 's fire support element boast about their role in the attack on Falluja in November last year : `` White Phosphorous . 
WP proved to be an effective and versatile munition . 
We used it for screening missions at two breeches and , later in the fight , as a potent psychological weapon against the insurgents in trench lines and spider holes when we could not get effects on them with HE -LRB- high explosive -RRB- . 
We fired ` shake and bake ' missions at the insurgents , using WP to flush them out and HE to take them out . '' 
The second , in California 's North County Times , was by a reporter embedded with the marines in the April 2004 siege of Falluja . '' 
` Gun up ! ' 
Millikin yelled ... grabbing a white phosphorus round from a nearby ammo can and holding it over the tube . 
Bogert yelled , as Millikin dropped it . 
The boom kicked dust around the pit as they ran through the drill again and again , sending a mixture of burning white phosphorus and high explosives they call ` shake 'n' bake ' into ... buildings where insurgents have been spotted all week . '' 
White phosphorus is not listed in the schedules of the Chemical Weapons Convention . 
It can be legally used as a flare to illuminate the battlefield , or to produce smoke to hide troop movements from the enemy . 
Like other unlisted substances , it may be deployed for `` Military purposes ... not dependent on the use of the toxic properties of chemicals as a method of warfare '' . 
But it becomes a chemical weapon as soon as it is used directly against people . 
A chemical weapon can be `` any chemical which through its chemical action on life processes can cause death , temporary incapacitation or permanent harm '' . 
White phosphorus is fat-soluble and burns spontaneously on contact with the air . 
According to globalsecurity.org : `` The burns usually are multiple , deep , and variable in size . 
The solid in the eye produces severe injury . 
The particles continue to burn unless deprived of atmospheric oxygen ... If service members are hit by pieces of white phosphorus , it could burn right down to the bone . '' 
As it oxidises , it produces smoke composed of phosphorus pentoxide . 
According to the standard US industrial safety sheet , the smoke `` releases heat on contact with moisture and will burn mucous surfaces ... Contact ... can cause severe eye burns and permanent damage . '' 
Until last week , the US state department maintained that US forces used white phosphorus shells `` very sparingly in Fallujah , for illumination purposes '' . 
They were fired `` to illuminate enemy positions at night , not at enemy fighters '' . 
Confronted with the new evidence , on Thursday it changed its position . 
`` We have learned that some of the information we were provided ... is incorrect . 
White phosphorous shells , which produce smoke , were used in Fallujah not for illumination but for screening purposes , ie obscuring troop movements and , according to ... Field Artillery magazine , ` as a potent psychological weapon against the insurgents in trench lines and spider holes ... ' The article states that US forces used white phosphorus rounds to flush out enemy fighters so that they could then be killed with high explosive rounds . '' 
The US government , in other words , appears to admit that white phosphorus was used in Falluja as a chemical weapon . 
The invaders have been forced into a similar climbdown over the use of napalm in Iraq . 
In December 2004 , the Labor MP Alice Mahon asked the British armed forces minister Adam Ingram `` whether napalm or a similar substance has been used by the coalition in Iraq -LRB- a -RRB- during and -LRB- b -RRB- since the war '' . 
`` No napalm , '' the minister replied , `` has been used by coalition forces in Iraq either during the war-fighting phase or since . '' 
This seemed odd to those who had been paying attention . 
There were widespread reports that in March 2003 US marines had dropped incendiary bombs around the bridges over the Tigris and the Saddam Canal on the way to Baghdad . 
The commander of Marine Air Group 11 admitted that `` We napalmed both those approaches '' . 
Embedded journalists reported that napalm was dropped at Safwan Hill on the border with Kuwait . 
In August 2003 the Pentagon confirmed that the marines had dropped `` mark 77 firebombs '' . 
Though the substance these contained was not napalm , its function , the Pentagon 's information sheet said , was `` remarkably similar '' . 
While napalm is made from petrol and polystyrene , the gel in the mark 77 is made from kerosene and polystyrene . 
I doubt it makes much difference to the people it lands on . 
So in January this year , the MP Harry Cohen refined Mahon 's question . 
He asked `` whether mark 77 firebombs have been used by coalition forces '' . 
The US , the minister replied , has `` confirmed to us that they have not used mark 77 firebombs , which are essentially napalm canisters , in Iraq at any time '' . 
The US government had lied to him . 
Mr Ingram had to retract his statements in a private letter to the MPs in June . 
We were told that the war with Iraq was necessary for two reasons . 
Saddam Hussein possessed biological and chemical weapons and might one day use them against another nation . 
And the Iraqi people needed to be liberated from his oppressive regime , which had , among its other crimes , used chemical weapons to kill them . 
Tony Blair , Colin Powell , William Shawcross , David Aaronovitch , Nick Cohen , Ann Clwyd and many others referred , in making their case , to Saddam 's gassing of the Kurds in Halabja in 1988 . 
They accused those who opposed the war of caring nothing for the welfare of the Iraqis . 
Given that they care so much , why has none of these hawks spoken out against the use of unconventional weapons by coalition forces ? 
Ann Clwyd , the Labor MP who turned from peace campaigner to chief apologist for an illegal war , is , as far as I can discover , the only one of these armchair warriors to engage with the issue . 
In May this year , she wrote to the Guardian to assure us that reports that a `` modern form of napalm '' has been used by US forces `` are completely without foundation . 
Coalition forces have not used napalm - either during operations in Falluja , or at any other time '' . 
How did she know ? 
The foreign office minister told her . 
Before the invasion , Clwyd traveled through Iraq to investigate Saddam 's crimes against his people . 
She told the Commons that what she found moved her to tears . 
After the invasion , she took the minister 's word at face value , when a 30-second search on the internet could have told her it was bunkum . 
It makes you wonder whether she really gave a damn about the people for whom she claimed to be campaigning . 
Saddam , facing a possible death sentence , is accused of mass murder , torture , false imprisonment and the use of chemical weapons . 
He is certainly guilty on all counts . 
So , it now seems , are those who overthrew him . 
