WILMINGTON , Delaware | Sun Oct 10 , 2010 11:42 am EDT WILMINGTON , Delaware -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Four attorneys from Texas , Louisiana and Florida were appointed on Friday to a committee to lead the hundreds of oil spill-related lawsuits against BP Plc and its partners , according to court documents . 
The committee will coordinate the activities of the 15-member plaintiffs ' steering committee that was also appointed on Friday by Judge Carl Barbier . 
Hundreds of lawsuits have been brought by fishermen , restaurant owners , hotels and injured workers stemming from the April explosion of the Deepwater Horizon rig , which set off the biggest oil spill in U.S. history . 
A federal judicial panel sent most of the spill-related lawsuits from around the country to Barbier , a federal judge based in New Orleans . 
The executive panel is made up of Jim Roy and Steve Herman , Louisiana lawyers who had already have been acting as the plaintiffs ' co-liaison counsel , which can be a largely administrative role coordinating with the court . 
Joining them will be Texas attorney Scott Summy of the Baron and Budd law firm based in Dallas and Brian Barr of Levin Papantonio Thomas Mitchell Rafferty & Proctor , which is based in Pensacola , Florida . 
The 15-member steering committee includes Elizabeth Cabraser , a California attorney who led the fight against Exxon over the company 's Valdez spill in Alaska . 
She is also playing a lead role in lawsuits against Toyota Motor Corp over claims its cars raced out of control . 
The committee also includes Mike Espy , the Agriculture Secretary for former U.S. President Bill Clinton . 
Espy is now a Mississippi lawyer . 
A seat on the committee gives the lawyer the power to shape the direction of the case as well as command a larger slice of the settlement . 
Attorneys left off the committee essentially lose control of the lawsuits they have filed against BP and others . 
More than 100 attorneys applied for the steering committee , and several notable applicants were excluded . 
David Boies , who represented Al Gore before the U.S. Supreme Court in the case that decided the disputed 2000 presidential election , was not appointed . 
Nor were heavyweights among plaintiffs attorneys such as Mark Lanier , a Texas attorney , or Joseph Rice of the Motley Rice law firm in South Carolina . 
The steering committee also excluded a group of mostly Texas attorneys who dubbed themselves the `` Deepwater Horizon Casualty Coalition '' that represented most of the workers who were injured or killed in the rig explosion . 
The coalition clashed with other plaintiffs ' attorneys by pushing for an aggressive schedule that included trials on key issues in March . 
The judge eventually set February 2012 for trying the main issues in the consolidated lawsuits , including how to parse blame for the spill among BP and its partners in the well . 
The case in U.S. District Court , Eastern District of Louisiana is In re Oil Spill by the Oil Rig `` Deepwater Horizon '' in the Gulf of Mexico April 20 , 2010 , No. 10-MDL-2179 . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
