cents Company pins hope on ` static kill ' operation after delay cents Success of attempt crucial to Obama and Democrats The Obama administration has come under attack for sanctioning use of chemical dispersants to break up the oil slick . 
Photograph : Charlie Riedel\/AP BP was poised to begin the final preparations for permanently plugging its leaking well in the Gulf of Mexico yesterday , 105 days after the gusher put the future of one of the world 's biggest oil companies and an entire region in jeopardy . 
A last-minute hitch a small leak of hydraulic fluid in a control panel delayed the start of a set of tests designed to gauge the condition of the well . 
Scott Dean , a BP spokesman , said the test would now get under way after repairs to the control panel on the capping stack on top of the well . 
It is hoped this will happen this morning . 
But even with an end to the crisis in sight , there were signs of a split between BP and the Obama administration last night about how and when the well will eventually be put to death . 
Kent Wells , BP 's senior vice-president , suggested the so-called static kill during which heavy mud will be slowly pumped into the top of the well could permanently plug the gusher . 
That runs counter to the conventional wisdom of the last three months that a relief well still weeks from completion was the only total solution . 
`` We want to end up with cement in the bottom of the hole , '' he said . 
`` Whether that comes from the top or whether it comes from the relief well , those will be decisions made along the way . '' 
He said a relief well might be used merely as `` confirmation '' that the well was dead . 
Thad Allen , the Coast Guard admiral in charge of the administration 's response , disagreed . 
`` I do n't think we can see this as the end-all and be-all until we get the relief wells done , '' he said . 
Allen was more guarded about the prospects for static kill , saying it could take up to 60 hours to complete the procedure . 
Engineers hope to begin pumping heavy drilling mud into the well after running a series of pressure tests . 
No new oil has entered the Gulf since 15 July , when BP put in a temporary cap . 
But despite the prospect of a permanent solution , there were fears that BP and the Obama administration were moving too quickly to declare the crisis over . 
`` We are terrified that there is going to be this ` mission accomplished ' moment , '' said Aaron Viles , campaign director of the Gulf Restoration Network , in a reference to George Bush 's notorious declaration of victory in Iraq in May 2003 . 
`` There is a tremendous pressure to move on here , on all these under-resourced federal agencies and BP clearly also has an incentive . '' 
Recent reports have suggested the environmental damage done by the 5m barrels of oil that entered the Gulf has been exaggerated , or that the ocean surface was now free of oil . 
Government scientists last night put out their highest estimate to date of the spill , saying the well had been gushing at a rate of 62,000 barrels per day at its peak . 
The figure exceeds BP 's early worst case scenario , of 60,000 barrels a day . 
Viles said : `` There are no magic elves . 
The oil is still there in large volumes . 
It is just dispersing and working its way through the ecosystem , and at each step of the process it is having an impact . '' 
He said he flew over the spill at the weekend . 
`` We saw significant amounts of oil , but there was no fleet mobilised to tackle that oil , '' he said . 
If tests go to plan , BP will begin pumping heavy drilling mud into the well from a nearby ship loaded with 8,000 barrels of the substance . 
Wells said the aim was to slowly force the oil back down into the reservoir by steadily pumping in the heavier mud . 
`` We 'll be carefully monitoring the pressures and the volumes . 
The team will be looking and making sure we do everything to get this well killed , if at all possible , '' he said . 
The success of this week 's operation will also be critical to Obama and his fellow Democrats , who are facing big losses in congressional elections in November . 
Since the explosion which killed 11 workers , the Obama administration has faced continued challenges to its claims to competence . 
BP is set to begin plugging its runaway well in the Gulf of Mexico after a last set of pressure tests . 
An experimental cap has stopped the flow of any fresh oil into the Gulf since 15 July , but engineers want to monitor the pressure and volume of oil in the well as they begin a procedure BP is calling a `` static kill '' . 
Once engineers give the go-ahead , crews will begin slowly pumping heavy drilling mud into the top of the well from a nearby ship , the Blue Dolphin , through a line connected to the well 's original blow-out preventer just below the cap . 
The mud would be pumped at low pressure and speed , as engineers hope to force the oil back down the well . 
If all goes well , engineers would then begin pumping in cement down the same line through the top of the well to seal it off . 
BP will decide whether to continue work on a relief well that had been designed to pump mud and cement into the Macondo from the bottom . 
