BP oil spill : final tests due before ` static kill ' Scientists confirm the Deepwater Horizon explosion , which released 5m barrels of oil , was the worst accidental spill ever as preparations are finalized to seal the ruptured well Tuesday 3 August 2010 09.05 BST Rigs drilling a relief well and preparing the static kill are seen at the site of the Deepwater Horizon well in the Gulf of Mexico Photograph : AFP\/Getty Images BP hopes to carry out a crucial test later today in final preparation for sealing the ruptured well in the Gulf of Mexico , which scientists agreed last night has been responsible for the worst accidental oil spill in history . 
Nearly 5m barrels of oil have gushed into the ocean since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded and sank in April , according to federal scientists . 
That makes the spill larger than the 3.3 m barrels released into Mexico 's Bay of Campeche when the Ixtoc I oil rig suffered a catastrophic blowout in 1979 . 
At its peak , the BP well was spewing 62,000 barrels a day , according to the federal team , which is higher than the original worst-case scenario of 60,000 . 
But by the time that BP was able to cap the well last month that figure had dropped to 53,000 a day . 
The new estimate of the size of the spill of a total of 4.9 m barrels means the potential penalty that BP faces under US law has ballooned . 
Under the Clean Water Act , BP faces a fine of $ 1,100 -LRB- # 691 -RRB- a barrel , or $ 4,300 a barrel if it is found that the spill was the result of gross negligence . 
As a result , BP could be fined either $ 5.4 bn or $ 21bn . 
The federal team reckon BP 's own containment efforts saved about 800,000 barrels which could be taken into account as a mitigating factor , reducing the fine to either $ 4.5 bn or $ 17.6 bn . 
The largest oil spill in history came at the end of the first Gulf war in 1991 when retreating Iraqi forces destroyed countless Kuwaiti wells , which resulted in an estimated 1.4 m to 1.5 m tonnes of oil being released into the Persian Gulf . 
That spill is not , of course , counted as accidental . 
In an attempt to finally close the Macondo well , BP engineers will today carry out a pressure test to see whether they can begin the so-called ` static kill ' procedure , which involves pumping heavy drilling mud into the well . 
If tests go to plan , BP will begin pumping mud into the well from a nearby ship loaded with 8,000 barrels of it . 
The plan is to slowly force the oil back down into the reservoir by steadily pumping in the heavier mud . 
If successful , BP will be able to either cement the well from the top , or wait until the relief wells which are due to be completed later this month have reached the correct depth and cement the well from the bottom . 
Preparations for the `` injectivity '' test which was delayed on Monday because of a small leak of hydraulic fluid in a control panel come as it emerged BP has sent a bill for $ 480m to one of its partners in the well . 
Japan 's Mitsui , which has a 10 % stake in the well through its unit Mitsui Oil Exploration , said overnight that it has received a bill for $ 480m from BP which it will `` carefully '' study but has yet to decide if it will pay any clean-up costs . 
Anadarko has flatly refused to accept any blame for the disaster . 
In June its chairman and chief executive , Jim Hackett , said BP 's actions probably amounted to `` gross negligence or wilful misconduct '' . 
