BP oil spill - the static kill explained Procedure pumps heavy mud and cement through blow-out preventer to force oil back down Macondo well Tuesday 3 August 2010 13.49 BST This BP image shows the original ` top kill ' procedure in operation , a maneuvre never before tried 5,000 ft underwater Photograph : Associated Press After three months of trying to stem the oil flow gushing from the Macondo well in the Gulf of Mexico and becoming responsible for the largest accidental oil spill in history , BP hopes its `` static kill '' method will seal it once and for all . 
Static kill is similar to the top kill method that BP attempted to use back in May . 
The procedure works by essentially pumping heavy mud and cement through the blow-out preventer and into the well . 
The idea being that the mud is so dense that it will suffocate the flow of oil , forcing it back down the well into the reservoir . 
-LRB- See graphic -RRB- . 
In a recent technical update , Kent Wells , BP senior vice-president , said the key difference between top kill and static kill is that during the top kill the well was flowing . 
`` We had to pump at tremendous rates and pressures to overcome that , '' he said . 
`` Today we have the well shut in , we do n't have that flow we have to overcome , so we can go at very slow rates , very little additional pressure above what the well shut-in pressure already is . 
`` It 's a much more controlled fashion . '' 
The heavy drilling mud , which weighs about 13lb per gallon , will be pumped to the seabed from a ship , and through a manifold a device that controls the mud flow before being forced down into the well through the blow-out preventer . 
If the mud successfully smothers the oil , BP could then pump concrete down into the well in a bid to seal it . 
The company will conduct an `` injectivity test '' this morning , and if successful could attempt the static kill this afternoon . 
Although , a spokesman warned that the procedure could take a few hours but might take `` much longer '' . 
Finally , sealing the well would represent an enormous relief for beleaguered BP executives . 
The flow of oil was first stemmed on 15 July , when the company fitted a cap to the blow-out preventer . 
The cap prevented leaking oil for the first time since 20 April , ending three months of attempted shut-off procedures . 
BP 's initial efforts to contain the spill focused on trapping and burning the oil on the water surface , while repairing the blow-out preventer , so it could shut off the flow . 
When this failed in late April , the company began to drill two relief wells , but warned they would take two to three months to become operational . 
While beginning this drilling , the company successfully stemmed one of the three leaks by attaching a valve to the end of the crippled drilling pipe , and after constructing three huge cofferdams or containment domes tried to lower one over the main source of the leak . 
In early May , the cofferdam failed due to a build up of crystallised gas , and as the oil began to wash ashore , BP focused instead on trying to capture some of the leaking oil , rather than stopping the flow all at once . 
At the end of May , the terms `` top kill '' and `` junk shot '' entered the worldwide vernacular , as BP tried to force heavy mud , and later golf balls and bits of tyre through the blow-out preventer . 
It did n't work , and in early June , BP turned to capping the well , with some success , before replacing the original cap with a tighter fitting one , sealing the well , in July . 
