Saudi King Abdullah expressed support for Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak . 
Saudi Arabia slammed protesters in Egypt on Saturday as `` infiltrators '' who seek to destabilize their country , while a a top Palestinian official affirmed `` solidarity '' with Egypt . 
An official in Iran called on Egypt to `` abide by the rightful demands of the nation '' and avoid violent reactions . 
And in Israel , a member of the Knesset , or parliament , described a recent conversation with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak that suggested that Mubarak had been expecting -- and preparing for -- the wave of unrest that has engulfed Egypt , the most populous Arab nation . 
Leaders across the Middle East were following events in Egypt with rapt attention Saturday , aided in that endeavor by saturation coverage on Arabic television networks such as Al-Jazeera . 
Many are on edge after protests in Algeria , Jordan and Yemen following unrest in Tunisia that forced that country 's president from office after two decades in power . 
In Saudi Arabia , the turmoil in Egypt rattled investors as the nation 's stock market lost over 6 % of its value Saturday . 
That said , Saudi King Abdullah called Mubarak and `` was reassured '' about the situation in Egypt , the state-run Saudi Press Agency reported . 
`` During the call , the king said , ` Egypt is a country of Arabism and Islam . 
No Arab and Muslim human being can bear that some infiltrators , in the name of freedom of expression , have infiltrated into the brotherly people of Egypt , to destabilize its security and stability and they have been exploited to spew out their hatred in destruction , intimidation , burning , looting and inciting a malicious sedition , ' '' the news agency said . 
Saudi Arabia `` strongly condemns '' the protest , it said . 
Mubarak assured the Saudi king `` that the situation is stable '' and that the protests `` are merely attempts of groups who do not want stability and security for the people of Egypt , but rather they seek to achieve strange and suspicious objectives . '' 
Mubarak added that Egypt will `` deter anyone who tries to exploit the freedom of -LRB- the -RRB- Egyptian people and will not allow anyone to lure those groups or use them to achieve suspicious and strange agendas , '' the news agency said . 
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas called Mubarak and `` affirmed his solidarity with Egypt and his commitment to its security and stability , '' according to the official Palestinian news agency , Wafa . 
In Iran , meanwhile , Foreign Ministry spokesman Ramin Mehmanparast said Egyptian authorities should respect the demonstrators . 
