2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Here are the latest developments as confirmed by CNN . 
-LRB- Update 3 p.m. Cairo , 8 a.m. ET -RRB- Turkey has sent two planes to Egypt to begin evacuating its citizens . 
-LRB- Update 2:45 p.m. Cairo , 7:45 a.m. ET -RRB- State-run Nile TV reports that Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak is currently visiting an armed services operations center to follow up on the security situation and in show of support . 
State television also reporting that Egypt 's military has arrested 450 people in various parts of Cairo . 
Egypt 's defense minister , Gen. Mohamad Tantawi , urged the public Sunday to obey the 4 p.m.-8 a.m. curfew -LRB- 9 a.m.-1 a.m. ET -RRB- Tantawi 's statement was carried by state television , and Tantawi was escorted to the network 's headquarters by red-helmeted troops in a convoy of sport-utility vehcies . 
Tantawi is among the Cabinet ministers that Mubarak announced he was replacing over the weekend . 
Also Sunday afternoon in Cairo , Al Jazeera `` strongly denounces '' the closure of its Cairo bureau by the Egyptian government , the news network said in a statement Sunday . 
Egypt 's information ministry announced the shutdown of Al Jazeera in Egypt and the withdrawal of its media license to operate in the country , state-run Nile TV reported Sunday . 
-LRB- Update 1:50 a.m. Cairo , 6:50 p.m. ET -RRB- - Roughly 1,000 prisoners have escaped from Prison Demu in Fayoum , southwest of Cairo , state-run Nile TV reported early Sunday . 
The inmates are `` on the streets causing chaos and families are scared , '' according to Nile TV . 
-LRB- Update 1:33 a.m. Cairo , 6:33 p.m. ET -RRB- - Seventeen people have been shot to death by Egyptian police , according to Reuters . 
Twelve people were killed trying to attack a police station in Beni Suef governorate , south of Cairo , Reuters reported . 
Another five people died in an attempted attack on a station in Nasr City , according to Reuters . 
-LRB- Update 1:16 a.m. Cairo , 6:16 p.m. ET -RRB- - CNN 's Ben Wedeman -LRB- #bencnn -RRB- tweeted that angry crowds dragged two looters to soldiers . 
The army is in control of the Egyptian Museum . 
The Egyptian Museum hosts one of the most extensive collections of Egyptian artifacts in the world , including the treasures of Tutankhamun . 
In addition to jewelry , sculptures and artwork , the museum boasts the Royal Mummy Room , which features the remains of several pharaohs . 
The artifacts were discovered around the turn of the 20th century . 
In Alexandria , CNN 's Nic Robertson -LRB- #NicRobertsonCNN -RRB- tweeted that gangs of machete - and iron-bar-wielding youths are stalking the deserted streets of Alexandria despite a curfew . 
-LRB- Update 12:53 a.m. Cairo , 5:53 p.m. ET -RRB- - In front of military tanks , people have gathered arm in arm outside the Egyptian Museum , protecting the famed building from looters . 
-LRB- Update 10:47 p.m. Cairo , 3:47 p.m. ET -RRB- - CNN 's Ben Wedeman -LRB- #bencnn -RRB- sent these tweets within the past 20 minutes : Neighborhood protection groups wearing white armbands in Cairo . 
People getting organised to end chaos and looting . 
NDP source says Omar Sulaiman VP appointment should be seen as first step for transfer of power . 
-LRB- Update 9:40 p.m. Cairo , 2:40 p.m. ET -RRB- -- National Security Adviser Tom Donilon on Saturday held a meeting with top officials to discuss the events in Egypt , White House spokesman Tommy Vietor said . 
Among the participants were Vice President Joe Biden , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Adm. Michael Mullen , chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . 
Israeli politician Benjamin Ben Eliezer says Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak recently told him `` this is not Beirut and not Tunis . '' 
In an interview with Israeli TV on Saturday , Eliezer said that Mubarak suggested that Egyptian authorities knew what was going on and had prepared the army in advance . 
In Alexandria , the scene at hospitals was chaotic , CNN 's Nic Robertson said in a message on Twitter . 
The facilities were short-staffed and injured protesters said they were not being treated quickly enough . 
-LRB- Update 8:19 p.m. Cairo , 1:19 p.m. ET -RRB- Cairo residents have given accounts of lawlessness after police withdraw from the streets . 
There were reports of looting and residents appealing to authorities for protection . 
CNN photojournalist Mary Rogers saw businesses looted in a downtown Cairo mall . 
She saw fast-food restaurants - KFC and Hardee 's - smashed and looted . 
People were carrying items from the mall . 
Journalist Ian Lee said vigilante groups in a middle-class Cairo neighborhood called Dohy were forming to protect personal property . 
He heard live fire , but saw no police presence . 
Soldiers were in the area but did not respond to the trouble , he said . 
CNN 's Fred Pleitgen tweeted : Illegal checkpoints popping up in Cairo . 
Just ran by a group of guys with guns and clubs . 
From Alexandria , CNN 's Nic Robertson tweeted : Without police , Alexandria residents fearful of looting , set up neighborhood watch , board shop windows . 
-LRB- Update 7:05 p.m. Cairo , 12:05 p.m. ET -RRB- CNN 's Ben Wedeman -LRB- #bencnn -RRB- sent this series of tweets within the past 20 minutes : Came to office by Cairo metro today . 
People talking about Mubarak as president IN THE PAST TENSE . 
For most I spoke , Mubarak is gone . 
Almost all police stations ransacked , arsenals looted . 
Suddenly weapons in the streets wielded by thugs . 
Where is the army ? 
Saw a truckload of riot police leaving Cairo this morning . 
they looked defeated and scared . 
people say `` they should be '' Widely believed hated #Egypt police force playing part in the chaos and looting . 
they 've abandoned their posts , in civilian clothes In residential areas of Cairo people setting up barricades to protect their streets . 
Wielding clubs , knives fearing looters . 
Man in Tahrir Square told me `` We have fired Mubarak . '' 
It 's clear from the streets that he 's no longer wanted . 
As violence in the streets continued in Egypt , U.S. President Barack Obama convened a meeting of his national security team on Saturday , the White House said in a statement . 
During the meeting , which lasted just more than an hour , Obama was updated on the situation in North Africa . 
He restated the U.S. focus on opposing violence , upholding universal rights , calling for restraint and supporting Egyptian efforts of political reform . 
Among the meeting 's participants were Vice President Joe Biden ; National Security Adviser Tom Donilon ; John Brennan , assistant to the president for homeland security and counterterrorism ; White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs and senior advisor David Plouffe . 
Egyptian military tanks surrounded Cairo 's Tahrir Square , where hundreds of protesters had gathered on Saturday . 
Demonstrators chanted `` Down with Mubarak '' and `` We are all Egyptians . '' 
The atmosphere was tense , but people gathered in the square were posing for pictures with tanks and shaking troops ' hands . 
Tahrir Square , located near many government buildings in the heart of downtown Cairo , has been a focal point for protesters . 
Nearby , police fired tear gas on protesters who were pushing toward the country 's Interior Ministry . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
