2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Here are the latest developments as confirmed by CNN . 
-LRB- Update 3 p.m. Cairo , 8 a.m. ET -RRB- Turkey has sent two planes to Egypt to begin evacuating its citizens . 
-LRB- Update 2:45 p.m. Cairo , 7:45 a.m. ET -RRB- State-run Nile TV reports that Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak is currently visiting an armed services operations center to follow up on the security situation and in show of support . 
State television also reporting that Egypt 's military has arrested 450 people in various parts of Cairo . 
Egypt 's defense minister , Gen. Mohamad Tantawi , urged the public Sunday to obey the 4 p.m.-8 a.m. curfew -LRB- 9 a.m.-1 a.m. ET -RRB- Tantawi 's statement was carried by state television , and Tantawi was escorted to the network 's headquarters by red-helmeted troops in a convoy of sport-utility vehcies . 
Tantawi is among the Cabinet ministers that Mubarak announced he was replacing over the weekend . 
Also Sunday afternoon in Cairo , Al Jazeera `` strongly denounces '' the closure of its Cairo bureau by the Egyptian government , the news network said in a statement Sunday . 
Egypt 's information ministry announced the shutdown of Al Jazeera in Egypt and the withdrawal of its media license to operate in the country , state-run Nile TV reported Sunday . 
-LRB- Update 1:50 a.m. Cairo , 6:50 p.m. ET -RRB- - Roughly 1,000 prisoners have escaped from Prison Demu in Fayoum , southwest of Cairo , state-run Nile TV reported early Sunday . 
The inmates are `` on the streets causing chaos and families are scared , '' according to Nile TV . 
-LRB- Update 1:33 a.m. Cairo , 6:33 p.m. ET -RRB- - Seventeen people have been shot to death by Egyptian police , according to Reuters . 
Twelve people were killed trying to attack a police station in Beni Suef governorate , south of Cairo , Reuters reported . 
Another five people died in an attempted attack on a station in Nasr City , according to Reuters . 
-LRB- Update 1:16 a.m. Cairo , 6:16 p.m. ET -RRB- - CNN 's Ben Wedeman -LRB- #bencnn -RRB- tweeted that angry crowds dragged two looters to soldiers . 
The army is in control of the Egyptian Museum . 
The Egyptian Museum hosts one of the most extensive collections of Egyptian artifacts in the world , including the treasures of Tutankhamun . 
In addition to jewelry , sculptures and artwork , the museum boasts the Royal Mummy Room , which features the remains of several pharaohs . 
The artifacts were discovered around the turn of the 20th century . 
In Alexandria , CNN 's Nic Robertson -LRB- #NicRobertsonCNN -RRB- tweeted that gangs of machete - and iron-bar-wielding youths are stalking the deserted streets of Alexandria despite a curfew . 
-LRB- Update 12:53 a.m. Cairo , 5:53 p.m. ET -RRB- - In front of military tanks , people have gathered arm in arm outside the Egyptian Museum , protecting the famed building from looters . 
-LRB- Update 10:47 p.m. Cairo , 3:47 p.m. ET -RRB- - CNN 's Ben Wedeman -LRB- #bencnn -RRB- sent these tweets within the past 20 minutes : Neighborhood protection groups wearing white armbands in Cairo . 
People getting organised to end chaos and looting . 
NDP source says Omar Sulaiman VP appointment should be seen as first step for transfer of power . 
-LRB- Update 9:40 p.m. Cairo , 2:40 p.m. ET -RRB- -- National Security Adviser Tom Donilon on Saturday held a meeting with top officials to discuss the events in Egypt , White House spokesman Tommy Vietor said . 
Among the participants were Vice President Joe Biden , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Adm. Michael Mullen , chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . 
Israeli politician Benjamin Ben Eliezer says Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak recently told him `` this is not Beirut and not Tunis . '' 
In an interview with Israeli TV on Saturday , Eliezer said that Mubarak suggested that Egyptian authorities knew what was going on and had prepared the army in advance . 
In Alexandria , the scene at hospitals was chaotic , CNN 's Nic Robertson said in a message on Twitter . 
The facilities were short-staffed and injured protesters said they were not being treated quickly enough . 
-LRB- Update 8:19 p.m. Cairo , 1:19 p.m. ET -RRB- Cairo residents have given accounts of lawlessness after police withdraw from the streets . 
There were reports of looting and residents appealing to authorities for protection . 
CNN photojournalist Mary Rogers saw businesses looted in a downtown Cairo mall . 
She saw fast-food restaurants - KFC and Hardee 's - smashed and looted . 
People were carrying items from the mall . 
Journalist Ian Lee said vigilante groups in a middle-class Cairo neighborhood called Dohy were forming to protect personal property . 
He heard live fire , but saw no police presence . 
Soldiers were in the area but did not respond to the trouble , he said . 
CNN 's Fred Pleitgen tweeted : Illegal checkpoints popping up in Cairo . 
Just ran by a group of guys with guns and clubs . 
From Alexandria , CNN 's Nic Robertson tweeted : Without police , Alexandria residents fearful of looting , set up neighborhood watch , board shop windows . 
-LRB- Update 7:05 p.m. Cairo , 12:05 p.m. ET -RRB- CNN 's Ben Wedeman -LRB- #bencnn -RRB- sent this series of tweets within the past 20 minutes : Came to office by Cairo metro today . 
People talking about Mubarak as president IN THE PAST TENSE . 
For most I spoke , Mubarak is gone . 
Almost all police stations ransacked , arsenals looted . 
Suddenly weapons in the streets wielded by thugs . 
Where is the army ? 
Saw a truckload of riot police leaving Cairo this morning . 
they looked defeated and scared . 
people say `` they should be '' Widely believed hated #Egypt police force playing part in the chaos and looting . 
they 've abandoned their posts , in civilian clothes In residential areas of Cairo people setting up barricades to protect their streets . 
Wielding clubs , knives fearing looters . 
Man in Tahrir Square told me `` We have fired Mubarak . '' 
It 's clear from the streets that he 's no longer wanted . 
-LRB- Update 6:55 p.m. Cairo , 11:55 a.m. ET -RRB- At least 31 people have been killed in protests in Alexandria , Egypt , hospital authorities told CNN Saturday . 
-LRB- Update 6:46 p.m. Cairo , 11:46 a.m. ET -RRB- Omar Suleiman , Egypt 's newly appointed deputy president , `` is someone that we know well and have worked closely with , '' State Department spokesman PJ Crowley told CNN on Saturday . 
-LRB- Update 6:19 p.m. Cairo , 11:19 a.m. ET -RRB- Egyptian Army Chief of Staff Sami Annan was huddling Saturday with five of his deputies after returning to Egypt from Washington , a senior Egyptian military official told CNN . 
Annan and other top officials were attending high-level talks with Pentagon officials when this week 's unrest broke out and those meetings were cut short Friday for the Egyptians to return to Cairo . 
-LRB- Update 6:07 Cairo , 11:07 ET -RRB- Ahmed Shafik , a minister from the cabinet that resigned today , has been appointed to form a new government , state TV reported . 
Shafik is Egypt 's former civil aviation minister . 
-LRB- Update 5:45 p.m. Cairo , 10:45 a.m. ET -RRB- At least five people have died from gunshot wounds near the Egyptian Interior Ministry , according to a physician at a triage center in a Cairo mosque . 
-LRB- Update 5:28 p.m. Cairo , 10:28 a.m. ET -RRB- Omar Suleiman , a former head of intelligence , has been appointed presidential deputy for Egyptian leader Hosni Mubarak , state TV reported . 
-LRB- Update 5:19 p.m. Cairo , 10:19 a.m. ET -RRB- The Egyptian military is urging people `` to stop the looting , chaos and the things that hurt Egypt . 
Protect the nation , protect Egypt , protect yourselves , '' according to state TV in Egypt . 
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas called Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak on Saturday , affirming his solidarity with Egypt , the official Palestinian news agency reported . 
British Foreign Secretary William Hague urged Mubarak on Saturday to seize the moment and carry through with reforms in Egypt . 
Egypt 's ruling party has accepted the resignation of Ahmed Ezz , who was one of its senior leaders and a close confidant of Mubarak 's son , according to state-run Nile TV . 
The Egyptian military blocked protesters who were trying to enter a central bank building , Al Arabiya is reporting . 
-LRB- Update 4:40 p.m. Cairo , 9:40 a.m ET -RRB- Police are firing on demonstrators at the Interior Ministry building in Cairo , journalist Ian Lee tells CNN . 
Lee said he was standing over a man who appeared to have been shot in the head . 
-LRB- Update 4:12 p.m. Cairo , 9:12 a.m. ET -RRB- Midyear examinations have been delayed in all of Egypt 's universities , state-run Nile TV reported on Saturday . 
-LRB- Update 4:03 p.m. Cairo , 9:03 a.m. ET -RRB- Hundreds , perhaps thousands , of protesters remain in front of the Information Ministry building on Corniche Al Nile in Cairo despite arrival of curfew and presence of army tanks , CNN 's Fred Pleitgen reports . 
-LRB- Update 3:59 p.m. in Cairo , 8:59 ET -RRB- A tweet from Ashraf Khalil in Cairo : Was in Tahrir 10 minutes after Mubarak gave his speech . 
Protestors though -LRB- t -RRB- it was comical . 
They were n't even mad , just laughed it off . 
-LRB- Update 3:39 p.m. Cairo , 8:39 ET -RRB- Delta Air Lines says its final flight out of Egypt has departed from Cairo and is scheduled to arrive at New York 's John F. Kennedy International Airport at 5:50 p.m. ET . 
`` We have suspended flights out of Egypt indefinitely , '' Delta spokesman Paul Skrbec said . 
More information is available at Delta 's website . 
-LRB- Update 3:31 p.m. Cairo , 8:31 a.m. ET -RRB- Thirty-eight people have died in the unrest in Egypt , including 10 members of the security forces , the state-run Nile TV reported Saturday . 
-LRB- Update 3:28 p.m. Cairo , 8:28 a.m. ET -RRB- The Iranian government urges Egypt to react peacefully to public demonstrations and respond constructively to demonstrators ' demands , Iran 's state-run Press TV reports . 
`` Iran expects Egyptian officials to listen to the voice of their Muslim people , respond to their rightful demands and refrain from exerting violence by security forces and police against an Islamic wave of awareness that has spread through the country in form of a popular movement , '' Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Ramin Mehmanparast said Saturday . 
Tehran attaches great importance to the fulfillment of public demands in Egypt , he said . 
`` Iran regards demonstrations by the Muslim people of this country as a justice-seeking movement in line with their national-religious demands . '' 
In 2009 , the Iranian government carried out a bloody crackdown on political demonstrations following the suspicious landslide re-election victory of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad . 
-LRB- Update 2:41 p.m. Cairo , 7:41 a.m. ET -RRB- The Egyptian cabinet has presented its resignation in response to President Hosni Mubarak 's request in his speech Saturday , Egypt 's state-run Nile TV is reporting . 
-LRB- Update 2:31 p.m. Cairo , 7:31 a.m. ET -RRB- A nighttime curfew from 4 p.m. Saturday to 8 a.m. Sunday local time has been imposed in the Egyptian cities of Cairo , Alexandria and Suez , state-run Nile TV reported . 
-LRB- Update 2:25 p.m Cairo , 7:25 a.m. ET -RRB- Saudi Arabia 's king told Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak that he stands with the Egyptian government . 
In the statement reported by the Saudi Press Agency , King Abdullah said in a Saturday phone call to Mubarak that he condemned people who have attempted `` to destabilize the nation 's security and stability . '' 
-LRB- Update 2:11 p.m. Cairo , 7:11 a.m. ET -RRB- The Egyptian government has announced that the Egyptian stock market and all banks will be closed Sunday , which usually is a normal business day in the Middle East . 
-LRB- Earlier -RRB- -- Cell phone service was apparently restored Saturday morning , a day after the internet went dark in many parts of the country and some text messaging and cell phone services were apparently blocked amid calls for intensified protests . 
-- Police fired tear gas on protesters who were pushing toward the country 's Interior Ministry in Cairo on Saturday . 
-- At least 2,000 protesters gathered in Raml Square in Alexandria on Saturday . 
There was no sign of police , and protests appeared peaceful . 
People chanted , `` No for Mubarak and his dynasty . '' 
-- They also said , `` The military and the people together will change the regime . '' 
Protesters smiled and shook hands with troops patrolling the area . 
One soldier cradled a baby and posed for a picture . 
-- Also on Saturday , Egyptian military tanks surrounded Cairo 's Tahrir Square , where a crowd of hundreds of protesters continue growing . 
Demonstrators chanted , `` Down with Mubarak '' and `` We are all Egyptians . '' 
The atmosphere was tense , but people gathered in the square were posing for pictures with tanks and shaking troops ' hands . 
-- Tahrir Square , located near many government buildings in the heart of downtown Cairo , has been a focal point for protesters . 
Nearby , police fired tear gas on protesters who were pushing toward the country 's Interior Ministry . 
-- Mubarak said in a speech Saturday morning that he asked the members of his government to resign so that he can form a new government , under his direction . 
-- The Egyptian leader , who has been president for 30 years , said , `` We have to be careful of anything that would allow chaos . '' 
He said his primary goal was to protect Egypt 's security , and he criticized looters and those who had set fires . 
-- Mubarak , 82 , said that he heard from demonstrators who wanted more job opportunities and lower prices on key goods . 
According to a translation , he said , `` I know all these things ... that the people are asking about it . 
I 've never been separated from it , and I work for it every day . '' 
Everybody worry about Israel and muslim brotherhood will harm Israel . 
if you do not remmber wwhat Israel did to the Arab nation about over 60 years ago ??!!! taken over a country and take some land from another country around . . 
killing hundred of thousand of man women and kids to be Israel . . 
this country built on the blood of these people before WW2 it was no Israel on the map . 
and now every body worry about it and they safty ... do you knew why Israelies are afraid because they took a land by force and they knew from inside them that way they will never will feel safe even if all arab will have a pease with them ... that is true read the history and you will knnew the fact ... There will always be fanatic muslins if they continue to be oppressed ! 
Fanatic religion people are result of oppression ! 
It is time for the powerful countries to take step and make Muburak go !!!! Obama where are you ???? Presidents can not only say nice words ... In The World the Honest & Sincere People in The Way of The God The Almighty Always Fights to Track & Save the Democracy . 
Democracy in Administration is the Only Policy for Freedom & Humanity . 
Our So Called CIVILIZE - WORLD Watching with Their Clean & Clear View the Insecure & Unstable Condition in Egypt . 
The Warn Possibility for Further Violence . 
The People the Leaders Relaxing Having Bed Tea Dinner . 
Inspiring Unfair and Corrupt Government with the Right of Inhumanity to Kill in a Blink the Hundreds to Thousands Innocents the Poor People . 
These Poor & Peace Loving Birds Flying for Freedom and Human Rights Only for The Foods the Cloths & The Shelters . 
The riots in Egypt organized by Obama , Iran and the Muslim Brotherhood Mohamed Mustafa ElBaradei the Iranian traitor , the Muslim Brotherhood and Iran want to rule Egypt . 
They want Repression of women , prohibition of education , high unemployment , radical Islam as Iran , Somalia and Afghanistan under Taliban rule ... As James Earl Carter supported Iranian Islamic Revolution of 1979 , so does today Barack Hussein Obama II ... SINCE 1979 USA HELP IRAN TO TAKE CONTROL IN Middle East ! 
What is the condition in Iran 1979 before the islamic Revolution and today in : Today if woman Wearing Jeans or Without a head covering in Iran she will be Punished ... ! 
All the Opposition parties in Egypt Agreed to the government 's changes and for new elections this year Except the Muslim Brotherhood ! 
After some months the Islamic extremists will take the POWER and people will be in worst situation then before ... Do the people in Iran , Somalia , Afghanistan want the Extremists to rule ? 
They 're out there . 
I ; ve seen them , so stop foaming at the mouth for this dictator to stay in power . 
Well they said that the Saudis are protesting now too . . 
Whoops !! There goes my cheap gas !! Time to fill up the tank !! yeah you know because Egypt really needs oppressive muslims in power rather than a democratic president -- it will do so much for womens rights and education there Where ARE the women ? 
There are some around but hardly any . 
Also , really Iran , criticizing violence against political protests ? 
That 's not at all the most hypocritical thing anyone 's ever done in the history of the world . 
Well there goes Saudi Arabia too . . 
Watch those gas prices hit 8 dollars a gallon by summertime ! 
yeah you know because Egypt really needs oppressive muslims in power rather than a democratic president it will do so much for womens rights and education there '' Have you guys even been paying attention ? 
They 're protesting because the government is NOT a democracy , it 's only a democracy in name . 
Mubarak 's party won with 95 % of the vote last election , the people on the streets are telling a very different story . 
Clearly you have neither an understanding of Egypt , nor of Islam . 
The situation is too dangerous . 
The women are being told by their husbands to stay home for their own safety . 
The situation is too serious now . 
Perhaps when you get over your clear bigotry , you will begin to develop some understanding of how a society where people geniunely care about each other works . 
Get out your cave and then talk I read nice comments and aaaaaaa not description . 
Any comments you have are just a reflection of your education , knowledge and intelligence about the world and religions . 
So my advice to you , or anyone is try to read more and choose reliable sources when reading then come leave comments . 
put down whatever drug you are having and think ! 
women were and still with men in the protests . 
they are in less numbers and staying away as the gov is acting more and more as a criminal mafia . . 
do you blame them ! 
no police protecting the people , people are protecting themselves from gov thugs that are terrorizing them and their homes . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
