January 29 , 2011 | By Shadi Hamid , Special to CNN With a mixture of anticipation and apprehension , the world is watching the largest pro-democracy protests in the history of Egypt and perhaps the Arab world . 
Egypt will never go back to what it was yesterday . 
Tomorrow , we will wake up to a new and different Egypt . 
What will that Egypt look like ? 
It is likely the beginning of the end for one of the longest serving authoritarian regimes -- as well as one of the most closely allied with the United States . 
The implications of such a shift , even if it does n't produce an outright revolution , are considerable . 
The regime of President Hosni Mubarak tried everything . 
It took the unprecedented step of blocking internet and cell phone service , stripping Egyptians of the ability to communicate with each other in the most basic ways . 
Police have fired on protesters with rubber bullets . 
They 've beaten them and sprayed tear gas . 
But , remarkably , the protests only seemed to grow . 
This is what a revolution looks like : Protestors overwhelming police ; everyday , ordinary citizens taking to the streets for the first time . 
It may get messier still . 
What happens if police forces or the army decide to use live ammunition ? 
What happens if protestors overtake a number of government buildings ? 
Already , the Egyptian regime has effectively lost control of parts of its own territory . 
It is worth remembering that revolutions do not happen overnight . 
The question , then , is whether protesters can sustain their momentum over a longer period of time . 
Similarly , can the Egyptian regime sustain weeks or months of protests that effectively shut down the country ? 
Tourism , one of Egypt 's most important industries , will suffer . 
Already , the stock market is in free fall . 
The streets of Cairo have become a war zone , complete with Molotov cocktails and broken barricades . 
Considering the costs , the regime has little choice but to move quickly to offer concessions to the people , in the form of more jobs , more freedoms and a more honest government . 
Along these lines , the Obama administration urged the Mubarak regime to take these events as an opportunity to institute long-needed reforms . 
This might seem a prudent course . 
But , as the protesters have made clear , they do n't want a better regime . 
They want a different regime . 
