2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Demonstrators chanted `` Down with Mubarak '' and `` We are all Egyptians . '' 
The atmosphere was tense , but people gathered in the square were posing for pictures with tanks and shaking troops ' hands . 
Tahrir Square , located near many government buildings in the heart of downtown Cairo , has been a focal point for protesters . 
Nearby , police fired tear gas on protesters who were pushing toward the country 's Interior Ministry . 
Victor Ireland ?? What may surprise you is a lot of the Americans that you would quickly and WRONGLY dismiss as unwitting idiots may agree with one or possibly two of your points but then we also know that people like you have an agenda and are n't smart enough to look at the big picture . 
Try to get beyond your own hatred so you can understand things such as , Strategic importance and trusting that some people can take care of themselves like we are witnessing right now . 
Just tired of policing the world . 
We need to get out of these other countries and let them fix thier own problems . 
This will reduce military spending . 
If we were ` nt spending so much over there we could take care of our own problems . 
Why would you say `` just saying '' when you just said it ? 
January 29 , 2011 at 3:17 pm | Report abuse | @huh , it 's a phrase many people use , and it is very handy , just saying . 
January 30 , 2011 at 10:18 am | Report abuse | No tony , there is only one of us . 
The other is a clown trying to be funny . 
At least , my posts are pertinent . 
January 30 , 2011 at 9:47 am | Report abuse | January 30 , 2011 at 10:27 am | Report abuse | @RUFFNUTT ... `` stop the NWO '' you say ? 
How can you stop something from happening , when it 's already happened ? 
The entire worlds economy is rule by one single foreign bank that directs the worlds individual federal reserves and central banks , including those located here . 
Everyone would know about the Bank for International Settlements -LRB- what they call themselves nowadays -RRB- if only even one of our -LRB- D -RRB- or -LRB- R -RRB- administrations would audit the federal reserve\/central banks here , or allow an independant audit . 
But they never have , and probably never will . 
Int ' l borders fall for profit , but not for people . 
They keep the people divided and rob them daily . 
The entire worlds financial structure is one big worldwide ponzi scheme . 
And that 's a fack , jack ! 
he he @Mmmmm ... it helps a conversation to get somewhere if you would identify who `` this man that took athe blue pill '' is . 
If you are referring to me , I knew of these things long before hereinreality.com spoke of a `` blue pill '' . 
Where did you first hear of the B.I.S. and the NWO ? 
Probably from that crackpot Alex Jones or his chubby buddy . 
@Mmmmm , well then , you are certainly middle class . 
Thank you for sharing your self analysis . 
The tanks rolling as protestors stand arm-in-arm in front of them reminds me of when Rachel Corrie did this in front of Israeli bulldozers . 
Rest in peace Rachel . 
I will never forget you . 
what Egypt has now is `` unacceptable '' you say ? 
It 's been this way for decades ! 
-LRB- their government -RRB- with full support of our government . 
Over 2 billion dollars in `` aid '' per year . 
Egypt is a very wealthy nation . 
Their minimum wage is higher than our own ! 
The funding of Egypt 's government has not been for humanitarian reasons , obviously . 
Egypt 's citizens are fed yp with their own government being in cahoots with whatt their holy book , the Koran , describes as infifels whom Allah has `` cursed '' . 
The Koran commands them to `` slay them and drive them from the land '' ... NOT to accept bribe money from them . 
The Koran identifies Mubarek , who accepts bribes from ` the infidels ' as a `` Renegade '' who must be dealt with harshly . 
Egypt 's citzenry are n't protesting and demanding freedoms like ours , they are going after the Renegade Muslim leaders who have been decieving them for profit . 
Who can guarantee Egypt will be better after Mubarak has gone ? 
The riots in Egypt organized by Obama , Iran and the Muslim Brotherhood Mohamed Mustafa ElBaradei the Iranian traitor , the Muslim Brotherhood and Iran want to rule Egypt . 
They want Repression of women , prohibition of education , high unemployment , radical Islam as Iran , Somalia and Afghanistan under Taliban rule ... As James Earl Carter supported Iranian Islamic Revolution of 1979 , so does today Barack Hussein Obama II ... SINCE 1979 USA HELP IRAN TO TAKE CONTROL IN Middle East ! 
What is the condition in Iran 1979 before the islamic Revolution and today in : Today if woman Wearing Jeans or Without a head covering in Iran she will be Punished ... ! 
All the Opposition parties in Egypt Agreed to the government 's changes and for new elections this year Except the Muslim Brotherhood ! 
After some months the Islamic extremists will take the POWER and people will be in worst situation then before ... Do the people in Iran , Somalia , Afghanistan want the Extremists to rule ? 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
