SIRTE , Libya | Thu Oct 20 , 2011 6:31 pm EDT SIRTE , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Disturbing images of a blood-stained and shaken Muammar Gaddafi being dragged around by angry fighters quickly circulated around the world after the Libyan dictator 's dramatic death near his home town of Sirte . 
The exact circumstances of his demise are still unclear with conflicting accounts of his death . 
But the footage of the last chaotic moments of Gaddafi 's life offered some clues into what happened . 
Gaddafi was still alive when he was captured near Sirte . 
In the video , filmed by a bystander in the crowd and later aired on television , Gaddafi is shown dazed and wounded being dragged off a vehicle 's bonnet and pulled to the ground by his hair . 
`` Keep him alive , keep him alive ! '' 
Gaddafi then goes out of view and gunshots ring out . 
`` They captured him alive and while he was being taken away , they beat him and then they killed him , '' one senior source in the NTC told Reuters . 
`` He might have been resisting . '' 
In what appeared to contradict the events depicted in the video , Libya 's ruling National Transitional Council said Gaddafi was killed when a gunfight broke out after his capture between his supporters and government fighters . 
He died from a bullet wound to the head , the prime minister said . 
The NTC said no order had been given to kill him . 
Gaddafi called the rebels who rose up against his 42 years of one-man rule `` rats , '' but in the end it appeared that it was he who was captured cowering in a drainage pipe full of rubbish and filth . 
`` He called us rats , but look where we found him , '' said Ahmed Al Sahati , a 27-year-old government fighter , standing next to two stinking drainage pipes under a six-lane highway near Sirte . 
On the ground , government fighters described scenes of carnage as they told stories of Gaddafi 's final hours . 
Shortly before dawn prayers , Gaddafi , surrounded by a few dozen loyal bodyguards and accompanied by the head of his now non-existent army Abu Bakr Younis Jabr , broke out of the two-month siege of Sirte and made a break for the west . 
They did not get far . 
France said its aircraft struck military vehicles belonging to Gaddafi forces near Sirte at about 8:30 a.m. -LRB- 0630 GMT -RRB- , but said it was unsure whether the strikes had killed Gaddafi . 
A NATO official said the convoy was hit either by a French plane or a U.S. Predator drone . 
Two miles west of Sirte , 15 pick-up trucks mounted with machine guns lay burned out , smashed and smoldering next to an electricity substation 20 meters from the main road . 
They had clearly been hit by a force far beyond anything the motley army the former rebels has assembled during eight months of revolt to overthrow the once feared leader . 
There was no bomb crater , indicating the strike may have been carried out by a jet fighter . 
Inside the trucks still in their seats sat the charred skeletal remains of drivers and passengers killed instantly by the strike . 
Other bodies lay mutilated and contorted strewn across the grass . 
Some 50 bodies in all . 
Mansour Daou , leader of Gaddafi 's personal bodyguards , was with the former strongman shortly before his end . 
He told al Arabiya television that after the air strike the survivors had `` split into groups and each group went its own way . '' 
`` I was with Gaddafi and Abu Bakr Younis Jabr and about four volunteer soldiers . '' 
Daou said he had not witnessed his leader 's death because he had fallen unconscious after being wounded in the back by a shell explosion . 
Fighters on the ground said Gaddafi and a handful of his men appeared to have run through a stand of trees and taken refuge in the two drainage pipes . 
`` At first we fired at them with anti-aircraft guns , but it was no use , '' said Salem Bakeer , while being feted by his comrades near the road . 
`` Then we went in on foot . 
`` One of Gaddafi 's men came out waving his rifle in the air and shouting surrender , but as soon as he saw my face he started shooting at me , '' he told Reuters . 
`` Then I think Gaddafi must have told them to stop . 
` My master is here , my master is here ' , he said , ` Muammar Gaddafi is here and he is wounded ' , '' said Bakeer . 
`` We went in and brought Gaddafi out . 
He was saying ` what 's wrong ? 
What 's going on ? ' . 
Then we took him and put him in the car , '' Bakeer said . 
At the time of his capture , Gaddafi was already wounded with gunshots to his leg and to his back , Bakeer said . 
Other government fighters who said they took part in Gaddafi 's capture , separately confirmed Bakeer 's version of events , though one said the man who ruled Libya for 42 years was shot and wounded at the last minute by one of his own men . 
`` One of Muammar Gaddafi 's guards shot him in the chest , '' said Omran Jouma Shawan . 
There were also other versions of events . 
NTC official Abdel Majid Mlegta told Reuters Gaddafi had been finally cornered in a compound in Sirte after hours of fighting , and wounded in a gun battle with NTC forces . 
He said Gaddafi kept repeating `` What is the matter ? 
What 's going on ? 
What do you want ? '' 
and resisted as NTC fighters seized him . 
He added that Gaddafi died of his wounds as he was being transported in an ambulance . 
`` He was bleeding from his stomach . 
It took a long time to transport him . 
He bled to death -LRB- in the ambulance -RRB- , '' he said . 
Another NTC official , speaking to Reuters anonymously , gave a violent account of Gaddafi 's death : `` They -LRB- NTC fighters -RRB- beat him very harshly and then they killed him . 
This is a war . '' 
Some video footage showed what appeared to be Gaddafi 's lifeless body being loaded into an ambulance in Sirte . 
One of the fighters who said he took part in the capture brandished a heavily engraved golden pistol he said he had taken from Gaddafi . 
Fallen electricity cables partially covered the entrance to the pipes and the bodies of three men , apparently Gaddafi bodyguards lay at the entrance to one end , one in shorts probably due to a bandaged wound on his leg . 
Four more bodies lay at the other end of the pipes . 
All black men , one had his brains blown out , another man had been decapitated , his dreadlocked head lying beside his torso . 
Army chief Jabr was also captured alive , Bakeer said . 
NTC officials later announced he was dead . 
Joyous government fighters fired their weapons in the air , shouted `` Allahu Akbar '' and posed for pictures . 
Others wrote graffiti on the concrete parapets of the highway . 
One said simply : `` Gaddafi was captured here . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Could n't have happened to a more repugnant piece of scum . 
He ended up in a way similar to one of his kindred spirits , Benito Mussolini ! 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
