LONDON | Thu Oct 20 , 2011 6:51 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Jockeying for power among Libya 's well-armed and fractious new leadership may intensify after the death of Muammar Gaddafi , an anxious and , for many , joyous moment in a country hungry for stability and impatient to swap the bullet for the ballot box . 
The interim government will be determined to ensure that lingering pro-Gaddafi forces are prevented from launching any rearguard guerrilla insurgency from the countryside that could destabilize the north African OPEC member and its oil industry . 
Gaddafi 's death is expected to allow Libya to start earning money again by selling its oil on world markets as a more benign security environment allows oilfield staff to get back to work . 
But perhaps the most important test for the interim National Transitional Council will be to manage the enormous expectations of Libya 's 6 million people , now freed definitively from the fear that Gaddafi could ever reimpose his long strongman rule . 
`` There is now this massive expectation . 
Up to now they 've had an excuse that they are running a war . 
They do n't have that now ... Everything now has got to happen , '' John Hamilton , a Libya expert at Cross Border Information , told Reuters . 
`` That 's a hard task . 
They have to deliver for the people ... On the other hand , this may renew the honeymoon they enjoyed when Tripoli fell , if they can put a decent government together in a short time . '' 
The news of Gaddafi 's capture and killing came minutes after reports that his home town Sirte had fallen amid raids by NATO warplanes , extinguishing the last significant resistance by loyalist forces . 
The capture of Sirte and the death of Gaddafi means Libya 's ruling NTC should now begin the task of forging a new democratic system which it had said it would get under way after the city , built as a showpiece for Gaddafi 's rule , had fallen . 
An announcement that the country has achieved `` liberation '' is expected on Saturday , setting in motion a transition to democratic elections . 
Some fear instability may linger and unsettle that process . 
`` Gaddafi is now a martyr and thus can become the rallying point for irredentist or tribal violence -- perhaps not in the immediate future but in the medium-to-long term , '' said George Joffe , a north Africa expert at Cambridge University . 
`` The fact that NATO can be blamed for his death is worrying , in terms of regional support , and may undermine the legitimacy of the National Transitional Council . '' 
But the interim NTC authorities are also faced with a possibly more critical task , namely getting under control a clutch of anti-Gaddafi armed militias competing , so far peacefully , for ample share of funding and political representation in a post-Gaddafi Libya . 
Libya expert Alex Warren , of Frontier MEA , a Middle East and north Africa research and advisory firm , said the death of Gaddafi `` is clearly a momentous event and far more than just a symbolic one . '' 
But he added , of the NTC militias : `` These groups need to be either carefully disbanded or integrated into the armed forces ... Questions remain about who these militias answer to , how they manage their relationships with each other and what their demands are . '' 
Under rules drawn up by revolutionary forces who overthrew Gaddafi in September , the fall of Sirte will lead to an official declaration that Libya is liberated , which will set in motion a process toward democratic elections . 
On declaring liberation , the NTC will move its headquarters from Benghazi to Tripoli and form a transitional government within 30 days . 
A 200-member national conference is to be elected within 240 days , and this will appoint a prime minister a month later who will nominate his government . 
The national conference is to be given deadlines to oversee the drafting of a new constitution and the holding of elections for a parliament . 
Some worry that the politicking involved in forming a new government in the coming days may strain to the limit the alliance of convenience between provincial forces that constituted the armed opposition to Gaddafi . 
Now he is gone , the glue that held the alliance together may fade . 
Warren said it was not clear whether the current NTC chairman Mustafa Abdel Jalil , widely seen as the most widely supported politician in the NTC , would step down or not . 
`` In the current absence of any other organized political institutions , it is vital that there is leadership to oversee crucial elements of the transition , including the licensing of political parties , the organization of elections , and the disbanding or reintegration of militias , '' he said . 
In recent weeks Tripoli has seen an apparent competition for the title of top militia in the capital , where the many armed groups now exercising authority in the city portrayed themselves as the sole legitimate security force . 
U.S. Republican Senator John McCain called on the NTC during a visit to Libya last month to move quickly to get the armed groups under their control . 
`` This is an end of one era but the fight over the new government has started already , '' said Ali Abdullatif Ahmida , a Libyan political scientist at the University of New England . 
`` It all depends on how the NTC leadership heals the country and reconciles people ... or takes revenge and settles scores . 
That may be a dangerous road . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
