\* Companies made decisions to save money before spill \* Gulf spill result of management failures by firms , govt \* Causes systemic , another massive spill possible -LRB- Updates with BP comment , paragraph 19 -RRB- WASHINGTON , Jan 5 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP -LRB- BP . 
N -RRB- and its partners made a series of cost-cutting decisions that ultimately contributed to the oil spill that ravaged the Gulf of Mexico coast over the summer , the White House oil spill commission said on Wednesday . 
In its final report on causes of the largest offshore oil spill in U.S. history , the commission said BP and its collaborators on the doomed Macondo well had lacked a system to ensure their actions were safe . 
`` Whether purposeful or not , many of the decisions that BP , Halliburton , and Transocean made that increased the risk of the Macondo blowout clearly saved those companies significant time -LRB- and money -RRB- , '' the report said . 
Created by President Barack Obama in the midst of the BP spill , the panel is the first government-sanctioned group to wrap up its probe of the causes of the drilling disaster . 
Charged with guiding the future of offshore drilling , the commission will release its full review of the spill and its aftermath next week . 
Although the commission lacks authority to establish policy or punish companies , its conclusions could have a bearing on future criminal and civil cases relating to the spill . 
The findings contradict its initial report in November , which found no evidence that Macondo project workers cut corners to save money . 
-LRB- ID : nN08212171 -RRB- After receiving criticism for that finding , the panel sought to clarify those comments , saying it did not mean companies involved with the accident had never sacrificed safety to save money . 
-LRB- ID : nN09295607 -RRB- A chart by the commission was later leaked by the media detailing decisions made while drilling the Macondo well that saved time , but increased risks . 
-LRB- ID : nN24213109 -RRB- Eventually , the panel made the document public and the final report included a similar chart . 
The conclusions released so far align with many previous comments from the panel , as well as initial results of another major probe conducted by a scientific panel . 
-LRB- ID : nN16159282 -RRB- The commission 's report ultimately blamed management failures for the April 20 explosion that ruptured the Macondo well and unleased millions of barrels of oil into the Gulf . 
The commission also concluded the Gulf spill was not an isolated incident caused by `` rogue industry or government officials '' . 
`` The root causes are systemic and , absent significant reform in both industry practices and government policies , might well recur , '' the report said . 
The report outlines major missteps by BP ; by Halliburton -LRB- HAL . 
N -RRB- , which oversaw cementing for the Macondo well ; and by Transocean -LRB- RIG . 
N -RRB- , owner and operator of the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
BP is faulted for not using a `` cement bond log '' or another diagnostic tool to test stability of the cementing . 
The report said BP 's `` fundamental mistake '' was failure to exercise caution before relying on the cement as a barrier to the flow of oil and gas up the well . 
BP was also blasted for various decisions made as it attempted temporarily to abandon the Macondo well . 
BP 's decision to displace mud in the riser pipe before setting a cement plug or another barrier `` unnecessarily and substantially increased the risk of a blowout '' , the report said . 
BP said in a statement that it supports the commission 's efforts to determine the causes of the accident . 
`` BP is working with regulators and the industry to ensure that the lessons learned from Macondo lead to improvements in operations ... in deepwater drilling , '' the company said . 
The report reiterated the panel 's prior criticism of Halliburton 's cement job on the project . 
Halliburton documents strongly suggest the company may have pumped cement into the well before receiving any test data that indicated it would be stable , the report said . 
-LRB- ID : nN28101677 -RRB- Halliburton disputed the commission 's accusations about its cement testing . 
The company said in a statement that it had received test results showing its cement formula would be stable before carrying out the Macondo job . 
The commission `` selectively omitted information we provided to them , '' Halliburton said . 
Transocean and BP were chided for lacking an internal procedure for interpreting negative pressure tests , which workers on the Deepwater Horizon rig misread . 
In addition , Transocean failed to communicate to crew lessons learned from a similar incident on one of the company 's ' rigs that almost led to an accident in the North Sea four months before the Macondo accident . 
In response to the report , Transocean said the company 's workers were `` well trained '' and considered among the best in the business . 
The company also said that consistent with industry standards , the final procedures on the rig were directed by BP engineers . 
`` Based on the limited information made available to them , the Transocean crew took appropriate actions to gain control of the well , '' a Transocean spokesman said . 
The commission said U.S. government regulators lacked the authority , resources and expertise to prevent safety lapses . 
Since the spill , the Obama administration has restructured the federal offshore drilling regulator and implemented a raft of new regulations aimed at strengthening government oversight . 
