2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Continue they did , as the central government lost control of the coastal city of Banghazi , and protests continued in Tripoli . 
Though CNN has not yet been granted access to report on the ground , there were several reports of violence Monday . 
Protesters set a government building in Tripoli ablaze the day after ransacking the state TV headquarters , according to media accounts . 
In the capital , hundreds of pro-government protesters gathered to listen to a speaker in Green Square , an eyewitness said . 
Another group of protesters who tried to make their way to the square dispersed when confronted by security forces with tear gas . 
Crowds topped 50,000 people this weekend as demonstrators continue to express their frustration with the state 's budget bill . 
Gov. Scott Walker , however , is not retreating . 
The bill is vital and complaints that it is union-busting are a `` red herring , '' he said . 
Tom Morello , formerly Rage Against the Machine 's guitarist , has called Walker `` the Mubarak of the Midwest , '' likening the governor to the recently toppled Egyptian leader . 
Morello will perform solo for protesters Monday . 
The budget repair bill was proposed by Walker to address a $ 137 million shortfall through June 30 . 
It increases state workers ' contributions to their pensions and health insurance benefits , requires collective bargaining units to conduct annual votes to maintain certification and eliminates the right of unions to have dues deducted from worker paychecks . 
Fourteen Democratic state senators essentially boycotted the Legislature and went to Illinois to prevent a quorum from passing the bill . 
Walker has said powerful public employee unions are behind the blocking of the bill . 
It was one of the bloodiest 72 hours in recent memory , authorities said after 53 people , including four policeman , were killed in Ciudad Juarez , Mexico . 
It began Thursday when 14 people were killed . 
Twenty more were killed Friday - a state police investigator en route home , among them . 
Saturday brought 19 killings , including a patrolman killed by a driver whom he 'd just given a citation . 
He was shot 10 times in broad daylight . 
The violence was not exclusive to Ciudad Juarez , either . 
Mexico 's Public Security Secretariat reported that 13 taxi drivers were killed in Acapulco in a rash of violence that began Friday . 
Suspected drug traffickers are believed to be behind the violence in addition to setting cars ablaze and destroying street lights and security cameras . 
Among the casualties , a human head was discovered on a street and another body was found near a charred vehicle . 
i CA N'T BELEIVE THAT KADAFI KILLING HIS PEOPLE WITH AIR STRIKES HOW CAN UNITED NATION SEE THIS ? 
THE POEPLE NEED HELP ASAP There is no justification for Wisconsin taxpayers paying $ 57 for every $ 1 school teachers pay into their retirement account . 
That is absurd and the behavior of crazy people . 
To allow it to continue is insane . 
Retirement funds are subject to inflation , just like anyother fund . 
The concept of people living 30 to 40 years and paying into retirement is what Social Security Administration was founded on . 
Might as well stop paying interest on bank accounts and other investments . 
February 21 , 2011 at 7:18 pm | Report abuse | There is no justification for Wisconsin taxpayers paying $ 57 for every $ 1 school teachers pay into their retirement fund . 
That is absurd and the behavior of crazy people . 
To allow it to continue is insane . 
Sorry about the double post . 
The first was n't displayed yet so I re-posted . 
@Jim Briesle hi jim ! 
i dont think the money is at issue . 
i believe thier problem is having no other say in any benefits which would eliminate unions from getting dues just saying Only 53 dead in Juarez ? 
Spring break is coming up and the extreme tourist season is upon us . 
Maybe a little Matamoros stew for the revelers ? 
I had too many lazy teachers in my school years to think any significant change has come forth . 
They are the most spoiled profession with the exception of 10-20 % . 
A large number should be shipped to Mexico , and not return as per the mexican drug cartel . 
Retirement funding can be remedied through cyberspace extortion . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival in Merida , Mexico seems like they favor throwing candy instead of beads ! 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
