Get To Know Piers Morgan Tonight : Donny Deutsch Guest Hosts This evening `` Piers Morgan Tonight '' welcomes the return of Donny Deutsch , as the brand guru is back for a fourth stint as guest host Who is the man at the center of the latest uprising in the Middle East ? 
Piers Morgan talks to several people who can shed some light on who Moammer Gadhafi really is . 
Prince Sayyid al-Senussi and Jamie Smith gave their take on `` Piers Morgan Tonight '' Monday night . 
this guy is the biggest joke cnn has evey had all your good anchors and journlish were fired like stouffer this is why fox is eating cnn 's lunch and this goon to replace king i 'll admit king should 've been gone long ago but to get this morgan goon iwhat nut got him should go . 
Sayyid Idris is well positioned to play an important role in the formation of a new Libya that is based on democracy with the rich heritage of Al Senussi Family . 
Libyan state doesn ' t exist at the moment and the royal family could achieve a good job there . 
Piers , as a nice Brit , clearly believes that by inviting failing kings and queens -LRB- see previously Queen Noor -RRB- , he offers serious analysis on the Middle East current political events . 
He should certainly overcome his British style and try to be more open minded , constructive and democratic . 
This was a ridiculous show yesterday ! 
A forgotten monarch -LRB- Prince of Libya ? -RRB- 
commented on a crazy dictator ... Why have n't you told the truth about the land and property robbery of 1973 that you and your associates are guilty of `` receiving stolen goods '' Piers Morgan ? 
Erik J C Young UK Please , refresh my history memory ?! No , Seriously ; Please , I suffered severe brain trauma and have to learn everything all over again Somethings you say in your comment seem familiar , OK ? 
Your friends Michael Napier QC of Irwin Mitchell Solicitors , Simon Cowell , Sharon Osbourne all from the Woking area like you are ? 
All involved in a series of very serious crimes you thought would be erased by time never mind two children were murdered . . 
You do know what I am talking about . . 
`` nobody knows where the owner has gone '' is n't that the story put out when I was right on your doorstep . . 
but you and your associates thought outnumbering me and killing two of my children would frighten me away . . 
and where is my wife and daughter Netnapa and Mercedes ??? you marauding friends came to Bangkok and interfered with serving a pack of very evil lies to ruin my life My wife was very similar to the girl in the film `` The Bodyguard '' -LRB- do you suppose the film was about my wife and I ? -RRB- 
until your marauding friends the Sylvester-Shinawatra family totally corrupted her beliefs in me . . 
Piers Morgan are you also from a former WW2 gestapo family ? 
let 's find out where you really come from You kjnow your group of friends had me severely tortured in Bangkok , many of my friends killed , I had to watch seven of them die in front of my eyes all under 35 years old . . 
all so your group could keep property that is n't yours to keep . 
I had to do my best to protect her from these very bad people lurking around trying to get her into very very bad things people who think it is ok to steal other peoples property . . 
did you know I was shot at -LRB- with real guns -RRB- over 60 bullets . . 
The last gun fire was a hired hit man using a high velocity rifle similar to that used to kill my UnclePresident John F Kennedy . . 
did you know your friends did that to me Piers Morgan . . 
a truck driver accelerated to stop the bullet killing me . . 
Do you think the USA people think our family Young-Henry-Kennedy-Johnson are liars NO we are not liars Piers Morgan . . 
do you think the Kennedy family do n't know my cousin Leonard Frederick Johnson ? 
Of course they know us So you and your group hired someopne to assassinate me the same way as my Uncle John F Kennedy was killed in Dallas Texas but on Rama 3 Bangkok Thailand . 
That cement-mixer truck driver risked his life to save mine . . 
he saw the gun man aiming at me . 
Do you think it is a game to steal someone 's children and have people assassinated so your group can get very rich ? 
What do you think CNN readers and viewers think ? . . 
you knew who was terrorising me and planning to kill me and did nothing to stop them Do you know who the other grad father of my daughter is Piers ? 
He is The Sultan of Brunei ... what did you people tell Sir Cliff Richards Managing Director Malcom Smith about me . . 
He was a personal friend of mine Then there is the horrifc attack upon Rihanna . . 
did you know that happened after your group and their mafia found out I was very fond of Rihanna ? 
Just like it has happened to other girls they found out I cared about they got beaten up for liking me . . 
I 've cried for her many times . . 
Do you know what malcom Smith thinks of Simon Cowell ? 
He thinks he has been wrecking the music industry . . 
he is correct I heard that your group of peoplke decided I would not be allowed to see my wife or daughter for nine years . . 
who the hell do you think you are ??? your game of being the humiliating judges . . 
what an evil thing to do to a family Americans should remember there are people in this World selling Heroin who go to massive lengths to poison the names of those that oppose their trade . . 
what was President J F Kennedy doing about the Heroin trade when he was assasinated Colonel Gadhafi had his family wrecked he 's had children killed etc. . 
but he 's the man that led a bloodless coup . . 
Gadhafi the last frican leader to join the syndicate to lock Heroin out of Africa . . 
do you suppose the Heroin trade has had a hate campaign against Gadhafi since before Lockerbie Pam-Am flight 103 ? 
I DO In 1969 Gadhafi took control of Libya without loss of life ... perhaps the recent killings are his military killing the runners\/trouble makers who are satanists of the Heroin trade ? 
of course that is how the Heroin trade want it to look like it is too crazy suggesting it is them behind the problems . . 
The real concern is OBAMAGATE look into the origins of President Obama ... his ancestors may have been gestapo families that stole land and property ijn Indonesia then moved to Hawaii and did the same there . . 
maybe that is why Gadhafi does n't trust the USA yet again ? 
OBAMAGATE Gestapo families have a 3500 year history of inflicting suffering particularly upon the poor who will not join their mafia . . 
they then target the rich with poisonous stories . . 
why is President Obama not helping Libya remove the real problem and why is he removing more financial support of the poorest Americans . . 
he 's from a gestapo family that is why President Obama 's family made their wealth from killing and defrauding other people in Asia , he may even be related to the killing fields of Cambodia executioners -LRB- who were not the Khmer people -RRB- they were Id thieves , historically marauding catalonians . . 
`` Erik the Germans soldiers were very nice to us in Norway in WW2 but the Gestapo they were n't Germans they were monsters '' the words of Fredrikke Louisa Young a cousin by marriage of President J F Kennedy A cat has 9 lives . . 
is a catalonian has 9 IDs in their lifetime ... a cat burglar . . 
is the catalonians robbing houses ... War of The Worlds by H G Wells -LRB- a member of the English Royal Family using an authoring ID to remain anonymous -RRB- is a book warning about the marauding catalonians . . 
the Triffids is reference to their strategy they always attack with 3 of them against one of you . . 
is President Obama 's family in fact Catalonian ? 
I think this may be true I refer to Marauding catalonians as Dubouys -LRB- sounds like jewboy -RRB- Durian is a Thai fruit in English it means Satan 's Fruit that is why I call them Dubuoys ... but do n't prejudice every Catalonian some have become good people it is their Heroin-gangster-ID thief element that are the major problem for the world behind 80 % of the world 's terrorism using other people 's IDs Do you know where I come from ? 
The family of the best friend of Jesus Christ . . 
my ancestor was a man called Luke ... I do n't like satanism or corruption I can swing a chandalier around clockwise or anti-clockwise with my eyes . . 
but I can prove it . . 
I have commanded a lightening strike -LRB- hundreds of times in a night one time -RRB- and have many witnesses to these supernatural powers . . 
which is the power of Almighty God not Satan ... sounds crazy does n't it but it is true . . 
hundreds of people in Thailand have witnessed me doing these things in the past ... Indonesia was where a relative by marriage of his daughter to a cousin of President J F Kennedy had serious problems concerning his business and assets being sabotaged and stolen by ID thieves . 
Mr V A Fog who owned The Summatra Planation Compagne in Indonesia was having his bank accounts and valuables robbed as well as his land interests ... I believe the family of Fog and Henry suffered similar problems in Siam -LRB- today Thailand -RRB- and possibly Hawaii ... as well . . 
This part of the Kennedy relatives , the Fog family are of Danish descent . . 
The Kennedy-Henry family are relatives of King Henri of France circa 1003a . 
d. ... for years we have been persecuted by satanists . . 
hiding behind the IDs of other people How the gestapo mafia heroin network killed some people I knew in Thailand then later claimed it was all made up and not real . . 
it was real 150 young men killed in one day , all innocent ... This all connects into the Morgan-Cowell-Shinawatra-Napier-Winn-Osbourne land and property fraud by what started as a group called the Okcult in the 1970s 1000s have died due to their theft and greed . . 
including the killing of children ... this is why I despair to know where my wife and daughter have gone are they still alive ?? I do not know The UN Security Council can say what they want , but Muammar Gaddafi is not listening . 
If someone does not step in , he will wipe out the entire population . 
He said these mercenaries will go house to house to kill the protestors . 
He also said he is fighting for liberty . 
I see no liberty in his actions , only a murderous mind wishing to kill his citizens . 
Someone needs to remove him from power now and have him sent to the Hague . 
However , I doubt he will survive this as most of the country is against him . 
If Gadhafi was inclined kill his people he would have been doing this for years and he has n't been killing his people ithe past . 
However there are some very bad people in Libya who are not peaceful and these people are his targets due to the fact they have caused chaos and violence . 
They had the same situ \ tion for a while in Egypt and they killed the people who caused the problems this resulted in peaceful protesting and a conclusion free of total chaos I had an Aunt from Philadelphia called Helene , perhaps you are a relative Woking Police in the UK mentioned something they called The Pyrford Place Scam back in the 1980s . . 
I think Michael Napier QC sold Pyrford Place to Geri Halliwell who bought in good faith . 
However it was not his property to sell and he already knew it formed part of my inheritance but never contacted me about it nor did I received any of the proceeds It is not a civil matter it is a series of crimes that has now implicated Geri Halliwell and others so she needs to be questioned by the police along with Michael Napier QC , Piers Morgan , Simon Cowell , John Berisford aka Ken Winn-Pope , and Sharon Osbourne all orginating from the Woking area Piers Morgans may have lived in Gloucester Rd Old Woking in the past when he had a different name As a result of this massive land property robbery and fraud , that may even be effecting Libya , Egypt and Tunisia is two of my children have been murdered , and my wiufe , Netnapa -LRB- her alias -RRB- disappeared over five years ago with my daughter , I do not know if they are still alive . . 
this is all connected to the OKcult group of Piers Morgan , Simon Cowell Michael Napier Sharon Osbourne and John Berisford -LRB- who keeps changing his ID -RRB- and Mr Sylvester aka Thaksin Shinawatra who has been dealing heroin for many many years . 
So will people please understand Gadhafi is not the bad man he does n't like Heroin dealers So they 've told 1000s of lies about me . . 
`` nobody knows where the owner of these properties is '' is one of their lies . . 
they knew it was my inheritance they are all liars . . 
they may have sold property to Sir Richard Branson which formed part of my inheritance So would the USA government please place extreme pressure on these people and their friend PM David Cameron and find out where my wife and daughter are being kept and explain to her I want to see them , I have never been convicted lawfully of any serious crime in my life . . 
they 've been telling her loads of lies ... which is why when all this trouble started in Thailand and she 'd been told a pack of lies she said on the phone in Thai about me `` not to kill him yet '' talking about me Irwin Mitchell Solicitors in London give me so little money out of my asset wealth I am only able to buy the basics to stay alive , can not fuel a car , can not go out for the evening , can not go and meet anyone I am trapped in a condition simiar to house arrest and I am not mad nor a criminal Thank you CNN for stopping others from blocking my right to publish the truth . . 
they have been stopping me publishing information on sites like your news site for years claiming I am mentally ill when I am not ill , they 've obstructed my right to have a Court of Protection Order removed which was a temporary arrngement for my divorce from my former second wife over five years ago . . 
but still they do not return my money they have been defrauding me an English firm of Solicitors called Irwin Mitchell Solicitors in London , they need to be arrested and my money returned I live in a very small house in Byfleet Surrey UK , most of my possessions at my previous home in Shamley Green stolen , but nothing belonging to my ex-wife was stolen only my possessions including a silver and gold beaker used at The Last Supper of Jesus Christ handed down through the family , it was a christening present to me from my scandinavian relatives My phone calls and emails have been blocked and interfered with , semi colons and brackets appear around phone numbers when I try to send text messages but other do not have these on their phones only me , my accounti is with vodaphone Now I remember where I have met Piers Morgan before he wasa friend of a man called Mark , a nephew of Mrs Irene Evans of Weybridge Surrey now deceased , who ended up in prison for fraud . 
Mark 's father Desmond was a con-man all his life ... I 'll remember Mraks family name in due course In their quest to destroy my name and my family and deprive me of love in my life , they had me physically tortured in Thailand as well as mentally tortured , they used 10,000 people there to claim I was so evil I was like Satan . . 
there were multiple attempts to kill me , meanwhile their solicitor friends in the UK Irwin Mitchell that includes Julia Lomas formerly Julian Sylvester told everyone I was a convicted pedophile , an outrageous lie totally untrue , they lied to my insurance company , my banks , the credit card companies , the Bently dealership so I got a US$ 10,000 for a first service on a Bentley Continental , they did the same with my Ferrari a huge service bill the car had only done 5000 miles . . 
everywhere I went they had people claiming I was a convicted pedophle total lies 1000s of lies trying to get me killed . . 
friends of Piers Morgan doing this Through their OKcult mafia they 've killed over 60 of my family 's friends and thousands of other people I knew elksewhere in the World , the young men in Tak Naratiwat Province had known me because they lived in the Naratiwat Rd area of Bangkok and went South and waited for me thinking I was going there to help sort out the problems . . 
before I had a chance to leave Bangkok and go South they were ALL dead ... Mr Sylvester 's heroin mafia were poisoning the paper in the school books the children used to write things down . . 
It is your OKcult group of friends who mis-used information stolen from my family to cause people 's deaths ... How are you feeling very stressed out because I recently placed inside an aerosol can of flea killer and placed it on a radiator . . 
and for a while in some boling water . . 
are you all stressed out at the moment . . 
Mr Sylvester was one of them ... a friend of PM David Cameron . . 
they 've caused loads of trouble in North Africa recently Please will the government of the USA help me recover my family -LRB- whoever is still alive -RRB- my friends and my asset wealth , you can not rely upon The British Government some of the ministers have been part of this sordid satanic heroin land and property scam ... They have abducted 40,000 children per year in India . . 
it is not unlawful to kill a satanist they have given up humanity for satanism . . 
they are niot protected by criminal law which is for humans not satans . . 
In india I told people to run them down with their cars and kill them I told India that if they successfullykill sone of them tell the police `` It was an Act of God '' then I gave the Indian people the telephone number of The Vatican in case the police needed confirmation from a reliable source ... my father Mervyn F S Young flew a Spitfire fighter plane in 129 Mysore Squadron . . 
he told me he became a pilot because he believed he would be `` closer to God '' Colonel Gadhafi is just another one of their victims . . 
and tthey turned him againstthe Americans by using his country as the scapegoat for the Lockerbie bomb Kellett , hogy rj k le egy r vid k zlem ny v s rolni , hogy k sz n m a fantasztikus javaslatot te forgalomba ezen a honlapon . 
Az n hosszan tart internetes keres ssel is a v g n a nap ismert k megb zhat adatokat s m dszereket a kereskedelem az n munkat rsaival . 
Azt ll tja , hogy t bb k z l nk olvas k val ban komolyan szerencs s lni fontos helyen , nagyon sok kiv l egy nek lesl t mutat . 
Soft Water vs Hard Water Thank you for some other great article . 
The place else may just anyone get that kind of information in such an ideal way of writing ? 
I 've a presentation next week , and I am at the look for such info . 
Amongst other problems I have The Abraham Cowley Secure Mental Unit constantly on my back in spite of a Court Order in June 2007 banning them from making any further contact with me . 
In addition a Social Services person named Elaine constantly harrassed me , she was at Woking Social Services , I complained to the Government and she was moved to Guildford , however someone using her name has been calling this Abraham Cowley Unit alleging to be my sister , who denies calling them . 
Further nobody knows who called in Social Services to jump me at Heathrow Airport in 2007 , The Foreign and Commonwealth Office have confirmed they nor their Embassy staff ever involve social services when re-patriating a Britsh citizen . 
My sister and her husband have never called them either . 
The Court was a Court of Law sitting as an appeal hearing at The Abraham Cowley Unit my solicitor a Mr Antony Stoker from a law firm in Kingston-upon-Thames he has a copy of the Court Order I wait for a copy to arrive following three requests to psychiatrists and hospital staff . . 
I have now been threatened with a `` Section 3 '' if I cause any problems , neither of the last two sections were based on the law of medicine and the rules under The Mental Health Act my psychitrist Dr Bizwas a British Psychitrist working in the same office as The Minister of Justice for Thailand says I am not mentally ill . 
October 7 , 2012 at 6:12 am | Report abuse | A Psychiatrist Dr Purcell who appeared to be attached to The Abraham Cowley Group deemed me to be eccentric but not mentally ill . 
A full BUPA health check conducted by a Doctor who was a psychitrist deemed me not to be mentally ill this test done in 2010 when I returned to the UK . 
A Court Order was made in June 2007 at a hearing held at The Abraham Cowley Unit 1 Holloway Hill Chertsey Surrey dismissing a section order placed upon me with a strong statement from the senior medical expert at the hearing that `` Mr John Erik C Young should never have been sectioned in the first instance he is not mentally ill . 
The NHS and ACU were banned from approaching me again the panel holding the hearing consisted of Solicitor , Senior Psaychiatrist for Abraham Cowley Group and Social Services Manager . 
The panel explained they were sitting as a Court of Law . 
They told me if I thought I may need medical assistance it was up to me to decide and that could be NHS or private . 
I was told I would not be hassled again and th panel apologised for the ordeal . 
I arrived back in UK , I live in Thailand usually , in 2010 to find the Abraham Cowley Unit seizing me at Heathrow Airport as per their first coup upon me . 
Since then they have continually hassled me . 
Other medical experts including a full BUPA medical 2010 state I am healthy and no mention of me being mentally ill . 
The Abraham Cowley Unit Chertsey continue to create the illusion that I am mentally ill in spite of a Court Order made banning them from contacting me again in 2007 . 
Please help if you are able to do so . 
A Court Order was made in June 2007 at a hearing held at The Abraham Cowley Unit 1 Holloway Hill Chertsey Surrey dismissing a section order placed upon me with a strong statement from the senior medical expert at the hearing that `` Mr John Erik C Young should never have been sectioned in the first instance he is not mentally ill . 
The NHS and ACU were banned from approaching me again the panel holding the hearing consisted of Solicitor , Senior Psaychiatrist for Abraham Cowley Group and Social Services Manager . 
The panel explained they were sitting as a Court of Law . 
They told me if I thought I may need medical assistance it was up to me to decide and that could be NHS or private . 
I was told I would not be hassled again and th panel apologised for the ordeal . 
I arrived back in UK , I live in Thailand usually , in 2010 to find the Abraham Cowley Unit seizing me at Heathrow Airport as per their first coup upon me . 
Since then they have continually hassled me . 
Other medical experts including a full BUPA medical 2010 state I am healthy and no mention of me being mentally ill . 
Please can you obtain a copy of the Court Order through a solicitor Antony Stokoe and prevent any further interference from the NHS , they have completely ignored the Court Order of June 2007 . 
I have asked the NHS for copy of Court Order three times nothing is provided . 
Thank you Anthony Stokoe Solicitors 4 Clifton Road President of India , Shri Pranab Mukherjee `` The Swami '' who received US$ 220 million from the non recognized Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah of Brunei ? 
I believe this money is linked to the satanic games that has beaten Thailand raw . 
Tthese funds to Barclays Knightsbridge Int Lawyers client account by `` The Swami '' unsolicited . 
The US$ 220 million was them sent to Switzerland as capital paid into a Panama Corporation S.A. Swami -- Panama Corp funded GIf-tech synthetic particle technology that causes WTC skeleton stress stell to lose its wavelength and collapse like deck of cards Unsolicited US$ 220 million paid to Swami by now non-recognised Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah of Brunei with unsatisfactory anti-laundering reason for payment just Sultan quoted `` For | GIF-t -RRB- Int Lawyer rejected this as un-satisfactory explanation but money sent to Barclays Knightsbridge unsolicited by Swami It was all to do with ID theft and land and property fraud on a massive scale Swami may know who wrote C + + code to override pilots as administrator planes flown remotely into WTCs I have requested President of India have Swami arrested and refused bail for next 30 days please inform Gen Petreus at CIA HQ Subject : Notification of new protectorate and jurisdiction of The Vatican With immediate effect dated this 9th December 2012 `` Brunei '' on the island of Borneo is deemed a protectorate and jurisdiction of The Vatican State Vatican City The Vatican Roma Italia EU . 
This to inform the UK police and The British Government that with immediate effect as of the Saturday the 8th of December 2012 the land that completes an area known as `` Brooklands '' as it was pior to the contsruction of the Brooklands Race Circuit is no longer within the jurisdiction of England and Wales it is now the jurisdiction and a protectorate of the State of `` The Vatican '' . 
This to inform the UK police and The British Government that with immediate effect as of the Saturday the 8th of December 2012 the land that completes an area known as `` Brooklands '' as it was prior to the contsruction of the Brooklands Race Circuit is no longer within the jurisdiction of England and Wales it is now the jurisdiction and a protectorate of the State of `` The Vatican '' . 
Therefore without the authority of Erik J C Young or another member of The Vatican the police of the Surrey Police , Metropolitan Police and other surrounnding official and non official police forces have no authority or jurisdiction within or outside St Georges Hill or Brooklands concerning any dispute relating to matters effecting the jurisdiction of The Vatican or outposts that are a protectorate of The Vatican . 
Mr Erik J C Young is licenced by The Vatican and US Military to carry any weapon he deems necessary within or outside the jurisdiction of The Vatican as he is authorised with the same security status as The Chief of the Central Intelligence Agency of The United States of America the instruction passed directly to him by General Petreus of The US Military Forces who have confirmed the US Military are advised to do as Erik Young wants them to do , they will do whatever he asks them to do . 
This arrangement was set up in July 2002 . 
The medical proof of arranged accidents for body organs of this OKcult-satanic-games mafia . 
Their victims often have an anti-gen for example a P1 negative ant-gen only detectable at 37 degrees . 
Unless this anti-gen is present even a transfusion with the correct blood group will kill the patient . 
Donor body organs without this anti-gen are not rejected by the patients body . 
This is the proof that the OKcult-Satanic-Games-Mafia is killing people for donor body organs to supply to the National Health service in the UK . 
Their patients have to take medication for the rest of their lives after the transplant of a liver or heart etc. -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Notify me of follow-up comments via email . 
OJ , Lance , Casey Anthony ? 
Can they ever get their reputations back ? 
@garyvee , @Faith_Saile , @HuntsmanAbby , Stan Van Gundy hashing it out . 
9:51 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` We do n't focus on it as an illness ... we look at them as crazy '' Stan Van Gundy on ex-LAPD cop killer , others who commit mass murders . 
9:45 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` There will be more people entertained by the tweeting during the State of the Union than the speech '' @garyvee #SOTU 9:40 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Yet you follow me , you dumbass -RRB- RT @ROSSH2304 Everytime someone rt 's a @piersmorgan tweet a little bit of me dies inside ... please stop !! You were fabulous ! -RRB- 
RT @reallorraine Thanks @piersmorgan and Life Stories team & brilliant audience - made me feel very relaxed and happy ! 
