updated : Thu May 03 2012 06:46:00 CNN 's Zain Verjee speaks exclusively with interim Libyan Prime Min . 
Abdel Rahim al-Kib about trying Saif al-Islam Gadhafi . 
CNN 's Ben Wedeman discusses the significance of Saif al-Islam Gadhafi 's capture . 
The International Criminal Court says they 're in `` informal conversations '' to bring Saif Gadhafi to The Hague . 
A third son of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi , Mohammed Gadhafi , has been captured . 
Gadhafi 's son floats possibility of elections updated : Thu Jun 16 2011 19:15:00 Elections watched by international observers could take place in Libya within three months , one of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's sons says in a published interview . 
CNN 's Jim Bittermann reports from an assault ship facilitating French air support key to NATO 's mission in Libya . 
Abdul Hafiz Ghoga tells CNN any deal on power succession from Gadhafi to his sons is not acceptable . 
A Modern Arab Studies professor says it would be a `` grievous mistake '' to commit non-Arab ground forces in Libya . 
Once thought to be a leading reformer inside the Libyan government , Saif al-Islam Gadhafi has emerged as one of his father 's most visible defenders . 
Libyan opposition lays out conditions for cease-fire updated : Fri Apr 01 2011 21:00:00 Battles raged in Libya on Friday as mixed messages of peace put forth from several corners brought no guarantees of an end to the bloody conflict . 
The London School of Economics announced the resignation Friday of a director who has been criticized for his links to the government of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi . 
UK university chief quits over Libya links updated : Fri Mar 04 2011 07:15:00 An academic , entertainers and a member of the board of a Libyan charity are among the high-profile beneficiaries of Libyan hospitality who have distanced themselves from the oil-rich government and its leaders in recent days . 
updated : Mon Feb 21 2011 20:38:00 Civil unrest sweeping across Libya has spread to the capital , Tripoli , as CNN 's Fionnuala Sweeney reports . 
The United States on Monday condemned the violence in Libya and called for a halt to the `` unacceptable bloodshed '' in response to civil unrest , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said in a statement . 
While state TV bounced between scenes of serene concert footage and orderly rallies in support of leader Moammar Gadhafi , eyewitnesses describe a far different , far more chaotic Libya -- one with arms-toting mercenaries , demonstrators ramming stolen tanks into a military base and masked men firing guns and blasting pro-government tunes from their sport utility vehicles . 
updated : Mon Feb 21 2011 13:25:00 A protester tells CNN what he is seeing on the streets of Libya . 
Saif al-Islam Gadhafi , 38 , has never lived a day in which his father Moammar did n't rule Libya -- as its undisputed leader inside the country and an enigmatic , controversial voice for the world . 
updated : Mon Feb 21 2011 12:02:00 London School of Economics analyst Fawaz Gerges explains why the protests in Libya are so volatile . 
updated : Mon Feb 21 2011 10:49:00 CNN 's John Vause and Don Lemon talk to Libya expert Khalil Matar on the recent uprising in Libya . 
The son of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi early Monday proposed the speedy implementation of significant democratic reforms in the traditionally restrictive country , while warning of a chaotic civil war , return to colonialism and mass poverty if citizens sided with anti-government demonstrators . 
The White House is `` analyzing '' the speech of Saif al-Islam Gadhafi to see `` what possibilities it contains for meaningful reform , '' a senior U.S. administration official said Sunday night after the Libyan leader 's son took to the airwaves to propose speedy implementation of significant democratic reforms following days of anti-government demonstrations . 
As protests and political unrest in Libya chip away at government stability , Libyans are reacting to Saif Gadhafi 's public address Sunday night . 
Jihadist death threatened Libyan peace deal updated : Sat Nov 28 2009 07:42:00 The long and intricate peace negotiations between the Libyan government and a radical Islamist group were nearly derailed by the sudden death in a Tripoli prison of a prominent Libyan Jihadist , Libyan sources revealed to CNN . 
updated : Sat Nov 28 2009 07:42:00 Saif al Islam Gadhafi , the son of the Libyan leader talks to CNN about a new Jihadi code that could help fight terror in Libya . 
A recently completed peace deal with an Islamic militant group in Libya will help pave the way for the political opening and economic modernization of Libya , Saif al Islam al Gadhafi , the second eldest son of Libya 's leader told CNN in an exclusive interview . 
