The White House is `` analyzing '' the speech of Saif al-Islam Gadhafi to see `` what possibilities it contains for meaningful reform , '' a senior U.S. administration official said Sunday night after the Libyan leader 's son took to the airwaves to propose speedy implementation of significant democratic reforms following days of anti-government demonstrations . 
The same source confirmed that President Barack Obama was monitoring the situation in Libya and `` considering all appropriate actions . '' 
The increased violence seen this weekend has prompted the White house to seek `` clarification '' from senior Libyan officials , the source added . 
`` We continue to raise with -LRB- Libyan officials -RRB- the need to avoid violence against peaceful protesters and respect universal rights . '' 
The terminology echoed an earlier statement from State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley . 
In a speech on Libyan state television that he said was unscripted , Gadhafi warned of a civil war and mass poverty if citizens sided with anti-government demonstrators . 
`` Tomorrow , we can speak rationally , we can spare the blood , we can stand all together for the sake of Libya , '' he said . 
But if the unrest continues , `` forget about democracy , forget about reform ... It will be a fierce civil war . '' 
Events in Libya are very difficult to confirm , since the government maintains tight control on communications and has not responded to repeated CNN requests for access to the country . 
Inside Libya , a local leader of the Muslim Brotherhood in the coastal city , Misurata , was unimpressed by Gadhafi 's speech . 
`` He is worse than his father , '' the leader said . 
`` His claims about the establishment of Islamic emirates in the country is not true at all . 
`` Despite our differences , Libyans are all one , '' he continued . 
`` They are all out on the streets against the regime . 
He called the protesters unstable ! 
It is the regime members who are not stable for spending the country 's wealth on petty things ! '' 
The country 's second-largest city , Benghazi , has seen some of the bloodiest clashes since protests began . 
A staff member working at the Benghazi Medical Center said of Gadhafi : `` He is a liar . 
Contrary to what Saif said , there are no divisions among Libyans . 
We are proud to be free from this regime . 
We have liberated the east of the country and we want to be united with our brothers and sisters in the east . 
... All Libyans think this way , it is the regime that lacks knowledge about the people . '' 
Meanwhile , a journalist working in the capital Tripoli said the speech caused further confusion . 
`` But most do not believe his talk of civil war , '' the journalist said . 
`` Earlier , thousands went to the streets chanting anti-government slogans calling on Gadhafi to leave the country . 
But now after the speech some pro-government crowds gathered in the downtown area . '' 
Human Rights Watch researcher Fred Abrahams said that he did n't believe the speech would placate crowds of people who are looking for change . 
`` There 's been so much resentment built up over four decades of rule , '' he said . 
`` Serious violations , disappearances , political killings , total restrictions on freedom of assembly , no free media , and corruption ... And those resentments bubble up from Libyans . '' 
