LONDON | Thu Jun 23 , 2011 7:53 am BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Concerns about the future of the NHS have boosted support for the opposition 's healthcare policies , but that has yet to translate into increased support for Labor as a whole , according to the latest Reuters\/Ipsos MORI poll . 
June 's survey shows a third of people now think that Labor has the best policies on healthcare -LRB- 37 percent -RRB- compared to 21 percent . 
This is a Labor lead of 16 points , compared to 9 points in March last year , when the question was last asked . 
It is the highest lead Labor has enjoyed on healthcare - a key voting issue - since 2002 . 
Healthcare was the second most important issue to voting at the 2010 general election after the economy . 
The Conservative-led coalition government last week diluted plans for radical reform of the cherished National Health Service after complaints from nurses , doctors and patients . 
Prime Minister David Cameron said his government had got things wrong after draft legislation prompted fears it planned to dismantle a system that gives patients free access to doctors and hospitals . 
When asked about the NHS over the next 12 months , the most negative impact of the government 's reforms was expected to be seen on waiting times ; two in five of those surveyed by Ipsos MORI thought waiting times will get worse . 
While a significant minority thought the next 12 months would bring greater efficiency to the NHS -LRB- 20 percent -RRB- , twice as many thought the efficiency with which the NHS spends public money will get worse -LRB- 39 percent -RRB- . 
A similar proportion thought it would stay the same -LRB- 35 percent -RRB- . 
However , the poll also suggests that concerns about healthcare have not yet shifted people 's voting plans . 
In fact , support for the Conservatives increased slightly this month while the Labor vote share fell . 
Among all those who are certain to vote , 37 percent would vote Conservative , 39 percent would vote Labor while 11 percent would vote Liberal Democrat , the government 's junior coalition partners . 
The public is evenly split on whether public sector workers are right to go on strike , suggesting public sector workers could struggle to win the battle for hearts and minds over their plans to stage mass stoppages . 
Public sector union Unison has threatened a program of rolling , widescale industrial action over changes to public pensions , and teachers and other groups have already voted to strike as the government slashes spending to rein in its deficit . 
A third of the public thought trade unions had too much power today , although three-quarters believed they were essential to protect workers ' rights -- a level that has changed little since Ipsos MORI first asked the question in 1975 . -RRB- 
And while agreement that unions have too much power has increased since Ipsos MORI last asked the question in 1995 -LRB- 35 percent compared to 24 percent -RRB- , this is much lower than during the 1970s and 80s when over two-thirds of the public consistently agreed that unions were too powerful . 
Technical data : Ipsos MORI interviewed a representative sample of 1,003 adults aged 18 + across Great Britain . 
Interviews were conducted by telephone 17-19 June 2011 . 
Data are weighted to match the profile of the population . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
