Britain 's Prime Minister David Cameron reviews the guard of honor during a welcoming ceremony at the Czech government headquarters in Prague June 23 , 2011 . 
PRAGUE | Thu Jun 23 , 2011 3:45 pm BST PRAGUE -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The planned U.S. troop reduction in Afghanistan does not mean any relaxation in pressure on the insurgency , Prime Minister David Cameron said on Thursday , while his government resisted calls to detail its own withdrawal timeline . 
U.S. President Barack Obama announced Wednesday he planned to withdraw 33,000 troops from Afghanistan by the end of next summer . 
After the withdrawal , about 70,000 U.S. troops will remain there . 
During a visit to fellow NATO member Czech Republic , Cameron said it was significant that only 10,000 of the troops would leave this year , with the remainder in 2012 . 
`` What this means is there will be no let-up in the pressure on the insurgency in Afghanistan , '' he told a media briefing . 
`` I 'm satisfied that the removal of the -LRB- U.S. troop -RRB- surge will still enable us to keep up the pressure on the insurgency as we transition to Afghan control between now and 2014 . '' 
Obama 's plan will bring home the entire `` surge '' force that he sent to Afghanistan in 2010 . 
Although the war is unpopular among American voters , military advisers have said a rapid departure from Afghanistan is not a good idea because they fear it could allow Taliban insurgents to quickly regain lost territory . 
U.S. and NATO forces , with Britain and Germany supplying the next largest contingents , have been unable to deal a decisive blow to the Taliban , which was ousted from power in Afghanistan in 2001 . 
Britain has the second-biggest foreign troop contingent in Afghanistan with around 9,500 troops . 
Most of them are in the southern Helmand province , one of the most violent areas , and 374 have died in the decade-long war . 
French President Nicolas Sarkozy said Thursday he would follow Washington in starting a gradual withdrawal of France 's 4,000 troops in the U.S. - and NATO-led operation . 
But in London , Cameron 's spokesman said only that Britain would study the U.S. proposal . 
He would not reveal if Britain would follow its lead and announce a detailed drawdown timetable . 
`` We will consider the U.S. announcement . 
The national security council will consider that . 
We will probably have more to say about that in due course , '' the prime minister 's spokesman told reporters . 
Cameron said last year British troops could start leaving Afghanistan in five years , with 1,000 trainers to stay on . 
Britain plans to make a `` conditions based '' withdrawal and expects its combat troops out of Afghanistan by 2015 . 
The spokesman said the term `` conditions based '' would not allow wiggle room for an extended stay . 
`` Conditions based , we are talking about the rate at which it proves possible to transition security to the Afghan security forces ... We will do that by the end of 2014 , '' the spokesman said . 
`` It is a deadline -- 2015 is a firm deadline . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
So the US withdrawal has already started last year . 
And as soon as Obama is re-elected US aid to Afghanistan soon will reach zero . 
With Karzai and his brothers living happy in Dubai enjoying their part of the profits made from this war and the destruction of Afghanistan . 
But I guess that 's politics . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
