April 26 : Weathered oil is seen on the surface of the Gulf of Mexico near the coast of Louisiana . 
AP Apr. 21 : An oil slick is seen as the Deepwater Horizon oil rig burns in the Gulf of Mexico . 
AP BILOXI , Mississippi -- This time , it 's not a hurricane that threatens to wreck their livelihoods -- it 's a blob of black ooze slowly making its way toward the Gulf Coast . 
Hotel owners , fishermen and restaurateurs are keeping anxious watch as an oil slick spreads from a wrecked drilling rig site like a giant filthy ink blot . 
Forecasters say it could wash ashore within days near delicate wetlands , oyster beds and pristine white beaches . 
Crews have not been able to stop thousands of barrels of oil from spewing out of the sea floor since an April 20 explosion destroyed the Deepwater Horizon , which was drilling 50 miles off the Louisiana coast . 
Eleven workers are missing and presumed dead , and the cause of the explosion has not been determined . 
Louis Skrmetta , 54 , runs a company called Ship Island Excursions that takes tourists to the Gulf Islands National Seashore , where white-sand beaches and green water create an idyllic landscape . 
`` This is the worst possible thing that could happen to the Mississippi Gulf Coast , '' he said . 
`` It will wipe out the oyster industry . 
Shrimping would n't recover for years . 
It would kill family tourism . 
That 's our livelihood . '' 
As crews struggled to contain the oil slick , Coast Guard officials said Tuesday they were considering setting fire to the contaminated water to burn off the crude . 
Pools of oil far offshore would be trapped in special containment booms and set aflame as soon as Wednesday . 
`` If we do n't secure this well , this could be one of the most significant oil spills in U.S. history , '' Coast Guard Rear Adm. Mary Landry said . 
A similar burn off the coast of Newfoundland in 1993 eliminated 50 to 99 percent of captured oil . 
However , burning the oil also creates air pollution , and the effect on marine life is unclear . 
Ed Overton , a professor emeritus of environmental sciences at Louisiana State University who 's studying the oil spill , questioned whether burning would work . 
`` It can be effective in calm water , not much wind , in a protected area , '' he said . 
`` When you 're out in the middle of the ocean , with wave actions , and currents , pushing you around , it 's not easy . '' 
He has another concern : The oil samples from the spill he 's looked at shows it to be a sticky substance similar to roofing tar . 
`` I 'm not super optimistic . 
This is tarry crude that lies down in the water , '' he said . 
`` But it 's something that has got to be tried . '' 
According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , birds and mammals are more likely to escape a burning area of the ocean than escape from an oil slick . 
The agency said birds might be disoriented by the plumes of smoke , but they would be at much greater risk from exposure to oil in the water . 
In Washington , meanwhile , the Obama administration launched a full investigation of the explosion , and Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano and Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said they will devote every available resource to the probe . 
Meanwhile , the glistening sheen of sweet crude continued to grow and began forming long reddish-orange ribbons of oil that , if they wash up on shore , could cover birds , white sand beaches and marsh grasses . 
The last major spill in the Gulf was in June 1979 , when an offshore drilling rig in Mexican waters -- the Ixtoc I -- blew up , releasing 140 million gallons of oil . 
It took until March 1980 to cap the well , and a great deal of the oil contaminated U.S. waters and Texas shores . 
`` In the worst-case scenario , this could also last months , '' said Richard Haut , a senior research scientist at the Houston Advanced Research Center who worked for Exxon for 20 years , 10 of them on an offshore platform in the North Sea . 
Oil from the Deepwater Horizon is not expected to reach the coast until late in the week , if at all . 
As of Tuesday , it was about 20 miles offshore , south of Venice , Louisiana . 
The spill covered an expanding area about 48 miles long and 80 miles wide , but with uneven borders , making it difficult to calculate its area in square miles . 
`` I understand there 's got to be industry , but it 's so sad for our kids . 
We do n't have a lot of beaches left , '' Bonnie Bethel , 66 , said as she watched her grandchildren splash in the water on a Mississippi beach . 
`` Can you imagine these poor birds in oil ? '' 
Thousands of birds such as egrets and brown pelicans are nesting on barrier islands close to the rig 's wreckage right now . 
If the oil gets to them , rescuers would need to reach their remote islands , wash them down and release them back into the wild . 
Michael Ziccardi , director of the Oiled Wildlife Care Network affiliated with the University of California at Davis , said he is standing by to clean up Gulf Coast birds if they are hurt by the spill . 
Cleaning up brown pelican chicks after a modest spill in Louisiana in 2005 was a major undertaking , he said . 
`` Just about any petroleum can cause problems for birds because they lose their waterproofing , and that 's what keeps them dry and warm , '' Ziccardi said . 
`` It 's a really difficult time , and we 're close to the peak of migration . '' 
The spill also threatens billions of fish eggs and larvae coating the Gulf 's surface this time of year . 
If the well can not be closed , almost 100,000 barrels of oil , or 4.2 million gallons , could spill into the Gulf before crews can drill a relief well to alleviate the pressure . 
By comparison , the Exxon Valdez , the worst oil spill in U.S. history , leaked 11 million gallons into Alaska 's Prince William Sound in 1989 . 
Crews working to clean up the spill from the Deepwater Horizon have other things in their favor . 
Oil from the Exxon Valdez can still be found under rocks in the cold water of Prince William Sound , but residue in the Gulf will disappear faster . 
`` You have warm temperatures , strong sunlight , microbial action . 
It will degrade a lot faster , '' said Ronald S. Tjeerdema , an environmental toxicologist at the University of California at Davis who 's studied the effects of oil on aquatic systems . 
`` Eventually , things will return to normal . '' 
And there 's another bit of good news : The oil spilling out is sweet crude , which is low in sulfur , unlike the oil from the Exxon Valdez , which was heavy crude . 
`` If you had to pick an oil to spill , this would be it , '' Overton , the LSU oil spill expert , said . 
BP said Tuesday that it planned to begin drilling a relief well to redirect the leaking oil in a $ 100 million effort to take the pressure off the blown-out well . 
The company said it would begin the drilling by Thursday even if crews can shut off oil leaking from the pipe 5,000 feet underground . 
Robot subs have tried to activate a shut-off device , but so far that has not worked . 
Company spokesman Robert Wine said the drilling will take up to three months and will be done from a rig now in place near where the Deepwater Horizon sank . 
Louisiana-based BP spokesman Neil Chapman said 49 vessels -- oil skimmers , tugboats barges and special recovery boats that separate oil from water -- are working to round up oil . 
In Pensacola , Florida , the easternmost point likely to be affected , beachgoers and business owners kept watch . 
`` I 've been looking at this sand all morning and thinking about the oil spill , '' said Shelley Brunson after a morning swim at Pensacola Beach . 
`` I am praying they clean it up fast and it does n't come here . '' 
Sal Pinzone , general manager of the fishing pier where anglers catch pompano and cobia , shows up at work at 5:30 every morning to watch the sun rise over the famous white-sand beach . 
`` We are all worried , '' he said . 
`` If the spill does hit the beaches along the Gulf , it will shut down everything . '' 
