Sunday , November 14 , 2010 ; 7:04 PM BP has reimbursed the federal government $ 518 million for cleanup costs for the April oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , congressional auditors said , but those costs have already hit $ 581 million and are still growing . 
The Government Accountability Office , in a report on the spill released Friday , reviewed the financial risks facing a trust fund Congress authorized in 1990 after the Exxon Valdez incident to pay cleanup expenses incurred by federal agencies . 
The pot of money , called the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund , is financed by an 8-cents-per-barrel tax on petroleum . 
Auditors said there was about $ 1.6 billion in the fund as of the end of September . 
But to limit the government 's exposure , the law caps at $ 1 billion the amount agencies can draw from it for cleanup costs - even if the oil company responsible for a spill pledges to reimburse the government for all costs . 
The fund is at risk in the near future of reaching the limit of what the government can spend , the GAO said . 
Congress is considering legislation to lift the $ 1 billion cap . 
Auditors urged Congress not only to lift it but to consider changing the rules so that money already reimbursed by BP is not counted against the limit . 
The oil-spill fund is separate from $ 20 billion set aside by BP to reimburse businesses and residents of the gulf region whose livelihoods were hurt by the blowout on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig . 
BP also has pledged to pay the potentially massive costs of restoring the gulf region to health , but an assessment of those costs has only just begun . 
Auditors concluded that the lingering uncertainty over the cost of the cleanup - even though BP has pledged to foot the bill - still poses financial risks to the government . 
`` The full extent of such costs and the extent to which they will ultimately be paid by the responsible parties or federal , state and local governments is unknown at this time , '' auditors wrote . 
`` Financial risks to the federal government exist if circumstances occur that adversely impact BP or other responsible parties ' financial condition or ability to pay such claims . '' 
Auditors concluded that `` it remains unclear '' whether the government will ultimately have to cover any spill-related costs and how big they could get . 
The GAO report was requested by several senators serving on committees addressing federal financial management . 
Sen. Thomas R. Carper -LRB- D-Del . -RRB- 
, chairman of such a panel on the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee , said in a statement , `` Although the BP\/Deepwater Horizon well has been sealed and the oil clean-up process continues to progress , the federal government must continue to be vigilant in ensuring that every dime spent by taxpayers is reimbursed by those responsible . '' 
The GAO did not assess the effectiveness of the government 's cleanup efforts - involving the Coast Guard , the Environmental Protection Agency , the Interior Department and other agencies - nor its oversight of the claims process or how well that process is working . 
Those are the subject of another audit that should be released this spring , said Susan Ragland , who is in charge of the GAO 's financial management reports . '' 
