NEW YORK | Thu Jul 7 , 2011 3:09 pm BST NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - New York City will open its clerk 's offices on Sunday , July 24 , to allow same-sex couples to wed on the first day the state 's gay marriage bill goes into effect , officials said on Wednesday . 
City clerk 's offices in the five boroughs of New York normally are closed on weekends , but Mayor Michael Bloomberg said that for this special occasion they will be open . 
`` This is a historic moment for New York , a moment many couples have waited years and even decades to see -- and we are not going to make them wait one day longer than they have to , '' Bloomberg said in a statement . 
City Clerk Michael McSweeney added that his office expected `` large numbers of people on the first day . '' 
New York Governor Andrew Cuomo last month signed the state 's Marriage Equality Act into law , making the state the sixth and most populous in the United States to allow gay marriage . 
Earlier this week , same-sex couples eager to marry in New York hit a bureaucratic snag when marriage license applications made available to them still used the terms `` bride '' and `` groom . '' 
But the forms were later changed to include the terms `` Spouse A '' and `` Spouse B. '' State law generally requires couples to wait 24 hours after receiving a marriage license before they can wed. . 
But on Sunday , July 24 , state judges will volunteer to perform ceremonies and review requests for waivers of the 24-hour waiting period , according to the mayor 's office . 
The New York city clerk 's offices will be open two hours later than usual for the first five weekdays after the same-sex marriage bill goes into effect to accommodate what is expected to be heavy demand from same-sex couples seeking marriage licenses and civil ceremonies . 
When a California Supreme Court ruling legalized same-sex marriage in June 2008 , the state saw a spike in marriage licenses issued , as gay and lesbian couples lined up to wed at municipal offices . 
California voters later banned gay marriages by approving a constitutional amendment in the November 2008 election . 
-LRB- Reporting by Alex Dobuzinskis . 
Editing by Peter Bohan -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
