HOUSTON | Sun Jul 11 , 2010 5:10 pm EDT HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc said on Sunday it is making progress on a new system to capture almost all the oil spewing from its blown-out well in the Gulf of Mexico and a relief well could finally plug the leak by early to mid-August . 
`` We 're pleased with our progress , '' BP senior vice president Kent Wells told reporters on a conference call . 
It will take up to a week for robots working 1 mile underwater to completely fit a new cap and seal . 
Oil will flow mostly unchecked until the bigger containment system is installed , further hurting tourism and fishing in all five states along the Gulf Coast . 
The British energy giant , which is also drilling two relief wells to try to permanently plug the leak , hopes the new containment system will funnel as much as 80,000 barrels -LRB- 12.7 million liters -RRB- per day of oil to vessels on the surface -- more than three times the current amount . 
It expects the first of the relief wells to intercept Macondo by the end of July , a first step in plugging the well by early to mid-August . 
BP is also on track to start a rig on Sunday evening that can siphon up to 25,000 bpd from the well , Wells said . 
The Obama administration has pressed BP to take advantage of calm weather and move forward with the containment . 
Senior Obama adviser David Axelrod , asked on the `` Fox News Sunday '' program about hopes the spill will be contained by the end of July , said he was `` reasonably confident but obviously this thing is uncharted waters . '' 
BP , which has set up a $ 20 billion spill fund under pressure from the White House , removed a smaller containment cap from the gushing well on Saturday . 
On Day 83 of the disaster , U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder said the Justice Department has started interviewing witnesses as part of a criminal and civil investigation into the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
BP shares have been hammered by the disaster and are likely to remain volatile until the well is capped and the company 's total costs and liabilities are clear . 
Some analysts have put BP 's likely costs at $ 20 billion to $ 40 billion but estimates have gone as high as $ 100 billion . 
Speculation is running high that BP is approaching several sovereign wealth funds for cash to ward off a takeover and to help pay for the spill . 
BP boss Tony Hayward met with an Abu Dhabi state investment fund last week . 
In Britain , The Sunday Times newspaper said BP is in talks to sell up to $ 12 billion in assets , including a stake in Alaska , to Apache Corp. . 
Holder said the U.S. investigation could apply to other companies involved in the drilling of the damaged well . 
`` We are in the process of accumulating documents , talking to witnesses on both the criminal side as well as the civil side , '' he told the CBS program `` Face the Nation . '' 
The investigation is aimed at ensuring no tax dollars pay for the cleanup `` and to make sure that we hold accountable anybody who was responsible for the spill , '' Holder said . 
If the Justice Department finds violations , penalties could be in the many billions of dollars . 
People living at the heart of the crisis expressed frustration over the pace of the cleanup . 
For Billy Nungesser , president of Plaquemines Parish in Louisiana , the top priority is more boats to mop up oil . 
`` Number one is a sense of urgency , '' he said . 
`` To get out on the water to work 24\/7 . 
We have to be on the front lines . '' 
Nungesser said he was due to meet two Obama administration officials on Sunday , a day before its first commission hearings on the spill in New Orleans . 
The administration 's commission consists of seven engineers , environmentalists and former politicians who plan to investigate decisions by oil companies and government regulators that may have led to the disaster . 
The panel will hear testimony from government officials , businesses groups like the Louisiana Shrimp Association , and BP 's Wells through Tuesday . 
As the spill hit local economies , animal welfare groups are distributing donated dog food to Plaquemines Parish fishermen and others to help struggling owners keep their pets . 
Donna Schexnayder of the Plaquemines Animal Welfare Society said she has noticed more pets being given to the shelter and expects the number to grow . 
`` We 're starting to see it a little more , '' she said . 
`` Within the next month or so , it will hit . '' 
Cherie Pete teared up as she described the changes confronting fisherman who are now mopping up oil . 
`` Now they have the hard hats on , and the tags around their necks , '' Pete said . 
`` They do n't look like our men . 
Our total way of life has already changed . '' 
Her home was completely submerged by Hurricane Katrina in 2005 . 
But she considers the oil spill worse . 
`` You get something like this -- I mean , Katrina was a category 5 , '' she said about the maximum rating a storm can muster . 
`` As far as I 'm concerned this is a category 10 . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
