VENICE , LA. -- A tide of sludgy oil has begun washing into the fringes of Louisiana 's coastal marshes , officials said Tuesday , as BP continued to siphon some of the oil gushing from a damaged well on the gulf floor but remained days away from trying to cap the leak . 
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar told Senate committees Tuesday that the company would attempt a `` dynamic kill '' of the oil well Saturday . 
That procedure involves pumping thick mud into the well in hopes of blocking the oil . 
And hundreds of miles from the Louisiana coast , there was a worrisome discovery : Tar balls , sticky clumps of decayed oil , were found Monday in Key West , Fla. . 
Officials said they were being tested to determine whether they came from the leaking BP well . 
But the most ominous news came from south Louisiana , where the Mississippi Delta peters out into the Gulf of Mexico . 
There , instead of the tar balls that had previously washed ashore from the spill , thick , brown oil was infiltrating the edges of the marshes . 
`` If I had been standing up , I would have fell to my knees , '' said Billy Nungesser , president of Plaquemines Parish , La. , about the moment that he heard the news . 
Nungesser , whose parish follows the Mississippi out to sea , said the oil had been spotted at places called South Pass and Pass-a-Loutre . 
`` It 's our greatest fear . '' 
If these marshes are destroyed by oil , it could mean huge losses for the area 's seafood industry and a reduction in Louisiana 's already skimpy shield against a hurricane storm surge . 
`` We 're finished . 
We 're out of business '' if that happens , Nungesser said . 
This news was not a huge surprise : For days , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration had predicted that thick oil might make landfall near here . 
These marshes are the closest land to the spot where the Deepwater Horizon offshore drilling rig sank April 22 . 
But Louisiana officials said the oil 's arrival underscored the need for their radical-sounding solution : the construction of a chain of small offshore islands to block the oil from the coast . 
`` This is the first time we 've seen this much heavy oil this far into our wetlands , '' Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal -LRB- R -RRB- said at a news conference here in Venice , the last town before the coastal marshes begin . 
`` We know there 's a lot more heavy oil behind it that has n't made it to shore yet . '' 
Also Tuesday , BP said it was slowly increasing the amount of oil it was siphoning away from the leaking well , using a tube inserted into a broken-off pipe Sunday . 
BP said it was removing 2,000 barrels of oil a day from the leak , up from 1,000 . 
It 's not clear how much of the spilling oil that represents : Officials had first estimated the leak at 5,000 barrels a day , but outside experts have said it appears much larger than that . 
Video of the leak , released by U.S. Sens. Bill Nelson -LRB- D-Fla . -RRB- 
and Barbara Boxer -LRB- D-Calif . -RRB- 
, showed oil continuing to billow out of the leaking pipe , even with the siphon pipe inserted into it . 
The company 's plan to stop the leak involves pumping heavy `` kill mud '' at 40 barrels a minute into openings in the blowout preventer , a mechanism that surrounds the drill pipe . 
If the influx of mud does not clog the drill pipe , a BP spokesman said , the company could still use a `` junk shot '' later -- pumping larger debris such as golf balls and pieces of tire into the mechanism . 
Mark Proegler , a BP spokesman , said the company had not used the mud-pumping technique earlier because it had to first gather data about pressures inside the blowout preventer . 
`` It takes a while to gather the information we need , '' he said . 
So far , officials said , the oil has not caused catastrophic damage on shore : Just 23 `` oiled '' birds have been found dead , in contrast to the tens of thousands killed by the Exxon Valdez spill in 1989 . 
But scientists are worried about vast areas of oil floating underwater , unseen . 
That worry was heightened by Monday 's discovery in Key West . 
If the tar balls found there are determined to have come from the BP leak , that could mean some oil has made its way into the Inner Loop currents of the Gulf Stream . 
NOAA Administrator Jane Lubchenco said that oil swept up in the current might take eight to 10 days to reach the Florida Keys . 
Exxon Mobil , meanwhile , said it had delayed plans to start drilling an exploration well this week in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Fahrenthold reported from Washington . 
Staff writers Juliet Eilperin and Steve Mufson also contributed to this report . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
