Special report : Will the cleanup make the BP oil spill worse ? 
CORDOVA , Alaska\/SAN FRANCISCO | Fri May 7 , 2010 2:25 pm EDT CORDOVA , Alaska\/SAN FRANCISCO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - More than half an inch of oil covered the sea when Dennis Kelso 's boat , piled with a few newly dead birds , nudged up against the side of the Exxon Valdez on Friday , March 24 , 1989 . 
A rope ladder hung down the side of one of the biggest vessels on earth , which had run aground near midnight on a reef in pristine Prince William Sound , a haven for birds , whales and otters , brimming with fish that supplied a multimillion dollar industry . 
It is also next to the end of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline , and the Exxon Valdez had picked up millions of gallons of crude piped from the top of the frosty state to bring to gas-thirsty consumers in Long Beach , California . 
Spring was breaking , migrations were starting -- and Kelso was gagging at the rush of chemicals from the liberated oil . 
`` At the beginning oil was literally boiling out of the tanker , '' said Kelso , the head of Alaska 's Department of Environmental Conservation at the time . 
The crude began changing as it hit the water , releasing benzene and other pungent chemicals into the air , the start of a months-long process of transforming from a light liquid to a tarry gunk that would cling to more than a thousand miles of beaches in southern Alaska . 
A close examination of studies of the Exxon Valdez disaster and interviews with many people who took part in the cleanup offers a possible peek into what lies ahead for the Gulf Coast in the coming weeks , months , years -- and perhaps decades . 
Indeed , by one estimate , about 21,000 gallons of oil still linger on some of Alaska 's beaches , often in the form of dark brown globs just beneath the rocks . 
What 's more , there are still some experts who argue that the aggressive cleanup following the Exxon Valdez spill proved more harmful than the oil itself . 
That continuing debate points to another potential cautionary tale about how conflicts among various groups looking to make things right can end up hampering cleanup efforts . 
The Exxon Valdez was an unrivaled environmental disaster which forced the United States to set a new standard for response to oil spills . 
Nothing in the United States had come close -- until now . 
As oil spreads across the Gulf of Mexico , a continent away , from the remnants of a British Petroleum well , the debates over how to contain the crude and what to do when it hits shore are similar to the arguments in Alaska two decades ago . 
Surprisingly , not much has changed in the technology of cleaning up oil spills , and research on what to do is dominated by `` gray literature '' funded by either oil companies or environmental organizations that makes some experts wary . 
It 's clear , though , that the warm Gulf waters lapping marshes in Louisiana and the white sand beaches stretching from Mississippi to northern Florida are a world of difference from Alaska 's chilly , craggy , rocky southern coast . 
Two mercurial forces -- weather and people -- are key for any cleanup . 
In many ways both acted against Exxon , beset by storms of nature and among warring scientists and politicians , and have played to BP 's advantage . 
Prevailing winds have largely kept the giant Gulf oil slick offshore for two weeks since the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig accident triggered the breach , and the coast guard is firmly in charge . 
On the day two decades ago in Alaska , the question of who was in charge was open . 
The day was calm and the sea was smooth -- perfect conditions for containing a slick of crude . 
But the view from the bridge , abandoned by the captain after his crew drove the Valdez out of shipping lanes and onto a well known reef , was eerily clear . 
Exxon had a plan to respond to spills , but the ` designated responder ' it had hired was n't responding . 
In fact , the boat that was supposed to be in the water , ready to launch at the first word of an accident , had been in dry dock covered with snow . 
The Valdez ran into the reef at four minutes after midnight . 
The captain was n't on the bridge and had been drinking alcohol earlier in the evening . 
Eleven of the ship 's cargo holds were punctured , and the first of 11 million gallons started filling Prince William Sound . 
The Valdez , roughly three American football fields long , eventually lost 20 percent of its cargo , although the exact figure was never known , since seawater flowing into the ship made it difficult to measure how much was left . 
The uncapped well in the Gulf has been spewing out around 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons\/795 ,000 liters -RRB- a day . 
Cleaning up oil is tough at the beginning and gets harder every day . 
The first job is to contain a spill , a nearly impossible task in the real world . 
On the water , booms which absorb and contain spills on relatively calm seas can be used to herd it into big pools that can be sucked up or burned . 
Burning needs perfect conditions , and one engineer compared a siphon to a toothpick in the Gulf . 
Chemical dispersants which separate crude into fine droplets can be sprayed from ships and planes . 
Rusty-colored oil ` mousse ' can be seen in the Gulf of Mexico where dispersants mixed into the water by waves are breaking down the oil . 
Above all , the oil needs to be kept off shore , which over time is the most difficult thing to do . 
When oil hits land it 's often for a short visit -- dropping off a sheen and then moving with the tides up or down the shoreline . 
Eventually though , the oil ages , becoming a tar -- like a blob that gloms onto a surface and wo n't let go . 
That 's fine on a hard-packed sandy beach , which is the best place for an oil spill , since a careful lift of a thin layer of sand can get rid of most of the problem . 
But in marshes , new and old oil can spread thin and deep with a ferocity that makes any cleanup counterproductive -- boots kill more than the oil . 
Alaska 's rocky coast is somewhere in between the two extremes , and just where the risks lay , and what the risks involved , is still debated today . 
The threats to wildlife are legion . 
Fish eggs in water and turtle eggs on land can be fouled by oil . 
Growing fish mutate , otters and whales swimming through oil can get sick or suffocate from the fumes or oil coating their breathing passages . 
Petroleum fouls feathers , and small sea creatures can ingest chemicals and die . 
How that affects the environment is still being studied . 
Do tiny sea creatures eat the tiny droplets of oil , creating a food chain timebomb in the way that mercury levels concentrate in bigger fish ? 
Researchers say they do n't know or disagree . 
The Southern Shrimp Alliance in the Gulf Coast fears just such long term effects . 
The experts converging on Alaska had seen hundreds of spills . 
Two decades later , they agree on one thing with regard to Exxon Valdez : the first three days were lost . 
Al Maki , Exxon 's chief scientist at the time , flew in early and knew what to do : break up the oil with chemical dispersants . 
The chemicals , which are being used widely in the current Gulf spill crisis , break oil into fine droplets so that it can be absorbed into the water and degrade naturally . 
Warm water and wave action speed the mixing and energy . 
`` If we had a chance to use dispersants earlier in the game , it would have reduced the landing impact substantially , '' said Maki . 
Exxon , which was in charge of the cleanup , was n't allowed to use dispersants for three critical , calm days , after the early Friday crash , he said . 
`` The storm that came through on Sunday night moved the oil way out beyond our reaches and the use of dispersants was canceled , '' he said . 
Kelso remembers the early days differently , though his conclusion is the same . 
`` The window of opportunity to move as much oil out of the water as possible was squandered , '' he said . 
Exxon , which had relied on an unreliable contractor to prepare for the spill , was scrambling in the first few days . 
Dispersants were n't at hand , and a trial of them was a flop in the cold , still water , he said . 
Conflicts over dispersants were one of the first between the main players in the cleanup -- state authorities like Kelso , Exxon leaders like Maki , and the federal government , including John Robinson , the chief scientist at the spill for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . 
Robinson remembers two years of animosity and contention , a management problem that contributed to the oil spill issue -- and which was dealt with directly by legislation the following year that gave the federal government clear authority to step in and take charge of a spill response , as it has done on the Gulf Coast . 
The state was so unhappy , `` it was difficult for them to agree to almost anything in terms of the approach to cleanup , '' Robinson , now retired , said by phone . 
The storm which swept through three days after the crash totally changed the game , making it a desperate attempt to keep oil away from sensitive areas and muster resources . 
A state report compared the work to `` guerrilla warfare . '' 
An obvious solution to too much oil is to send it up in flames . 
`` People think you just light a match , '' said Stan Jones , spokesman for the Prince William Sound Regional Citizens Advisory Council , a commission that monitors tanker and marine safety operations in Prince William Sound and was established by Congress in response to the Exxon Valdez . 
`` Burning 's just not that easy , '' he said . 
Some 15,000 gallons burned in about 75 minutes in one attempt the day after the spill . 
But others proved futile . 
Little seemed to be happening the day after the spill , and Exxon panicked at the lack of clear action . 
`` Kick ass and get stuff out there . 
I do n't care what it is . 
I do n't care if it picks up two gallons -LRB- of oil -RRB- a week . 
Get that shit out there and stand it around where people can see it , '' executive Don Cornett said , according to a transcript of an audio tape of Cornett gathered for a 1994 trial on the spill . 
Frustrated fishermen took to the seas , marshaling what they called the `` mosquito fleet '' of skiffs and small boats loaded with buckets and hand-skimmers that launched off a state ferry press-ganged into service . 
There was no incident command system , the standard hierarchy that is used for responses to natural disasters and is now automatically activated to respond to oil spills . 
`` Early in the oil spill , no one was in charge and everyone was in charge , '' said R.J. Kopchak , a longtime Cordova commercial fisherman and development director for the Prince William Sound Science Center . 
`` It was sort of a spontaneous , grass-roots response where people saw that the oil-company response was n't working , '' said Rick Steiner , a marine scientist and former Cordova fishermen who was part of the effort . 
`` Some boats got booms . 
Some just got buckets . '' 
A salmon fishery was saved and a good 100,000 gallons of oil picked up in the home-made effort . 
Exxon coordinated with the group , and Kelso says it shamed the oil giant into action . 
The oil kept spreading . 
In four days it was 37 miles from the spill site . 
In two weeks it was 150 miles . 
By day 56 , a sheen of crude stretched 470 miles . 
But two months in , guerrilla warfare had turned into a corporate campaign . 
Exxon had mobilized in full . 
Some 11,000 workers were washing rocks , first with rags and then with power hoses . 
The main plan was to float the oil off the beaches . 
Since oil floats , flooded beaches would shed the oil , which could be caught at the waterline . 
The main problem was that by this time the oil was tar , stuck to rock , and was n't going to move that easily . 
`` This stuff became much more difficult to deal with plastered on the rocks than it was the first few days . 
and that is what led us to deal with it with the hot water , '' NOAA 's Robinson remembers , describing the decision to rely heavily on high pressure hot water to wash the rocky beaches . 
`` The cleanup in Alaska did n't get started for a couple of months , started in a serious way , '' he said . 
`` We eventually had to have about 10,000 people and several ships and support facilities and all the wherewithal to make hot water and deliver it to the coast . 
And that was a couple of months before that arrived , at least , '' he said . 
It was more than a big effort though . 
It was a big mistake , Robinson said . 
`` The aggressiveness of the cleanup in the end contributed to more damage than the oil did , '' he believes . 
Nine strips of beach were left untouched as an experiment , and those nine beaches look better today than the swept ones , where whatever was alive was cooked to death in superhot water . 
Maki , the Exxon scientist , disagrees . 
Beach denizens -- mussels , clams , worms -- indeed were killed off by the washes , but birds could nest , seals could raise pups on the cleared beaches , sea otters ' chances of survival rose . 
`` When you look at the hot water or warm water wash from a net environmental standpoint for all the species , it was a benefit , '' he said . 
Exxon also put fertilizer on beaches far and wide , calculating that naturally existing microbes that eat naturally seeping hydrocarbons would multiply with the fertilizer and munch up the oil , which many said was indeed the case . 
Maki is in the Gulf today , so far as an observer and potentially as a consultant . 
The differences are stark , he believes . 
Dispersants are breaking up the oil far from land , weather has been good , keeping the oil at sea up to now , and the land oil may come to is a different world -- marshes and stretches of white , packed sand that lets oil rest on the surface , not rocks that oil slips down between . 
That is not to say a white sand beach is easy to clean . 
The key to such an effort is to wait until all the oil has arrived , skim it and a little sand off with a shovel , and be done . 
But oil moves with tides , so the perfect time to clean is a moving target . 
Volunteers can easily dig too deep , or not deep enough . 
Heavy equipment works faster but can damage the beach . 
And so a simple one-two exercise can become a seemingly endless process that is repeated until there is no beach left . 
More than 20 years after Valdez , there is hardly any difference in the tools available for cleanup , and very little research has been done to solve the question that divides Robinson and Maki -- what is the least of the evils ? 
The answers are mostly in studies that Environmental Scientist Nancy Kinner of University of New Hampshire calls ` gray literature ' -- funded by either the oil industry or environmental groups , and thus suspect . 
Take the case of dispersants . 
There is broad agreement that they can be used in the warm waters of the Gulf , she said , but Alaska ? 
`` I do n't know and I 'm pretty sure from looking at the literature that other people do n't know either . 
They may they claim they do but again it 's a matter of the quality of these studies , '' said Kinner , who is co-director the Coastal Response Research Center , a joint effort between the university and NOAA . 
Funding for a great new generation of inquiry , studies that would answer , for instance , whether dispersed droplets of oil disappeared or collected in tummies of microbes eaten by shrimp , never happened . 
Congress authorized studies in the 1990 law which followed on the Exxon Valdez disaster , but it never approved the funds to carry out them out , she said . 
Oil still lingers on some Alaska beaches , in surprisingly fresh condition . 
NOAA estimates that about 21,000 gallons of oil are buried in beaches . 
`` There 's more oil out there , in larger quantities and in a more toxic state , than we thought there would be , '' said Craig Tillery , Deputy Attorney General of Alaska . 
Exxon spent billions on the cleanup , which Erich Gundlach , an engineer who consulted on the Valdez spill , still marvels at . 
`` The line was -- we did n't tell Exxon but -- thank God it was Exxon . 
The state could n't do it . '' 
Crude from Alaska 's north still comes down the pipeline , and Royal Dutch Shell is on the cusp of drilling exploratory wells in pristine , remote territory of the Chukchi and Beaufort seas . 
Today , a small beach at the end of a narrow cove on Prince William Sound 's Eleanor Island , a site hit heavily by Exxon oil in 1989 , presents an iconic Alaska scene of natural beauty . 
On a recent visit , a bald eagle flew overhead . 
The air was scented with kelp , clinging to beach cobbles , and fresh water rushed from a stream in the spruce forest down into the sound . 
Snowy peaks glitter nearby . 
Dave Janka has been searching beaches like this for oil since the cleanup was declared officially complete in 1992 . 
His oldest daughter , who was 3 years old at the time of the spill , wound up riding along while Janka took scientists and others around the sound . 
He remembers her playing with a toy rod and toy fish . 
`` She 'd bring it up onto the boat and say , ` Oh , it 's dead , it got oil on it , ' '' he said . 
Two decades of his samples rest in jars on display at the Prince William Sound Science Center , headquartered in a cozy building at the end of a pier in Cordova Harbor , where the local fishing fleet is based . 
On the recent visit , Janka plunged a shovel into the beach surface . 
Globs of dark brown oil surrounded by reflective sheen emerged , emitting a headache-inducing odor . 
`` Looks like oil . 
Smells like oil , '' said Janka . 
`` Right from the start of the spill , you did n't want to see it , and then to be here 21 years later and still be seeing it ... '' He paused . 
`` It gets old . 
It really does . '' 
-LRB- Editing by Jim Impoco and Claudia Parsons -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
