NEW YORK | Fri May 7 , 2010 1:59 pm EDT NEW YORK May 7 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico following a fire at the deepwater Macondo well off Louisiana could last for weeks and lead to negative rating actions for the five primary companies involved in the project , Moody 's Investors Service said on Friday . 
The companies are BP Plc -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- , the British company backing drilling at the Macondo well , Anadarko Petroleum -LRB- APC . 
N -RRB- , which owns a 25 percent state in Macondo , Transocean -LRB- RIG . 
N -RRB- , the owner of the rig that burned down , Cameron International -LRB- CAM . 
N -RRB- , manufacturer of the blowout preventer and Halliburton -LRB- HAL . 
N -RRB- , which had just completed the cementing of the production casing , the agency said in a note . 
`` The environmental liabilities and legal costs facing these five companies involved in the Macondo drilling project will put negative pressure on their credit profiles , '' said Steven Wood , Managing Director of the Oil and Gas\/Chemicals team at Moody 's . 
`` Although the monetary liability and long-term credit effects remain unclear , all five companies face reputational risk , '' he said . 
BP is likely to take the brunt of the liability although it is too early to assess its exposure as the spill continues , he said . 
`` The magnitude of the spill could place BP under some credit pressure , but how much -- and whether it will affect the company 's long-term credit rating -- remains unclear , '' said the analyst . 
`` The accident has compelled us to revise our outlook on BP 's ratings to negative from stable , however . '' 
Anadarko was not the operator at Macondo , and unlike BP it was insured against accidents . 
But it 's likely to share in well-repair and clean-up costs , he said . 
Transocean has about $ 1.6 billion in insurance , and has already collected most of the cost of its destroyed rig -- over $ 400 million , said Wood . 
A greater threat to the company is that new regulations and laws stemming from the high-profile accident could hurt its business model in the long term , he said . 
Insurance may limit the liability of the other two companies involved , Cameron International and Halliburton . 
`` The impact on both companies is also buffered by strong liquidity , adequate insurance , and a limited degree of responsibility for the well , '' said Wood . 
However , the likelihood of regulatory and legal battles over the spill `` make this far from certain today , '' said the report . 
-LRB- Reporting by Ciara Linnane ; Editing by Diane Craft -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
