Massive dome lowered at site of huge U.S. oil spill ROBERT , Louisiana | Fri May 7 , 2010 7:40 pm EDT ROBERT , Louisiana -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc engineers using undersea robots maneuvered a massive metal chamber to fit over a gushing ruptured oil well in the Gulf of Mexico on Friday in their best chance yet to contain a leak that threatens an environmental catastrophe on U.S. shores . 
The four-story structure , the best short-term hope of controlling the spewing crude , was lowered to the seabed almost one mile below the surface in an attempt to funnel the escaping oil to a surface tanker . 
BP , which faces major financial losses from the spill , suffered a further blow when ratings agency Standard & Poor 's lowered its outlook on the British oil giant to negative from stable . 
It is under pressure from the Obama administration to limit the damage from what could be the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
BP has said it will pay all legitimate costs , a bill that is likely to run into the billions of dollars . 
BP officials hope the container will begin funneling oil from the leak next week . 
Workers will spend the next three to four days making the connections to pump crude to the surface . 
The device has not been tried at that depth , where engineers guiding remotely operated vehicles battle darkness , currents and intense undersea pressure . 
BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward warned there was no certainty of success . 
`` The pressures and temperatures are very different here , so we can not be confident that it will work , '' Hayward told CNN . 
BP is drilling a relief well to halt the leak -- which began after the Deepwater Horizon exploded on April 20 , killing 11 crew members -- but it could take up to three months to complete . 
Engineers have also considered pumping heavy fluids into the top of the failed blowout preventer to plug the leaking well in a technique called `` top kill . '' 
They gave up on efforts to close valves on a failed blowout preventer with underwater robots , after trying in vain for two weeks , Doug Suttles , BP 's chief operating officer , said . 
Surface containment efforts continue , helped by calm seas . 
Controlled burns on Thursday removed up to 9,000 barrels -LRB- 280,000 gallons\/1 ,070,000 liters -RRB- of oil , he said . 
It `` is a very powerful technique and when the weather is good it will continue , '' Suttles said . 
Forecasts suggest light winds through Saturday , although they are expected shift and come from the south to southwest , which could push the slick toward the Louisiana shore . 
About 250 boats deployed protective booms and used dispersants to break up the thick oil on Friday . 
Crews have laid almost 800,000 feet of boom , and spread 267,000 gallons -LRB- 1 million liters -RRB- of chemical dispersant . 
On Thursday , after meeting with BP executives in Houston , U.S. Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said the company and its partners made `` some very major mistakes . '' 
Salazar reiterated the U.S. government will issue no new offshore drilling permits until an inter-agency panel gives a safety review to President Barack Obama by May 28 . 
In the meantime , current drilling will continue . 
Standard & Poor 's , in announcing the negative outlook , indicated a ratings downgrade was likely . 
Moody 's said the spill raised the specter of credit pressure for the five primary companies involved in the project . 
S&P cut its outlook for Anadarko Petroleum Corp , which has a 25 percent stake in the ill-fated well , to stable from positive , saying it is `` potentially liable for significant costs and liabilities relating to the clean-up . '' 
Other companies involved are Transocean , owner of the rig that caught fire and collapsed ; Cameron International , which supplied the failed blow-out preventer for the well ; and Halliburton , which helped cement in place the blown-out well . 
Hayward a $ 75 million legal cap on its cleanup and compensation liabilities under federal law , which some U.S. lawmakers now want to raise , would not be a limit for BP . 
BP shares dropped 2.3 percent in London on Friday , less than the broad STOXX Europe 600 Oil and Gas index which fell 3.8 percent . 
In New York , BP 's American Depository Receipts sank 2.7 percent . 
The spill threatens an economic and ecological disaster on tourist beaches , wildlife refuges and fishing grounds in Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama and Florida . 
It has forced Obama to rethink plans to open more waters to drilling . 
At least 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons\/795 ,000 liters -RRB- have poured into the Gulf each day since the well ruptured . 
A sheen of oil has engulfed much of the Chandeleur Islands , barrier islands that are part of Louisiana 's Breton National Wildlife Refuge , the first confirmation of the oil slick hitting land . 
Some oiled birds have been found in recent days . 
The Breton refuge was closed to the public after a silver sheen and emulsified oil reached the shoreline , the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service said . 
Altogether , crude from the spill could hit 24 national wildlife refuges . 
A Reuters photographer , on a flyover of the coast , saw a band of oil , orange in color and about a mile or two long , running parallel to shore about 17 miles south of barrier islands off Mississippi 's mainland . 
Numerous black blobs , possibly emulsified tar , were visible just below the surface in shallow water near some marsh coast to the east of the Chandeleur Islands . 
U.S. authorities on Friday modified and expanded the boundaries of the area closed to fishing as a result of the spill , and extended restrictions for another 10 days , to May 17 . 
The closed area represents almost 4.5 percent of Gulf of Mexico federal waters , up from slightly less than 3 percent included in the original ban . 
`` This oil spill was the last thing we needed , '' Lance Nacio , a shrimper with Anna Marie Seafood in Dulac , Louisiana , said on a call with reporters . 
`` I think this is going to devastate the industry which was already tattered by low dockside prices . '' 
Kevin Begos , a seafood industry spokesman in Apalachicola , Florida , said dealers in his area have seen orders drop . 
`` Right now , it 's mostly fear , because oil has n't come here yet , '' Begos said . 
Alabama tourism officials planned an ad campaign to let tourists know the beaches were still clean and encourage them not to cancel their vacation plans . 
Fears of massive shipping problems in the Gulf of Mexico have not panned out . 
Shippers and ports are prepared to clean vessels that move through the oily waters , but so far ships have passed through without contamination . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
I hope that is a special place in hell for corrupt corporations . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
