Norman Davies applauds Tony Judt 's Postwar , one American 's personal view of our continent 's recent history Contemporary history is not an easy option . 
It deals with incomplete processes and with the uncertain outcomes of recent events . 
Timothy Garton Ash , the mastercraftsman of the genre , has written of `` analytical reportage '' demanding the highest skills of both historian and journalist . 
By these criteria , Tony Judt has splendid qualifications . 
An authority on modern French intellectual history , he is director of the Remarque Institute in New York , entrusted with the task of explaining Europe to America . 
He has also involved himself in current international relations , notably in the former Yugoslavia and the Middle East . 
He is a principled critic of the Iraq war . 
With Postwar , however , Judt moves up into the ranks of the grands simplificateurs . 
He dares to expound the sum total of Europe since 1945 in a seamless narrative . 
By presenting `` an avowedly personal interpretation '' , he accepts that his personal make-up will be reflected in the end product . 
His French expertise , his Jewish background , his American mission and , one suspects , a mis-spent political youth can all help to explain particular , and not always felicitous , points of emphasis . 
This is history-writing with a human face , as well as with brainpower . 
Naturally enough , the `` advance praise '' on the cover is over the top . 
Lord Owen begs a question or two by praising a book about `` the true Europe '' . 
The publishers announce a volume that supposedly deals `` uniquely '' with the whole of Europe . 
In this connection , the structure of the text deserves comment . 
Some of the 24 chapters are pan-European . 
An excellent essay on `` The Coming of the Cold War '' , for example , discusses both western and eastern factors in the growing conflict , before revealing critical links to the Korean war and to France 's sponsorship of the nascent European project . 
Yet the majority of chapters deal separately either with the west or the east ; and the west has the numerical edge . 
Given 40 years of the iron curtain , the treatment is justified . 
Judt 's style is crisp . 
Complicated subjects are tamed by uncomplicated sentences ; and four or five slim paragraphs fit on to every page . 
The brisk pace is accompanied by fine quotes , lively anecdotes and acerbic phrases . 
I particularly liked Franjo Tudjman being `` notoriously ecumenical in his prejudices '' . 
The 800 pages of the main text do not weigh heavily . 
The terminology occasionally lacks precision . 
`` Russia '' and `` the USSR '' should not be used as interchangeables in a book of this quality . 
In the Soviet era , for instance , Poland never played `` Russia '' at football -LRB- although a Polish goalkeeper is once said to have been imprisoned for saving a penalty -RRB- . 
Similarly , the careless use of `` small states '' smacks of Churchill 's imperial division of the world into `` giants '' and `` pygmies '' . 
Europe has countries of all shapes and sizes . 
And `` the insecurity of small-state nationalism '' is doubly dubious . 
Insecurity is a psychological trait of all nationalisms . 
Regarding western Europe , Judt stands on firm ground . 
He puts France and Germany center stage , and nicely elucidates the lurches and fumbles by which the European movement has progressed . 
Britain , including Northern Ireland , is not sidelined ; Scandinavia emerges in `` The Social-Democratic Moment '' ; and there are first-rate sections on the retreat from empire in the 1960s and on the rehabilitation of the Mediterranean countries in the 1970s . 
Judt , however , is impervious to religion , unmoved by music and rather complacent about non-French and non-political branches of art and culture . 
Parisian intellectual warlords and east European dissidents , though important , do not tell the whole story . 
Authors of syntheses must sometimes try to empathise with incongenial subjects . 
The attack on the late pope as a `` parochial '' idolater is demeaning . 
As a paid-up professor of philosophy , with a PhD on Schelerian phenomenology , John Paul II could have offered Judt a much-needed tutorial on comprehending the full spectrum of human ideas and experience . 
Surprisingly , therefore , Judt 's expos of the workings of the Soviet bloc is almost magnificent . 
He is specially good on Czechoslovakia , and carefully differentiates the reactions of different countries to successive crises . 
His chapter `` Into the Whirlwind '' -LRB- after Ginzburg -RRB- is a model , nuanced analysis of Stalinist practices : from the monopoly power of the party-state to its mad economics , its colonialism and its gargantuan organs of repression . 
-LRB- One statistic speaks volumes : the Stasi employed five times as many operatives in the DDR as the Gestapo employed in the entire Reich . -RRB- 
None the less , one has to say `` almost '' because of Judt 's strange reluctance to give the Stalinist spade its real name . 
Elsewhere , he accepts the fact of communism 's criminality . 
Yet the term `` mass murder '' does not occur until page 559 , echoing Solzhenitsyn , and the term `` crimes against humanity '' does not surface until page 681 in relation to ex-Yugoslavia . 
As Judt knows perfectly well , Milosevic compared to Stalin , or to Stalin 's pupil , Mao , is a garden gnome . 
He records Tarrou 's good intention , from La Peste , `` to reject everything that makes people die '' . 
It is a fair motto . 
Similarly , the account of the Soviet bloc 's demise is very nearly brilliant . 
There is no need to invent an antithesis between the role of Solidarity - which is dismissed as a `` sideshow '' - and subsequent events in Moscow . 
Surely the two were complementary . 
But Judt is absolutely correct to concentrate on Gorbachev 's bungling . 
It would be still better if discussion of the mishandling of the nationalities issue were not postponed to a further , exquisite section on the Baltic states , and if the meaning of glasnost in the Soviet context were properly explained . 
-LRB- Initially it meant internal party discussion . -RRB- 
Revered in the west for reversing foreign policy , `` Gorbie '' was widely reviled throughout the USSR as a clueless reformer . 
He knew very little about Soviet history , and hence about the foundations of the system which he headed . 
Postwar is worth buying for one judgment alone : Gorbachev `` had no idea what he was doing '' . 
Unlike the USSR , the US features only sporadically , like the ghost at the feast . 
Perhaps the author assumed that his readers ' grasp of the American background was adequate . 
At all events , the later chapters , `` Varieties of Europe '' and `` Europe as a Way of Life '' , stress the contrasts with the US . 
And they end on an upbeat . 
`` The 21st century '' , writes Judt , `` might yet belong to Europe . '' 
Errors and omissions inevitably occur . 
Apart from religion and the arts , the thinnest coverage relates to the Irish republic , to the big regions of France and Germany , and to European regionalism in general . 
What a pity , too , that Judt does not share his thoughts here on the founding of Israel - surely an important topic in `` The Legacy of War '' . 
-LRB- In 2003 , he courageously criticised Israel as an `` anachronistic '' `` ethno-state '' , thereby earning himself a rich crop of inappropriate epithets . -RRB- 
Overall , the great schoolmaster in the sky might mark this effort at 8 or 9 out of 10 . 
Determined nit-pickers , with their own priorities , might rate it lower . 
The only sensible response to their carping is : `` Let them produce something better . '' 
In reality , it is most unlikely that Judt 's achievement will be superseded soon . 
Norman Davies 's next book , Europe at War , will be published by Macmillan in 2006 . 
To order Postwar for # 23 with free UK p & p call Guardian book service on 08708360875 . 
Write your review of this or any other book , find out what other readers thought or add it to your lists Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Review : Postwar by Tony Judt This article appeared on p8 of the Guardian review section of the Guardian on 01.54 GMT on Saturday 3 December 2005 Latest news and views from the Guardian 's books team paullaity : Read this : clever and funny and rightly cutting . 
