John Gray , academic , writer and public intellectual , was an unlikely Thatcherite , then an early Blairite . 
He is now the scourge of neocons and the disciples of science and rationalism If you had to fit the message of John Gray 's 14 books and innumerable articles on a sandwich board , it would be simple : you 're all doomed . 
Quite who is doomed , and why , has varied with the development of his thought . 
He started off as a Thatcherite and cold warrior , convinced that the postwar consensus and welfare state could not last . 
Then he became an early Blairite , warning against the dangers of Thatcherism . 
Now he attacks Blair as a dangerous neocon ; he has been an unyielding opponent of the Iraq war and he is convinced that globalisation will end in a welter of resource wars and ecological collapse . 
Peter Wilby , a former editor of the New Statesman who published him for three years , says : `` He 's one of life 's sceptics , really . 
Any kind of ideology - the more he looks at it , the more he decides that it crumbles apart . 
None of the emperors has any clothes so far as John is concerned . '' 
In all this , he sees himself as consistent . 
As a polemicist he has always argued against the conventional wisdom , and usually been about five years ahead of it . 
As a political philosopher , he believes he has always had a guiding principle : that there are certain limits on human life which politics can never abolish , and never wholly work around . 
Utopian or universal schemes will only make things worse . 
This sounds like conservatism ; but he also believes that real , reactionary conservatism is no longer possible : `` The right today likes to imagine that it is the voice of the past . 
In truth ... the fate of the right in the late modern age is to destroy what remains of the past in a vain attempt to recover it . '' 
Gray was born in 1947 into a world which the market has quite swept away : the working class of Tyneside , when they still had jobs . 
His father was a shipyard joiner in South Shields . 
They never thought of themselves as poor , he says ; others remember it differently . 
His childhood friend Robert Colls , now a historian at the University of Leicester , who grew up in the same part of town , remembers `` this poor brilliant boy living in a mixed area of town . 
His dad was disabled in his 50s . 
I think he had a hard time on the money front . '' 
In 1968 , he went up to Oxford to read PPE on a scholarship . 
Isaiah Berlin was at Oxford then , working on the most subtle and powerful justification for liberalism that anyone managed in the 20th century ; Gray , who became a friend , set out to overthrow it . 
Liberalism , said Berlin , is valuable because it lets people live in many different ways , seeking many different goals . 
But no one society , Gray objects , can encompass all the humanly fulfilling ways to live . 
Russia under totalitarianism\/communism was in some respects less materialistic and more respectful of culture than it is now , but these virtues were made possible only by a dreadful tyranny . 
His arguments on this topic are pitched in academic prose , but they can be boiled down into one line of Mick Jagger 's : We ca n't get no satisfaction . 
We are not the sort of creatures who could get lasting satisfaction , not just because we often want bad things instead of good ones , but because the goods we want ca n't be reconciled with each other . 
The Australian philosopher George Crowder claims that Gray must logically endorse Stalin and Hitler as offering legitimate models of society , something Gray cheerfully denies . 
The fact that our values , though real , are sometimes incompatible does n't mean they have nothing in common . 
It must be possible , he claims , to build some kind of minimal universal moral framework , even if this does not lead to liberalism : `` No society can be called good which rests on torture . '' 
His pessimistic twist on Berlin is also part of the rootless conservatism which has made him denounce the projects of the right as passionately as he denounced Marxism . 
He believes that human life can always be made better , but that this process does not approach perfection . 
New problems are always arising ; old gains can easily be lost . 
There is no steady ladder of progress ; but we are able , sometimes , to run up the down escalator . 
He rejects the idea that political debate starts from human rights . 
The process seems to him the other way round : that `` rights '' are something that emerge from a political process , and different rights may be produced under different political systems . 
None is inherent in all human beings , and the ones that we do recognize may conflict with each other . 
When they do so , we ca n't honestly resolve the problem by logic which everyone comes to accept , nor even , as Americans do , by handing the matter over to a Supreme Court . 
The final decision , says Gray , must be political . 
As a working-class undergraduate , he was a Thatcherite before Thatcher herself , a believer in the market , and a critic of planned economies . 
He read Hayek in the late 1960s , and understood his essential point to be that markets in some sense know more than any of the people who operate in them . 
It followed that state planning , and social engineering based on rational discussion were always likely to go wrong . 
This much was common among Thatcherites in the 70s , but unlike most Thatcherites , he saw that ripping down communities to make way for a market was itself a form of social engineering , though an often anti-social one . 
`` Give him any collection of pigeons and he 'll set a cat among them , '' says his friend the academic and publisher Henry Hardy . 
Gray 's views on council-house sales are a good example of his contrarian style - and of his appetite for anchoring large arguments in historical detail . 
The sale of council houses , he said , might have been good for the Conservative party in the short term , but it did nothing to decrease dependency on the state , as it was supposed to do . 
All it changed was the form of subsidy . 
`` Spending on housing benefit during 1996-67 was over 10 times the total cost of housing benefits in 1979-80 . 
Public expenditure on social housing was replaced , many times over , by rent rebates and assistance with the payment of mortgages . 
The price of privatising municipal housing in Britain has been a colossal increase in welfare dependency . '' 
This kind of inconsistency in Thatcherism led to his conversion to Blairism . 
As a Blairite in the days before there was a Blair government , he started to attack the costs of the free market : `` In the United States free markets have contributed to social breakdown on a scale unknown in any other developed country . 
Families are weaker in America than in any other country . 
At the same time , social order has been propped up by a policy of mass incarceration . 
No other advanced industrial country , aside from post-communist Russia , uses imprisonment as a means of social control on the scale of the United States . 
Free markets , the desolation of families and communities and the use of the sanctions of criminal law as a last recourse against social collapse go in tandem . '' 
Thatcherism was not just a local phenomenon . 
It was also recognized as a global symbol , and this was the next symbol against which he charged . 
Nothing could be more alien to his temperament than the 90s ' bland optimism that history was over and the whole world must converge , with greater or lesser success , on the model of the United States of America . 
For one thing , he argued , globalisation depends on the world being different . 
If it were all the same , there would be no reason to invest in one part of it rather than another . 
The vast , destabilising currency markets take as their premise the inequalities between nations , and then act to enlarge them , not to bring countries together . 
The spread of technology was inevitable and irreversible . 
But there was no reason to suppose that the spread of American technology meant the spread of American models of society ; and the examples of countries that had successfully enriched themselves with modern technology , such as Japan , shows that their differences from western models were essential to their success . 
Although he was prolific - 12 books - and successful , Gray was little known outside academic circles until the mid-90s . 
His first post , at the University of East Anglia , had been succeeded by a job at Jesus College , Oxford , where he remained for nearly 15 years . 
He held visiting professorships at Harvard and Yale . 
His writing has always had a chameleon quality . 
When he writes about Berlin his sentences stretch and then tangle and convolute like brain cells . 
When he writes about his favorite philosopher , the Spanish aphorist Santayana , his own style becomes elegant and precise . 
In 1998 he moved to the LSE , as professor of European thought , and in 2000 he published Straw Dogs , with Granta , rather than Routledge , which marked his breakthrough as a public intellectual . 
It is written in a wrought-up , aphoristic style . 
`` When will the Jews be forgiven the Holocaust ? '' 
he asks at one stage . 
But it was very widely and respectfully reviewed . 
His view of the world cut through the antidepressant euphoria of the 90s with a sense of a much nastier future ahead . 
In Straw Dogs , his pessimism became truly global , and entangled with environmentalism . 
The hubris which he had been denouncing all his life , first in socialism , then in neo-liberalism , was now identified with the notion of growth . 
Just as before , nemesis was to be supplied by nature . 
But this time it was not human nature that would ensure our doom , but nature itself . 
Since then , a series of short , punchy books has kept up with the troubles of the age . 
His essays for the New Statesman are being republished as Heresies with a characteristic subtitle : Against Progress and Other Illusions . 
His fiercest scorn has switched to the disciples of rationalism and of science : `` Of all modern delusions , the idea that we live in a secular age is the furthest from reality ... liberal humanism itself is very obviously a religion - a shoddy replica of Christian faith markedly more irrational than the original article , and in recent times more harmful . '' 
