By Nic Robertson , CNN senior international correspondent Is opposition waning in Tripoli ? 
Until the leadership is overthrown , then Tripoli is where the tipping point will need to happen It appears at the moment that both sides are heading for a stalemate If talks can progress in rebel-controlled Zawia and Misrata it could provide incentive for other areas The government is feeling international and domestic pressure but it is also a diehard leadership Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- In Libya , the rivals for power appear to be heading towards a stalemate . 
CNN 's Nic Robertson explains what 's happening in the capital , Tripoli , why two cities in rebel control could be key to the country 's future , and why neither side has the power to dislodge the other completely . 
What 's it like on the streets of Tripoli ? 
We have seen about three rings of security around the capital . 
They include Army checkpoints with armored personnel carriers , anti-aircraft batteries and tanks . 
But there are not that many soldiers around and they do n't stop many vehicles . 
They are more interested in vehicles coming into the city than those leaving it . 
On the streets in the outskirts where we know there have been anti-government protests we saw some police in armored vehicles and riot gear . 
But we are talking about a couple of dozen at any one location . 
At street intersections there might be a couple of soldiers or police armed with automatic weapons but it is not a complete lockdown of every street . 
The traffic passes through and they are not stopping people . 
How willing are people to talk to you ? 
Fuel truck causes blasts in Tripoli Quiet but not normal in Tripoli For rebels , a long road to Tripoli Some people , as soon as they see the camera , they come up and tell us how much they love Gadhafi but if you engage in conversation you can scratch the surface and they will tell you they want reforms . 
Often you hear the chant or people saying `` miya miya '' which means they are 100 percent for Gadhafi . 
Others may not want to share their opinions but it is clear they are not happy with the situation or the government . 
Yet others are brave to explain their positions . 
One man who came up to me took me into his confidence . 
He said they had tried anti-government protests and thought they were doing well , but now they 've been so badly beaten and forced off the streets that they are afraid to come out again . 
Is Gadhafi 's message resonating with Libyans ? 
There is an uneducated population that will go with their tribe . 
If the tribe says `` go with Gadhafi '' then they support Gadhafi . 
Government officials will tell you a good part of the population will follow the tribe . 
It is not a developed society . 
It 's tribal and basic and people are not taught to analyze for themselves . 
When you speak to the more middle class people they take it with more of a pinch of salt . 
But a lot of these people are worried by how the protests developed . 
I talked to a lawyer who said he protested the regime but when he saw weapons in the hands of protesters he felt the protest was being hijacked . 
These people have a lot at stake -- their kids ' education , their businesses or professional reputations . 
They are worried that violent protests threaten stability . 
They want change but do not want it through violent means . 
There were others , intellectuals among them , who think they have to really pressure the regime to make the change . 
Can the protesters in other parts of the country affect what happens in Tripoli ? 
Protesters in Benghazi can come out on the streets but it will not change anything in Tripoli . 
Until the leadership is overthrown in Tripoli , then Tripoli is where the tipping point will need to happen . 
But they can make a difference by organizing politically to either negotiate with the government or to build international pressure . 
And they can organize militarily to move forces and try to take the capital . 
But that is not going to happen anytime soon . 
In a place like Zawia the center is controlled by the opposition but they are surrounded by government forces . 
The more they engage the military the more it stretches the government but it does not appear they are doing that . 
We are in a stand off . 
There is no pressure point where the opposition can push through . 
What do the options seem to be at the moment for how this will play out ? 
The government says it wants to negotiate . 
I do not think the government can get away with wholesale bloodshed to retake parts of the country . 
I am not sure that they have enough loyal military to mobilize against the opposition . 
The government does not have the strength to breakout from where it is . 
And the opposition does not have the strength to tip the balance at the moment . 
I think a key test will be in Zawia , west of Tripoli , and Misrata , east of Tripoli . 
We are told the government is trying to negotiate with the rebels in these areas . 
If they can negotiate then they may be able to be productive with rebels elsewhere . 
But I do n't think it will come together in the next few days . 
The situation can not go on for much longer but it could still be a few weeks . 
A senior government official told me dealing with the opposition is `` chaotic . '' 
The opposition is divided . 
There are the protest leaders and former government ministers who have just resigned and swapped sides . 
It is possible the government is reaching out to the former government elements . 
There is no effective process for any sort of dialogue . 
I think the government here does not quite know what to do . 
It is still on the back foot . 
The government is feeling international and domestic pressure but it is also a diehard leadership . 
