From Jill Dougherty and Elise Labott , CNN Obama doing enough to pressure Gadhafi ? 
A delegation of U.S. House members visits the Libyan Embassy Washington -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The Obama administration is considering whether it should cut diplomatic ties with Libya , a senior U.S. official told CNN on Tuesday . 
`` Whether to maintain relations or sever them is under review , '' the official said . 
Cutting ties would send a strong message that the United States no longer considers the government of Moammar Gadhafi to be legitimate . 
President Barack Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton both said in recent days that Gadhafi has lost his legitimacy to rule the Libyan people and should leave power . 
According to the senior U.S. official , the last high-level communication with Gadhafi 's government was last week , when Clinton spoke with Libyan Foreign Minister Musa Kusa . 
Mass Libya exodus creates border chaos Fuel truck causes blasts in Tripoli U.S. preps Libyan humanitarian effort Who makes money from Libyan oil ? 
However , the official also said there was `` still some utility '' in reserving channels of communication with the Gadhafi government , noting that some American citizens remain in Libya and there could be a need to talk to Libyan officials about humanitarian activity . 
`` There may be instructions one has to give to Libya depending on what happens going forward , '' the official said . 
The official added that the United States still considered Ali Aujali to be the legitimate Libyan ambassador to the United States , even after the Gadhafi regime notified Washington that Aujali no longer represented its interests . 
Last week , Aujali said he no longer represented the regime because of Gadhafi 's brutal repression against the Libyan people . 
But he said he still represented the Libyan people and told the State Department he would remain a liaison to the Libyan opposition . 
On Monday , the State Department received a fax from the Libyan government saying Aujali was no longer the ambassador and it had named the deputy ambassador as the new `` charge d'affaires , '' spokesman P.J. Crowley told reporters . 
The senior U.S. official said the fax from Libya was not an official diplomatic note and until State Department lawyers review its authenticity , `` Ambassador Aujali continues to be the head of mission at this time . '' 
At the Libyan Embassy on Tuesday , Aujali greeted a delegation of U.S. House members led by Democratic Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee of Texas who came for a visit as a few dozen anti-Gadhafi protesters chanted on the street . 
Afterwards , Jackson Lee said she and her colleagues would try to ensure that the U.S. government continues to recognize Aujali to be `` the representative of the Libyan people . '' 
She praised Aujali for condemning the Gadhafi regime , saying that , `` In jeopardy of his life , he has been willing to stand with those who fight . '' 
Aujali asked for support from the United States . 
`` Please stand with us to change this regime , to stop the killing of the Libyan people which is taking place every day , '' he said , later adding : `` This regime is a brutal regime . 
The slogan of the regime is , ' I rule you or I kill you . ' '' 
As Jackson Lee 's delegation prepared to get in vehicles to leave , they were surrounded by demonstrators who wanted to shake their hands and hug them . 
We stand with the people of Libya , '' Jackson Lee repeated over and over amid a barrage of embraces . 
