In one painting , pro-regime thugs are disguised as monstrous animals Severed heads lie on platters , like fruit on the table . 
A woman protects her baby as monsters move in . 
Angels with no heads still manage to fly . 
There is a queue of gray figures , maybe standing guard over their country , maybe lined up for execution . 
All are pictures from inside Syria , painted during the last year of bloodshed and turmoil . 
All of the artists except the organiser , Mouneer al-Shaarani , are still inside Syria right now . 
Yes to freedom : Shaarani has used his training as a calligrapher to express his message He will return there as soon as the exhibition finishes , despite supervising this artistic outpouring against the government . 
`` I must be there , '' he says with a shake of the head . 
`` I have to be back . 
I have to be with the people for what is going on . '' 
The overstretched security forces have more important priorities than rounding up artists , Mr Shaarani believes and hopes . 
`` The prisons are already full so art is at the bottom of the regime 's priorities , '' he suggests . 
Nevertheless , he and several of the artists whose work is on show have spent time in the prisons of the Assad dynasty , and spent many years in exile . 
Mr Shaarani has used his training as a calligrapher - a skill much valued in the Arab world - to portray his message . 
If we look at the history of art , art always has a role in politics '' `` Yes to freedom , '' says the intricate pattern in one piece , `` no to killing , prison , intimidation , humiliation , siege , hypocrisy , suppression , violence , fear , falsehood , terrorism , corruption . '' 
Another of his pictures repeatedly weaves the name of Syria with the tribes , religions , and ethnic groups that belong there . 
Indivisible and united , is the message . 
But that is about as hopeful as it gets in this bleak collection . 
In one dark picture a man lies dead , a bullet clean through his forehead . 
In another by the same artist , Youssef Abdelke , there is a knife , and a heart . 
The artists are considering whether to mount a private exhibition inside Syria In one of Edwar Shahda 's pictures , pro-regime thugs are thinly and horribly disguised as monstrous animals . 
One of them wields a bloodied knife , while a woman holding her baby screams in terror . 
A picture by Yaser Safi is called The Dictator . 
A crazed man is on a chair , a gun pointed to his own head . 
Read what you like into it . 
Mr Shaarani will not explain how they got the pictures out of Syria . 
Not openly , it is clear . 
The artists had already formed a couple of groups on Facebook , including a page called Art and Freedom . 
In Yaser Safi 's The Dictator , a crazed man is on a chair , a gun pointed to his own head Galleries are not open in Damascus at the moment , though they are considering whether to mount a private exhibition inside their country . 
`` If we look at the history of art , art always has a role in politics , '' argues Mr Shaarani . 
However , he concedes that these paintings are unlikely to influence any of those who are now ruling Syria . 
`` People at the moment are desperate , '' he says , because they have given up any hope of change from within the government . 
Nevertheless , he believes the key to change lies in peaceful opposition inside Syria itself . 
One of the aims of this art is to mobilise what he calls the `` silent people '' , who sympathise with the opposition but have not yet actively taken part . 
`` The situation is in the hands of the Syrian people . '' 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
