Oil spill map : What 's at stake ? 
Track the spill and view how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
See the major forms oil takes on upon water contact . 
View all the Washington Post graphics on the oil spill . 
President Obama will appoint former Florida senator Bob Graham -LRB- D -RRB- and former Environmental Protection Agency administrator William K. Reilly to head an independent probe of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , sources familiar with the decision said Friday night . 
The commission , which Obama will outline Saturday during his weekly radio address , will examine issues from causes of last month 's spill -- started when an offshore drilling rig exploded April 20 and then sank -- to federal oversight of offshore oil and gas drilling and the potential risks of such energy exploration . 
Both men are known for their strong environmental credentials . 
Reilly headed the EPA under President George H.W. Bush and now serves as chairman emeritus of the World Wildlife Fund , while Graham pushed for restoration of Florida 's Everglades during his three terms in the Senate . 
The commission , modeled on ones which investigated the Challenger shuttle explosion and the nuclear accident at Three Mile Island , will not include any federal officials , administration officials said this week . 
News of the appointments came late in a day when a senior official of the BP oil company said that it was siphoning far less oil from the Gulf of Mexico than other officials had said a day earlier , while Louisiana officials gave voice to rising frustration over the pace of the cleanup operation . 
Doug Suttles , the oil company 's chief operating officer , said that a tube inserted into a leaking pipe on the sea floor had captured 2,200 barrels of oil and 15 million cubic feet of natural gas in 24 hours . 
BP said Thursday that it was collecting 5,000 barrels a day , but Suttles said that rate was achieved only for short periods of time . 
He added that surges of gas meant that the mile-long tube , which is connected to a ship , was at times bringing up no oil . 
`` We 've never said it produced 5,000 barrels a day ... I apologize if for some reason you 've heard it that way , '' Suttles said . 
`` Yes , at some points in time , we 've had rates as high as 5,000 , but the average in the last day was 2,200 . '' 
At a command center in Robert , La. , Suttles said that the next effort to stop the oil spill -- a `` dynamic kill , '' in which high-pressure mud is used to plug the hole in the sea floor -- was not likely to come until Tuesday . 
Work to disperse and burn the oil offshore was making `` good progress , '' Suttles said . 
Closer to the coast , he said , `` Our near-shore activities were also quite successful yesterday ... We 're quite fortunate ; we have only had oil show up on seven locations onshore . '' 
But the mood was bleaker close to the coast . 
At a news conference in Chauvin , La. , Gov. Bobby Jindal -LRB- R -RRB- noted that thick , sludgy oil was now broaching some of his state 's marshes and beaches , and said he was beginning an emergency effort to build large sand islands to protect inland marshes . 
`` We 're not going to wait any longer . 
We can not wait any longer , '' Jindal said . 
The U.S. government has not yet responded to a Louisiana plan to build a larger string of barrier islands along the state 's coast . 
U.S. Coast Guard Capt. Edwin M. Stanton -- who oversees the New Orleans area -- admitted in Chauvin that he had not pushed BP hard enough , and that the oil company had moved too slowly in bringing floating `` containment boom '' to areas threatened by oil . 
Staff writer Steven Mufson contributed to this report . '' 
