Wednesday 20 April 2005 16.26 BST The bodies of 69 people , apparently victims of separate insurgent attacks , were discovered in two locations in Iraq today . 
The Iraqi president , Jalal Talabani , reported that the bodies of 50 people had been dragged from the Tigris river south of Baghdad . 
They are believed to be hostages held by insurgents in Madaen , a town south of Baghdad , since earlier this week . 
`` More than 50 bodies have been brought out from the Tigris , and we have the full names of those who were killed and those criminals who committed these crimes , '' Mr Talabani told reporters . 
`` We will give you details in the coming days ... terrorists committed crimes there . '' 
Mr Talabani gave no details about when or where the victims were abducted or found , saying only that the interim prime minister , Ayad Allawi , would deal with the matter . 
However , he provided the information in response to a question about the search for hostages reportedly seized from the Madaen region , south of Baghdad . 
Shia leaders and government officials claimed last week that Sunni militants had abducted as many as 100 Shia residents from the area , but when Iraqi forces moved into Madaen , they found no captives . 
Later , Shia officials said that dozens of bodies had been found in the Tigris river south of Madaen , but residents and police in the area who spoke to the Reuters news agency said they had not seen any bodies . 
Today Mr Talabani insisted : `` It is not true that there were no hostages . 
There were , but they were killed and they threw the bodies into the Tigris . '' 
Meanwhile , residents said they had found the bullet-ridden bodies of 19 Iraqi men in a soccer stadium in Haditha , a town 140 miles north of Baghad . 
Usama Rauf and Ousama Halim , both taxi drivers , said they heard gunshots and rushed to the stadium where they saw the bodies lined up against a bloodstained wall . 
An Iraqi reporter and other residents counted 19 bodies and said all of them appeared to have been shot . 
Residents said they believed the victims , all men in civilian clothes , were soldiers abducted by insurgents as they headed home for tomorrow 's holiday marking the birthday of the prophet Muhammad . 
Walid al-Hadithi , a doctor in the town 's hospital , told Reuters that the murders followed clashes in the area between national guardsmen , US troops and rebels . 
US forces said they were investigating , and Iraqi military officials said they had no immediate information . 
