Wednesday 19 January 2005 00.03 GMT The first British soldier has come forward to urge mass refusal among the ranks to serve in Iraq , saying he would rather go to prison than accept a call-up to war . 
Speaking ahead of a press conference today , Lance Corporal George Solomou , from the London regiment of the Territorial Army , said : `` I am not going to Iraq , point-blank . 
I am a conscientious objector to this war , and I am going to see how the army plays it from there . 
I would rather spend a year in prison than a minute in Iraq as part of an illegal war . '' 
He spoke out as the Ministry of Defense said it was unable to provide details of serious injuries sustained by 790 British troops evacuated since the invasion of Iraq . 
Their injuries were as a result of `` hostile actions , accidents , and other incidents '' , Ivor Caplin , the junior defense minister , told MPs earlier this month . 
Mr Solomou describes an atmosphere of restlessness over Iraq in the increasingly deployed reservist TA , saying : `` I want to act as a beacon for other soldiers to come out and say they are against the war , or at least that they are not prepared to go . 
There are so many more soldiers out there who believe what I believe . 
`` I have always wanted to be a soldier and I still want to be a soldier , '' he added . 
`` But I want to be used in the correct manner . 
We are not just pieces of flesh to be moved about on a chessboard . '' 
Mr Solomou , 38 , a worker for the emergency services in east London , said he had always opposed the war in Iraq , and had marched against it in February 2003 with a group of TA colleagues . 
Citing his objections yesterday , he said : `` I believe the occupation of Iraq to be illegal . 
They have tried everything - weapons of mass destruction , the connection to al-Qaida - none of it was true . 
`` Now the fundamental bedrocks of democracy are being trampled by this war , with the American treatment of prisoners . 
Added to that , the Iraqis can see oil tanker after oil tanker coming out of Iraq while they have n't even got electricity . 
This war is a turning point in history and is about America setting itself on a course to control the world 's petroleum . '' 
Mr Solomou started his TA career as an infantryman , but transferred to the Royal Army Medical Corps attached to the London Irish Rifles . 
He will present his case at a press conference at Westminster today , convened by Military Families Against the War , and led by Rose Gentle from Glasgow , whose 19-year-old son Gordon was killed in Iraq in June last year . 
Most of the 790 injuries sustained by British service personnel since March 2003 were caused by shrapnel , defense sources suggested yesterday . 
The MoD said it could not give any further information . 
It is known that a number have had limbs amputated . 
They include two Royal Signals soldiers who lost their legs in a suicide bomber attack on the Black Watch battlegroup south of Baghdad in November . 
Seveny-three members of the armed forces have been killed in Iraq , more than half the result of accidents and , in at least one case , suicide , according to the latest MoD figures on fatalities . 
Mr Caplin also told MPs earlier this month that there are about 400 British military medical personnel in Iraq , including surgeons , dentists , physiotherapists and mental health specialists . 
In separate parliamentary answers , the Foreign Office minister , Bill Rammell , said the government had `` no reliable of ascertaining the number of Iraqi civilians injured by military or terrorist action '' since May 2003 . 
But he said that according to the Iraqi health minister , figures based on records from some 180 hospitals , showed that between April and October last year 15,517 Iraqi civilians were injured , and 3,853 killed . 
