Wednesday 19 January 2005 14.24 GMT Photograph number nine of a set of 22 showing Lance Corporal Mark Cooley driving a fork lift truck with an Iraqi detainee bound to it . 
Photograph : PA A lawyer for one of the British soldiers facing charges of abusing Iraqi detainees today blamed superiors who had called for a crackdown on looters at a British camp . 
Three Royal Regiment of Fusiliers soldiers are on trial at a court martial this week charged with abusing and sexually humiliating looters they had detained at an aid camp in Basra , southern Iraq , in May 2003 . 
Twenty two photographs of soldiers abusing naked and bound detainees , including images of them being forced to feign sexual acts , prompted outrage after being released by the court last night . 
Today , on the second day of the hearing , a lawyer for the most senior of the accused soldiers , Corporal Daniel Kenyon , 33 , referred to Major Dan Taylor who , the hearing was told yesterday , had launched the crackdown on looters at Camp Bread Basket . 
The major ordered an operation called Ali Baba - a reference to the story Ali Baba and the 40 Thieves - ordering that looters be caught and soldiers `` work them hard '' . 
Today Joseph Giret , Cpl Kenyon 's lawyer , told the hearing : `` He -LRB- Cpl Kenyon -RRB- has not acted out of character . 
The whole reason he is in the dock stems from those who gave the order to operate the Ali Baba plan . '' 
Major Taylor was expected to give evidence to the hearing in Osnabruck , northern Germany , later today . 
Speaking yesterday Lieutenant Colonel Nick Clapham , prosecuting , said Major Taylor 's order was in breach of the Geneva Convention . 
Cpl Kenyon pleaded not guilty yesterday to six charges , including aiding and abetting a person to force two naked detainees to simulate a sex act and failing to report the alleged abuse . 
Today Mr Giret told the panel of seven officers who are trying the soldiers that Cpl Kenyon had been described as a `` war hero '' who had saved soldiers ' lives in the conflict . 
The photographs , taken two weeks after the fall of Saddam Hussein 's regime , prompted comparisons with those showing US troops abusing detainees at Abu Ghraib prison outside Baghdad which caused international outrage . 
As well as showing forced simulation of sexual acts , some also depict British soldiers allegedly pretending to punch and kick bound men and a prisoner tied to the raised tines of a forklift truck . 
In the Commons this morning , the prime minister , Tony Blair , said that while there was disgust at the `` shocking and appalling '' images , he hoped that the proceedings in Germany would `` indicate we do not tolerate this type of activity in any shape or form '' . 
In Germany , the court has heard that the Ali Baba operation began at daybreak on May 15 2003 with more than 100 British soldiers patrolling the camp in groups of four to six . 
A number of looters were caught and forced to carry back the aid they had stolen . 
They were then broken up into groups and distributed between the servicemen to be `` worked hard '' by carrying out menial tasks at the camp . 
A section run by Cpl Kenyon was given three or four Iraqis to detain and work and a short time later the scenes in the photographs occurred . 
The other men facing court martial are Lance Corporal Darren Larkin , 30 , from Oldham , Greater Manchester , and Lance Corporal Cooley , 25 , from Newcastle upon Tyne . 
L\/Cpl Larkin yesterday admitted one charge of assaulting an unknown male at the camp , but pleaded not guilty to a charge of indecent conduct for allegedly forcing two Iraqi detainees to undress in front of others . 
One of the released photographs shows L\/Cpl Larkin wearing shorts and flip-flops standing on top of a bound Iraqi . 
L\/Cpl Cooley denied three charges , including placing an unknown Iraqi captive on a forklift and also `` simulating '' punching and kicking a detainee while someone else took photographs . 
The court heard yesterday that L\/Cpl Cooley admitted driving the truck but claimed it was `` to move the man out of the sun '' . 
The court heard today that all the accused were briefed on the law of armed conflict and prisoner of war handling , according to army records . 
The army 's senior legal adviser in Iraq , Lieutenant Colonel Nicholas Mercer , told the hearing his orders had made it clear how detainees should be treated . 
He said that the Geneva Convention only allowed photographs of prisoners of war to be taken for the purpose of identification and that photographing civilian detainees had to be `` humane and dignified '' . 
The photographs came to light after a film was taken to be developed at a high street shop in Britain by Fusilier Gary Bartlam , who was convicted of a number of offences in connection with them last week . 
Details of his case can not be fully reported because of reporting restrictions imposed by Judge Advocate Michael Hunter , who is sitting on the hearing 's panel . 
The hearing , which is expected to last up to four weeks , continues . 
up to four weeks , continues . 
