Too bad the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention -LRB- CDC -RRB- does n't charge for its information or make money off its website -- they could have made a pile of cash on the swine flu scare . 
-LRB- You know , if it was n't a government site . -RRB- 
Web traffic measurement firm comScore says traffic soared at CDC . 
gov last month , as people visited the website amid concerns over the H1N1 , or swine , flu . 
In April , CDC . 
gov saw a 142 percent increase in traffic , or 5.7 million visitors , making it the top audience gainer among websites , comScore said . 
`` When news of the swine flu pandemic erupted , many Americans turned to the Internet as their primary source of information for how to keep themselves and their families safe , '' said Jack Flanagan , executive vice president at comScore Media Metrix . 
Social networks also continued their tear last month , growing 12 percent to nearly 140 million visitors . 
That 's about three-quarters of the U.S. online population , comScore says , so chances are someone you know is either is Twittering , Facebook-ing or on MySpace . 
Twitter jumped 83 percent to 17 million visitors , while Facebook grew 10 percent in April from the previous month to reach 67.5 million visitors . 
MySpace had 71 million visitors . 
Will The Boston Globe 's biggest union balk at the New York Times Co offer ? 
-LRB- The Boston Phoenix -RRB- Web entrepreneurs may no longer need venture capital dollars -LRB- The New York Times Bits blog -RRB- MGM scrambles to restructure its $ 3.7 billion debt pile -LRB- Financial Times -RRB- First they were blamed for the swine flu that caused a worldwide stir after it was discovered in Mexico -- and now everyone 's likening them to Members of Parliament with their snouts in the trough . 
But look at the facts . 
The genetic make-up of the virus may have been predominantly porcine but the pigs themselves did n't have it . 
Even at the supposed epicentre of the outbreak in Mexico they showed no symptoms -- things reached such a state that owners of some pig farms in the US were stopping humans coming near them in case they infected their animals . 
The pigs were innocent OK ? 
And yet the name `` swine flu '' stuck , lots of people stopped eating pork and in Egypt they were even culled . 
Use Twitter 's name even when you 're dissing it : that could be a good way to ensure some publicity , given the hype around everyone 's current sweetheart . 
But maybe Scribd , the social publishing startup that lets you upload all kinds of documents online and embed them into blog posts , does have a point about the misinformation that Twitterers could be putting up in 140-character bursts . 
After all , at the Society of American Business Editors and Writers -LRB- SABEW -RRB- conference last week , CUNY J-school professor Sandeep Junnarkar did begin his workshop on Twitter for journalists with a caveat : `` Everything you find on Twitter is rumors , false information . 
That 's the default position . '' 
Kind of like what journalists and students are always told about Wikipedia . 
A press release that landed in my inbox from Scribd seeks to distinguish the San Francisco-based startup as `` anti-Twitter '' -- the antithesis of Twitter . 
Scribd is `` quickly becoming a trusted source for unfiltered , detailed information about the swine flu , '' the release says . 
Facebook has been mapping swine flu discussions among its members for the past few days using its Lexicon application , and it 's pretty cool to see how the conversation on Wall posts shot up over the weekend as more and more cases of the disease came to light in the United States . 
Lexicon , for those who do n't have to follow Facebook 's every move , is a tool the social networking site uses to follow trends on words and phrases that are being used on `` Walls , '' the open space on each member 's profile where friends can post comments . 
Kind of like how you can take the pulse of topics trending up or down in Twitter search . 
The chart below , courtesy of Facebook , shows how there were no mentions of the term `` swine flu '' before the evening of April 23 on any of its 200 million members ' walls , but people start discussing it quite a bit over the next two days , causing a sharp upward spike . 
