ATLANTA | Fri May 15 , 2009 2:58 pm EDT ATLANTA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - President Barack Obama on Friday named a new director for the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , tapping a health activist who pushed for expanding AIDS testing and banning smoking in restaurants . 
Dr. Thomas Frieden , 48 , who has been New York City 's top health official since 2002 , will head the federal agency charged with protecting Americans from illnesses ranging from heart disease to new flu strains . 
Under Frieden 's leadership , New York became the first city in the country to ban trans fats , which clog arteries and raise the risk of heart disease , from food in restaurants . 
He will take over as director of an organization that has been central to global efforts to combat the H1N1 flu virus . 
The illness , also known as swine flu , has killed 65 people , most in Mexico and infected nearly 6,500 people in 33 nations . 
`` Frieden is an expert in preparedness and response to health emergencies , and has been at the forefront of the fight against heart disease , cancer and obesity , infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and AIDS , '' the White House said in a statement . 
`` Frieden has been a leader in the fight for health care reform , and his experiences confronting public health challenges in our country and abroad will be essential in this new role , '' it said . 
In New York he spearheaded the country 's biggest community-based electronic health record project in an effort to improve preventive care . 
Frieden also worked in India for five years on tuberculosis control and has experience as an epidemiologist , administrator , teacher , researcher , clinician and community organizer . 
Frieden , who will start his job in June , told a news conference he was `` deeply honored '' by the appointment . 
The new CDC director brings `` real world experience fighting AIDS '' to the agency , according to The AIDS Healthcare Foundation , the largest HIV\/AIDS organization in the country . 
Frieden has pressed for expanding routine testing for AIDS as a first step to controlling a virus that is spreading in the United States among minorities , gay and bisexual men and many women . 
Jeff Levi of the Trust for America 's Health , an advocacy and study group often critical of U.S. health policy , described Frieden as a bold leader who could reinvigorate the CDC . 
But he argued that the agency 's director is often a passive diplomat with fewer powers of direct persuasion than a state or city health officer and that the organization must wait to be invited by state authorities or governments to intervene . 
In evidence of divided reaction to some of Frieden 's decisions in New York , the Center for Consumer Freedom , a coalition supported by restaurants , food companies and consumers , called Frieden an `` over-zealous activist '' . 
Frieden `` does n't give any consideration to personal responsibility or privacy '' when it comes to health , said Justin Wilson , a research analyst for the center . 
Frieden will likely follow the lead of former CDC director Dr. Julie Gerberding in becoming a visible spokesperson for the agency . 
The CDC has been headed by acting director Dr. Richard Besser since Gerberding resigned in January . 
Besser became the public face of the organization 's fight against H1N1 during daily televised news briefings . 
He will continue in his role coordinating CDC 's office of terrorism preparedness and emergency response , the statement said . 
The CDC , based in Atlanta , has a budget of around $ 9 billion and is responsible for tracking diseases across the United States and helping other countries battle outbreaks of diseases ranging from H5N1 avian influenza to Ebola . 
