The new flu strain that emerged in Mexico last month has brought Japanese TV shows , newspapers and government ads out in a rash of demonstration s of the art of proper hand-washing to avoid the spread of germs . 
`` First , you clean the palms , then rub the dirt off the back of the hands . 
Make sure you wash between fingers and finger tips . 
And yes , do n't forget your thumbs and wrists !! '' Even for the Japanese , who wear flu and hay fever masks by the million , sometimes when they 're not even sick , washing hands thoroughly for at least 15 seconds requires extra effort , as not many of us are well-versed in proper thumb-washing techniques . 
The government also has a `` cough etiquette '' campaign calling on people to cover their mouths with a tissue when in the act , adding the rather obvious need to face away from other people . 
The guideline says post-cough dirty tissues must be thrown away immediately , although it does n't say where - a slight drawback in a country that is occasionaly trashcan-challenged . 
Japan reported its first confirmed cases of the new flu recently and now has four patients , detected at Narita international Airport and sent directly to a hospital nearby to limit the spread of H1N1 . 
The government continues to have health officials board planes from Mexico , the United States and Canada to check passengers , including using portable thermal sensors to find people with fever . 
A Reuters colleague went through on-board medical checks lasting more than one hour last week . 
`` In the U.S. , everything was more relaxed , '' she told me the other day . 
`` Some people were getting irritated by the wait on the plane but no one was angry . 
As we had to wait for all passengers to be inspected , a flight attendant announced results of the NBA playoffs to take our minds off our frustration . '' 
Handed a mask to wear when leaving the plane , she got a call a few days later from a local public health center that took down her contact numbers , travel history and health conditions after the flight . 
Despite these efforts , it seems like it 's just a matter of time before the disease spreads around the country , whether or not we wash our hands and cough correctly . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Before moving to my current position , I specialised in Japan 's economic policy and macroeconomic news for about 10 years , with a concentration in reporting daily policy developments at Ministry of Finance , the Bank of Japan and other economic agencies . 
