BP and a global ethic Bruce Rich looks far from our own world for solutions to the great problems facing civilization . 
His quest takes him back to ancient times where he finds virtue in an ethical system developed by an Indian emperor called Ashoka in the third century B.C. . 
In his book To Uphold the World : A Call for a New Global Ethic From Ancient India , Rich shows how in our day of globalization and multicultural tensions we have much to learn from Ashoka s policy of nonviolence and compassion . 
Here , he argues that the BP oil spill makes the need for a global ethic all the more pressing . 
Rich is a D.C. attorney who promotes environmental and social standards for international finance . 
In the aftermath of the BP oil spill what has been left unsaid amidst all the finger pointing is that it is the latest example of a global economy in desperate need of a global ethic . 
The world economic system is driving a significant number of all living creatures to extinction . 
It is a world order -- or disorder -- which is increasingly undermining the biological foundations of long-term human civilization . 
Millions on the Gulf Coast now realize belatedly just how much their economic and social survival is linked to the respect and safeguard of other species and ecosystems . 
The global order of the past 20 years has prioritized market forces over other social values and created a profoundly unstable , interconnected world . 
A financial crisis in Greece tanks the Dow Jones Industrial Average in New York and China s cheap manufacturing affects the polar ice caps . 
It is a world not only of increased inequality and environmental deterioration , but , as the global financial crisis shows , one where the viability of whole societies , nations , and democracy itself can be put at risk . 
A decade ago George Soros warned that market fundamentalism was a greater threat to human society than any totalitarian ideology , noting that the supreme challenge of our time is to establish a set of values that applies to a largely transactional , global society . 
In the words of Catholic theologian Hans K ng , a global market economy requires a global ethic . 
And each new environmental crisis forces us to recognize that an ethic of respect for all life is also an ethic for long-term human survival and well-being . 
As an advocate for environmental and social standards for international finance , I thought of the historical nature of this principle , when in India I came across edicts etched into rock faces and stone pillars by the 3rd Century BC Indian Emperor Ashoka . 
A warrior who became a Buddhist , Ashoka expressed huge remorse over the suffering he caused in his final war unifying India . 
His edicts , inscribed over much of South Asia , including most of today s Afghanistan , set forth a secular ethic of compassion and non-violence , religious toleration , establishment of forest and nature reserves , and protection of species . 
Ashoka established a network of free medical services for humans and animals throughout his empire , as well as social welfare for widows and the indigent . 
But Ashoka s great ethical leap might not have taken place without the foundations laid by Kautilya , the chief counselor of Ashoka s grandfather . 
Kautilya wrote history s first treatise on economics , the Arthasastra , literally the science of material wealth , which proclaimed the accumulation of material riches as the chief underpinning of human society . 
He also recommended amoral realpolitik as an effective political approach and was a master of the practice . 
Though their reasoning was different , Kautilya and Ashoka both helped the poor and protected forests and animals . 
Kautilya thought such measures strengthened the long-term stability of the state , while Ashoka acted on ethical principles of non-violence and protection of all life . 
Kautilya s reasoning was utilitarian and rested on a narrow , pessimistic view of human nature . 
Nobel economics laureate Amartya Sen has compared Kautilya s view of human motivation to that of many conventional contemporary economists . 
Ashoka wrote that he had changed his viewpoint and tried to create a civic order which would prompt a similar ethical change among the inhabitants of his empire . 
His was a more hopeful view of human nature , but he probably also realized the Kautilyan world view could not alone hold together a large , diverse empire of nations . 
Two millennia later Adam Smith in his Theory of Moral Sentiments concluded that the three values of justice , prudence and beneficence uphold the social and economic order . 
Justice , he emphasized , is the main pillar that upholds the whole edifice . 
... if it is removed , the great , immense fabric of human society ... must in a moment crumble to atoms . 
Ashoka went farther and recognized that justice , prudence and beneficence extended to all living beings . 
Like Ashoka , we are living in a Kautilyan age and must find a new global ethic to preserve our civilization . 
Thinkers from Ashoka to Adam Smith to Amartya Sen , all see that if human society is to survive , economic activity has to be embedded in a framework of common ethical values . 
We need a global consensus for an ethic to guide national and international economic activity . 
Some global lenders have set standards to mitigate the social and environmental impact of their projects . 
This is a small beginning in a universal consensus but not near enough . 
The need for a universal ethic is crucial . 
The BP disaster , coming in the wake of the global economic crisis , is yet one more wake up call . 
How many more are needed ? 
By Steven E. Levingston | June 22 , 2010 ; 5:30 AM ET The comments to this entry are closed . 
