The mood in America is shifting against the Iraq war , but it has found inadequate expression in Congress Monday 22 August 2005 00.02 BST The myth of Rosa Parks is well known . 
The tired seamstress who boarded a bus in Montgomery , Alabama , in December 1955 and refused to give up her seat to a white man has become one of the most enduring legends of the civil rights era . 
Her subsequent arrest started the bus boycott that launched the civil rights movement . 
It transformed the apartheid of America 's southern states from a local idiosyncrasy to an international scandal and turned a previously unknown 26-year-old preacher , Martin Luther King , into a household name . 
`` She was a victim of both the forces of history and the forces of destiny , '' said King . 
`` She had been tracked down by the zeitgeist - the spirit of the times . '' 
The reality was somewhat different . 
Parks was no victim . 
The zeitgeist did not track her down ; she embodied it . 
She had a long history of anti-racist activism and had often been thrown off buses for resisting segregation . 
Far from being a meek lady in need of a foot massage she was a keen supporter of Malcolm X , who never fully embraced King 's strategy of non-violence . 
`` To call Rosa Parks a poor , tired seamstress and not talk about her role as a community leader and civil rights activist as well , is to turn an organised struggle for freedom into a personal act of frustration , '' writes Herbert Kohl in his book She Would Not Be Moved . 
The story of collective struggles is all too often filtered through the experience of an individual . 
In a bid to render the account more palatable and popular , the personal takes precedence over the political . 
As a result the story may reach a wider audience ; but by the time they receive it , the agendas and the issues involved have often become distorted - to the detriment of both the individual and the movement . 
The story of Cindy Sheehan , the 48-year-old woman whose son Casey was killed in Iraq in April 2004 , is one such example . 
Until late last week , Sheehan was camping outside President George Bush 's ranch in Crawford , Texas , demanding to see the president . 
`` I want to ask him , why did my son die ? '' 
she told the Guardian . 
`` What was this noble cause you talk about ? 
And if the cause is so noble , when are you going to send your daughters over there and let somebody else 's son come home ? '' 
Sheehan , who has met the president once before and was not impressed , had planned to stay at what became known as Camp Casey for the whole of August but had to leave on Thursday because her mother became sick . 
With the help of PR consultants she was packaged as a grieving Everymother who wanted answers . 
Capturing the public imagination , over the past two weeks she has been a regular feature on US cable and network news , the letters pages and newspaper editorials . 
In turn , she has re-energised the anti-war movement . 
On Wednesday , thousands of people across the country attended 1,627 vigils in solidarity with her cause . 
Her popularity has made her a prime target for the right . 
One commentator on Rupert Murdoch 's Fox channel branded her a `` crackpot '' ; Christopher Hitchens derided her for `` spouting piffle '' and lambasted her protest as `` dreary , sentimental nonsense '' . 
Talk-radio king Rush Limbaugh said her story `` is nothing more than forged documents - there 's nothing about it that 's real '' . 
The backlash continued this weekend with the launch of a `` You Do n't Speak for Me Cindy '' tour heading for Crawford with the support of rightwing talk radio hosts , to set up a pro-war camp . 
The focus on Sheehan 's personal loss is indeed problematic . 
Bereavement , in and of itself , confers neither knowledge nor insight - only a particular sensibility that might lead to both and a compelling personal narrative through which to articulate them . 
To define her as a mournful mother , while ignoring that she is a politically conscious , media-savvy campaigner , which she has been for quite some time , does neither her nor her cause any favors . 
Indeed , those who focus on Sheehan 's woes , whether they support or attack her , miss the point entirely . 
Had she come to Crawford at Easter , she would most likely have gone unnoticed . 
The reason she has struck a chord is not because of the sorrow that is personal to her but because of the frustration she shares with the rest of the country over Iraq . 
That is also why the right have attacked her so ferociously and so personally . 
But unlike the Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry in his swift boat , Sheehan will not be blown off course quite so easily . 
The public mood in America is shifting consistently and decisively against the war and Bush 's handling of it . 
Gallup has commissioned eight polls asking whether it was worth going to war since the beginning of the year : every time at least half have said no. . 
For the first time , most people believe the invasion of Iraq has made the US more vulnerable to further attacks . 
The number of those who want all the troops withdrawn remains a minority at 33 % - but that is double what it was two years ago , and still growing . 
The reason Sheehan has become such a lightning rod is because that mood has found only inadequate and inconsistent expression in Congress . 
It has been left to her to articulate an escalating political demand that is in desperate need of political representation . 
This marks not only a profound dislocation between the political class and political culture but a short circuit in the democratic process . 
The mainstream has effectively been marginalised . 
This is not particular to the US . 
In Britain , the view that there was a link between Iraq and the London bombings was shared by two-thirds of the population , but the handful of politicians who dared to mention it were shouted down in parliament and vilified in the press . 
In Germany , all the main parties support the labor market reforms that will cut welfare entitlements and reduce social protection , even though most of the population do not . 
But what many `` centre-left '' politicians regard as electoral expediency is actually becoming an electoral liability . 
Evidence exists that support for more radical stances is there if only they had the backbone to campaign for it . 
In Germany , a new leftwing party combining ex-communists and disaffected Social Democrats is attracting 12 % in polls and could yet rob the right of an outright victory next month . 
This month , in a congressional byelection in southern Ohio , Paul Hackett , a marine reservist who recently served in Iraq , stood for the Democrats on an anti-war platform . 
In a constituency where the Republicans won with 72 % of the vote nine months ago , Hackett branded Bush a `` chicken hawk '' . 
He won 48 % , turning a safe seat into a marginal . 
Sadly , such examples are all too rare . 
Sheehan has revealed both the strength and the weakness of the left . 
We have a political agenda that can command considerable mainstream support ; yet we do not have a political leadership willing or able to articulate those agendas . 
We wield political influence ; we lack legislative power . 
