Under US noses , brutal insurgents rule Sunni citadel Guardian gains rare access to Iraqi town and finds it fully in control of ` mujahideen ' Monday 22 August 2005 00.09 BST The executions are carried out at dawn on Haqlania bridge , the entrance to Haditha . 
A small crowd usually turns up to watch even though the killings are filmed and made available on DVD in the market the same afternoon . 
One of last week 's victims was a young man in a black tracksuit . 
Like the others he was left on his belly by the blue iron railings at the bridge 's southern end . 
His severed head rested on his back , facing Baghdad . 
Children cheered when they heard that the next day 's spectacle would be a double bill : two decapitations . 
A man named Watban and his brother had been found guilty of spying . 
With so many alleged American agents dying here Haqlania bridge was renamed Agents ' bridge . 
Then a local wag dubbed it Agents ' fridge , evoking a mortuary , and that name has stuck . 
A three-day visit by a reporter working for the Guardian last week established what neither the Iraqi government nor the US military has admitted : Haditha , a farming town of 90,000 people by the Euphrates river , is an insurgent citadel . 
That Islamist guerrillas were active in the area was no secret but only now has the extent of their control been revealed . 
They are the sole authority , running the town 's security , administration and communications . 
A three-hour drive north from Baghdad , under the nose of an American base , it is a miniature Taliban-like state . 
Insurgents decide who lives and dies , which salaries get paid , what people wear , what they watch and listen to . 
Haditha exposes the limitations of the Iraqi state and US power on the day when the political process is supposed to make a great leap - a draft constitution finalized and approved by midnight tonight . 
For politicians and diplomats in Baghdad 's fortified green zone the constitution is a means to stabilise Iraq and woo Sunni Arabs away from the rebellion . 
For Haditha , 140 miles north-west of the capital , whether a draft is agreed is irrelevant . 
Residents already have a set of laws and rules promulgated by insurgents . 
Within minutes of driving into town the Guardian was stopped by a group of men and informed about rule number one : announce yourself . 
The mujahideen , as they are known locally , must know who comes and goes . 
The Guardian reporter did not say he worked for a British newspaper . 
For their own protection interviewees can not be named . 
There is no fighting here because there is no one to challenge the Islamists . 
The police station and municipal offices were destroyed last year and US marines make only fleeting visits every few months . 
Two groups share power . 
Ansar al-Sunna is a largely homegrown organization , though its leader in Haditha is said to be foreign . 
Al-Qaida in Iraq , known locally by its old name Tawhid al-Jihad , is led by the Jordanian-born Abu Musab al-Zarqawi . 
There was a rumor that Zarqawi , Washington 's most wanted militant after Osama bin Laden , visited early last week . 
True or not , residents wanted to believe they had hosted such a celebrity . 
A year ago Haditha was just another sleepy town in western Anbar province , deep in the Sunni triangle and suspicious of the Shia-led government in Baghdad but no insurgent hotbed . 
Then , say residents , arrived mostly Shia police with heavyhanded behavior . 
`` That 's how it began , '' said one man . 
Attacks against the police escalated until they fled , creating a vacuum filled by insurgents . 
Alcohol and music deemed unIslamic were banned , women were told to wear headscarves and relations between the sexes were closely monitored . 
The mobile phone network was shut down but insurgents retained their walkie-talkies and satellite phones . 
Right-hand lanes are reserved for their vehicles . 
From attacks on US and Iraqi forces it is clear that other Anbar towns , such as Qaim , Rawa , Anna and Ramadi , are to varying degrees under the sway of rebels . 
In Haditha hospital staff and teachers are allowed to collect government salaries in Ramadi , the capital of Anbar , but other civil servants have had to quit . 
Last year the US trumpeted its rehabilitation of a nearby power plant : `` The incredible progress at Haditha is just one example of the huge strides made by the US army corps of engineers . '' 
Now insurgents earn praise from residents for allegedly pressuring managers to supply electricity almost 24 hours a day , a luxury denied the rest of Iraq . 
The court caters solely for divorces and marriages . 
Alleged criminals are punished in the market . 
The Guardian witnessed a headmaster accused of adultery whipped 190 times with cables . 
Children laughed as he sobbed and his robe turned crimson . 
Two men who robbed a foreign exchange shop were splayed on the ground . 
Masked men stood on their hands while others broke their arms with rocks . 
The shopkeeper offered the insurgents a reward but they declined . 
DVDs of beheadings on the bridge are distributed free in the souk . 
Children prefer them to cartoons . 
`` They should not watch such things , '' said one grandfather , but parents appeared not to object . 
One DVD features a young , blond muscular man who had been disembowelled . 
He was said to have been a member of a six-strong US sniper team ambushed and killed on August 1 . 
Residents said he had been paraded in town before being executed . 
The US military denied that , saying six bodies were recovered and that all appeared to have died in combat . 
Shortly after the ambush three landmines killed 14 marines in a convoy which ventured from their base outside the town . 
Twice in recent months marines backed by aircraft and armor swept into Haditha to flush out the rebels . 
In a pattern repeated across Anbar there were skirmishes , a few suspects killed or detained , and success was declared . 
In reality , said residents , the insurgents withdrew for a few days and returned when the Americans left . 
They have learned from last November 's battle in Falluja , when hundreds died fighting the marines and still lost the city . 
Now their strategy appears to be to wait out the Americans , calculating they will leave within a few years , and then escalate what some consider the real war against a government led by Shias , a rival sect which Sunni extremists consider apostasy . 
The US military declined to respond to questions detailing the extent of insurgent control in the town . 
There was evidence of growing cooperation between rebels . 
A group in Falluja , where the resistance is said to be regrouping , wrote to Haditha requesting background checks on two volunteers from the town . 
One local man in his 40s told the Guardian he wanted to be a suicide bomber to atone for sins and secure a place in heaven . 
`` But the mujahideen will not let me . 
They said I had eight children and it was my duty to look after them . '' 
Tribal elders said they feared but respected insurgents for keeping order and not turning the town into a battleground . 
They appear to have been radicalised , and condemned Sunni groups , such as the Iraqi Islamic party and the Muslim Scholars ' Association , for engaging in the political process . 
The constitution talks , the referendum due in October , the election due in December : all are deemed collaboration punishable by death . 
The task now is to bleed the Americans and destabilise the government . 
Some call that nihilism . 
Haditha calls it the future . 
Omer Mahdi was in Haditha for a Guardian Films project before security precautions forced it to be suspended . 
