Monday 22 August 2005 00.03 BST British officials are seriously concerned about the level of corruption in the Iraqi defense ministry , after the embezzlement of vast amounts of money earmarked for the country 's security forces . 
Officials from the British Ministry of Defense had already warned US and Iraqi authorities against the squandering of money - and have been proved right , on a catastrophic scale . 
A report compiled by the Iraqi Board of Supreme Audit has concluded that at least half , and probably more , of $ 1.27 bn -LRB- # 700m -RRB- of Iraqi money spent on military procurement has disappeared into a miasma of kickbacks and vanished middlemen - or else has been spent on useless equipment . 
The report , leaked to the US news organization Knight Ridder , comes as a blow to the credibility of the Iraqi army and its ability to contain the increasingly cogent insurgency . 
According to the report , led by former human rights minister Abdel Baset al-Turki , the vanished money came solely from Iraqi funds , not from foreign donations to Iraq 's military or the US-funded training budget . 
The report focuses on an eight-month period after the transfer of sovereignty from the US-led occupation to caretaker Iraqi authorities on June 28 2004 . 
The report found that contracts were awarded to favored weapons suppliers , via middlemen , without bidding or approval from the prime minister 's office . 
Contracts included a clause stating that the full value of deals was to be paid up front , in cash . 
All deals were done through third-party companies or agencies headed by Iraqi middlemen , who have disappeared , leaving the Iraqi government without recourse when it complained of unfulfilled contracts . 
Internal documents , said the report , `` incorrectly indicated that the -LRB- Iraqi -RRB- ministry of defense signed contracts with Poland , Arab countries , the United States and Europe , but we discovered that all contracts were signed and executed with Iraqi suppliers '' . 
Among those missing is a man called Nair Mohamed al-Jumaili , sole beneficiary of 43 out of 89 contracts , into whose bank account several million dollars was paid . 
Nine ministry officials , all of them appointed by the US , have been fired by the ministry , and face possible criminal charges . 
Among them is the ministry 's procurement chief , Ziad Cattan . 
Mr Cattan , who returned to Iraq two days before the war began , contacted Knight Ridder from hiding , to deny the charges and the claims that he took a 10 % finder 's fee on every contract . 
He said the Americans controlled the purse strings of Iraqi defense expenditure . 
During the period covered by the report , 20 US officials worked alongside the Iraqi defense ministry , and all the sacked officials had been appointed by the Coalition Provisional Authority - the administration headed by American Paul Bremer . 
British defense officials say that `` ultimately , Iraqi spending decisions are a matter for the Iraqi government '' . 
Additional reporting by Jason Rodrigues Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article was published on guardian . 
