Monday 22 August 2005 00.03 BST The United States has eased its opposition to an Islamic Iraqi state to help clinch a deal on a draft constitution before tonight 's deadline . 
American diplomats backed religious conservatives who threatened to torpedo talks over the shape of the new Iraq unless Islam was a primary source of law . 
Secular and liberal groups were dismayed at the move , branding it a betrayal of Washington 's promise to advocate equal rights in a free and tolerant society . 
Stalemate over the role of Islam , among other issues , meant last week 's deadline was extended for a week . 
Outstanding disputes could produce another cliffhanger tonight , triggering a further extension . 
The Bush administration , keen to show the political process is on track , has waded into negotiations and pressured all sides to compromise . 
Administration officials have suggested that the number of US troops could be reduced next year if Iraq makes political progress and enough Iraqi troops are trained to take on insurgents . 
But yesterday , a US general said the army was making `` worst case '' contingency plans to maintain troops at the current level for another four years . 
In an interview with the Associated Press , General Peter Schoomaker said the army had planned troop rotations up to 2009 to ensure enough soldiers would be available . 
But actual deployments will be decided by commanders in Iraq , if conditions allow , he added . 
There are currently 138,000 US troops in Iraq , including 25,000 marines . 
President Bush has repeatedly denied that the US intends to `` cut and run '' , leaving Iraq to the insurgents . 
`` Our troops know that they 're fighting in Iraq , Afghanistan , and elsewhere to protect their fellow Americans from a savage enemy , '' the president said yesterday in his weekly radio address . 
Conservative Shias , dominant in the Iraqi government , had clashed with Kurds and other minorities who wanted Islam to be `` a '' rather than `` the '' main source of law . 
According to Kurdish and Sunni negotiators , the US ambassador , Zalmay Khalilzad , proposed that Islam be named `` a primary source '' and supported a wording which would give clerics authority in civil matters such as divorce , marriage and inheritance . 
If approved , critics say that the proposals would erode women 's rights and other freedoms enshrined under existing laws . 
`` We understand the Americans have sided with the Shias . 
It does n't fit with American values , '' an unnamed Kurdish negotiator told Reuters . 
`` They have spent so much blood and money here , only to back the creation of an Islamist state . '' 
Dozens of women gathered in central Baghdad yesterday to protest against what the organiser , Yanar Mohammad , feared would be a `` fascist , nationalist and Islamist '' constitution . 
`` We are fighting to avoid becoming second class citizens , '' she said . 
The US embassy declined to discuss the negotiations but a state department official in Washington told the New York Times that the draft document should be judged in its entirety . 
There are conflicting signals about the prospect of a deal before the deadline , with some factions claiming divisions have narrowed , others saying they have widened . 
If a text is not handed to parliament by midnight , deputies could be asked to repeat last week 's vote and amend the existing law , which decreed the deadline , to extend it further . 
The alternative would be to dissolve parliament and call an election , something the ruling Shia and Kurdish coalition wants to avoid . 
If a text is agreed , there will be a referendum in October which - if passed - will pave the way for a December election . 
Sunni Arabs , a dominant minority under Saddam Hussein and now the backbone of the insurgency , fear a constitution which cedes autonomy to Kurds in the north and Shias in the south , leaving central government too weak to funnel oil revenues to Sunnis in the middle . 
The drafting committee 's 15-member Sunni bloc said it had been sidelined in recent days and appealed to the US and UN to ensure their voice was heard . 
US and British diplomats have suggested that federalism will be fudged enough to bring mainstream Sunnis on board and drain support from the resistance . 
Al Qaida in Iraq and other insurgent groups have threatened to kill Sunnis who register to vote , saying the political process is a US-orchestrated sham . 
Three Sunnis who erected posters in Mosul urging people to vote were murdered last week . 
