On Tuesday , Marie Colvin said the bombardment of Baba Amr had been `` unrelenting '' Two prominent Western journalists have been killed in the Syrian city of Homs in the latest violence which left 60 people dead across Syria on Wednesday . 
Sunday Times reporter Marie Colvin , an American , and award-winning French photographer Remi Ochlik died when a shell hit a makeshift media center in the Baba Amr district . 
Troops are shelling opposition-held areas of Homs , besieged for weeks . 
Thousands have died in unrest against the rule of President Bashar al-Assad . 
On Tuesday Rami al-Sayed , a man who broadcast a live video stream from Homs used by world media , was killed in Baba Amr . 
The Red Cross has called on the government and rebels to agree to a daily ceasefire , to allow medical supplies to reach the worst affected areas and get civilians out , but there is no sign yet of this being agreed . 
Ms Colvin and Mr Ochlik were reportedly staying in a house in Baba Amr that was being used by activists as a media center when it was hit by a shell on Wednesday morning . 
Marie would not want any tribute to leave out mention of the people she met , the stories she heard . 
She often spoke of how humbled she was by the `` quiet bravery of civilians '' . 
We 've come to expect that wherever something of consequence was happening , Marie would be there . 
Her signature was not just to go to a story , but to stay for as long as she could , regardless of the danger or discomfort . 
She admired the pioneering journalism of fellow American Martha Gelhorn . 
I always saw her as the Martha of our generation : brave and beautiful . 
A woman with a wicked laugh , a sensitive soul , and a steely determination to tell the stories that mattered . 
She had both guts and glamour . 
I remember a conversation long ago where she told me a partner wanted her to be what she called a `` Laura Ashley '' - pretty and perfect in the home . 
But that was n't Marie and she knew it . 
She was , without exception , a kind and considerate colleague and fellow traveller , a woman who inspired and engaged . 
At least two other foreign journalists were wounded , activists said . 
One was named as British freelance photographer Paul Conroy , who was working with Ms Colvin , and Edith Bouvier of the French newspaper , Le Figaro . 
Ms Bouvier was said to be in a serious condition . 
The dead and the injured journalists are said to have been taken to a field clinic in Baba Amr . 
Activists have expressed fears that Ms Bouvier risks bleeding to death without urgent medical attention and they were trying to get her out . 
Syrian state television said the information ministry had asked officials in Homs to determine the location of foreign journalists because it had learned that some may have been injured . 
In Paris , French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said his country held the Syrian government accountable for the deaths . 
`` Damascus owes us an answer , '' Mr Juppe said . 
UK Prime Minister David Cameron told parliament : `` This is a desperately sad reminder of the risks that journalists take to inform the world of what is happening , and the dreadful events in Syria . '' 
Later , the Syrian ambassador to London was summoned to be told that the UK expected Damascus to arrange for the immediate repatriation of the journalists ' bodies and to provide medical treatment for the injured British journalist . 
The US state department referred to `` another example of the shameless brutality '' of the Syrian regime . 
The editor of the Sunday Times , John Witherow , said it was doing what it could to recover Ms Colvin 's body and get Mr Conroy to safety . 
`` Marie was an extraordinary figure in the life of the Sunday Times , driven by a passion to cover wars in the belief that what she did mattered , '' he added . 
`` She believed profoundly that reporting could curtail the excesses of brutal regimes and make the international community take notice . '' 
Her mother told journalists Ms Colvin 's legacy was : `` Be passionate and be involved in what you believe in . 
And do it as thoroughly and honestly and fearlessly as you can . '' 
Mr Ochlik , 28 , had reported from Haiti and covered many of the recent uprisings in the Arab world . 
Sunday Times Editor John Witherow : `` She may have been targeted '' Ms Colvin , in her 50s , had been a foreign correspondent for the Sunday Times for two decades , and had reported from several war zones . 
She lost the sight in one eye in Sri Lanka in 2001 after being hit by shrapnel . 
On Tuesday , she told the BBC the bombardment of Baba Amr by Syrian government artillery and tanks had been `` unrelenting '' . 
`` I watched a little baby die today , absolutely horrific , a two year old - found the shrapnel had gone into the left chest and the doctor said : ' I ca n't do anything , ' and his little tummy just kept heaving until he died . 
That is happening over and over and over . 
`` There are 28,000 people in Baba Amr , '' she added . 
`` The Syrians will not let them out and are shelling all the civilian areas . 
The Sunday Times on Wednesday made available Ms Corvin 's last article in which she said , '' We live in fear of a massacre '' . 
Western journalists have mostly been barred from Syria since the uprising against President Bashar al-Assad began last March . 
But increasingly , they have risked entering the country undercover , helped by networks of activists , to report from flashpoints . 
Last month , the French television journalist , Gilles Jacquier , was killed in Homs while visiting the city on a government-organised trip . 
Anthony Shadid , of the New York Times , died of an apparent asthma attack in Syria last week . 
As many as 50 people are feared to have been killed on Tuesday in the northern province of Idlib . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
22nd February 2012 - 21:26 Deeply sad news . 
A journalist of fantastic integrity who was compelling to read as she told it just like it was . 
Without people like Marie Colvin we would know less of what is really happening in places like Hom and other crises she helped cover in the past . 
I am thankful for what she has done and what she has given to shine some light of truth on the horrors inflicted on the innocent . 
22nd February 2012 - 21:05 This is not the first time that reporters have been killed sending us news from warzones . 
Each time it happens , the ethos of sending them into dangerous situations is questioned . 
Do we really need their ` close up ' reports and who is getting the benefit of it ? 
Us , seeing them duck on our TV screens like modern gladiators avoiding the thrust of incoming missiles or a media that thrives on it ? 
22nd February 2012 - 20:25 It is awful that these journalists were killed covering this war . 
But let 's not forget the many other people killed every day by Syria 's hideous regime - they too are fully deserving of obituaries . 
It 's understandable that the media mourns its own people but this should not detract from the value of all lives lost to the ghastly Assad regime . 
