Syria unrest : Reporters ' deaths spark Western outrage Marie Colvin and Remi Ochlik were killed in a makeshift media center in Homs Sunday Times reporter Marie Colvin , an American , and French photographer Remi Ochlik died in shelling by Syria 's government forces . 
The US said it was `` another example of the shameless brutality '' of the regime . 
French President Nicolas Sarkozy said : `` That 's enough ... The regime must go . '' 
Syrian troops have been shelling opposition-held areas of Homs for weeks . 
Thousands have died since the unrest erupted last March . 
The International Red Cross said it hoped Wednesday 's deaths would draw the attention of the world to the many hundreds of other people suffering in Syria . 
It earlier urged the government and rebels to agree to a daily ceasefire , to allow medical supplies to reach the worst affected areas and get civilians out . 
However , there is no sign yet of this being agreed . 
Colvin , 56 , and Ochlik , 28 , were reportedly staying in a house in Homs ' area of Baba Amr that was being used by activists as a media center when it was hit by a shell on Wednesday morning . 
Marie would not want any tribute to leave out mention of the people she met , the stories she heard . 
She often spoke of how humbled she was by the `` quiet bravery of civilians '' . 
We 've come to expect that wherever something of consequence was happening , Marie would be there . 
Her signature was not just to go to a story , but to stay for as long as she could , regardless of the danger or discomfort . 
She admired the pioneering journalism of fellow American Martha Gelhorn . 
I always saw her as the Martha of our generation : brave and beautiful . 
A woman with a wicked laugh , a sensitive soul , and a steely determination to tell the stories that mattered . 
She had both guts and glamour . 
I remember a conversation long ago where she told me a partner wanted her to be what she called a `` Laura Ashley '' - pretty and perfect in the home . 
But that was n't Marie and she knew it . 
She was , without exception , a kind and considerate colleague and fellow traveller , a woman who inspired and engaged . 
At least two other foreign journalists were wounded , activists said . 
One was named as British freelance photographer Paul Conroy , who was working with Colvin , and Edith Bouvier of the French newspaper , Le Figaro . 
Bouvier was said to be in a serious condition . 
The dead and the injured journalists are said to have been taken to a field clinic in Baba Amr . 
Activists have expressed fears that Bouvier risks bleeding to death without urgent medical attention and they were trying to get her out . 
Syrian state TV said the information ministry had asked officials in Homs to determine the location of foreign journalists because it had learned that some may have been injured . 
In Washington , US State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland said : `` This tragic incident is another example of the shameless brutality of the Assad regime . '' 
Earlier , the US warned that it was not ruling out taking `` additional measures '' to assist the rebels if the government onslaught continued . 
In Paris , French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said his country held the Syrian government accountable for the deaths . 
`` Damascus owes us an answer , '' Mr Juppe said . 
UK Prime Minister David Cameron told parliament : `` This is a desperately sad reminder of the risks that journalists take to inform the world of what is happening , and the dreadful events in Syria . '' 
Later , the Syrian ambassador to London was summoned to be told that the UK expected Damascus to arrange for the immediate repatriation of the journalists ' bodies and to provide medical treatment for the injured British journalist . 
The editor of the Sunday Times , John Witherow , said the newspaper was doing what it could to recover Colvin 's body and get Conroy to safety . 
`` Marie was an extraordinary figure in the life of the Sunday Times , driven by a passion to cover wars in the belief that what she did mattered , '' he added . 
`` She believed profoundly that reporting could curtail the excesses of brutal regimes and make the international community take notice . '' 
Her mother told journalists Colvin 's legacy was : `` Be passionate and be involved in what you believe in . 
And do it as thoroughly and honestly and fearlessly as you can . '' 
Ochlik had reported from Haiti and covered many of the recent uprisings in the Arab world . 
Sunday Times Editor John Witherow : `` She may have been targeted '' Colvin had been a foreign correspondent for the Sunday Times for two decades , and had reported from several war zones . 
She lost the sight in one eye in Sri Lanka in 2001 after being hit by shrapnel . 
On Tuesday , she told the BBC the bombardment of Baba Amr by Syrian government artillery and tanks had been `` unrelenting '' . 
`` I watched a little baby die today , absolutely horrific , a two year old - found the shrapnel had gone into the left chest and the doctor said : ' I ca n't do anything , ' and his little tummy just kept heaving until he died . 
That is happening over and over and over . 
But increasingly , they have risked entering the country undercover , helped by networks of activists , to report from flashpoints . 
Last month , the French television journalist , Gilles Jacquier , was killed in Homs while visiting the city on a government-organised trip . 
Anthony Shadid , of the New York Times , died of an apparent asthma attack in Syria last week . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
