Suppressed passage suggests that attorney general still believed invasion was illegal less than two weeks before the troops went in Thursday 24 March 2005 17.20 GMT The government yesterday tried to suppress evidence that the attorney general believed war against Iraq was illegal less than two weeks before British troops joined the US-led invasion of the country . 
It has removed a key passage in the resignation letter written by Elizabeth Wilmshurst , deputy chief legal adviser at the Foreign Office , on March 18 2003 , the eve of the invasion . 
The remainder of her letter - in which she described the planned invasion as a `` crime of aggression '' - was released yesterday under the Freedom of Information Act . 
The entire letter would have remained secret had not the Guardian published parts of it last month , the FO said . 
The passage suppressed yesterday has now been seen by this newspaper . 
In it , Ms Wilmshurst shows that the attorney , Lord Goldsmith , changed his view on the war twice before the invasion . 
She says that her view that a war would be illegal was the advice which the FO had consistently given before and after the UN security council resolution 1441 , agreed in November 2002 . 
She says that was also Lord Goldsmith 's view until March 7 , when he sent a 13-page written legal opinion to Tony Blair . 
Ms Wilmshurst does not reveal the content of this advice . 
However , reports that the at torney warned Mr Blair that British participation in the invasion could be ruled unlawful by an international court have not been denied by the government . 
In the censored passage of her letter , Ms Wilmshurst points out that the attorney 's view changed yet again into a new `` official line '' . 
That is a reference to a parliamentary answer released by Lord Goldsmith on March 17 , the eve of a crucial Commons vote on military action . 
In this , the attorney said - on the basis of advice from Mr Blair - that it was `` plain '' Iraq was in breach of its disarmament obligations . 
In the rest of her letter , Ms Wilmshurst , now on the staff of Chatham House , the Royal Institute of International Affairs , said she could not `` in conscience '' go along with the view that an invasion would be lawful without a second UN resolution clearly sanctioning war . 
Such a resolution , which Mr Blair was desperate to get , was not forthcoming . 
As that became clear , both Jack Straw , the foreign secretary , and Lord Goldsmith changed their view . 
Ms Wilmshurst described planned military action against Iraq as `` so detrimental to the international order and the rule of law '' . 
She also referred to her work , specifically negotiations on the `` crime of aggression '' . 
The FO yesterday cited exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act to justify sup pressing parts of the Wilmshurst letter . 
They covered `` the formulation or development of government policy '' , `` ministerial communications '' , and `` the provision of advice by any of the law officers '' . 
The FO also referred to an exemption relating to `` information in respect of which a claim to legal professional privilege _ could be maintained in legal proceedings '' . 
It said it was not in the `` public interest '' to release the deleted passage of the Wilmshurst letter . 
However , critics suggested the government had tried to censor the Wilmshurst letter . 
Sir Menzies Campbell QC , Liberal Democrat foreign affairs spokesman , said last night : `` The whole letter suggests that the attorney general went from a position of believing military action to be illegal to a more equivocal view and finally to a conclusion that military action would be legal . '' 
The former international development secretary Clare Short told Channel 4 News last night : `` I think the government had to try and cover it up because it is so devastating . 
`` The bit that was blacked out shows that the attorney general changed his mind twice in a matter of days before he gave advice to the cabinet when he just said unequivocally , ` My view is that there is legal authority for war ' , and kept from the cabinet any suggestion that he had had doubts about it . '' 
