Friday 12 August 2005 01.21 BST Shia leaders in Iraq demanded an autonomous region for the Shia-dominated south yesterday , raising the prospect of an oil-rich fiefdom dominated by conservative Muslim clerics . 
The head of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq -LRB- SCITI -RRB- , one of the main ruling parties , called for the creation of a federal southern state in a new national constitution due to be completed this weekend . 
Abdul Aziz al-Hakim used a rally in the Shia holy city of Najaf to make one of the boldest pitches yet for a `` Shiastan '' encompassing the Gulf oilfields and almost half of Iraq 's 26 million population . 
`` Regarding federalism , we think that it is necessary to form one entire region in the south , '' he told tens of thousands of chanting supporters . 
Hadi al-Amery , head of the party 's militia , the Badr Organisation , echoed the call for a Shia version of the autonomy enjoyed by Kurds in the north , declaring : `` Federalism has to be in all of Iraq . '' 
The SCIRI 's cleric leaders have strong ties to Iran 's theocracy and dominate the Shia bloc , which rules in coalition with the largely secular Kurds . 
Some analysts suggested the call for southern autonomy was a negotiating ploy to gain leverage for making Islam the main source of legislation . 
The prospect of autonomy dismayed Sunni Arabs who fear being marginalised in the center of Iraq . 
Secular Shias and women 's rights advocates were more alarmed at the spectre of Islamic sharia law being imposed on a region stretching from Kerbala in the center to Basra in the south . 
Negotiators from Iraq 's main religious and ethnic groups have a deadline to agree a draft constitution by tomorrow , giving parliament until Monday to approve the text and submit it to voters for a referendum on October 15 . 
All sides accept that Kurds will retain the autonomy they have enjoyed since the 1991 Gulf war . 
But the drive to mirror that with autonomy for the south has encountered fierce opposition . 
Sunnis fear that Iraq will disintegrate , or at least fracture , if Shias and Kurds control the oil wells and leave Sunnis with only the `` sands of Anbar '' , a vast , barren province . 
`` We hoped this day would never come , '' said Saleh al-Mutlak , a leading Sunni politician . 
`` We believe that the Arabs , whether Sunni or Shia , are one . 
We totally reject any attempt to stir up sectarian issues to divide Iraq . '' 
Sunnis were a dominant minority under the deposed president , Saddam Hussein , and Sunni militants are driving the insurgency . 
The Shia prime minister , Ibrahim al-Jaafari , is keen to draw them into the political process , and this is one reason he opposes southern autonomy . 
`` The idea of a Shia region is unacceptable to us , '' his spokesman said yesterday . 
After decades of oppression under Saddam , Shia conservatives emerged after the United States-led invasion two years ago to impose Islamic rule on the south , closing alcohol shops , curtailing music and encouraging women to wear headscarves . 
Having swept elections in January , conservatives boast a democratic mandate , but secular Shias and liberals say voters did not call for oppression and intolerance . 
`` We 're against federalism because we are against sharia . 
That is our fear , '' said Ghareba Ghareb of the Iraqi Women 's Association . 
She hoped a centralised Baghdad government would rein in militant clerics . 
US officials have been pushing hard for the constitution deadline to be met , seeing the process as a way to quell the insurgency and reduce foreign troop levels . 
If a draft constitution is agreed and passed in a referendum it will pave the way for elections in December . 
As the deadline looms , negotiators are haggling over whether the Republic of Iraq should be renamed the Federal Republic of Iraq , the Islamic Republic or the Federal Islamic Republic . 
Iraq 's al-Qaida group vowed yesterday to kill anyone involved in drafting the constitution . 
The group , led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi , says that sharia law should be the only legislation to govern Iraq . 
