It is not only Iraq that is occupied . 
America is too My country is in the grip of a president surrounded by thugs in suits Friday 12 August 2005 01.21 BST It has quickly become clear that Iraq is not a liberated country , but an occupied country . 
We became familiar with that term during the second world war . 
We talked of German-occupied France , German-occupied Europe . 
And after the war we spoke of Soviet-occupied Hungary , Czechoslovakia , eastern Europe . 
It was the Nazis , the Soviets , who occupied countries . 
The United States liberated them from occupation . 
Now we are the occupiers . 
True , we liberated Iraq from Saddam Hussein , but not from us . 
Just as in 1898 we liberated Cuba from Spain , but not from us . 
Spanish tyranny was overthrown , but the US established a military base in Cuba , as we are doing in Iraq . 
US corporations moved into Cuba , just as Bechtel and Halliburton and the oil corporations are moving into Iraq . 
The US framed and imposed , with support from local accomplices , the constitution that would govern Cuba , just as it has drawn up , with help from local political groups , a constitution for Iraq . 
And it is an ugly occupation . 
On August 7 2003 the New York Times reported that General Sanchez in Baghdad was worried about the Iraqi reaction to occupation . 
Pro-US Iraqi leaders were giving him a message , as he put it : `` When you take a father in front of his family and put a bag over his head and put him on the ground , you have had a significant adverse effect on his dignity and respect in the eyes of his family . '' 
-LRB- That 's very perceptive . -RRB- 
We know that fighting during the US offensive in November 2004 destroyed three-quarters of the town of Falluja -LRB- population 360,000 -RRB- , killing hundreds of its inhabitants . 
The objective of the operation was to cleanse the town of the terrorist bands acting as part of a `` Ba'athist conspiracy '' . 
But we should recall that on June 16 2003 , barely six weeks after President Bush had claimed victory in Iraq , two reporters for the Knight Ridder newspaper group wrote this about the Falluja area : `` In dozens of interviews during the past five days , most residents across the area said there was no Ba'athist or Sunni conspiracy against US soldiers , there were only people ready to fight because their relatives had been hurt or killed , or they themselves had been humiliated by home searches and road stops ... One woman said , after her husband was taken from their home because of empty wooden crates which they had bought for firewood , that the US is guilty of terrorism . '' 
Soldiers who are set down in a country where they were told they would be welcomed as liberators and find they are surrounded by a hostile population become fearful and trigger-happy . 
On March 4 nervous , frightened GIs manning a roadblock fired on the Italian journalist Giuliana Sgrena , just released by kidnappers , and an intelligence service officer , Nicola Calipari , whom they killed . 
We have all read reports of US soldiers angry at being kept in Iraq . 
Such sentiments are becoming known to the US public , as are the feelings of many deserters who are refusing to return to Iraq after home leave . 
In May 2003 a Gallup poll reported that only 13 % of the US public thought the war was going badly . 
According to a poll published by the New York Times and CBS News on June 17 , 51 % now think the US should not have invaded Iraq or become involved in the war . 
Some 59 % disapprove of Bush 's handling of the situation . 
But more ominous , perhaps , than the occupation of Iraq is the occupation of the US . 
I wake up in the morning , read the newspaper , and feel that we are an occupied country , that some alien group has taken over . 
I wake up thinking : the US is in the grip of a president surrounded by thugs in suits who care nothing about human life abroad or here , who care nothing about freedom abroad or here , who care nothing about what happens to the earth , the water or the air , or what kind of world will be inherited by our children and grandchildren . 
More Americans are beginning to feel , like the soldiers in Iraq , that something is terribly wrong . 
More and more every day the lies are being exposed . 
And then there is the largest lie , that everything the US does is to be pardoned because we are engaged in a `` war on terrorism '' , ignoring the fact that war is itself terrorism , that barging into homes and taking away people and subjecting them to torture is terrorism , that invading and bombing other countries does not give us more security but less . 
The Bush administration , unable to capture the perpetrators of the September 11 attacks , invaded Afghanistan , killing thousands of people and driving hundreds of thousands from their homes . 
Yet it still does not know where the criminals are . 
Not knowing what weapons Saddam Hussein was hiding , it invaded and bombed Iraq in March 2003 , disregarding the UN , killing thousands of civilians and soldiers and terrorising the population ; and not knowing who was and was not a terrorist , the US government confined hundreds of people in Guant namo under such conditions that 18 have tried to commit suicide . 
The Amnesty International Report 2005 notes : `` Guant namo Bay has become the gulag of our times ... When the most powerful country in the world thumbs its nose at the rule of law and human rights , it grants a licence to others to commit abuse with impunity '' . 
The `` war on terrorism '' is not only a war on innocent people in other countries ; it is a war on the people of the US : on our liberties , on our standard of living . 
The country 's wealth is being stolen from the people and handed over to the super-rich . 
The lives of the young are being stolen . 
The Iraq war will undoubtedly claim many more victims , not only abroad but also on US territory . 
The Bush administration maintains that , unlike the Vietnam war , this conflict is not causing many casualties . 
True enough , fewer than 2,000 service men and women have lost their lives in the fighting . 
But when the war finally ends , the number of its indirect victims , through disease or mental disorders , will increase steadily . 
After the Vietnam war , veterans reported congenital malformations in their children , caused by Agent Orange . 
Officially there were only a few hundred losses in the Gulf war of 1991 , but the US Gulf War Veterans Association has reported 8,000 deaths in the past 10 years . 
Some 200,000 veterans , out of 600,000 who took part , have registered a range of complaints due to the weapons and munitions used in combat . 
We have yet to see the long-term effects of depleted uranium on those currently stationed in Iraq . 
Our faith is that human beings only support violence and terror when they have been lied to . 
And when they learn the truth , as happened in the course of the Vietnam war , they will turn against the government . 
We have the support of the rest of the world . 
The US can not indefinitely ignore the 10 million people who protested around the world on February 15 2003 . 
There is no act too small , no act too bold . 
The history of social change is the history of millions of actions , small and large , coming together at points in history and creating a power that governments can not suppress . 
Howard Zinn is professor emeritus of political science at Boston University ; his books include A People 's History of the United States A version of this article appears in the August issue of Le Monde diplomatique 's English language edition Mondediplo.com Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Howard Zinn : My country is in the grip of a president surrounded by thugs in suits This article was published on guardian . 
