TRIPOLI | Fri Apr 15 , 2011 7:32 pm EDT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - President Barack Obama acknowledged on Friday there was a `` stalemate '' on the ground in Libya , but said he still expected the three-week-old air campaign to succeed in ousting Muammar Gaddafi eventually . 
Obama and the leaders of France and Britain earlier on Friday published a joint newspaper article pledging to continue the military campaign until Gaddafi leaves power , effectively making regime change the officially-stated aim of their air war . 
More than a hundred government rockets crashed into Misrata on Friday , a second day of heavy bombardment of the city , the lone major bastion of the rebels in the western part of Libya . 
Rebels said government forces had reached the city 's center . 
`` I did n't expect that in three weeks , suddenly as a consequence of an air campaign , that Gaddafi would necessarily be gone , '' Obama said in an interview with the Associated Press . 
He said the mission had succeeded in stopping large-scale civilian casualties , especially in the rebel-held city of Benghazi , and would eventually succeed in ousting Gaddafi . 
`` You now have a stalemate on the ground militarily , but Gaddafi is still getting squeezed in all kinds of other ways . 
He is running out of money , he is running out of supplies . 
The noose is tightening and he is becoming more and more isolated . 
`` My expectation is that if we continue to apply that pressure and continue to protect civilians , which NATO is doing very capably , then I think over the long term Gaddafi will go and we will be successful . '' 
A rebel spokesman in Misrata said pro-Gaddafi forces had shelled both the center and the road leading to the port , a lifeline for trapped civilians and the main entry point for international aid agencies , killing eight people on Friday . 
`` Today was very tough ... Gaddafi 's forces entered Tripoli Street and Nakl al Theqeel road , '' he said by phone , referring to a main Misrata thoroughfare , scene of heavy clashes in recent weeks , and the road to the port . 
`` Witnesses said they saw pro-Gaddafi soldiers on foot in the city center today . 
Except for snipers , they usually stay in their tanks and armored vehicles , '' the spokesman added . 
A government reconnaissance helicopter had flown over the city , he said , despite a no-fly zone mandated by the U.N. Security Council and enforced by NATO warplanes . 
Hundreds are believed to have died in Misrata , under what Obama , British Prime Minister David Cameron and French President Nicolas Sarkozy described in their article as a `` medieval siege as Gaddafi tries to strangle its population into submission . '' 
`` It is unthinkable that someone who has tried to massacre his own people can play a part in their future government , '' they wrote in the article , published on both sides of the Atlantic . 
They acknowledged that their new goal of regime change went beyond the explicit terms of a U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing force to protect civilians , but said Libyans would never be safe as long as Gaddafi remained in power . 
The United States led the bombing campaign in its first week , but has since then taken a back seat , putting NATO in command with the British and French responsible for most strikes on Gaddafi 's forces . 
Obama made clear Washington was not planning to resume to a more active military role . 
`` What we 're doing is still providing jamming capacity , intelligence , refueling , so we still have a lot of planes up there . 
We 're just not the ones who are providing strikes on the ground for the most part , '' he said . 
Britain and France have been trying to persuade other NATO allies to contribute more fire power . 
NATO ministers met for a second day on Friday in Berlin , where the divisions were clear . 
British Foreign Secretary William Hague and NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen voiced optimism that allies would supply more combat planes , but Italy immediately ruled out ordering its aircraft to open fire . 
French Defense Minister Gerard Longuet said London and Paris wanted to extend strikes to Gaddafi 's logistic installations to try to break a stalemate in the two-month civil war . 
Russia attended the NATO meeting and said the alliance was going beyond the terms of the U.N. Security Council resolution . 
Russia abstained but did not veto the resolution in March . 
On the fluid eastern Libyan front , rebels said Gaddafi forces advancing from the oil port of Brega had opened fire on the western outskirts of the insurgent-held town of Ajdabiyah on Friday , killing one of their fighters . 
In the capital Tripoli , Reuters reporters heard intermittent gunfire on Friday evening . 
There was no immediate explanation . 
Libyan state television said `` the bombardment of the crusader and colonial aggressors '' had struck the al-Assah area , about 170 km -LRB- 105 miles -RRB- west of the capital . 
The rebels have begged for more air strikes to avert what they say is a potential massacre in Misrata . 
A rescue ship carrying nearly 1,200 Asian and African migrants , many needing urgent medical attention after weeks with little food or water in Misrata , was expected in Benghazi . 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said the NATO allies were searching for ways to provide funds to the rebels , including helping them to sell oil from areas they control . 
`` The opposition needs a lot of assistance , on the organizational side , on the humanitarian side , and on the military side , '' she said . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
There is always Turkey 's Ergenekon and Al Queda or even the Taliban that they can rehire to keep them gainfully employed . 
ghadaffi must go it is the only thing that will bring peace to Libya . 
Regime change is the main focus of the allied coalition and the rebels could n't care if their western allied coalition carpet bombed all of Libya to achieve their aims . 
2 things are now going to happen . 
1 -- The destruction of Libya . 
2 -- The killing of untold numbers of Libyan soldiers and civilians . 
Welcome to our western world 's definition of protecting civilians . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
