LONDON | Wed Dec 1 , 2010 8:28 am EST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Last month , BP increased by $ 8 billion the financial provisions it was taking for the Gulf of Mexico oil spill ; the company 's shares rose . 
Better-than - expected underlying profits and upbeat comments from new Chief Executive Bob Dudley were taken by the market as a sign the company had turned the corner and would soon return to pumping out steadily rising dividends . 
Key to this sanguine outlook is confidence that the new estimate of the total cost of the spill -- $ 40 billion -- will be sufficient . 
`` We think that $ 40 billion adequately provisions for the liabilities that are outstanding so far , '' said Mark Lacey , Fund Manager at Investec Global Energy Fund . 
Paul Mumford , fund manager at Cavendish Asset Management , went further , saying the provision is likely to be overly conservative : `` You might well find that you get provision write-backs , '' he said , hinting the bill could be lower . 
That optimistic view may turn out to be true . 
BP executives have said this is their `` best estimate '' of costs , adding they could turn out lower . 
But history shows there is ample scope for nasty surprises from BP . 
The London-based oil giant -- last year it was the biggest non-state controlled oil and gas producer in the world -- has so far consistently underestimated the scope and potential cost of the Gulf spill . 
It also has a track record of low-balling disasters , including the fatal Texas City refinery blast in 2005 . 
Not only has the company underestimated the cost of repairing equipment and ecosystems in the past , it has also made overly optimistic assumptions about legal challenges . 
That may be happening again . 
CEO Dudley , an American who took over from Briton Tony Hayward in October , has said a $ 20 billion fund BP created to compensate victims of the spill should cover all damages claims . 
The lawyers who are suing BP do n't think so . 
`` The total value of the claims already registered could exceed the amount of money that has been dedicated to pay the fund , '' said Texas-based trial lawyer Brent Coon , who represents victims of the explosion and subsequent spill and who was prominent in litigation against BP after Texas City . 
`` Then you have the claims that have not been filed yet , and claims from those indirectly impacted , and shareholder derivative claims ... You have very large potential claims that could , in total , be exponentially greater than the amount set aside . '' 
Zygmunt Plater , Professor of Law at Boston College Law School , agrees . 
`` In the short term , it 's in everyone 's interests within the company to low-ball -- but the portents are there for a realistic inflation of $ 20 - $ 50 billon , '' he said . 
An analysis by Reuters of the potential fines , damages , costs related directly to the leak , compensation and the damage to BP 's business suggests the final spill bill could , over the long term , end up much higher than BP 's latest provision -- perhaps even more than twice as much . 
Much hinges on whether U.S. courts find the company was `` grossly negligent '' in the run-up to the disaster , but there are other risks . 
BP declined to comment for this article , beyond stating that it stands by its statements on the likely costs and that its estimates are based on the assumption that it was not grossly negligent . 
`` UNPRECEDENTED STRING OF BAD NEWS '' BP 's inability to gauge the true scope of the spill in the early days in April is well documented . 
After the Deepwater Horizon rig sunk , following an explosion which killed 11 workers , the company initially hoped to staunch the flow of oil from the well by activating shut-off valves with subsea robots . 
In case this did n't work , it started drilling a relief well to permanently plug the well from below . 
A week after the blast , the company said the well would take three months to complete and cost $ 100 million -- but that would be the most expensive part of the whole response operation . 
Combining this with the daily expenditure that BP reported at the time suggested a total bill of $ 200 million . 
BP hinted then that even this calculation was pessimistic . 
As estimates of the spill flow increased -- it eventually became the worst in U.S. history -- so did the cost . 
From an initial 1,000 barrels per day to 5,000 bpd , it finally reached 62,000 bpd . 
In June , BP told analysts the cost of containing and cleaning up the spill would be $ 3-6 billion . 
By mid-September , the response effort alone , excluding damages claims , had cost BP $ 8 billion . 
Investment analysts were forgiving of these errors . 
The disaster seemed to grow worse and worse making accurate estimates difficult . 
`` It was an unprecedented string of bad news , '' Simon Hawkins , oil analyst at Ambrian said last month . 
But even after the well was capped , BP appeared no more adept at forecasting costs . 
Twelve days after it had sealed the top of the well , on July 27 , the company said the likely cost of the spill would be $ 32 billion . 
On November 2 , it hiked its estimate by another 25 percent , or $ 8 billion . 
BP 's Chief Financial Officer Byron Grote blamed that increase mainly on a delay in completing the relief well , which meant the company needed to keep its offshore response effort going longer . 
In a conference call with analysts , he also cited costs related to decontamination of the thousands of ships used in the spill response and undefined administration and legal costs . 
BP did not give a detailed breakdown , but it is hard to see how the delay in the relief well accounted for most of the increased provision . 
Assuming an extra 40 days at the average cash-burn for the operation of $ 60 million per day gives an extra spend of only $ 2.6 billion . 
In addition to this , the well delay and many extra costs were already clear in July and could have been factored in earlier . 
Nonetheless , analysts have largely accepted the company 's estimates . 
Perhaps this is on the assumption that after months of bad publicity , the suspension of dividend payments for at least three quarters , a collapse in its share price to less than half its pre-spill level and a change of CEO , BP would take the opportunity to throw every conceivable cost into the mix and pave the way for recovery under a new boss . 
It 's a common enough practice when corporations change CEO . 
`` I tend to believe BP . 
Given how bad it was , they basically decided to kitchen-sink it , '' says Peter Hitchens , oil analyst at Panmure Gordon . 
WHAT HISTORY CAN TEACH US Such an assumption , though , may not be entirely safe in BP 's case . 
The company 's record of assessing costs after past disasters is less than stellar . 
BP 's Thunder Horse platform in the Gulf of Mexico captured front pages around the world in the summer of 2005 when a hurricane left it listing precariously . 
The company predicted it would take a year and $ 250 million to repair the damaged platform . 
In the end , it took almost three years to fix ; analysts estimate BP spent more than $ 500 million . 
That undershoot was nothing compared with what followed the explosion at its Texas City refinery in 2005 . 
The blast killed 15 workers and ruined the company 's carefully nurtured reputation as the green and caring face of Big Oil . 
Because it was a single-point disaster , the cost of Texas City should have been easier to quantify than an ongoing catastrophe like the Gulf spill . 
A gasoline production unit destroyed in the blast would need to be replaced , BP said . 
The going cost for such machinery was widely agreed to be in the region of $ 100 - $ 200 million . 
A few pessimists added in ancillary damages , lost profits and legal costs to arrive at a total cost of $ 1 billion . 
But a month after the accident , then-CEO John Browne said the final bill would be `` significantly '' less than that and analysts put the total cost at around $ 300-400 million , a figure the company appeared comfortable with . 
By 2008 , though , BP had paid over $ 2 billion in compensation claims related to Texas City , while lost profits and repairs had cost another $ 1 billion at least . 
Claims remain outstanding , so the final tally could be even higher . 
Is BP making the same mistake on penalties and compensation again ? 
A `` gross negligence '' finding would require the Department of Justice to show a high degree of recklessness on the part of senior BP officials , rather than a mistake by a low-level worker . 
BP has blamed low-level employees and its contractors for the Deepwater Horizon rig blast . 
On November 8 , a report by the White House oil spill commission prompted many analysts to assume it was going to be tough to pin gross negligence on BP for the Gulf spill , and BP shares rose as a result . 
The commission said it had found no direct evidence of `` a conscious decision to favor dollars over safety '' in BP . 
But the commission 's co-chairmen , Bill Reilly and Bob Graham , subsequently stressed that its November 8 finding did not mean anyone was off the hook . 
They said a `` culture that did not promote safety '' had fostered misjudgments leading up to the disaster in all the companies involved . 
A panel of scientists conducting another probe for the government subsequently said that BP 's systems for managing drilling risks were inadequate . 
Some lawmakers argue that in BP 's case , the culture created an incentive for employees to short-cut safety precautions without issuing explicitly dangerous orders . 
David Logan , professor of law at Roger Williams University in Rhode Island , believes there is no legal reason why a claimant could not establish gross negligence on the part of a corporation based solely on its culture . 
`` Can you stitch together an argument of gross negligence from the corporate culture ? 
It is possible to do that , '' Logan says . 
If BP is found to be grossly negligent , the U.S. Clean Water Act allows for a fine of up to $ 4,300 per barrel , nearly four times the $ 1,100 maximum BP otherwise faces . 
The government estimates 4.9 million barrels of oil flowed from BP 's well , suggesting a maximum fine of $ 5.4 billion if `` gross negligence '' is not proven , and $ 21.1 billion if it is . 
The company has argued that it should receive credit for the 700,000 barrels of oil which it scooped from the surface or burned , and it disputes the government estimate of the size of the spill . 
`` I think there 's room for considerable discussion there , '' Dudley said last month . 
A close study of company statements suggests BP has factored in a fine below $ 4 billion . 
As well as adding billions to that , a gross negligence finding would prevent BP from forcing its partners to pay their share of any fine or cleanup costs . 
Anadarko Petroleum , 25 percent owner of the blown-out well , and 10 percent owner , Japan 's Mitsui , have so far refused to pay , saying their contractual obligation to do so is void due to gross negligence on the part of the project operator , BP . 
Any costs BP might recover are not included in its current estimates because accounting rules prevent this , although the company has said it does expect to recoup money from its partners and has reserved the right to sue the companies it hired to help drill the well . 
Most lawyers expect BP and the Department of Justice to reach a settlement that avoids a court ruling on the degree of negligence . 
The spill -- and President Barack Obama 's inability to halt it -- hurt the president 's ratings . 
`` The government can not let them get away with it . 
After President Obama came in with the heavy foot , they just ca n't , '' the chief executive of a rival oil company , speaking on condition of anonymity because of the political sensitivity of the spill , told Reuters . 
Plater , the Boston professor , says if the government sought to be aggressive it could attempt to broaden the interpretation of environmental and economic damages that BP must make good . 
Oil and fishing dominate employment along the Gulf coast , especially in Louisiana , the state worst hit by the spill . 
While most of the fishing bans have been lifted , experts say it will take years for the coast to recover . 
`` There are different ways of measuring natural resource damages and the ecosystem services argument , '' Plater says . 
When you knock out an ecosystem , looking at the damage in terms of indirect harm to the economy could carry the cost `` into the hundreds of billions '' . 
BP 's assessments of the environmental damage caused by the spill are at the optimistic end of the spectrum . 
A government report released in August suggested up to 75 percent of the oil had disappeared -- BP has often referred to this report , and former CEO Hayward recently told a gathering of students in Cambridge , England , that all of the spilled oil had gone . 
However , researchers at the University of Georgia said in late August that about three-quarters of the oil was still lurking below the surface ; other studies have also pointed to the prospect of severe long-term damage . 
BP will be on the hook to make any such damage good . 
Whatever BP ends up paying in fines and cleanup costs , there could be another big charge : punitive damages . 
Such a charge would be helped by a finding of gross negligence , though claimants could pursue punitive damages even if gross negligence was n't proven . 
Exxon Mobil paid punitive damages of $ 1 per $ 1 of economic damage following the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska when the captain of the tanker , who had been drinking , hit a reef . 
Jamison Colburn , Professor of Law at Penn State University , says it is not entirely clear whether the current law covering oil spills at sea will allow punitive damages for BP , though if such damages are allowed , a one-to-one ratio would be in line with precedents like the Valdez . 
`` Punitive damages are a wild card , '' he said . 
`` It 's still an open question . '' 
In the Texas City case , BP settled all claims out of court , so a judge did not rule on punitive damages . 
However , lawyers say the amount paid out in settlements is consistent with an expectation there was a good chance significant punitive damages would have been awarded . 
If BP were to face punitive damages , given the prevailing estimates of economic damages at around $ 20 billion for the Gulf spill , a fine at the same ratio could add another $ 20 billion to its bill . 
But trial lawyer Coon says he believes punitive damages could be levied at a higher multiple , because the accusations against BP are greater than those Exxon faced . 
`` In that accident , a drunk captain inadvertently ran his ship onto a reef . 
The drunk captain was n't doing something at the request of the company , '' Coon said , referring to the arguments which would underpin a gross negligence claim . 
What 's clearly not included in BP 's spill estimate is a figure related to the damage the disaster has done to its U.S. business over the long term . 
BP said it lost 30,000 barrels per day of production in the Gulf -- one of its most profitable bases -- in the third quarter , and expected further impacts in the fourth quarter and into 2011 . 
But the added regulatory scrutiny the oil firm is likely to undergo in the United States will surely add to its operating costs . 
Analysts at Bernstein say BP 's upstream production costs could rise by 10 percent , or $ 280 million a year . 
Using the company 's own internal discount rate of 9-13 percent implies the present value of a 10 percent rise in these costs would be $ 2.5 billion . 
If other areas of BP 's U.S. business faced similar increases , the hit could be twice this . 
In addition , some lawmakers have called for BP , currently the Gulf 's largest operator , to be banned from future license rounds . 
`` BP may find that when its application for a license goes in , it is put in the ` pending ' file while Shell or someone else gets the license , '' said Iain Armstrong , analyst at Brewin Dolphin . 
Tally up fines commensurate with gross negligence , punitive damages at a ratio of just once economic damages , lower production , a 10 percent rise in U.S. operating costs , and difficulties in securing new reserves in the United States , and you quickly reach a figure around $ 50 billion . 
That may not be as dramatic as it sounds : some costs could still be shared with partners and contractors , many would be tax deductible , and they would in any case probably be payable over many years . 
The company can likely afford even the most pessimistic estimates . 
But things might not be as easy today as they were in 2005 . 
BP 's under-clubbing of the costs of Texas City was made up for by a more than doubling of the oil price between 2005 and 2008 . 
The outlook for crude now is less bullish , which may mean the oil giant has fewer places to hide . 
`` A very slight miscalculation now about what we think is going to happen is magnified by the huge numbers of stake holders -LRB- who could make claims -RRB- , '' said Logan of Roger Williams University . 
`` A billion here , a billion there and pretty soon you 're talking about real money . '' 
Despite BP 's official statements , some industry analysts say the company may be expecting to have to pay more . 
`` The way that they are selling assets and strengthening their balance , is what you would expect them to do if they were preparing for a worse scenario such as a finding of gross negligence , '' said one analyst who asked not to be named because he did not want to be seen questioning BP 's public comments . 
Currently , analysts predict BP will reinstate its dividend in early 2011 , at half the pre-spill level . 
If it has n't done its sums right , a return to steady dividend growth from the company could take quite a while longer . 
-LRB- Editing by Sara Ledwith and Simon Robinson -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
U.S. officials and the media offered no help or sympathy , only demonized the company and the situation . 
If a family member had such a problem , the least one would do is say , `` What can I do to help ? '' 
Instead , the media whips up world opinion against this company . 
I hope our next leadership is far more human and compassionate . 
And I can not believe no one has defended them . 
BP has paid and paid and it is time for leaders to offer help and stop the blame . 
Just another journalistic hack job . 
Adds nothing to what is already known . 
Just a lot of speculation and backward looking extrapolation . 
Like the projections that the oil would surround Florida and despoil the east coast . 
If `` gross negligence '' is the verdict , it would be purely political , anti `` big oil '' , and chauvinistic . 
The article barely mentions the shared responsibility of Anadarko and Mitsui . 
It does not mention the shared responsibility of Halliburton , Transocean , and Cameron . 
I 'm not sure where you live or what you do for a living , but the sheer level of your ignorance is staggering beyond comprehension . 
I live on the Gulf Coast and have experienced first-hand the impact of the leak\/spill ` on the ground ' from ` day one ' . 
How the hell is doing nothing but finger pointing for over a week , repeatedly underestimating the volume of oil , failing to cooperate with authorities at every turn , saying you 'll do everything you can to keep the oil from reaching shore and then ` taking responsibility ' for cleaning it up after abysmally failing to do so in ANY way being proactive ? 
As for humane and compassionate ... I can not believe your failing to even mention the 11 human beings who DIED in the sinking inferno of the Deepwater Horizon . 
BP will be lucky if they still exist after the families of the forgotten dead are finished suing them back to the Stone Age . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
