Worries escalate over effect of Corexit on marine wildlife BP faces criticism over the chemicals it is using to disperse the oil slick . 
Photograph : Stephane Jourdain\/AFP\/Getty Images The White House directed BP to cut its use of chemical dispersants to break up the Louisiana oil slick by as much as 50 % yesterday , reflecting concerns that the clean-up of the spill could be worsening the economic disaster in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Lisa Jackson , the head of the Environmental Protection Agency , said the Obama administration wanted the oil company to scale back its use of chemicals on the water surface . 
The order came amid increasing tension between the administration and the oil company about how to manage the oil on the ocean floor , more than a month after the sinking of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig . 
`` I am recommending as strongly as we can that we absolutely minimize the use of dispersants and that we monitor as rigorously as we can , '' she told a conference call with reporters touring Louisiana marshes contaminated by the oil . 
She said she thought BP would be able to cut its use of chemicals to break up the spill by half or even 75 % by injecting smaller quantities underwater . 
The directive is in line with a hardening of administration 's rhetoric against BP . 
With thick brown sheets of crude oil now washing up on shore , the White House as well as the oil company is feeling the pressure of not stopping the leak . 
Louisiana 's governor , Bobby Jindal , said he had warned the administration for days that the booms deployed by BP would not keep back the oil . 
He has said some 65 miles of Louisiana 's coastline is affected , contaminating oyster beds and coating pelicans and sea turtles in oil . 
Independent scientists and members of Congress have also been warning about BP 's heavy reliance on a dispersant called Corexit which is banned in the UK because it is harmful for marine life . 
BP has poured more than 650,000 gallons of the chemical on to the spill . 
Scientists told congressional hearings last week that Corexit was more toxic and less effective than other dispersants on the market . 
Conservationists fear the chemical could further jeopardise already depleted stocks of fish such as Atlantic bluefin tuna or poison endangered species of turtle . 
The Centre for Biological Diversity petitioned the Obama administration yesterday to protect the bluefin tuna as an endangered species . 
The move would compel the administration to consider the consequences of offshore drilling before sanctioning any more oil rigs . 
Jackson directed the EPA last week to seek out alternative chemicals within 24 hours , but admitted yesterday that BP had continued to use Corexit to break up the spill . 
She and the coast guard commander , Mary Landry , defended the use of the chemical , arguing it had prevented a more devastating landfall of heavy crude . 
But she admitted the longterm consequences of using enormous quantities of the chemical over such a long period of time were unresolved . 
`` It is clear to me that the science of dispersants has not in any way kept up with our ability to drill and use fossifl fuels and that is a huge disconnect , '' she said . 
RT @BrianSozzi : Within food , white bread had one of the strongest price increases in December . 
