A ship deploys boom to absorb oil in the vacinity of the Deep Sea Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico May 8 . 
-LRB- AP Photo -RRB- Louisiana officials plan to ask BP to pay to dredge up miles of new barrier islands as a defense against the oil slick headed to the state 's coastline , Gov. Bobby Jindal said Saturday . 
The project would cost $ 200 million and take four to six months to complete its first phase , adding 43 miles to extend the Chandeleur island chain off the state 's eastern coastline in both directions , said Plaquemines Parish President Billy Nungesser , speaking at a press conference with Jindal . 
However , even a few days of dredging would improve coastal protections , he added . 
BP will be asked to fund the project , Jindal said . 
`` It would be so much easier to clean oil off this -LRB- dredged -RRB- sand than to deal with in our marshes , '' Jindal said . 
State and parish officials are seeking expedited permitting from the Environmental Protection Agency , and will also need approval from the U.S. Coast Guard , Nungesser said . 
A BP well 50 miles off Louisiana 's coast has leaked oil into the Gulf of Mexico for more than two weeks , ever since a rig working the site caught fire and sank . 
The slick has reached the Chandeleur Islands , and a heavy patch of oil is four or five miles off the entrance to Southwest Pass , the commercial shipping route into the Mississippi River , Nungesser said . 
On Saturday , BP said a containment device it had lowered onto the larger of two leaks had run into a hitch , after the opening at the top clogged with crystallized gas and water . 
The company plans to take two days to remove the hydrates and determine next steps . 
One option includes injecting methanol , a chemical used as antifreeze , to prevent hydrates from forming , said Doug Suttles , BP 's chief operating officer . 
Containment dome technology has never been used at such depths before . 
Jindal said the dredging plan is one way Louisiana can `` prepare for the worst-case scenario '' in case the well continues to leak for another three months until BP can drill a relief well cutting off the flow of oil . 
Plaquemines Parish had drafted plans as far back as 2008 to expand its barrier islands to protect the coast against storm surges , but was unable to secure federal funding needed to begin the project , a parish spokesman said . 
Nungesser said Saturday that the dredging the parish hopes BP will fund can also serve as storm protection once the threat from the oil slick passes . 
