May 6 : The oil containment box is lowered into the Gulf at the site of the Deepwater Horizon rig collapse . 
AP As a massive oil leak spit thousands of gallons more crude into the Gulf of Mexico , a big box that BP hoped would be its savior sat idle hundreds of feet away , encased in ice crystals . 
The company 's first attempt to divert the oil was foiled , its mission now in serious doubt . 
Meanwhile , thick blobs of tar washed up on Alabama 's white sand beaches , yet another sign the spill was worsening . 
It had taken about two weeks to build the box and three days to cart it 50 miles out and slowly lower it to the well a mile below the surface , but the frozen depths were just too much . 
BP officials were not giving up hopes that a containment box -- either the one brought there or another one being built -- could cover the well . 
But they said it could be days before another attempt to capture the oil and funnel it to a tanker at the surface would be tried . 
`` I would n't say it 's failed yet , '' BP chief operating officer Doug Suttles said . 
`` What I would say is what we attempted to do ... did n't work . '' 
There was a renewed sense of urgency as dime - to golfball-sized balls of tar began washing up on Dauphin Island , three miles off the Alabama mainland at the mouth of Mobile Bay and much farther east than the thin , rainbow sheens that have arrived sporadically in the Louisiana marshes . 
`` It almost looks like bark , but when you pick it up it definitely has a liquid consistency and it 's definitely oil , '' said Kimberly Creel , 41 , who was hanging out and swimming with hundreds of other beachgoers . '' 
... I can only imagine what might be coming this way that might be larger . '' 
About a half dozen tar balls had been collected by Saturday afternoon at Dauphin Island , Coast Guard chief warrant officer Adam Wine said in Mobile , and crews in protective clothing patrolled the beach for debris . 
Authorities planned to test the substance but strongly suspected it came from the oil spill . 
In the nearly three weeks since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded April 20 , killing 11 workers , about 210,000 gallons of crude a day has been flowing into the Gulf . 
Until Saturday none of the thick sludge -- those iconic images of past spills -- had reached shore . 
It had taken more than 12 hours to slowly lower to the seafloor the peaked box the size of a four-story house , a task that required painstaking precision to accurately position it over the well for fear of damaging the leaking pipe and making the problem worse . 
Nothing like it had been attempted at such depths , where water pressure can crush a submarine . 
Company and Coast Guard officials had cautioned that icelike hydrates , a slushy mixture of gas and water , would be one of the biggest challenges to the containment box plan , and their warnings proved accurate . 
The crystals clogged the opening in the top of the peaked box , BP 's Suttles said , like sand in a funnel , only upside-down . 
Options under consideration included raising the box high enough that warmer water would prevent the slush from forming , or using heated water or methanol . 
Even as officials pondered their next move , Coast Guard Rear Adm. Mary Landry said she must continue to manage expectations of what the containment box can do . 
`` This dome is no silver bullet to stop the leak , '' she said . 
The captain of the supply boat that carried the hulking , concrete-and-steel vault for 11 hours from the Louisiana coast last week was n't giving up hope . 
`` Everybody knew this was a possibility well before we brought the dome out , '' Capt. Demi Shaffer , of Seward , Alaska , told an Associated Press reporter stationed with the 12-man crew of the Joe Griffin in the heart of the containment zone . 
`` It 's an everyday occurrence when you 're drilling , with the pipeline trying to freeze up . '' 
The spot where the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded and sank now teems with vessels working on containing the rogue well . 
There are 15 boats and large ships at or near the site -- some being used in an ongoing effort to drill a relief well , considered a permanent if weeks-away fix . 
News that the containment box plan , designed to siphon up to 85 percent of the leaking oil , had faltered dampened spirits in Louisiana 's coastal communities . 
`` Everyone was hoping that that would slow it down a bit if not stop it , '' said Shane Robichaux , of Chauvin , a 39-year-old registered nurse relaxing at his vacation camp in Cocodrie . 
`` I 'm sure they 'll keep working on it till it gets fixed , one way or another . 
But we were hopeful that would shut it down . '' 
The original blowout was triggered by a bubble of methane gas that escaped from the well and shot up the drill column , expanding quickly as it burst through several seals and barriers before exploding , according to interviews with rig workers conducted during BP PLC 's internal investigation . 
Deep sea oil drillers often encounter pockets of methane crystals as they dig into the earth . 
As the bubble rose , it intensified and grew , breaking through various safety barriers , said Robert Bea , a University of California Berkley engineering professor and oil pipeline expert who detailed the interviews exclusively to an Associated Press reporter . 
