Sen. John McCain meets with local business leaders at Buckingham Smokehouse Bar-B-Q in Columbia , Mo. -LRB- By Ricky Carioti -- The Washington Post -RRB- BELTON , Mo. , Oct. 20 -- Battling George W. Bush for the GOP presidential nomination in 2000 , John McCain lashed out at the Texas governor , denouncing his proposed tax cuts as a giveaway to the rich . 
Eight years later , this time running as the Republican presidential nominee , the senator from Arizona is again criticizing Bush and his financial policies , as he renews his efforts to demonstrate that he would represent a departure from the current administration . 
At virtually every campaign stop , McCain is reprising a line he used last Wednesday in his final debate with Sen. Barack Obama : `` I am not George Bush . '' 
And in a television ad introduced last week , McCain looks into the camera and says , `` The last eight years have n't worked very well , have they ? '' 
As he struggles to pull his campaign out from beneath the shadow of a president whose approval ratings have reached historic lows , McCain is offering some of his toughest criticism of the Bush White House . 
In recent weeks , he has focused his message on the administration 's handling of the nation 's financial crisis , suggesting that the Treasury Department has been more interested in `` bailing out the banks '' than helping struggling homeowners avoid foreclosure . 
`` I am so disturbed that this administration has not done what we have to do , and that is to go out and buy up these bad mortgages , '' McCain told Jewish leaders in a conference call Sunday morning . 
The new rhetoric has drawn roars of applause at some campaign stops and represents a tacit acknowledgment that McCain has not distanced himself sufficiently from the administration in his bid . 
One senior adviser said the campaign had to do something to counteract the Obama operation 's decision to spend `` tens of millions of dollars pushing '' the idea that McCain is a virtual clone of Bush . 
`` The majority of the swing voters do n't believe it , but some do , and we have to convince them that we are different from Bush , '' said this adviser , who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss campaign strategy . 
Bush is hardly the only problem for McCain as he struggles to close a gap with Obama . 
Voters perceive Obama as better prepared to handle the economic crisis , the GOP brand has been severely tarnished in recent years , and McCain is at a huge financial disadvantage . 
But with the Republican president 's approval ratings languishing , the perceived connection with him is a significant drag on the party 's nominee . 
Nearly half of all voters in a new Washington Post-ABC News poll said McCain would mainly carry on Bush 's policies , and among those who would consider a McCain presidency as a continuation of the current administration , 90 percent support Obama . 
And the prized independent voters who link McCain and Bush also overwhelmingly tilt toward the Democrat . 
McCain has made progress in distancing himself from the president . 
Among independents , 54 percent now see the senator as offering a new direction , up from 44 percent before the third presidential debate , where he introduced his new language on Bush . 
Among all likely voters , the percentage associating McCain with Bush is less than 50 percent for the first time , albeit barely , at 49 percent . 
Forty-eight percent said McCain would mainly continue to lead in Bush 's footsteps . 
A senior Republican close to the campaign said internal GOP polling underscores those findings . 
`` It 's night and day , '' the source said . 
`` You have somebody whose public approval is in the 20s . 
There 's just not a ` there ' there anymore in terms of residual support . '' 
