INEVITABLY , PERHAPS , the deepening financial crisis has spawned a search for scapegoats and quick fixes . 
According to many Republican members of Congress , banking industry lobbyists and financial pundits , the Wall Street meltdown would not be nearly as bad as it is but for the baleful impact of `` mark-to-market '' accounting rules . 
These are national standards , adopted in the wake of the savings and loan debacle of the 1980s , that require banks to carry certain financial assets on their books at the current market price . 
The idea is to give investors the latest and most objective estimate of a company 's true financial condition -- as opposed to a company 's inevitably self-serving calculation based on original costs . 
Now that the markets for mortgage-backed securities and derivatives have seized up , however , their market price is either distressingly close to zero or impossible to determine . 
Critics argue that marking-to-market when there is no market artificially and irrationally depresses banks ' balance sheets , since the assets would fetch near face-value under normal circumstances . 
Ergo , they contend , the way to shore up bank capital is to relax or eliminate mark-to-market -- and it would n't cost taxpayers a dime . 
The critics have a point . 
Undoubtedly the markets , out of irrational fear , are shunning some relatively solid assets as well as actual turkeys . 
Mark-to-market therefore does force banks to write their books in the panicky language of today 's meltdown . 
Perhaps , once the crisis is over , it would be wise for the Securities and Exchange Commission and the accounting authorities to revisit this `` pro-cyclical '' aspect of the rule . 
The recent bailout legislation included a provision requiring the SEC to study mark-to-market 's impact . 
We see no harm in that . 
But the critics ' arguments against mark-to-market may prove too much . 
If the rule requires banks to accentuate the negative during bust times , then presumably it is also to blame for all those wonderful financial statements the banks were issuing during the boom . 
We do n't recall anyone demanding its suspension then . 
Actually , complaints about the rule probably overstate its impact , since financial institutions only have to use it for securities they intend to trade . 
Loans and securities held to maturity are not covered by mark-to-market ; at big banks such as SunTrust , Wells Fargo and Bank of America , such long-term assets represent half or more of all assets . 
Markets not only need transparent financial reporting , they need consistent financial reporting . 
To suspend or abandon mark-to-market now , in the middle of a panic , would simply deepen the confusion and suspicion that are already crippling the financial system . 
No , today 's financial meltdown is not some accidental byproduct of misguided technical rules . 
It happened because too many firms made too many bad financial bets with borrowed money . 
Pretending otherwise wo n't solve anything . 
