Syria unrest : Civilians need protection , says UN Activists said thousands of people protested in a number of Syrian cities on Friday A UN investigative team has wrapped up its visit to Syria , concluding that `` there is an urgent need to protect civilians '' from excessive force . 
The team , the first Syria has allowed in since a deadly crackdown on protests began in March , said there was no countrywide humanitarian crisis . 
The UN says more than 2,200 people have been killed in the violence . 
The UN Security Council is split over whether to impose sanctions against Syria 's leadership over the crackdown . 
Syria had refused for months to allow a UN mission into the country to investigate the violence . 
The government allowed the team in last week , promising full and unfettered access . 
`` The mission concluded that although there 's no countrywide humanitarian crisis , there is an urgent need to protect civilians from the excessive use of force , '' said UN spokesman Farhan Haq . 
But the promised free access did not materialise . 
`` The constant presence of government officials limited the mission 's ability to fully and independently assess the situation , '' Mr Haq said . 
In areas the team visited where there had been unrest , `` people ... said they felt extremely intimidated and under constant threat '' . 
President Assad says his security forces are tackling `` armed criminal gangs '' Demonstrations against the rule of President Bashar al-Assad began in mid-March and have since spread across much of the country . 
President Assad has sent in tanks and troops to hotbeds of protest , activists have said , but the demonstrations have continued . 
The government has blamed the unrest on `` armed criminal gangs '' . 
Human rights groups estimate 500 soldiers have been killed in the unrest , which has seen thousands of people arrested . 
Most foreign journalists have been barred from Syria , making it difficult to verify reports from local activists and officials . 
Activists said at least three people were killed on Friday as thousands of people came out to protest in a number of cities after Friday prayers - the last in the month of Ramadan . 
At the UN Security Council , the battle over what to do about Syria has heated up , says the BBC 's UN correspondent Barbara Plett . 
Russia and a group consisting of the US , France , Britain , Germany and Portugal submitted rival draft resolutions on Syria . 
The Russian draft calls for the Syrian government to speed up reforms and for the opposition to take part in political dialogue . 
The US-European draft calls for a freeze of President Assad 's assets and an arms embargo against Syria . 
Russia 's UN ambassador Vitaly Churkin said the Western group was `` stirring up the opposition '' in Syria . 
Our UN correspondent says there is no immediate plan for a vote on the rival drafts . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
