Thursday , April 29 , 2010 ; 4:49 PM A massive crude oil spill from last week 's offshore rig explosion is expected to reach Louisiana 's delicate coastline by Thursday night -- 24 hours ahead of a Coast Guard projection earlier in the day -- Gov. Bobby Jindal -LRB- R -RRB- said . 
`` We are expecting to see the first impact at Pass-A-Loutre today , Chandeleur Islands on Saturday , '' Jindal said at a briefing in Baton Rouge . 
The Coast Guard confirmed that the leading edge of the oil slick in the Gulf of Mexico is three miles from Pass-A-Loutre Wildlife Management Area , the Reuters news agency reported . 
The area is at the mouth of the Mississippi River . 
The spill could threaten wildlife , tourism and the livelihoods of fishermen . 
`` We are being very aggressive and we are prepared for the worst case , '' Coast Guard Rear Adm. Sally Brice-O'Hare , the service 's deputy commandant for operations , said at the White House . 
The oil spill is not only moving faster toward shore than was anticipated , it is also pouring out vastly more crude oil than initially estimated . 
The White House said Thursday that President Obama had directed his administration -- including the Pentagon -- to aggressively join in cleanup efforts . 
The government declared the spill to be of `` national significance , '' Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano said , which clears the way for a wider federal response to prevent environmental damage . 
But officials warned that it may take 90 days to shut off the flow of leaking oil . 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration estimates that oil could be pouring out of the ground at a rate of up to 5,000 barrels a day . 
Federal officials expressed frustration Thursday with the inability of BP , the oil company that had drilled the undersea well , to seal the ruptured wellhead . 
`` The spill is now crossing different regions , '' Napolitano said . 
`` We will continue to push BP to engage in the strongest response possible . '' 
The Pentagon is reviewing what resources it could offer in the cleanup , but no decision has been reached , spokesman Geoff Morrell said . 
`` We have come to no conclusions yet to what those -LRB- resources -RRB- might be and whether they would be of much assistance to the effort down there , '' Morrell said . 
In a briefing at the White House , Napolitano and other administration officials rejected the suggestions that the administration had been slow to deal with the spill , saying that it has employed booms , skimmers and chemical dispersants to try to control the oil . 
Weather and sea conditions Thursday prevented officials from trying another controlled burn of the oil . 
Such a burn worked Wednesday with a small test section of the slick . 
