View how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
The Coast Guard and BP set fire to a portion of the crude oil floating in the Gulf of Mexico on Wednesday in a bid to limit the impact of a widening slick , which federal officials said could touch shore in parts of the Louisiana delta as early as Friday evening . 
With BP unable to stop the flow of oil from a deepwater exploration well that blew up last week , attention was turning to the gulf 's coastlines , where the spill could threaten wildlife , tourism and the livelihoods of fishermen . 
`` It 's premature to say this is catastrophic , '' said Coast Guard Rear Adm. Mary Landry . 
`` I will say that this is very serious . '' 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration estimated Wednesday night that oil could be pouring out of the ground at a rate of up to 5,000 barrels a day . 
That is five times BP 's earlier estimate . 
Government officials said Wednesday they had urged BP to seek additional help from the Defense Department in protecting the shoreline . 
President Obama was briefed Wednesday by Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano on the situation . 
Earlier , the Coast Guard said the company corralled the thickest areas of the oil slick inside fireproof booms , lighted it late in the afternoon and burned it for 28 minutes . 
By burning off several thousand gallons of oil , the Coast Guard said , it could limit damage to coastal areas . 
The unusual strategy has been used for damaged tankers in World War II , in an oil spill off Britain and in rare cases on inland waters in Louisiana and Texas . 
But a burn off U.S. shores and the prospect of oil landing on the gulf coastline could become powerful symbols of the perils of offshore drilling , just as President Obama and Congress appear set to open new areas to offshore oil and gas exploration . 
On Wednesday , the Obama administration said it will open federal waters to wind farms , approving a divisive offshore project near Cape Cod in Massachusetts -- and providing a juxtaposition of controversies over both old and new energy sources . 
The crisis in the gulf is likely to get worse before it gets better . 
It began April 20 , when an oil and gas discovery blew upward , setting the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig on fire . 
The rig , owned by Transocean and leased to BP , later sank , and 11 of its workers are missing and presumed dead . 
At its current rate , the spill could surpass by next week the size of the 1969 Santa Barbara spill that helped lead to the far-reaching moratorium on oil and gas drilling off the Pacific and Atlantic coasts , a ban that Obama recently said he wants to modify . 
It would take about 260 days for this incident to exceed the size of the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill off Alaska , but it took several weeks for a similar oil well blowout to be brought under control off the coast of Australia last year . 
Asked about the potential political effects of the spill , BP chief executive Tony Hayward said : `` It 's far too early to tell . 
I think a lot of it will be determined by the intensity of the response , the quality of the response and the success of the response . '' 
He said BP is trying to be `` very forward-leaning . 
We have enormous resources committed to contain it . '' 
In recent years , BP has been plagued with other troubles , such as an explosion at a Texas refinery , construction delays on a gulf production platform and leaks in one of its Alaska pipelines . 
