Assad officials deny rebel ` Damascus volcano ' push Activists released images they said showed tanks on the streets of Damascus Syrian officials have dismissed claims by rebels that they have launched an all-out offensive in Damascus . 
State media said security forces fought off attacks by small groups of armed terrorists in the city . 
The rebels had declared a final battle for the capital , calling it Operation Damascus Volcano . 
They said the regime had used helicopters and tanks to repel a well-planned attack . 
UN chiefs are trying to persuade China and Russia to agree tougher measures . 
Envoy Kofi Annan held talks with Russian President Vladimir Putin in Moscow , and Ban Ki-moon is visiting Beijing . 
The UN has until Friday to renew the mandate for observers in Syria , and Western nations want a new resolution backed by the threat of force . 
Iraq warns its citizens to flee the violence , hours after the bodies of two killed journalists were handed over by the Syrian authorities Syrian General Manaf Tlas , a former aide of President Bashar al-Assad who defected earlier this month , is in Paris , French authorities confirm The army and rebels have battled in several parts of Damascus for the past three days . 
Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut With international diplomacy virtually paralysed by big-power splits over how to tackle the Syrian crisis , the clashes in Damascus seem to have carried the conflict into a new phase . 
The fighting in the capital may have started on Sunday as a case of security forces tackling armed rebels displaced by a crackdown on the suburbs . 
But the Free Syrian Army has now declared that Operation Damascus Volcano is under way . 
The Muslim Brotherhood , the biggest and most organised opposition group , has called it a `` decisive battle '' and urged all Syrians to join a nationwide civil insurrection . 
The regime is clearly discomfited . 
With parts of the capital 's center paralysed , and thousands of residents displaced within the city limits , state media have dropped all mention of the Damascus fighting . 
The fighting reached central areas on Tuesday , with gunfire and plumes of smoke reported in a street near parliament . 
The Free Syrian Army said the operation was well planned , and they had sent hundreds of fighters to the capital last week to be in place for the assault . 
`` There is no going back . 
The Damascus battle has priority for us . 
We have started the operation to liberate Damascus , '' said FSA spokesman Col Qassem Saadeddine . 
Activists accused the regime of deploying tanks and helicopter gunships to the capital , and claimed that rebels had shot down one helicopter . 
State news agency Sana , however , detailed several isolated attacks by `` armed terrorist gangs '' , and said the army had fought them off . 
Sana said gangs had attacked a power station and a printing house , attempted to block roads around the capital , and had used civilians as human shields . 
Information Minister Omran Zoabi told Reuters news agency some `` armed elements '' had infiltrated Damascus . 
`` The security forces surrounded them and dealt with them , and are still dealing with them , '' he said . 
`` Some have surrendered and others escaped on foot and by car and are firing randomly in the air to frighten people . '' 
The rebels and the government often publish contradictory accounts of the same incidents . 
Western journalists are under heavy restrictions in Syria , making it difficult to verify the claims of either side . 
About 16,000 people have died in Syria since protests against the Assad regime began in March last year . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
