Nawaf Fares : Chemical weapons ` may have been used ' Former Syrian diplomat Nawaf Fares , who defected last week , has said President Bashar al-Assad would not shy away from using chemical weapons on his own people , and has colluded with al-Qaeda to carry out attacks . 
But how valid are the claims , asks the BBC 's security correspondent Frank Gardner in Doha . 
Nawaf al-Fares does not look at first glance like a man who has just defected from a regime he calls `` murderous criminals '' . 
Neatly dressed in suit and tie , he was until last week Syria 's ambassador to Iraq and is the most senior diplomat to defect so far from the rule of President Bashar al-Assad . 
Sitting now in a luxury hotel in the Gulf state of Qatar , he piles one accusation after another against the regime he served for 34 years . 
I have built my opinion based on my knowledge of the regime 's mentality and the government 's mentality '' `` Bashar al-Assad 's regime is like a cornered and wounded wolf , '' he tells me . 
`` It will do anything to survive . '' 
He accuses his former masters of colluding with al-Qaeda to carry out mass-casualty bombings on its own citizens to discredit the opposition . 
The Assads , he says , will never give up power through `` political interventions '' , only if they are forced out . 
He says the regime , if cornered further , `` will not hesitate to use chemical weapons '' , and that they may have been `` used partially in Homs '' . 
This is a serious allegation from a defector with some inside knowledge , but Mr Fares is not a scientist nor a soldier . 
And his words have disturbing echoes of the sort of claims being trumpeted about Saddam 's mythical Weapons of Mass Destruction -LRB- WMD -RRB- in the run-up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq . 
I press him further . 
Is this just conjecture , I ask him , or do you have any evidence of that ? 
The Syrian government has blamed al-Qaeda for a number of bomb attacks `` It 's absolutely certain that such issues are never discussed because it 's very serious , '' he replies . 
`` If they decide to use chemical weapons they will not discuss it . 
I have built my opinion based on my knowledge of the regime 's mentality and the government 's mentality . '' 
Nawaf Fares does of course have a vested interest in discrediting the regime which he has just deserted . 
He knows that unless or until it falls he can never go back . 
He says he is in contact with elements of the opposition and hopes to return to `` a free and democratic Syria '' . 
I put it to him that as a former senior Syrian security and intelligence official and provincial governor , many believe him to be complicit not just in violent crimes inside Syria but in Iraq too . 
Here , Mr Fares is adamant . 
He denies any role in sheltering militants who have carried out bombings in Iraq and says he is willing to be judged on this in a court of law . 
`` All the bombings that have been committed -LRB- in Syria -RRB- , especially the major ones with large number of innocent victims , are perpetrated by the regime , '' he says . 
`` The regime now is using al-Qaeda to strike the Syrian people . '' 
He offers no proof of this , and I counter that this makes no sense as al-Qaeda has always condemned Bashar 's rule , with al-Qaeda leader Dr Ayman al-Zawahiri calling him an apostate and urging jihadists to fight against him . 
Mr Fares insists that it is an alliance of convenience . 
`` Al-Qaeda is searching for space to move and for means of support , the regime is looking for ways to terrorise the Syrian people , '' he says . 
At the end of the interview Mr Fares folds his hands in his lap as his chaperones glance at their watches . 
`` This regime is doomed , '' he concludes . 
The fact the fighting is now in Damascus `` is hugely significant . 
It is the beginning of the end '' . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
