Michael Jackson died in June 2009 aged 50 Executors of Michael Jackson 's estate have asked the Discovery Channel to cancel plans for a program claiming to re-enact the late singer 's autopsy . 
John Branca and John McClain said the show was `` in shockingly bad taste '' . 
In a letter , the pair accused the company of being motivated by `` blind desire '' to exploit the singer 's death . 
The show - entitled Michael Jackson 's Autopsy : What Really Killed Michael Jackson - is scheduled to be broadcast in Europe in January . 
`` Your decision to even schedule this program is in shockingly bad taste and insensitive to Michael 's family , '' the co-executors wrote . 
`` On behalf of Michael 's family , fans , common sense and decency , we urge you to reconsider and cancel this program , '' they added . 
An advertisement used to promote the show reportedly depicts a body covered by a sheet with one hand wearing the singer 's trademark sequined glove visible . 
`` Discovery obviously views this as clever advertising and creative ` branding ' for its program , '' Branca and McClain continued . 
`` In fact , the ad is debased , sick and insensitive . '' 
Dr Conrad Murray has pleaded not guilty to involuntary manslaughter Discovery Communications declined to comment on the letter , the Reuters news agency reported . 
Meanwhile , lawyers for the doctor facing trial for involuntary manslaughter over Jackson 's death may suggest the singer killed himself , a prosecutor has claimed . 
In a court session to discuss evidence in the case against Dr Conrad Murray , Deputy District Attorney David Walgren said he believed defense lawyers were looking into the theory . 
`` They do n't want to say it but that 's the direction in which they are going , '' he said on Wednesday . 
Outside the Los Angeles courtroom , defense lawyer J Michael Flanagan declined to comment and said lawyers were still investigating the case . 
A preliminary hearing is scheduled to begin on 4 January where it will be decided if there is sufficient evidence to hold Dr Murray for trial . 
Dr Murray has repeatedly denied causing Jackson 's death . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
