A rebel fighter gestures next to his comrade at the Libyan and Tunisian border crossing of Dehiba May 1 , 2011 . 
TRIPOLI | Sun May 1 , 2011 6:03 pm EDT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya said Sunday Muammar Gaddafi 's youngest son and three grandchildren were killed in a NATO air strike and Britain said that while it was not targeting the leader , it was homing in on his military machine . 
Libyan government spokesman Mussa Ibrahim said Gaddafi was unharmed and in good health despite what he called `` a direct operation to assassinate the leader of this country . '' 
The deaths have not been independently confirmed . 
But they will be sure to heap pressure on NATO from critics who say it is overstepping a U.N. mandate to protect Libyan civilians and could trigger a backlash against the West and a renewed government push against rebels supported by the strikes . 
Britain and Italy 's embassies in Tripoli were attacked after Gaddafi loyalists were shown on Libyan television vowing vengeance following the air strike . 
Britain expelled the Libyan ambassador and Italy condemned the attack on its embassy as a grave and vile act . 
Most Western countries closed their embassies in Tripoli before the NATO military intervention began several weeks ago . 
Libyan officials took journalists to a Tripoli house that had been hit by at least three missiles . 
The roof had collapsed in places . 
Glass and debris covered the lawns and what appeared to be an unexploded missile lay in one corner . 
`` What we have now is the law of the jungle , '' Ibrahim said . 
`` We think now it is clear to everyone that what is happening in Libya has nothing to do with the protection of civilians . '' 
Libya 's civil war , which grew out street demonstrations for greater political freedoms that have rippled across the Arab world , has reached stalemate in recent weeks . 
NATO denied targeting Gaddafi , or his family , but said in a statement it had launched air strikes on military targets in the same area of Tripoli as the bombed site seen by reporters . 
Ibrahim said Gaddafi 's youngest son , Saif al-Arab , was killed in the attack . 
Saif al-Arab , 29 , is one of Gaddafi 's less prominent sons , with a limited role in the power structure . 
Ibrahim described him as a student who had studied in Germany . 
Al Arabiya Sunday broadcast footage taken from Libyan Jamahiriyah TV which it said were the bodies of Saif al-Arab and the three children -- two 2-year-olds and a five-month-old . 
They were wrapped in green cloth with their faces covered in white . 
`` NATO continued its precision strikes against regime military installations in Tripoli overnight , including striking a known command and control building in the Bab al-Aziziyah neighborhood shortly after 1800 GMT Saturday , '' NATO said . 
NATO 's commander of Libya operations , Canadian Lieutenant-General Charles Bouchard , said the target was part of a strategy to hit command centers that threaten civilians . 
`` All NATO 's targets are military in nature ... We do not target individuals , '' he said in a statement . 
`` I am aware of unconfirmed media reports that some of Gaddafi 's family members may have been killed . 
We regret all loss of life . '' 
Any appearance of an assassination attempt against Gaddafi is likely to lead to accusations that the British - and French-led strikes are exceeding the provisions of the U.N. resolution to protect civilians . 
British Prime Minister David Cameron declined to comment on what he also called the `` unconfirmed report . '' 
But he told BBC television : `` The targeting policy of NATO and the alliance is absolutely clear . 
It is in line with U.N. Resolution 1973 and it is about preventing a loss of civilian life by targeting Gaddafi 's war-making machine . 
So that is obviously tanks and guns , rocket launchers , but also command and control as well . '' 
The French Foreign Ministry said : `` France is following its mandate from the U.N. Security Council and there is no question of regime change or targeting individuals in the resolution . '' 
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez , a long-time ally of Gaddafi , called the attack attempted murder . 
Gaddafi , who seized power in a 1969 coup , is fighting an uprising by rebels who have seized much of eastern Libya . 
He describes the rebels as religious extremists and Western agents who seek to control Libya 's oil . 
Saturday night 's attack appeared to be the second NATO strike near to Gaddafi in 24 hours . 
A missile struck near a television station early Saturday when the Libyan leader was making an address in which he said he would never step down and offered talks to rebels . 
The rebels say they can not trust Gaddafi . 
Gaddafi 's daughter was killed in a U.S. air strike in 1986 , ordered after a bomb attack on a West Berlin discotheque killed two U.S. servicemen . 
Washington linked Tripoli to the attack . 
Tripoli has declared a sea blockade on the besieged western outpost of Misrata , potentially stopping the rebels from sending weapons and humanitarian supplies in from their eastern heartland . 
An International Organization for Migration ship , the Red Star One , was waiting offshore to deliver aid and evacuate migrants . 
A rebel spokesman reported more shelling in Misrata . 
`` The bombardment started last night . 
It is still going on , '' the spokesman , called Reda , told Reuters by telephone . 
`` The random bombardment targeted residential areas and the port area . 
I can hear explosions now . '' 
Rebel spokesman Ahmed Hassan said later that the Libyan army was shelling where an aid ship was trying to unload . 
Libyan TV said government forces were trying to stop a NATO arms delivery to `` armed criminal gangs . '' 
A third rebel spokesman said government forces and rebels were fighting for control of the airport near Misrata . 
Pockets of fighting continued elsewhere in the west . 
Government forces were bombarding Zintan with rockets to try to advance on the rebel-held city southwest of Tripoli , and the rebels said NATO was bombing Libyan army positions nearby . 
Loyalists ' artillery fire also landed in the Tunisian border town of Dehiba after fighting on the Libyan side of the border . 
A rebel spokesman and an oil official said an air strike destroyed a Gaddafi convoy after his forces killed five civilians in fighting in the eastern towns of Jalu and Awlijah . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It is a war . 
two wrongs do n't make a right . 
Even if Gaddafi is wrong in do many areas , killing children is never right . 
Did n't NATO pledge not to target the Libyan leader for bombing ? 
Why they do it now ? 
The rebels can overthrow Gaddafi by themselves but they will not be accredited for completing this job if NATO lends such helping hand . 
We want the war , if persists , to go fair . 
Gaddafi should have offered surrender instead of ceasefire yesterday so his son would n't die for him . 
NATO did this becoz the West is not patient with continued disrupted cheap oil supply from Libya . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
