Credit : Reuters\/Louafi Larbi -LRB- LIBYA - Tags : CIVIL UNREST IMAGES OF THE DAY POLITICS CONFLICT -RRB- TRIPOLI | Sun May 1 , 2011 12:58 am BST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi survived a NATO air strike on a Tripoli house that killed his youngest son and three grandchildren , a government spokesman said on Saturday . 
`` What we have now is the law of the jungle , '' government spokesman Mussa Ibrahim told a news conference . 
`` We think now it is clear to everyone that what is happening in Libya has nothing to do with the protection of civilians . '' 
Gaddafi , who seized power in a 1969 coup , is fighting an uprising by rebels who have seized much of the eastern part of the country . 
British and French-led NATO forces are permitted under a United Nations resolution to mount air attacks on Gaddafi forces to protect civilians . 
There was no immediate NATO reaction or any independent confirmation of the deaths . 
Gaddafi had appeared on television in the early hours of Saturday and said he would never step down . 
He offered talks to the rebels , who rejected the proposal as hollow and treacherous . 
Libya 's government took journalists to the house , which had been hit by at least three missiles . 
The roof had completely caved in in some areas , leaving mangled rods of reinforcing steel hanging down among chunks of concrete . 
A table football machine stood outside in the garden of the house , in a wealthy residential area of Tripoli . 
Glass and debris covered the lawns and what appeared to be an unexploded missile lay in one corner . 
Inside one part of the villa , a beige corner sofa was virtually untouched , but debris had caved in on other striped upholstered chairs . 
The blasts had been heard across the city late on Saturday . 
Rifle fire and car horns rang out in the rebels ' eastern capital of Benghazi as news of the attack spread . 
`` The leader himself is in good health . 
He was n't harmed , '' Ibrahim said . 
`` His wife is also in good health . 
`` This was a direct operation to assassinate the leader of this country . 
This is not permitted by international law . 
It is not permitted by any moral code or principle . '' 
He said Gaddafi 's youngest son , Saif Al-Arab , had been killed in the attack . 
Saif al-Arab , 29 , is one of Gaddafi 's less prominent sons , with a limited role in the power structure . 
Ibrahim described him as a student who had studied in Germany . 
`` We will fight and fight if we have to , '' Ibrahim said . 
`` The leader offered peace to NATO yesterday and NATO rejected it . '' 
Fighting in Libya 's civil war , which grew from protests for greater political freedom that have spread across the Arab world , has reached stalemate in recent weeks with neither side capable of achieving a decisive blow . 
Libyan forces had reached the gates of Benghazi last month when Gaddafi appeared on television declaring he would crush the rebellion , showing `` no pity , no mercy . '' 
Days later the United Nations passed its resolution allowing the air strikes and saving the rebels from defeat . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
