ANKARA | Tue Oct 4 , 2011 8:36 am EDT ANKARA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Turkey 's military will conduct an exercise in the southern province of Hatay , where more than 7,000 Syrians have taken refuge from Syrian President Bashar al-Assad 's security forces . 
The October 5-13 `` mobilization '' exercise , announced on the military 's website on Tuesday , may coincide with a visit that Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan is expected to make to refugee camps in Hatay after he returns from South Africa this week . 
The army said the exercise would involve the 39th mechanized infantry brigade and 730 reserve soldiers . 
Turkey 's once-close relations with Syria have soured as Erdogan has fiercely criticized Assad 's crackdown on protesters , urging him to end the bloodshed and enact reforms . 
Syria has a longstanding territorial claim to Hatay province , but had put this on the back burner in recent years , when Erdogan and Assad cultivated close ties . 
Erdogan said last month that Assad would be ousted by his people `` sooner or later '' and warned that Syria could slide into a sectarian civil war between Alawites and Sunnis . 
Most Syrians , like most Turks , are Sunni Muslims , while Assad is from the minority Alawite Muslim sect . 
Ankara , which has already imposed an arms embargo , has said it is preparing further sanctions against the Syrian government . 
The Hatay exercise may revive speculation , denied by officials , that Turkey plans to create a buffer zone in Syria to protect civilians and prevent a flood of refugees to Turkey . 
Syrian refugee numbers have remained relatively low and Erdogan is under little public pressure to take decisive action . 
During the 1991 Gulf War , about half a million Iraqi Kurds fled to Turkey , returning only after Western powers , along with Turkish contingents , set up a safe haven across the border . 
Syria and Turkey almost went to war in the late 1990s when Damascus was sheltering Turkish Kurd guerrillas . 
Syria 's old claim to Hatay has bedeviled relations with Turkey . 
After the Ottoman Empire collapsed in World War One , the province passed to French mandate Syria . 
Syria gained independence in 1936 , but Hatay became part of Turkey in 1939 . 
Erdogan was reported to have reached an understanding with Assad in the mid-2000s whereby Syria would drop its claim on Hatay in return for enhanced trade and water rights from Turkey , but neither side has formally acknowledged any such agreement . 
With relations again chilly , Turkey has hosted several meetings of Syrian opposition groups , including one at the weekend where a broad-based Syrian National Council was formed . 
The council , grouping Assad 's secular and Islamist foes , said the world was obliged to protect the Syrian people , but it rejected foreign intervention that harmed Syrian sovereignty . 
-LRB- Editing by Simon Cameron-Moore and Alistair Lyon -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
