BP thrown off FTSE4Good ethical index cents Oil firm excluded from ethical index over response to gulf spill cents BP delays Q3 results but denies discovery of new liabilities Friday 10 September 2010 18.59 BST Greenpeace and other green campaign groups have lobbied for BP to be taken off ethical investment indexes after the Deepwater Horizon disaster . 
Photograph : Ann Heisenfelt\/EPA BP is to be thrown out of the main ethical investment index , FTSE4Good , and has been forced to delay publication of its third quarter financial results because of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
The global index provider said its policy committee , which is used by many ethical fund managers to provide yardsticks to the industry , had decided to exclude BP from the end of next week . 
The Guardian has also learned that BP faces a second legal challenge over its safety record in the gulf . 
Campaign group Food & Water Watch was set to file a lawsuit in Houston tonight against the company , alleging that it began production on its giant Atlantis platform there without having and keeping safety documents required by law . 
BP denies the allegations . 
The move to eject BP from the FTSE4Good , which could further hit the company 's already battered share price as investors withdraw , underlines the damage to its reputation wreaked by America 's worst offshore oil pollution incident . 
`` The committee 's decision to remove BP followed consideration of the company 's response to the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , the environmental and social impact and its history of similar incidents , '' FTSE4Good said in a statement . 
Greenpeace and others had launched a major campaign to have the British oil group removed while earlier this year BP was evicted from the Dow Jones Sustainability Index . 
Ethical investors account for an increasing portion of share buyers and the decisions could hit future demand for BP shares , which closed down nearly 1 % on the day . 
BP said earlier it would delay the release of its latest quarterly results by a week because of added accounting complexities related to the Deepwater Horizon accident . 
The company said its quarterly figures , normally reported on the last Tuesday of the month after the end of a calendar quarter , would now be released on 2 November . 
A spokesman said the decision came after it proved challenging to complete its previous quarterly numbers within the normal timeline and denied it was related to the discovery of any new liabilities . 
BP last week produced an internal investigation into the explosion which killed 11 rig workers and spread millions of gallons of oil onto the shores of the southern states of the US . 
The spokesman said the team compiling the report , which laid most of the blame on Transocean and other companies BP hired to drill the well , had been supported by internal and external lawyers . 
However , he said the lawyers had been `` ring-fenced '' from the rest of BP and denied their role was to present the report so as to help BP fend off lawsuits . 
`` Their role was to make sure everything in the report was legally watertight , '' said the spokesman amid mounting criticism by the contractors and American politicians . 
A version appeared on p32 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 16.29 BST on Friday 1 October 2010 Follow the latest business news , comment and analysis on Twitter dominicru : Average Goldman Sachs pay : $ 399,506 . 
