BP oil spill prompts Q3 results delay Gulf oil spill means BP is to delay publication of third-quarter results as company requires more time to prepare figures Friday 10 September 2010 10.16 BST BP is to delay publication of its third-quarter results in the wake of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
Photograph : Luke Macgregor\/Reuters BP has delayed the publication of its third-quarter results by a week because of the complexity of counting the cost of the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The oil firm said today that the results would be released on Tuesday 2 November , a week later than previously indicated . 
A spokesman said the company wanted more time to prepare the figures , saying because of the `` complex accounting issues associated with the Gulf of Mexico spill it 's prudent to allow a bit more time '' . 
He also noted that BP used to publish its third-quarter results in November but had brought them forward in recent years . 
In June , chief executive Tony Hayward who has since resigned was forced by the White House to suspend dividend payments to shareholders for the rest of this year and to set aside $ 20bn instead to pay compensation to those affected by the disaster . 
BP admitted this week that its managers on the Deepwater Horizon missed key warning signs in the hours before the 20 April explosion aboard the oil rig , but an internal investigation shifted much of the blame towards other companies involved in the well . 
Analysts at Evolution Securities noted that the eight key events that led to the disaster are interwoven between BP , Halliburton and Transocean , according to BP , and appear not to single out any one company or action as solely responsible for the accident . 
`` We suspect this makes a gross negligence case more difficult to prove and so subsequent litigation claims against BP will take longer and ultimately be spread between BP , its licence partners , Transocean and Halliburton . '' 
BP 's market value has plunged by $ 72bn since the accident to $ 120bn , while its rivals have only fallen an average of 9 % . 
`` It appears that BP 's shares are still assuming a cost for the accident of $ 55bn . 
If we assume that BP 's ultimate liability is 50 % of the $ 55bn decline in the market value this would still imply a share price of 510p , '' the analysts said . 
BP shares were down 2.85 p at 412.6 p this morning . 
