LONDON | Thu Oct 6 , 2011 10:36 am BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Defensive stocks in sectors such as telecoms and utilities offer `` outstanding value '' and are set to benefit as investors switch out of over-priced government bonds , said Armstrong Investment Managers ' Patrick Armstrong . 
Armstrong , whose London-based firm manages 251 million pounds in assets , said the telecoms , healthcare and utilities sectors had been hit by `` indiscriminate selling '' by index investors , and said he had added to telecoms holdings on Tuesday . 
`` Investors are destroying the real value of their wealth with bonds which yield significantly less than inflation , '' Armstrong , who is joint managing partner and head of investment selection at the firm , said in an interview late on Tuesday . 
`` We expect a rotation out of these bonds into high-yielding equities , which have stable earnings and cash flows , '' he said . 
According to Armstrong , Western economies are heading for stagflation -- an unhealthy mix of economic stagnation and inflation -- as governments and central banks continue to try to revive their flagging economies . 
This is set to make government bonds -- in which investors have taken refuge from this summer 's financial market woes -- less attractive , he said . 
German 10-year bond yields have dropped below 1.8 percent from above 3 percent at end-June , while 10-year Treasury yields have fallen to less than 1.9 percent from 3.2 percent . 
Euro zone inflation , in contrast , rose unexpectedly to 3 percent in September , its highest level in almost three years . 
The STOXX Europe 600 Utilities . 
SX6R index is down 13 percent since end-June and is on a price\/earnings ratio of 9.9 times , for instance . 
`` France Telecom -LRB- FTE . 
PA -RRB- is on less than three times cashflow . 
Even if there 's no growth again ... you get the cash in less than three years . 
And there 's a dividend yield of 12 percent , '' said Armstrong . 
Armstrong has bought shares in luxury goods companies CF Richemont -LRB- CFR . 
VX -RRB- and Tiffany -LRB- TIF . 
N -RRB- in recent days , as well as in drinks giant Coca-Cola -LRB- KO . 
N -RRB- , believing emerging market demand can drive earnings growth even as Western economies slow . 
Such companies now account for 4.8 percent of his fund . 
`` At 13 times earnings there 's still potential for earnings growth if we do n't have a global recession , and just have a Western recession , '' he said . 
`` In China the lower-middle class view it -LRB- Coca Cola -RRB- as a luxury good . '' 
He has also added to his holdings in livestock , betting that a drought in the U.S. midwest that sent corn prices soaring and forced farmers to slaughter cattle will feed through into higher livestock prices . 
Corn soared above $ 7.50 a bushel in August , up from around $ 4.30 a year before , while cattle has risen around 20 percent over the same period . 
`` Eighty percent of livestock prices can be explained by corn prices from 12 months ago , '' he said . 
Armstrong still has positions in gold , silver and platinum , even though in the short-term he thinks assets perceived as safe havens are in a `` bubble-like status . '' 
Long-term he thinks they will benefit from money-printing by Western governments . 
-LRB- Reporting by Laurence Fletcher , editing by Sinead Cruise and Jane Merriman -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
