Global Head of Private Wealth Management at Deutsche Bank Pierre de Weck gestures during the Reuters Global Wealth Management Summit in Geneva October 4 , 2011 . 
ZURICH | Thu Oct 6 , 2011 3:22 pm BST ZURICH -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Stiff competition for top private bankers has kept a floor under pay even as low interest rates , flaccid client trading and tougher regulation squeeze industry profit margins . 
Sky-high pay and bonuses for investment bank counterparts may once have turned private bankers green with envy . 
But the drive to slash wage bills and rein in risk has made investment bankers expendable as many banks realign their business around more stable private banking . 
`` Pay was never extreme in private banking -- it 's not as subject to a correction as in investment banking , '' Deutsche Bank global head of private wealth management Pierre de Weck told the Reuters Wealth Summit this week . 
Stricter rules on capital have curbed profits in many areas of investment banking and a number of large integrated banks like UBS and Bank of America have pledged to cut back on capital guzzling businesses and shrink staff numbers , piling downward pressure on pay . 
But in private banking , competition remains hot for advisers who can bring in a good portfolio of clients , helping sustain pay , said James Fleming , head of international private banking at RBS unit Coutts & Co. `` The war for talent is not quite the 100 years war but certainly 15 years , '' Fleming said at the Reuters Summit . 
`` Experience shows high compensation is a key part of retention , but also tools to do the job properly , and working for a brand that 's forward thinking and progressive and providing good service for the client base . '' 
Remuneration is by far the biggest cost center , well ahead of premises and technology , said Alexandre Zeller , head of Private banking , EMEA at HSBC , adding that banks have to put time and effort into finding the right people to serve its clients . 
`` The value of staff in our business is actually extremely high , '' said de Weck . 
`` When we make a new hire it takes 2.5 to three years for them to become productive . 
But the penalty for making the wrong pay decision in our business is very high . '' 
Bankers at the Reuters summit generally confirmed their commitment to their businesses in Switzerland , although they said the strong Swiss franc was limiting profitability . 
As competition limits growth in developed markets , the fight for staff was intensifying in higher-growth areas like Singapore . 
De Weck said these factors have pushed the cost of Asian bankers higher than in Switzerland , while in London staff costs are about the same . 
The business remains centered around people and relationships and downward pressure on costs can have only a limited effect on pay scales , said Pablo Garnica , European head of JP Morgan 's private bank . 
`` You need to reward people to incentivize people to grow , '' Garnica said . 
`` At the end of the day you need to have the people capable of dealing with clients and complex situations . 
At the end of the day you need a human being talking to a human being . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
