CAIRO | Tue Jun 16 , 2009 10:20 am EDT CAIRO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan authorities have reported an outbreak of bubonic plague in the Mediterranean coastal town of Tubruq , and the World Health Organization was sending a team to investigate , a WHO official said on Tuesday . 
The cases -- approximately 16 to 18 have been reported -- would be the first in more than two decades in Libya of the disease known in medieval times as the Black Death , according to John Jabbour , a Cairo-based emerging diseases specialist at WHO . 
`` It is reported as bubonic plague , '' Jabbour said , adding WHO still did n't have `` a full picture '' of the situation . 
`` It is officially reported by Libya ... Tomorrow , WHO is deploying a mission to Libya to investigate the whole situation , to see how many of the cases are confirmed , or not confirmed . '' 
He said preliminary information from Libyan authorities showed 16 to 18 reported cases including one death , and that Tripoli had asked for assistance from the global health body . 
Bubonic plague , noticeable by black bumps that sometimes develop on victims ' bodies , causes severe vomiting and fever and still kills around 100 to 200 people annually worldwide . 
It can kill within days if not treated with antibiotics . 
A plague epidemic of 1347 to 1351 was one of the deadliest recorded in human history , killing about 75 million people , according to some estimates , including more than a third of Europe 's population . 
That pandemic was thought to have begun in Asia , then spread into the Middle East , Africa and Europe . 
Tubruq , where the new cases were reported , is approximately 125 km from the Egyptian border and was the scene of previous plague cases decades ago , Jabbour said . 
Egypt , already fighting to contain an outbreak of the H1N1 flu virus , said it had no reported cases of plague . 
Rodents carry plague , which is virtually impossible to wipe out and moves through the animal world as a constant threat to humans . 
Globally the World Health Organization reports about 1,000 to 3,000 plague cases each year , with most in the last five years occurring in Madagascar , Tanzania , Mozambique , Malawi , Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo . 
The United States sees about 10 to 20 cases each year . 
-LRB- Reporting by Cynthia Johnston ; Editing by Matthew Jones -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
