Turkish F-4 warplane ` shot down ' near Syrian border The Turkish military said it lost radio contact with the F-4 while it was flying over Hatay The F-4 Phantom disappeared over the Mediterranean , south-west of Hatay province , not far from Syria 's coast . 
PM Recep Tayyip Erdogan said initially that `` the other side have expressed regret '' but later was unable to confirm what had happened . 
After an emergency security meeting , his office said it was understood that Syria had brought the plane down . 
In a statement , it said a search for the two crew members was under way involving Turkish and Syrian coast guard ships . 
Once all the circumstances were established , it added that Turkey would respond decisively . 
Jonathan Head BBC News , Istanbul Given the breakdown in relations between the two countries over the Syrian conflict , this incident has the potential to provoke a serious crisis . 
When gunfire from Syrian forces crossed the Turkish border earlier this year , Ankara threatened a military response . 
Much will depend on whether or not the Turkish pilots have survived . 
If not , public anger might push the government into some kind of punitive action against Syria . 
Syria 's response will also influence Turkey 's reaction . 
A clear apology , and a statement that the shooting was unintentional , might be enough to assuage Turkish anger . 
But then again , we do not know yet whether the aircraft were clearly in Turkish airspace or not . 
Initial Turkish reports that they came down eight miles from Syrian territorial waters suggests that they were , but Syria may claim otherwise . 
`` Regarding our pilots , we do not have any information , but at the moment four of our gunboats and some Syrian gunboats are carrying out a joint search there , '' Mr Erdogan told reporters earlier on Friday evening . 
Relations between Nato-member Turkey and Syria , once close allies , have deteriorated sharply since the uprising against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad began in March 2011 . 
Tens of thousands of Syrian refugees have fled the violence across the border into Turkey . 
The Turkish military said it lost radio contact with the F-4 at 1158 -LRB- 0858 GMT -RRB- on Friday while it was flying over Hatay , about 90 minutes after it took off from Erhac airbase in the province of Malatya , to the north-west . 
The private news channel , NTV , later cited unnamed military sources as saying that the plane had crashed off Hatay 's Mediterranean coast , in Syrian territorial waters , but that there had been no border violation . 
Witnesses in the Syrian coastal city of Latakia meanwhile told BBC Arabic that Syrian air defences had shot down an unidentified aircraft near the town of Ras al-Basit . 
Lebanon 's al-Manar television channel - controlled by Lebanon 's Shia Hezbollah movement , an ally of the Syrian government - also reported that Syrian security sources had said that `` Syrian air defences shot down a Turkish warplane and hit another in Syrian airspace '' . 
Mr Erdogan was also said to have told Turkish reporters on a flight back from Brazil on Friday afternoon that `` the other side '' had expressed regret over the downing of the F-4 , and also that the pilots had been recovered . 
But in his televised news conference on arrival at Ankara airport , he indicated that the pilots were still missing and he appeared to play down suggestions of an apology . 
`` I can not confirm whether they have apologised or on what grounds they did so if they apologised , '' the Hurriyet website quoted him as saying . 
He then went into a two-hour emergency meeting with his interior , defense and foreign ministers and the Chief of the General Staff , Gen Necdet Ozel . 
Inside Syria , the violence has continued with state media reporting that `` armed terrorist groups '' had abducted and massacred 25 villagers in Aleppo province . 
Activists said that rebels had shot dead 26 government supporters who were believed to be militiamen . 
A video has been posted online , purporting to show the bodies of some of the victims in the village of Darat Izza . 
In Aleppo city , activists said a number of people died when security forces opened fire on a demonstration after Friday prayers . 
International envoy Kofi Annan has said it is time for the world to exert greater pressure to help bring the violence in Syria to an end . 
He was speaking in Geneva alongside the head of the UN observer mission , Maj-Gen Robert Mood , who suspended patrols in Syria at the weekend because of the risks to the safety of the 300 observers . 
Mr Annan called for Iran to be involved in attempts to end the violence , a proposal put forward by Russia but rejected by the US . 
In a separate development , the BBC has learned that UK government officials have decided to prevent the head of the Syrian Olympic Committee , Gen Mowaffak Joumaa , from traveling to London for the Games . 
The visa ban is believed to be linked to his relationship to President Bashar al-Assad 's government . 
The International Olympic Committee is expected to ratify the decision . 
