The MP George Galloway angrily rejected fresh allegations last night from a US senate investigation that he lied under oath about Saddam Hussein 's multimillion-pound oil-for-food program . 
The inquiry , headed by the Republican Norm Coleman , claimed he had `` knowingly made false or misleading statements under oath '' when he appeared before a committee hearing in Washington in May . 
The MP for Bethnal Green and Bow won widespread acclaim , especially from anti-Iraq war campaigners , when he flew to the US capital to confront Mr Coleman . 
An assistant to Mr Galloway , Ron McKay , who sat beside him at the Senate hearing , said last night that the MP was prepared to fly to Washington again to face the new allegations . 
`` If such an allegation has been made , George denies it absolutely and is ready to fly to the US tomorrow if Coleman brings these charges and it will all be sorted in court , '' he said . 
Mr Galloway , who was forced out of the Labor party because of anti-war comments , and the senator have been at loggerheads since the Senate began its inquiry into oil-for-food , a UN humanitarian program intended to alleviate Iraqi suffering from sanctions . 
Saddam abused the program . 
The latest report from the committee claims : `` Galloway personally solicited and was granted oil allocations from the government of Iraq during the reign of Saddam Hussein . 
The Hussein regime granted Galloway and the Mariam Appeal -LRB- an organization he set up to help Iraqis suffering from sanctions -RRB- eight allocations totalling 23m barrels from 1999 through to 2003 . '' 
`` Galloway 's wife , Dr Amineh Abu-Zayyad , received approximately $ 150,000 in connection with one of those oil allocations . '' 
`` Galloway 's political campaign , the Mariam Appeal , received at least $ 446,000 in connection with the oil allocations granted to Galloway and the Mariam Appeal under the oil-for-food program . '' 
`` The Hussein regime received improper ` surcharge ' payments amounting to $ 1,642,000 in connection with the oil allocations granted to Galloway and the Mariam Appeal . '' 
`` Galloway knowingly made false or misleading statements under oath before the sub-committee . '' 
Mr Galloway said last night : `` There is not a shred of truth in any of these allegations . 
There has been no impropriety and I have not received even one thin dime from the oil-for-food program . '' 
Tariq Aziz , the former deputy prime minister who has been in jail since the US invasion of Iraq , allegedly told the investigation the oil had been allocated in the name of two of Mr Galloway 's agents , one of whom was Fawaz Zureikat . 
However , he added : `` These oil allocations were for the benefit of George Galloway and for Mariam 's Appeal . 
The proceeds from the sale benefited the cause and Mr Galloway . '' 
Mr Aziz is one of the primary witnesses mentioned in the new Senate investigation . 
It quotes him as authenticating a letter supposedly sent by the head of Iraqi intelligence detailing a meeting between Mr Galloway , Mr Zureikat and an unnamed intelligence officer during which the MP is said to have asked for an increased oil allocation . 
The letter was published in the Daily Telegraph in 2003 . 
Mr Galloway successfully sued the newspaper , which is currently appealing against the ruling . 
According to the new report , Mr Aziz `` stated that he recognized the ... letter and recalled seeing it in the past '' . 
Mr Aziz also allegedly told investigators that Mr Galloway had expressed concern to him about `` the appearance of taking money directly from the Iraqi government '' , and asked for his and his wife 's name to be omitted from official documents . 
However , the report found that several documents , authenticated by former regime officials , did mention Mr Galloway by name . 
The report quoted the former Iraqi vice-president Taha Yasin Ramadan saying Mr Galloway , who is now an MP for the Respect party , was a `` friend of Iraq '' who `` needed to be compensated for his support '' . 
`` Galloway needed money to pay for his actions , '' Mr Ramadan allegedly told investigators , adding `` we gave him oil to sell to make the money '' . 
According to the report , the claim was confirmed by the former minister of oil , Amer Rashid . 
Mr Galloway 's wife , Dr Abu Zayyad , from whom he is estranged , could not be contacted last night . 
But she is quoted in the report as denying having received any money . 
Mr McKay challenged the validity of the statements made by Mr Aziz and Mr Ramadan . 
`` Tariq Aziz has been in custody and we know from his lawyer this senate committee offered him a deal - just what I do not know , whether reduced charges or freedom - and it is ironic that Tariq Aziz , Yasin and Saddam are being accused , on the one hand , of being homicidal maniacs and on the other of being relied upon to give a true and accurate statements uncoerced . '' 
