NEW YORK | Thu Sep 30 , 2010 7:09 pm EDT NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - University researchers said on Thursday they recently found alarming levels of cancer-causing toxins in an area of the Gulf of Mexico affected by BP 's oil spill , raising the specter of long-lasting health concerns . 
Oregon State University -LRB- OSU -RRB- researchers found sharply heightened levels of chemicals including carcinogens in the waters off the coast of Louisiana in August , the last sampling date , even after BP successfully capped its runaway Gulf well in mid-July . 
Near Grand Isle , Louisiana , the team discovered that polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons -LRB- PAHs -RRB- -- which include carcinogens and chemicals that pose various risks to human health -- remained at levels 40 times higher than before the area was affected by the oil spill . 
The compounds may enter the food chain through organisms like plankton or fish , a researcher said . 
`` In a natural environment a 40-fold increase is huge , '' said Oregon State toxicologist Kim Anderson , who led the research . 
`` We do n't usually see that at other contamination sites . '' 
The PAH chemicals , which are often linked to oil spills , are most concentrated in the area near the Louisiana Coast , but levels have also jumped 2 to 3 fold in other spill-affected areas off Alabama , Mississippi and Florida , Anderson said . 
As of last month , PAH levels remained near those discovered while the oil spill was still flowing heavily , Anderson said . 
The team will continue to sample for chemicals in months to come . 
Although BP has sealed its well , experts are still cataloging the environmental and health hazards left in the wake of the spill . 
Scores of research teams , including Anderson 's , are working with Federal Superfund grants to measure how the spill affected the environment . 
Also on Thursday , Arizona Congressman Raul Grijalva told Reuters he would press for a congressional investigation into whether estimates of the oil spill volume and its related environmental risks were misrepresented in a federal report from early August . 
BP 's ill-fated Macondo well spilled a total of up to 4.9 million barrels before it was capped , the report said . 
But it also suggested that most of the oil had been dispersed naturally or removed by clean-up efforts at the time . 
Grijalva , who chairs a subcommittee that oversees some wetlands damaged by the spill , said it was unclear whether the Federal report was peer-reviewed and whether its estimates remain accurate . 
`` I do n't want to let BP off the hook , and my suspicion is that the numbers may be wrong and that the oil is still a danger , '' Grijalva said in an interview . 
BP representatives were not immediately available for comment . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
