BP pledges Gulf of Mexico oil fields to spill fund LONDON | Fri Oct 1 , 2010 4:52 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP , which faces U.S. opposition to drilling for oil in the Gulf of Mexico , named fields there that it will use to help finance its $ 20 billion fund for victims of the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
The oil major on Friday said it would channel revenue from a number of its fields in the Gulf , including Thunder Horse , Atlantis and Mad Dog , into its compensation fund . 
`` It 's quite a clever thing that BP 's done which is , here are our deep water Gulf of Mexico assets , and we 're pledging overriding royalties as collateral which should suggest to the U.S. administration not to in any way meddle with these facilities , '' said Seymour Pierce analyst Alan Sinclair . 
There have been concerns that the U.S. could ban BP from future drilling after lawmakers in July voted to pass an amendment to a bill that would prevent BP from acquiring new exploration leases after the blow-out at its Macondo well in April . 
A BP spokesman declined to comment on whether the move means the U.S. government has told BP , or the company expects , it will not be banned from future drilling . 
Shares in BP gained 2.9 percent to 440 pence at 7:02 a.m. EDT on Friday , their highest level since early June , outperforming Britain 's blue-chip index , which was up 0.6 percent and slightly ahead of the European index of oil and gas companies which was up 2 percent . 
Another analyst , who did not wish to be named , noted that BP is planning to sell $ 30 billion of assets and said the deal between Chinese refiner Sinopec and Spanish oil major Repsol , announced earlier could be driving market optimism on asset prices . 
`` Repsol 's got a very good price for some of its assets today so maybe people are getting hopeful on that , '' he said . 
BP also said on Friday that the total bill for fighting the spill and compensating victims hit $ 11.2 billion by September 29 , rising from $ 9.5 billion on September 18 . 
The pledging of the assets is in line with the terms of the fund set out in August , when BP agreed to give the fund first priority to some oil revenues to finance its $ 5 billion contribution this year and the $ 1.25 billion every quarter from 2011 to 2013 . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The US Government wont ' let them drill , making the Gulf leases worthless . 
Pledge the assets of the now worthless leases against the claims funds . 
BP gets to write off the worthless leases against earnings , and does n't end up paying the claims because the `` assets '' of those leases are pledge against them . 
Score - BP : 1 , US Government : 0 Ah , the US government . 
Never a better group of Telfon Warriors have I seen . 
When things are going bad in the US , look for the nearest foreign government or business to blame . 
Take China and the Yuan as the latest in a long series of perfect pass off 's . 
@bobw111 : your type continues to annoy me . 
If BP wanted to ` avoid ' paying anything , they could do so very easily . 
BP 's US business is seperate from the rest of the Group . 
Therefore , if the Group -LRB- yes , the Group being the British owned , operated and managed entity -RRB- wanted to , they could quite simply stop funding the US business and leave it to fund and fight for itself from its own assets . 
It is a simple thing that every large corporation does -- it is called a Corporate Veil and it seperates business units , allowing Groups to 's eperate ' business units that it may need to . 
Therefore your comments are completely inane . 
If BP wanted to , it would be too easy for them to not sell any assets and leave the US business to fund the entire GOM situation from the revenue of their assets . 
This would obviously lead to bankruptcy of the US business which employes over 30,000 American 's and is owned primarily by American 's as it is listed on the NYSE . 
Suggest you look to support a constructive solution whereby the UK based Group supports the US business . 
Lest you wish to add to the unemployment lines and double dipping of your economy . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
