By Jamie Crawford , CNN National Security Producer A charred car sits near an oil terminal in the section of eastern Libya now held by the Transitional National Council . 
Tesoro , a U.S. refiner , entered into a deal May 25 with the Transitional National Council Deal is for 1.2 million barrels of Libyan crude oil , the State Department says Secretary of State Hillary Clinton arrives in UAE for Libya Contact Group meeting Washington -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The rebel government in control of the eastern part of Libya has made its first sale of oil from territory it controls , the State Department confirmed Wednesday . 
Tesoro , a U.S. oil refiner , entered into a deal May 25 with the Transitional National Council based in Benghazi , Libya for 1.2 million barrels of Libyan crude oil , the State Department said in a written statement . 
The shipment was scheduled to arrive aboard the MT Equator , a Liberian-flagged tanker , at the Single Point Mooring in Hawaii on Wednesday . 
The dollar value of the deal is not known . 
U.S. support for additional oil sales with the TNC will continue as a means to support additional revenue streams for the Libyan people , the statement said . 
The sale was made possible following an April announcement by the Office of Foreign Assets Control at the Treasury Department that established a new licensing policy with Libya . 
That action was taken to ease barriers to certain oil related transactions with the TNC , in place because of wider U.S. sanctions on Libya . 
The announcement came the same day Secretary of State Hillary Clinton arrived in the United Arab Emirates for a meeting with the Libya Contact Group , a coalition of various countries and international organizations that seek to build support for the TNC while preparing for Libya 's future after the presumed end of Moammar Gadhafi 's regime . 
This is the third meeting of the group . 
France , Italy and Qatar are among the small number of countries who have officially recognized the TNC as the legitimate government of Libya . 
While the United States has yet to take that step , President Barack Obama `` has invited them to open an office in Washington , '' a senior administration official told reporters traveling with Clinton . 
`` We are still considering it but there 's no final decision as of right now , '' the official said of U.S. efforts to offer formal recognition to the TNC . 
Jeffrey Feltman , Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs , traveled to Benghazi last month for two days . 
