Anderson Cooper reports on the manhunt for former LAPD officer Christopher Dorner who 's accused of killing three and threatening to attack again . 
Watch AC360 at 8 & 10 p.m. ET . 
Abu Dhabi , United Arab Emirates -LRB- CNN -RRB- - World powers beefed up financial and moral support for the Libyan opposition Thursday at an international coalition meeting aimed at charting the course of a post-Moammar Gadhafi Libya . 
Talk at the meeting in the United Arab Emirates focused on sustaining pressure on the embattled Libyan leader . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said `` numerous and continuous discussions '' on a transition of power were taking place among people close to Gadhafi . 
A spokesman for a Libyan opposition group told CNN that Gadhafi 's son , Saif al-Islam Gadhafi , was the primary negotiator for an exit plan for his father , but suggested the timing of the talks might not be good . 
`` I 'm not sure there 's a lot of people willing to listen right now , '' said Mohammed Ali Abdallah of the National Front for the Salvation of Libya . 
Abdallah said a southern front had opened up in the fighting and that Gadhafi 's days were numbered . 
`` We are in the final phases , '' Abdallah said . 
`` Gadhafi 's military power has significantly been reduced . 
He is basically rattled . '' 
Clinton announced an additional $ 26 million in U.S. aid for the victims of Libya 's ongoing war and said time was on the international coalition 's side so long as Gadhafi faced sustained pressure . 
`` The violence must stop , '' she said . 
`` Gadhafi must go . '' 
Financial assistance flowed at the meeting , the third the international Libya group has held since war erupted . 
Italy pledged up to $ 580 million to the Libyan opposition 's Transitional National Council - which is facing a budget shortfall - to cover its expenses , but not weapons , Foreign Ministry Spokesman Maurizio Massari said . 
And Kuwait is donating the $ 180 million it promised in April for humanitarian needs , said Sheikh Mohammed Sabah al Salman al Sabah , the Gulf nation 's deputy prime minister and minister of foreign affairs . 
France , Italy and Qatar are among a small number of countries that have recognized the Transitional National Council as the legitimate government of Libya . 
While the United States has yet to officially recognize the rebel government , President Barack Obama `` has invited them to open an office in Washington , '' a senior administration official told reporters traveling with Clinton to the meeting in Abu Dhabi . 
The official spoke on condition of anonymity as a matter of practice for a press background briefing . 
Thank you for covering LIbya no one seems to want to question this . 
The Libyan Leader is being attacked and the UN resolution does not call for all out war against Libya and if a Nation wants to have a civil war they must bare the burden . 
What would we be if we called for help during are revolution witch way , way more wore killed every day than in Libya and if we can leaders now witch is against International law and are own law then who is next . 
These war is illegal June 9 , 2011 at 11:30 pm | Want to know more ? 
Go behind the scenes with AC361 `` We are elated ... that there is one person or two who is off the streets who could cause harm . '' 
- Shatira Wilks , #Hadiya 's cousin #chicago 8:52 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET #Breaking : more details on the two men who are facing murder charges in the death of a #Chicago teen . 
#ac 360 8:47 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Heartbreaking words as Chris Kyle 's wife , Taya , said goodbye in a public memorial service today . 
#ac 360 RT @andersoncooper : New details about the killing of #BinLaden and what 's happening to the SEAL who reportedly fired the shots . 
@AC360 8:42 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET New details about the killing of #BinLaden and what 's happening to the SEAL who reportedly fired the shots . 
@AC360 8p , 10p 8:41 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET A hero speaks out : the man who killed #BinLaden and is now fighting for his livelihood at home . 
#ac 360 Widespread damage in #Mississippi & #Alabama : shocking pictures from the storm 's aftermath . 
#AC 360 8:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Coming up : the man who killed #BinLaden . 
He speaks out only to @PhilBronstein who joins us . 
#ac 360 What will you make of the #Pope 's legacy ? 
