Thursday 12 May 2005 12.21 BST George Galloway , the newly elected MP for the anti-war Respect party in east London , this morning faces allegations from the US Senate over whether he benefited from the Iraq oil-for-food program run under Saddam Hussein . 
A US Senate committee report published today claims to have uncovered `` significant evidence '' that the former Labor MP was allocated millions of barrels of oil from the Saddam regime . 
It bases its conclusions on previously disclosed documents from the Iraqi ministry of oil and interviews with senior officials of the regime , plus unnamed Iraqi sources . 
Mr Galloway last night denied the allegations . 
He told the Guardian : `` This committee has never spoken to me , never written to me and never asked me a single question and did not even acknowledge last year my offer to go and speak to them . 
It is hardly an investigation . 
`` It is merely the repetition of false accusations that have been made and denied before . 
Something does not become true because it is repeated by George Bush 's Senate majority . '' 
The US report concludes : `` The evidence obtained by the sub-committee , including Hussein-era documents from the ministry of oil and testimony from senior Hussein officials , shows that Iraq granted George Galloway allocations for millions of barrels of oil under the oil-for-food program . 
`` Moreover , some evidence indicates that Galloway appeared to use a charity for children 's leukemia to conceal payments associated with at least one such allocation . '' 
Last night 's report was produced by the staff of the Senate 's permanent subcommittee on investigations , part of the committee on homeland security and government affairs . 
The subcommittee is chaired by Norm Coleman , a Minnesota Republican , who has made it his mission to bring to book those he considers responsible for the Iraqi oil-for-food scandal . 
In December he called for the resignation of the UN secretary general , Kofi Annan . 
Mr Galloway said last night that the oil allocation vouchers were given to a Jordanian businessman , Fawaz Zureikat , who was chairman of his Mariam Appeal , a charity he set up to help a young Iraqi girl suffering from leukemia . 
The MP said the appeal , part of a campaign against United Nations sanctions in Iraq , has already been investigated by the Charity Commission and no impropriety had been found . 
`` In other words , no money ended up in my pocket , '' Mr Galloway said . 
Last week Mr Galloway won a sensational victory against Labor 's Oona King in Bethnal Green . 
He has consistently denied that he personally profited from Iraqi oil sales . 
He won a high court libel action against the Daily Telegraph relating to similar allegations . 
The US Senate committee report says it based its conclusions on documents from the Iraqi oil ministry , distinct from those alleged foreign ministry papers relied upon by the Telegraph . 
`` The documents presented in this report have no relation to those discussed in the Daily Telegraph piece . '' 
In the course of the libel trial , Mr Galloway said he had never received or traded in oil , diverted money from the oil-for-food program , or used the Mariam Appeal as a front for his own personal gain . 
The Senate committee report says that in April 2005 the vice-president of Iraq , Taha Yassin Ramadan , told the committee that Mr Galloway had been granted oil allocations `` because of his opinions about Iraq '' and because Mr Galloway `` wanted to lift the embargo against Iraq '' . 
Another official , the report alleges , told investigators from the US Treasury that `` a member of the British parliament benefited tremendously from the illegal trade of oil by Iraq '' . 
The report said : '' -LRB- The Source -RRB- stated that George Galloway , Labor Party , was the owner of a company that was involved in the Iraqi oil trade scheme . '' 
Mr Galloway last night said that claim was `` preposterous '' . 
`` I do not own any companies . '' 
