Soldier wins first VC since Falklands Friday 18 March 2005 12.47 GMT Private Johnson Beharry , 25 , awarded the Victoria Cross for bravery under fire in Iraq . 
Photograph : Toby Melville\/PA A young soldier has been awarded the Victoria Cross , the highest military honor , for bravery under fire in some of the fiercest , and largely unreported , engagements between British forces and insurgents in south-eastern Iraq . 
Private Johnson Beharry , 25 , is the first soldier to receive the VC since the Falklands war in 1982 and the first living recipient since 1969 , when two Australians were given the award for action in Vietnam . 
The citation , gazetted today , describes his `` great heroism '' in two separate encounters in the town of Amara , north of Basra , last summer . 
In the first , on May 1 , the Warrior armored vehicle he was driving was hit by multiple rocket-propelled grenades -LRB- RPGs -RRB- . 
His company , the citation says , had been ordered to extract a foot patrol pinned down by small arms and heavy machine-gun fire and an attack by an improvised explosive device and RPGs . 
As they passed a roundabout on their way to the pinned-down patrol , his platoon noticed that the road ahead was empty of civilians and traffic , an indicator of a potential ambush . 
The platoon commander ordered the vehicle to halt so that he could assess the situation . 
The vehicle was then hit by RPGs . 
The citation continues : `` As a result of this ferocious initial volley of fire , both the platoon commander and the vehicle 's gunner were incapacitated by concussion and other wounds , and a number of the soldiers in the rear of the vehicle were also wounded . '' 
Pte Beharry had no means of communication with the turret crew or any of the other Warriors around him . 
He did not know if his commander or crew were still alive or how serious their injuries were . 
`` On his own initiative , he closed his driver 's hatch and moved forward through the ambush position to try to establish some form of communications , halting just short of a barricade across the road . '' 
The Warrior was hit again by RPGs . 
It caught fire and filled with thick , noxious smoke . 
Pte Beharry , continues the citation , `` assessed that his best course of action to save the lives of his crew was to push through , out of the ambush . 
He drove his Warrior directly through the barricade , not knowing if there were mines or improvised explosive devices placed there to destroy his vehicle . 
By doing this he was able to lead the remaining five Warriors behind him towards safety . '' 
Another RPG hit the Warrior . 
`` The flames and force of the blast passed directly over him , down the driver 's tunnel , further wounding the semi-conscious gunner in the turret . '' 
Pte Beharry was `` forced to drive the vehicle along the rest of the ambushed route , some 1,500 metres , with his hatch opened up and his head exposed to enemy fire , all the time with no communications with any other vehicle . '' 
A 7.62 mm bullet penetrated his helmet and remained lodged on its inner surface . 
Pte Beharry then climbed on to the turret of the burning vehicle and , `` seemingly oblivious to the incoming enemy small arms fire , manhandled his wounded platoon commander out of the turret , off the vehicle and to the safety of a nearby Warrior '' . 
Remounting his burning vehicle for the third time , he drove it through `` a complex chicane and into the security of the defended perimeter of the outpost , thus denying it to the enemy '' . 
Once inside , he collapsed from physical and mental exhaustion . 
A few weeks later , on June 11 , another Warrior convoy he was leading was ambushed . 
A grenade detonated six inches from his head . 
`` With the blood from his head injury obscuring his vision , Beharry managed to continue to control his vehicle and forcefully reversed the Warrior out of the ambush , '' says the citation . 
He then collapsed , unconscious . 
The Grenada-born private was paraded by the top brass yesterday among his comrades in the 1st Battalion , the Princess of Wales 's Royal Regiment , and other recipients of high military honors . 
`` I was just doing my job . 
I was just thinking of the guys in the vehicle and the guys behind me , '' he said . 
He was asked what was going through his mind at the time . 
`` An RPG '' , Pte Beharry promptly replied . 
He was not afraid at the time , only afterwards . 
Asked why he had left Grenada , he said he wanted `` a change of life '' . 
Asked if he would be Britain 's first black general , he quickly replied : `` No. '' His wife Lynthia said that after he had been injured he was told he had only a 50-50 chance of surviving . 
She said her husband would return to Iraq `` if he has to '' . 
Pte Beharry 's award was described by Gary Sheffield , a leading historian of the modern British army , as `` a classic in the VC mould - he was rescuing colleagues '' . 
He added : `` It is also testimony of what a nasty war is going on in Iraq . '' 
Lieutenant Colonel Matt Maer , Pte Beharry 's commanding officer , described yesterday how his troops were in action every day for five months , more than 800 times in all . 
It was the longest period of continuous combat experienced by the British army since the Korean war 50 years ago . 
The soldiers were repeatedly attacked by Mahdi militia , supporters of the radical Shia cleric , Moqtada al-Sadr . 
He said 40 of his soldiers were wounded and three killed from his battlegroup of about 1,300 . 
British military sources who experienced the action say they do not know how many Iraqis were killed , but add that hundreds would be an exaggeration . 
