Sen. Barack Obama , so steady in public , did not hide his vexation when he summoned his top advisers to meet with him in Chicago on Sept. 14 . 
His general-election campaign had gone stale . 
For weeks , he had watched Sen. John McCain suction up the oxygen in the race , driving the news coverage after the boisterous Republican convention in St. Paul , Minn. , and suddenly drawing huge crowds with his new running mate , Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin . 
Convening the meeting that Sunday in the office of David Axelrod , his chief strategist , Obama was blunt : It was time to get serious . 
`` He said , ` You know , maybe we can just win it on the issues . 
But I do n't think so , ' '' recalled senior adviser Anita Dunn . 
With the debates approaching and just seven weeks until the election , `` his charge to everybody was ` Guys , we 're back in combat mode , ' '' Dunn said . 
And then , the next morning , a global earthquake hit : Lehman Brothers , the giant investment firm , filed for bankruptcy , triggering the biggest corporate collapse in U.S. history and an international financial meltdown , and transforming the presidential race . 
It was a moment neither the senator from Illinois nor his advisers had anticipated , but one for which they were uniquely prepared . 
In the days that followed , the newly chastised Obama team became more aggressive , with a message they had refined over the summer . 
The candidate himself , criticized as too cool , too cerebral and too detached , suddenly had the opportunity to show those qualities to be reassuring and presidential . 
For McCain , already struggling with the economic issue , the Wall Street meltdown became part of a much different narrative . 
By the time the senator from Arizona made the surprise announcement on Sept. 24 that he would suspend his campaign , a powerful image had been framed : of an `` erratic , '' older Republican who could not be trusted to handle a crisis , economic or otherwise . 
In a race that had been thought to be even , the polls showed Obama to be pulling ahead , a lead that he would not relinquish through three debates and the election 's closing weeks . 
`` It was a pivotal two weeks of the election , '' Axelrod said yesterday . '' 
... It changed the structure of the race , in that it just never went back . 
Once people had rendered that verdict , it just did n't change . '' 
In the end , both the candidate and the campaign lived up to the challenge Obama outlined that Sunday in Chicago . 
They benefited from a dose of what his staff called `` Obama luck . '' 
But to paraphrase the famous adage of Pasteur , it was the kind of luck that favored only a prepared candidate . 
If Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton -LRB- N.Y. -RRB- had been a formidable primary opponent , McCain seemed to present another challenge to Obama -- as one of the few Republicans who could potentially slip the damaging shackles of his party and run on his compelling biography as a former prisoner of war and as someone with a record of working with Democrats . 
`` John McCain had the potential to be the toughest Republican opponent we could have drawn , '' said Dan Pfeiffer , Obama 's communications director . 
`` Although his record told a different story , his national celebrity was based on his opposition to President Bush and his reform credentials . 
On paper , McCain was perfectly suited to run a very strong campaign that nullified some of our strengths and exploited some of our weaknesses . '' 
