'' Follow The World Desk On : Financial Crisis Leaves Romania Reeling A bank and foreign currency exchange in Bucharest , where many consumers are struggling to repay loans they took out in euros and Swiss francs . 
-LRB- By Craig Whitlock -- The Washington Post -RRB- BUCHAREST , Romania -- In recent days , this once-booming country has been pounded by aftershocks from the global financial crisis . 
Speculators have attacked the local currency , the leu , betting that it would plunge in value . 
At one point last month , the stock market had dropped by 70 percent . 
By next year , some analysts predict , the jobless rate could double . 
Like many of its East European neighbors , Romania is experiencing a sudden reversal of fortune . 
After years of record economic growth fueled by easy credit and heavy foreign investment , people here are bracing for a sharp slowdown that they hope does not turn into an outright crash . 
Two of Romania 's neighbors , Hungary and Ukraine , already have been forced to accept bailouts from the International Monetary Fund . 
Next-door Bulgaria , with a bulging current-account deficit , has troubles of its own . 
To the north , the Baltic states are also feeling a severe pinch , with consumers deeply in hock to stressed Scandinavian banks . 
The European Union , which many of the former Soviet satellite countries thought would bring them stability , has n't offered much help . 
`` I 'm afraid E.U. membership is not enough protection for Romania , Bulgaria and the Baltics , '' said Ilie Serbanescu , an economist and former government official . 
`` The entire Romanian economy is in the hands of foreign companies . 
If the international situation is good , then it 's no problem . 
But if the situation is not good , like now , we are in trouble . '' 
Romanian officials have acknowledged some of their economic difficulties but said concerns about the country 's stability are overblown . 
In an Oct. 22 speech , President Traian Basescu pinned the blame on `` corrupt '' outsiders . 
`` There were smart guys coming to Romania , who had studied at Harvard and Oxford , and they invented how to increase the value of one 's shares without actually having money , '' he said . 
Officials here have brushed aside talk of an IMF bailout , which would be a setback for a country that joined the E.U. just last year . 
They especially reject comparisons to Iceland , which has been hit so hard that bankrupt entrepreneurs are now looking for jobs as cod fishermen . 
`` I am sick and tired of comparing Romania to the Baltic states and Iceland . 
What do we have in common ? '' 
Mugur Isarescu , the governor of Romania 's central bank , said in an interview . 
`` This is the black part of globalization , the fact that you have all these ratings agencies and others putting together six or seven countries in the same boat . '' 
At the same time , Isarescu and other officials said Romania has serious challenges to overcome . 
The central bank has raised interest rates seven times in the past year . 
Last month , it was forced to intervene in the currency markets to prop up the leu , which traders were betting would collapse against the euro . 
`` It was creating here a kind of panic , '' Isarescu said . 
Romania plans to adopt the euro in 2014 but needs to meet a number of economic benchmarks before it can do so . 
Romania 's biggest problem is its current-account deficit : Far more money has been pouring into the country than going out . 
Much of the money comes from the estimated 2.5 million Romanians -- more than 10 percent of the population -- who work in countries such as Italy and Spain and send earnings back . 
But with those economies now suffering as well , many emigrants are expected to return home empty-handed . 
Multimedia reports on the struggle for equality around the globe . 
