Benjamin B. Lacy and his wife Debra sipped beer and munched on beef carpaccio a few weeks ago in Munich at a commercial real estate gathering . 
In recent years , the Lacys have advised Germans to invest about $ 1 billion in office buildings , helping pump up the regional market . 
`` Everybody showed up and we had nice dinners and drank lots of good beer , '' he said . 
`` But underneath was a fear of doom and gloom . 
We were talking up deals but the undercurrent was , ` What is going on in the U.S. ? ' '' 
For the Lacys , who run a real estate investment and advisory firm , it was another stark signal that the global financial crisis is hitting the commercial market . 
With few lenders doling out money these days , commercial real estate sales -- including office , mall and warehouse properties -- are expected to be less than half of last year 's record-setting $ 514 billion , according to Real Capital Analytics of New York . 
More than $ 14.5 billion in deals have been canceled or pulled away from this year , including about $ 1 billion in the Washington region , according to Cassidy & Pinkard Colliers . 
In addition , growing layoffs and falling profits mean companies are giving up office space at rapid rates . 
Nationwide , more than 19 million square feet of space -- enough to fill more than 300 football fields -- has been emptied by office users this year , the most since the months after the Sept. 11 , 2001 , attacks . 
Locally , about 1 million square feet of office space is dark and empty , according to Reis Inc. , a New York-based real estate research firm . 
PriceWaterhouseCoopers and the Urban Land Institute concluded in a recently released report that `` U.S. commercial real estate faces its worst year since the wrenching 1991-1992 industry depression . '' 
Analysts say that nationwide , rents are stagnant and will probably drop . 
Vacancy rates at offices , shopping malls and hotels are expected to rise , and billions of dollars of loans are coming due next year . 
`` This is a record-setter because it transcends real estate , '' said John Germano , managing director of the mid-Atlantic region for CB Richard Ellis , one of the country 's largest commercial real estate firms . 
`` You 've seen companies that real estate depends on like Merrill Lynch , Lehman either be retrenched , sold or go under . '' 
Things will get worse if unemployment rises nationwide and consumers continue to cut back on spending , according to analysts . 
Stores and businesses would lease less space , probably resulting in a glut of office space and lower rents . 
`` We have n't had the second shoe drop , '' said Dan Fasulo , a managing director at Real Capital Analytics , the real estate research company . 
`` You 're going to see more tenants closing up shop . '' 
`` If we get pushed into a recession , all bets are off . 
This is affecting everybody , '' he said . 
There are a few large , blue-chip projects around the country that are having troubles -- a sign that has brokers , developers and lenders in the industry worried that even deals in good , solid locations with established developers behind them are at risk . 
