Michael Flanagan of the DEA describes the operation Police have searched the Las Vegas home and offices of Michael Jackson 's doctor as part of a manslaughter investigation into the singer 's death . 
Dr Conrad Murray 's lawyer , Edward Chernoff , said officials were looking for the star 's medical records . 
The search is the second in a week following a similar operation at the doctor 's Houston clinic on 22 July . 
Dr Murray , who was with Jackson and tried to revive him before he died , has not been named as a suspect . 
In a statement , Dr Murray 's lawyer Edward Chernoff said the warrant `` authorised investigators to look for medical records relating to Michael Jackson and all of his reported aliases '' . 
He added Dr Murray was present during the search of his home and assisted the officers , who seized mobile phones and a computer hard drive . 
Reports suggest the investigation around Jackson 's death is focusing on his use of powerful painkilling drugs . 
The Drug Enforcement Administration has been involved in the investigation because the agency licenses doctors to administer controlled pharmaceuticals . 
Searches at the clinic and another site rented by Dr Murray in Houston , Texas , were carried out last Wednesday after a warrant was issued by a judge in the city . 
Dr Murray has already been interviewed twice by police The warrant , filed in Harris County District Court , said authorities were looking for `` items constituting evidence of the offence of manslaughter that tend to show that Dr Conrad Murray committed the said criminal offence '' . 
Such charges against a doctor for the death of a patient are extremely rare and require authorities to show there was a reckless action that created a risk of death . 
Items seized during the searches included 27 tablets of the weight loss drug Phentermine , a tablet of the muscle relaxant Clonazepam , two hard drives , notices from the Internal Revenue Service and a registration for controlled substances . 
Police have said Dr Murray is co-operating in the investigation . 
Paramedics were called to Jackson 's Los Angeles mansion while Dr Murray was performing CPR on the singer on the day he died , according to a recording of a 911 call . 
Speaking a few days after Jackson 's 25 June death , Mr Chernoff , denied his client administered painkilling drugs that could have contributed to the singer 's death . 
An official determination of what killed Jackson will not be made until the results of a toxicology report are disclosed . 
