UN Human Rights Commissioner Navi Pillay : `` President Assad could simply issue an order to stop the killings '' Syrian authorities are systematically detaining and torturing children , the United Nations ' human rights chief , Navi Pillay , has told the BBC . 
Ms Pillay said President Bashar al-Assad could end the detentions and stop the killing of civilians immediately , simply by issuing an order . 
Syria has accepted a peace plan , amid scepticism about its intentions . 
Most opposition groups have now agreed that the Syrian National Council will formally represent the Syrian people . 
Navi Pillay , in an interview with the BBC before Syria accepted the plan , said Mr Assad would face justice for the abuses carried out by his security forces . 
Asked if he bore command responsibility for the abuses , Ms Pillay said : `` That is the legal situation . 
Factually there is enough evidence pointing to the fact that many of these acts are committed by the security forces -LRB- and -RRB- must have received the approval or the complicity at the highest level . 
`` Because President Assad could simply issue an order to stop the killings and the killings would stop . '' 
Ms Pillay said she believed that the UN Security Council had enough reliable information to warrant referring Syria to the International Criminal Court -LRB- ICC -RRB- . 
Jonathan Head BBC News , Istanbul We have been here before . 
Last November , President Assad agreed to a deal proposed by the Arab League which had many of the same elements as the Annan plan - withdrawal of government forces from residential areas , freeing of political prisoners and good-faith negotiations with the opposition . 
None of those promises was kept . 
The Annan plan contains no timetable for implementation , but for it to get any momentum , it must produce results on the ground in a matter of days . 
The Syrian opposition groups who have been meeting in Istanbul this week are unanimous in their belief that President Assad is just playing for time . 
So they are convinced they will never have to confront the dilemma over whether to sit down and negotiate with him . 
At Russia 's request , the Annan plan makes no mention of any requirement for President Assad to leave office . 
But almost all the opposition groups say that requirement is non-negotiable ; all they would be willing to talk about is how he leaves office , and what kind of system follows his departure . 
`` I feel that investigation and prosecution is a crucial element to deter and call a stop to these violations , '' she said . 
She listed what she called `` horrendous '' treatment of children during the unrest . 
`` They 've gone for the children - for whatever purposes - in large numbers . 
Hundreds detained and tortured ... it 's just horrendous , '' she said . 
`` Children shot in the knees , held together with adults in really inhumane conditions , denied medical treatment for their injuries , either held as hostages or as sources of information . '' 
Ms Pillay said anyone who committed such violations would be held to account . 
`` There is no statute of limitations so people like -LRB- Mr Assad -RRB- can go on for a very long time but one day they will have to face justice . '' 
On Tuesday , Radhika Coomaraswamy , the UN special representative for children and armed conflict , said they had received claims that the rebel Free Syrian Army was using children as fighters . 
The UN says more than 9,000 people have been killed since the uprising against President Assad began a year ago . 
Late on Tuesday , several Syrian dissident groups meeting in Istanbul agreed to recognize the Syrian National Council as the official representative of the Syrian people . 
The BBC 's Jonathan Head at the gathering said none of the delegates he spoke to believed President Assad was sincere , and the Syrian opposition would never accept any deal allowing him to remain in power . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said President Bashar al-Assad would be judged by events . 
But our correspondent says their disunity was openly on display , with constant disputes and walkouts . 
Earlier , a spokesman for UN and Arab League envoy Kofi Annan said he considered the Syrian acceptance of his six-point peace plan an `` important initial step '' but that implementation was key . 
Mr Annan - currently in Beijing where he has held talks with Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao - has written to President Assad urging him to put his commitments into immediate effect . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said President Assad would be judged by events . 
`` Given Assad 's history of over-promising and under-delivering , that commitment must now be matched by immediate actions , '' she said . 
`` If he is ready to bring this dark chapter in Syria 's history to a close he can prove it by immediately ordering regime forces to stop firing and begin withdrawing from populated areas . '' 
However , there were reports of further violence on Wednesday . 
Syrian-led political process to address the aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people 2 . 
UN-supervised cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties to protect civilians 3 . 
All parties to ensure provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the fighting , and implement a daily two-hour humanitarian pause 4 . 
Authorities to intensify the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons 5 . 
Authorities to ensure freedom of movement throughout the country for journalists 6 . 
Authorities to respect freedom of association and the right to demonstrate peacefully London-based opposition group the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said that government forces backed by tanks had stormed the central town of Qalaat al-Madi at dawn , following a 17-day barrage . 
A local activist told AFP news agency that fighters with the Free Syrian Army had withdrawn from the area . 
Arab League foreign ministers meeting in Baghdad on Wednesday are expected to strongly back Mr Annan 's peace mission , calling for talks between the Syrian opposition and government . 
Syria is expected to dominate an Arab League summit in the Iraqi capital on Thursday . 
Speaking to the BBC , Arab League Secretary General Nabil al-Arabi reiterated that the league had not called for the arming of the Syrian opposition . 
He said it was instead a decision for individual member states . 
The six-point plan calls for Mr Assad 's government to remove troops and heavy weapons from population centres and for all parties to allow a daily two-hour ceasefire for humanitarian aid to reach affected areas . 
The plan also requests that authorities release those detained in the uprising . 
However , it does not impose any deadline for Mr Assad , or call for him to leave power . 
The BBC 's Barbara Plett at the UN says that , despite the scepticism , this is the first strategy for ending the conflict that has the backing of the entire Security Council , including Syria 's allies Russia and China . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
28th March 2012 - 15:39 The reports of the Syrian Government killing children make chilling reading . 
Hopefully when the pointless killing stops the world will hold those responsible to account . 
However , the killing fields of Cambodia and , more lately Sri Lanka , have shown that those responsible can look forward to a long life even after the murders have ceased . 
28th March 2012 - 11:00 Many questions here on who to believe : Syrian Government or the rebels . 
If the Syrian government allowed international journalists in , not just western but international , we would get closer to the truth . 
But the Syrian Government denies access to journalists . 
Obviously , there is something they do n't want the world to see . 
Stop accusing and denying and let everyone see for themselves . 
28th March 2012 - 8:13 44 . 
Oh , come off it , the Syrian government has been making spurious claims left right and center about all the rebels being armed gangs with close to zero evidence backing up their claims . 
If the Assad wants to end the allegations he could allow monitors into the camps or even end child detention completely . 
Otherwise , he only has himself to blame when UN officials say these things . 
28th March 2012 - 8:07 The Syrian `` revolution '' obviously did not have much support within Syria . 
Unlike Gaddafi , who relied on mercenaries , Assad has a large armed force who have not revolted . 
The best outcome is for the rebel groups to negotiate . 
I can not see any appetite for regime removal within Syria or in the world community . 
And neither side is innocent of atrocities . 
28th March 2012 - 7:05 Like all civilians in a war zone , children are victims too , Having said that , these accustions , if true , are beyond the pale . 
It is easy to make generalised statements about who is doing what , but if this is happening on the scale alleged , there would be hard evidence available . 
If Pillay has evidence to support her claims , then she should produce it . 
All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
