Syria clashes as Arab League meets in Baghdad Qalaat al-Mandiq , known for its historic fortress , has been under siege for more than two weeks , activists say Syrian forces are bombarding a town in the province of Hama for the 17th straight day , activists say , as the Arab League discusses a peace plan to end a year of fighting in Syria . 
Government troops stormed the rebel bastion of Qalaat al-Madiq , said the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights . 
The UN and the Arab League have called on Syria to adopt the plan . 
But Syria has said it will not address any initiative from the Arab League , from which it was suspended last year . 
The plan put forward by UN-Arab League envoy Kofi Annan calls for a commitment from all parties to stop armed violence ; a daily two-hour ceasefire to allow aid to get through ; and media access to areas affected by fighting . 
On Tuesday , the UN said the Syrian government had agreed to accept the plan - a claim met by scepticism from anti-government activists . 
Jonathan Head BBC News , Istanbul We have been here before . 
Last November , President Assad agreed to a deal proposed by the Arab League which had many of the same elements as the Annan plan - withdrawal of government forces from residential areas , freeing of political prisoners and good-faith negotiations with the opposition . 
None of those promises was kept . 
The Annan plan contains no timetable for implementation , but for it to get any momentum , it must produce results on the ground in a matter of days . 
The Syrian opposition groups who have been meeting in Istanbul this week are unanimous in their belief that President Assad is just playing for time . 
So they are convinced they will never have to confront the dilemma over whether to sit down and negotiate with him . 
At Russia 's request , the Annan plan makes no mention of any requirement for President Assad to leave office . 
But almost all the opposition groups say that requirement is non-negotiable ; all they would be willing to talk about is how he leaves office , and what kind of system follows his departure . 
But on Wednesday , a Syrian government spokesman told the BBC : `` Since our membership was suspended , we deal with other Arab countries on a bilateral level only . 
`` Therefore , we will not be dealing with or addressing any initiative that comes out of the Arab League at any level , '' Jihad Makdisi said . 
Syrian forces stormed Qalaat al-Madiq and nearby villages in Hama after a siege lasting more than two weeks , the UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said on its website . 
Their claim can not be independently verified , as Syria severely restricts journalists ' freedom of movement . 
One activist said thousands of people had fled the area , including the rebels , who did not have enough weapons to fight back , Reuters reported . 
More than 40 people were killed in Qalaat al-Mandiq in recent days , the Observatory said . 
Meanwhile , shelling continued around Homs , Syria 's third-largest city and the scene of a major offensive by government forces last month , activists said . 
UN human rights commissioner Navi Pillay accused the Syrian government of systematically detaining and torturing children . 
Syrian-led political process to address the aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people 2 . 
UN-supervised cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties to protect civilians 3 . 
All parties to ensure provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the fighting , and implement a daily two-hour humanitarian pause 4 . 
Authorities to intensify the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons 5 . 
Authorities to ensure freedom of movement throughout the country for journalists 6 . 
Authorities to respect freedom of association and the right to demonstrate peacefully In an interview with the BBC , Ms Pillay said President Bashar al-Assad bore command responsibility for the abuses carried out by his security forces and would face justice . 
`` Factually , there is enough evidence pointing to the fact that many of these acts are committed by the security forces -LRB- and -RRB- must have received the approval or the complicity at the highest level , '' Ms Pillay said . 
`` Because President Assad could simply issue an order to stop the killings and the killings would stop . '' 
Ms Pillay said she believed that the UN Security Council had enough reliable information to warrant referring Syria to the International Criminal Court -LRB- ICC -RRB- . 
Late on Tuesday , several Syrian dissident groups meeting in Istanbul agreed to recognize the Syrian National Council -LRB- SNC -RRB- as the official representative of the Syrian people . 
But the BBC 's Jonathan Head , in Istanbul , says their disunity was openly on display , with constant disputes and walkouts . 
The UN says more than 9,000 people have been killed since the uprising against President Assad began a year ago . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
