Tris Cotterill | 16:55 UK time , Tuesday , 23 March 2010 We are recording the first show of series two today which is very exciting but we managed to grab Russell a few seconds to ask him another of your questions , this time from @marysmith1992 . 
In order to see this content you need to have both Javascript enabled and Flash installed . 
Visit BBC Webwise for full instructions . 
If you 're reading via RSS , you 'll need to visit the blog to access this content . 
if you could live in any home on a television series , what would it be ? 
At 18:40 23rd Mar 2010 , jenny wrote : If you could go to Disney World with any celebrity alive today , who would it be and why ? 
and if you were to have anything in the world as ur birthday presant what would it be ? 
At 01:20 24th Mar 2010 , Tanya wrote : Happy Birthday Russell -LRB- for yesterday -RRB- . 
Hope you had a good day , and hope you had fun at the recording : -RRB- I no I did , was amazing ! 
So happy i 've finally got tickets ! 
Best birthday present ever ! 
That card you found on stage tonight was from me , so was the stig : -RRB- Hope you get to read this ! 
I 've got two questions , do you get the reason why I got you that stig thing and i 'm coming to the show for the next 3 weeks , so can I have my hug that you promised I could have at the end of tonights show ... but I did n't get one : -LRB- Someone let me know please , i 'm a hugeeeeeee fan !! Xxxxxxxxxx At 10:19 24th Mar 2010 , fizzylizzy21 wrote : This was front page news last week : direct quote `` we 're being invaded - they 're running everywhere its unbelievable '' Firstly , Thank you Russell for a brilliant recording last night , it was hilarious - 3 hours of non stop laughter - brilliant ! 
Oh and I hope you had a good birthday : -RRB- A question for Russell - Have you ever watched yourself on TV , and when you are 50 and look back\/watch yourself will you cringe or laugh ?! Couple of news stories - Not funny as much as completely ridiculous . 
Oh and thank you Russell - I can now never eat a poached egg ever again ! 
At 20:49 24th Mar 2010 , Gemma wrote : I know its a day late but HAPPY 30th BIRTHDAY : D Hope you had a great day . 
I send my love At 20:58 24th Mar 2010 , Gemma wrote : Here are some News stories I found for your show x There kinda weird They seem to point a very definate direction - towards the local lidl - and once you reach lidl they disappear ! 
Perhaps God 's trying to tell us something ... . 
\* Yeah , I know , how sad do you have to be to follow pliers ? 
\* Well , we did n't see this coming !?! : Check this out , it 's brilliant ! 
This teenager is awesome - the amount of things he keeps stealing - including planes that he learned to fly from a manuel - and they ca n't catch him , even though he gets pizza delivered to where he is , and has been hunted by the FBI ! 
he deserves a medal ! 
Man who drinks daughter 's breast milk to combat cancer Cancer sufferer Tim Browne pours a rather bizarre ingredient over his breakfast cornflakes his daughter s breast milk . 
Mum-of-one Georgia , 27 , expresses her milk after feeding baby son Monty , then delivers it to her ailing dad in the hope that it will boost his immune system as he battles colon and liver cancer . 
And one month after drinking her milk mixed with his daily pinta , scans showed that 67-year-old Tim s cancer had reduced . 
Tim , a retired teacher , of Calne , Wilts , said : It s not unpleasant just slightly pungent and oily . 
But once it is mixed with cow s milk , I can t taste it . 
I do feel like I have a special bond with Georgia and Monty . 
Daughter Georgia , of Bristol , said : I don t find it strange at all . 
I m just glad to help . 
My mum Carole and my siblings are right behind it . 
In fact , they all think it s quite funny and Dad s told his friends . 
Tim was diagnosed with cancer in July 2007 , a week before Georgia s wedding . 
He had an operation to remove a tumor and a year of chemotherapy put the disease in remission . 
But it returned when Georgia was pregnant . 
Baby Monty was just a month old when she saw a TV documentary on the benefits of breast milk . 
She said : This man with prostate cancer swore that drinking breast milk every day had reduced his tumors . 
Dad agreed it was a worth a go . 
Tim s doctors support the odd concoction . 
But although scans show that his condition has improved , it can not be proved if it is down to the milk or chemotherapy . 
World Cancer Research Fund UK said : We are not aware of any evidence that breast milk brings any benefits to cancer patients . 
Georgia said : I d do anything to give my dad more time . 
Prince Philip in strip club gaffe Prince Philip put his foot in it during a visit to a barracks when he asked a young Navy sea cadet instructor if she worked in a strip club . 
The Duke of Edinburgh 's question provoked howls of laughter from Elizabeth Rendle , 24 , and her friends , reports the Daily Mail . 
Miss Rendle , a barmaid , said Philip had asked her what she did for a living : `` I told him I worked in a club . 
He then asked if it was a strip club , '' she said . 
The 88-year-old royal then appeared to think better of the suggestion in the current weather and joked that such an occupation would be `` too cold '' . 
The Duke was with the Queen at Wyvern Barracks in Exeter during a tour of Devon . 
Miss Rendle later said that , far from being offended by the question , she felt Prince Philip had been `` putting people at their ease '' . 
She said : `` He was just going round chatting with people , asking them what they did for a living . 
`` It was a joke and we were all laughing which drew everyone else 's attention . 
I do n't think he put his foot in it . 
It was a joke and I did n't take any offence . '' 
Row over Tiger Woods blow-up doll Lawyers for Tiger Woods are reportedly trying to halt the sale of a series of sex toys which exploit the golfer 's personal problems . 
-LRB- Unsuitable\/Broken URL removed by Moderator -RRB- The toys include a ` Take Home , Blow-up Tiger Love Doll ' and are for sale on the website of Pipedream Products . 
Pipedream is advertising its Tiger products as being `` available for a very limited time only '' . 
The US gossip website TMZ.com has managed to obtain a copy of a lawyer 's letter to Pipedream . 
It is demanding that the company stops selling the products , recalls all items that have already been distributed and destroys all stock . 
This is n't the first time lawyers have been called to deal with offensive products in the wake of the Tiger Woods scandal . 
In February , Joslyn James , one of his extramarital girlfriends , called on her lawyers to stop the sale of sets of `` mistress '' golf balls in which each ball featured the face of one of his alleged lovers . 
Michael Jackson 's syringe ` up for sale ' The syringe that allegedly administered Michael Jackson 's fatal dose of drugs is reportedly set to go on sale for # 3.3 million . 
The needle is believed to have been obtained secretly and is apparently being offered around Las Vegas auction houses , reports the Daily Mirror . 
Michael Jackson 's family are said to have been informed by lawyers representing the unnamed seller and are said to be desperate to stop the sale . 
The artefact could go under the hammer on June 25 - the first anniversary of the singer 's death in Los Angeles . 
His personal doctor , Conrad Murray , 57 , has been charged with involuntary manslaughter after allegedly administering drugs such as Valium , lorazepam and propofol to the troubled star . 
An autopsy found that Jackson died from `` lethal levels '' of propofol , a powerful anesthetic . 
The syringe set to go on sale is said to be the one used to administer the fatal dose . 
The Mirror quoted a source as saying : `` This is one of the sickest lots ever put up . 
The syringe is no longer needed in the inquest or in Murray 's forthcoming trial but the moral implications do n't bear thinking about . 
`` The guy who has possession of the needle has been in meetings with his legal team , making sure it is legitimate and his to sell . 
`` The plan is to flog it for up to $ 5m in a big Vegas casino but he 's been told he may have to sell it somewhere that does n't have ` reciprocal legal agreements with the United States ' , such as Brazil or even Libya . 
`` Rumours are leaking thick and fast and the Jackson family are aware of the auction plan . 
They are furious and incensed that someone is yet again trying to profit from him . 
It 's an incredibly distressing time for them . '' 
Theme park takes the p \*\*\* A Surrey theme park is calling on members of the public to submit their urine samples in a bid to find the country 's most pungent smelling wee . 
Thorpe Park , near Chertsey , wants it to become the signature stench of its brand new attraction , SAW Alive - billed as the world 's most extreme live action horror maze . 
Bosses are offering a # 500 cash prize to the person who submits the winning sample and is asking entrants to attend the park on Friday , 26 , February between 11am and 2pm . 
The distinctive smell of the winning entry will be recreated and feature in the new attraction , which features six traps depicting the most grisly and iconic scenes from the six SAW films . 
It will be pumped into the iconic washroom scene , recreating a `` realistic and truly gut wrenching sensory experience '' designed to test the nerve of all who enter . 
Laura Sinclair , Thorpe Park 's entertainments manager , will be responsible for selecting the most stomach turning urine sample . 
She said : `` We want SAW Alive to be as authentic and terrifying as possible to make visitors feel as if they are living in a real life horror film . 
`` To do this we need to really push the boundaries of what our guests experience from a sensory point of view with the use of smells , special lighting and effects such as electrocution and vibrating floors that will create a full on attack of the senses . 
`` We 've begun creating some of the stenches of SAW Alive but need the help of the public to create the most realistic and unsavoury urine odour . 
We are looking for a sample that will really get the public gagging . '' 
At 15:45 25th Mar 2010 , frescoandfallow wrote : Its the look on the face of the man in the studio that made me laugh At 18:44 25th Mar 2010 , Liam wrote : I heard about a rollercoster that is supposed to so scary that people who go on it get offered free life cover . 
I know some rides are scary but come on it cant be that scary !! just something for the show LOL That sounds an amazing story ! 
If you can let us know where it 's from we 'll see if we can get it on the show Here are a few news stories I have found amusing At 23:29 28th Mar 2010 , jade wrote : heyyah russell i like this joke i heard when cherel coles song parachute came on -LRB- soz cant spell -RRB- and said she is screwed now because she doesnt have him any more i laughed just like how i laugh at all yur jokes because they are really cool just like yu xx love yu and how old were yu on yur birthday 19 ? 
please tell me xx love yu xx jade Welcome to Russell Howard s Good News blog where you can read about the big news , the little news and the random bits and pieces that have caught Russell s eye . 
And if you spot something that should be in the show this is the place to let us know or just keep up with the latest exclusive content . 
Follow the show on Twitter @bbcgoodnews Find out more about the program Subscribe to Russell Howard 's Good News You can stay up to date with Russell Howard 's Good News via these feeds . 
