LONDON | Tue Jun 7 , 2011 6:39 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Norwegian oil and gas giant Statoil has called on the British government to publicly support the future use of gas in the UK energy mix to soothe investor concerns , a senior executive told Reuters . 
`` We think there 's lot of uncertainty in the UK market these days when it comes to oil and gas , '' Rune Bjoernson , senior vice president for natural gas , said in an interview on Tuesday . 
`` We would like a clear statement from -LRB- the government -RRB- where they actually say that gas is to play a prominent role in the energy mix , something along the lines of what Chancellor -LRB- Angela -RRB- Merkel in Germany provided us with . '' 
In March , the UK government unexpectedly raised the tax rate for offshore oil and gas exploration to 32 percent from 20 percent , fuelling concerns among producers that a number of marginal fields may become unprofitable . 
Statoil put on hold development of two oil and gas fields off the British coast following the tax rise . 
Germany 's Merkel , on the other hand , says her country 's exit from nuclear power will require heavier investment in gas and coal power plants . 
Bjoernson said the UK 's Electricity Market Reform -LRB- EMR -RRB- proposals clearly support nuclear and renewable energy , but fail to give incentives to investors involved in the gas industry . 
`` That is a bit strange in times of financial austerity because that 's where the British consumer and British industry will be presented with a higher energy bill , '' he said . 
Statoil 's investor partners had grown reluctant to make investment decisions in the UK due to regulatory uncertainty , he added . 
`` We are an industry with very long lead time . 
We need a predictable regulatory framework . '' 
The EMR White Paper is expected to be presented to parliament before the summer recess , which starts in July . 
Statoil is the largest supplier of gas from the Norwegian Continental Shelf to the UK , with a market share of around 16-18 percent , according to company figures . 
UK imports of Norwegian gas have dropped in recent months as Britain has sourced additional supply from liquefied natural gas -LRB- LNG -RRB- tankers . 
Despite the decline , Bjoernson said he was confident Norwegian gas and LNG could supply Britain alongside each other . 
`` I think that as UK production falls there 's room for Norwegian gas and additional LNG , '' Bjoernson said . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
