LONDON , June 7 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A major upturn in dry bulk shipping rates is not expected before the end of 2013 as the freight market will continue to struggle with mounting fleet growth , leading ship broker Fearnleys said on Tuesday . 
Sverre Svenning , director with Fearnley Consultants , which is part of broker Fearnleys , said net fleet growth was forecast to reach 13 percent this year , despite a pick up in scrapping in May , versus over 16 percent in 2010 and nearly 10 percent in 2009 . 
`` During the course of three years , the entire dry bulk fleet will have expanded by more than 40 percent and there is no chance that demand growth can match that , '' he told a Navigate shipping conference in London . 
`` The freight market is expected to remain subdued for the next 18 to 24 months . 
We do not foresee any significant upturn before the end of 2013 . '' 
Ship owners went on a ship ordering spree before economic turmoil in 2008 hit the sector . 
It normally takes three years for a ship to hit the water from when it is ordered . 
`` We think this year will become a record delivery year both for capesizes and for bulk carriers in general , '' Svenning said . 
`` The dry bulk market has tanked , there is no doubt about it . '' 
Fearnleys estimated net fleet growth would reach 11 percent next year before coming off substantially in 2013 to 4 percent . '' 
-LRB- There will be -RRB- strong fleet growth through to 2012 before we see a more benign development in 2013 , '' he said . 
Svenning said there had been expectation that rates would stay soft when they hit a record low in late 2008 . 
`` Then the Chinese came back in the spring of 2009 and saved everybody by increasing imports of iron ore and coal , '' he said . 
`` After two relatively good years we see now that capesizes especially and to a certain degree panamaxes are really , really low in earnings . '' 
Average capesize earnings have fallen to below $ 5,000 a day this year , below operating costs estimated at $ 7,500 to $ 8,000 a day , compared with over $ 200,000 a day before the financial crisis in 2008 . 
They reached $ 10,937 a day on Tuesday , Baltic Exchange data showed . 
`` Everyone is anticipating the freight market is going to be disappointingly low for probably 12 to 24 months , '' James Leake , managing director of ICAP Shipping Research , told the conference . 
Iron ore and coal account for about two thirds of total seaborne trade of dry bulk volumes . 
Svenning said coal imports , excluding India , were down about 2 percent year-on-year in the first quarter of this year and dropped about 7 percent from the fourth quarter of 2010 , which `` indicates a weaker momentum in the market '' . 
`` We see that coal imports are increasing still , but the effect on total demand is relatively small . '' 
He said iron ore imports continued to increase and had risen 12 percent year-on-year in the first quarter of this year , rising 6 percent from the fourth quarter of 2010 . 
`` The problem is the steel industry in Japan , South Korea and Taiwan -- they are all producing at very closely to capacity . 
So they do n't need any more iron ore , so again we have to look to China . '' 
Simon Young , chief executive of COSCO UK , a unit of China 's top shipping conglomerate -LRB- 601919 . 
SS -RRB- , told the conference indications were growing that throughput at China 's ports was slowing down and iron ore imports could weaken . 
-LRB- IDn : LDE7560PK -RRB- He said the dry freight market had experienced a `` super cycle '' boom period encouraging players to expect China to have annual growth of iron ore and coal trade of over 20 percent . 
`` The booming period was so long that this made everybody believe that China would never stop , '' he said . 
`` Nobody could guarantee for every year for the next 10 years to have a 20 or 30 percent increase . '' 
Republication or redistribution ofReuters content , including by caching , framing or similar means , is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters . 
Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
