The daily White House intelligence report that catalogs the top security threats to the nation has a grim new addition , reflecting the realities of the age : a daily update on the global financial crisis and its cascading effects on the stability of countries through the world . 
The first Economic Intelligence Briefing report was presented to the White House yesterday by the CIA , the agency 's new director , Leon Panetta , revealed at a news conference . 
The addition of economic news to the daily roundup of terrorist attacks and surveillance reports appears to reflect a growing belief among intelligence officials that the economic meltdown is now preeminent among security threats facing the United States . 
`` We 've seen the impact of a worldwide recession occur throughout the world , '' said Panetta , who described the agency 's newest product at his first news briefing since his confirmation . 
Instigated at the request of the White House , the daily report will ensure that U.S. policymakers are `` not surprised '' by the aftershocks from bank failures and rising unemployment , he said . 
The spy agency is following worrisome trends in many corners of the globe , from East Asia to Latin America . 
In private meetings yesterday , Latin American intelligence officials warned their U.S. counterparts of a crisis spreading throughout the hemisphere , particularly in Argentina , Ecuador and Venezuela , Panetta said . 
`` Clearly , it 's related : What happens in the economy , and what 's happening as a result of that , is affecting the stability of the world , '' he said . 
Other key intelligence officials have raised similar alarms in other settings . 
The new director of national intelligence , Dennis C. Blair , told a Senate panel this month that economic woes have largely replaced terrorism as the country 's No. 1 security challenge . 
Blair repeated the theme yesterday in testimony before the House intelligence committee , noting that three European governments have fallen because of economic issues . 
Central and Eastern Europe `` are under tremendous strain , '' and much of Eurasia , Latin American and sub-Saharan Africa lack sufficient cash reserves and access to international aid , he said . 
`` Our analysis indicates that economic crisis increases the risk of regime-threatening instability if it continues for a one - or two-year period , '' Blair said . 
`` Instability can loosen the fragile hold that many developing countries have on law and order . '' 
The economic crunch adds to a formidable list of global concerns facing the new administration 's security team . 
Panetta said the CIA continues to regard al-Qaeda as a serious threat , as the terrorist movement retains its stronghold along the Pakistan-Afghanistan border and gains momentum in Somalia and Yemen . 
