\* Continued fighting in Tripoli blocks inflow of aid \* Dire shortages of food , water , blood for medical care \* Libyan hospital staff overwhelmed GENEVA , Aug 24 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Conditions in Tripoli 's hospitals could become catastrophic without a rapid improvement in security in the Libyan capital , the emergency coordinator of aid group Medecins Sans Frontieres -LRB- MSF -RRB- told Reuters on Wednesday . 
Medical supplies ran low during six months of civil war but have almost completely dried up in the siege and battle of the past week . 
Fuel supplies have run out and the few remaining medical workers are struggling to get to work . 
`` The situation is very tough and the movement is very restricted . 
The situation in medical structures at the moment is not good , it 's almost a catastrophe , '' MSF 's Rosa Crestani said . 
`` There are clearly shortages of life-saving medication and equipment . 
There are no antibiotics and instruments for life-saving surgery . '' 
Crestani , who is based in Brussels but in close contact with MSF staff on the ground in Libya , said the most urgent cases included not just those wounded in the fighting , but also civilians such as women needing caesarian sections . 
Hospital staff are overwhelmed and exhausted , she said . 
Muftah Etwilb , a spokesman for the International Federation of the Red Cross in Benghazi , said he had spoken to the director of Tripoli Central Hospital who said he was appealing for his staff to come to work despite the security situation . 
Restricted movement across the capital has exacerbated supply problems , Etwilb said , with Tripoli Central likely to run out of oxygen stocks within two or three days . 
A rebel spokesman said all of Tripoli 's health facilities were suffering from shortages and urged doctors to return to work . 
`` There is a real catastrophe here , '' he said . 
`` Appeals were made yesterday in the streets and mosques for urgent help . 
There is also a dangerous shortage of blood at hospitals for the wounded ... and a shortage of foodstuffs . 
Drinking water is completely unavailable in some areas in Tripoli . '' 
Crestani said the items needed included dressing materials , external fixators for treating fractures , anaesthetics , antibiotics and tetanus vaccine , but also drugs for chronic diseases such as diabetes , hypertension and cancer . 
Many cancer drugs had been out of stock for weeks or even months , Crestani said . 
The shortage of fuel and electricity has also crippled hospitals ' ability to keep health services running . 
`` It 's a big problem to run ambulances and also some hospitals have been running on generators for the past few days and are really at the end of their capacity . 
This is really a major problem . '' 
MSF is just one of many international agencies ready to help Tripoli cope with the aftermath of the fighting . 
But it 's still not clear whether the `` aftermath '' has arrived . 
The European Union said on Wednesday it had been preparing for months and was `` geared up for the humanitarian challenge '' , with an initial focus on war surgery and helping hospitals . 
`` We have prepositioned humanitarian stocks in the accessible zones of Libya and have coordinated all efforts with our humanitarian partners . 
We are ready , '' Kristalina Georgieva , European Commissioner for International Cooperation , Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Response , said in a statement . 
The Commission has allocated 80 million euros to respond to the Libyan conflict , including 10 million for assistance once Tripoli and the coastal cities opened up for delivery of relief . 
The Commission was in a position to deliver aid swiftly and efficiently , it said , without saying when this would start . 
Crestani said MSF teams were on their way from Tunisia and she hoped to give the green light to deploy to Tripoli as soon as possible , and in a few days in the worst case . 
`` I really hope that it 's not weeks because that will be a real catastrophe . '' 
Even in the best case scenario , it will take months to restore normality to the health care system , she said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Miles in Geneva and Hamid Ould Ahmed in Algiers ; Editing by Mark Heinrich -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
