Wed Aug 24 , 2011 6:37 pm EDT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Here is a timeline on the civil war in Libya since protests against the 42-year rule of Muammar Gaddafi began in February : Feb 15\/16 , 2011 - A riot in Benghazi is triggered by the arrest of human rights activist Fethi Tarbel , who has worked to free political prisoners , Quryna newspaper reports . 
February 17 - Activists designate February 17 as a day of rage . 
It is the anniversary of clashes in Benghazi in 2006 when security forces killed protesters attacking the consulate of the former colonial power Italy . 
February 24 - Anti-government militias take control of central coastal city of Misrata after evicting forces loyal to Gaddafi . 
February 26 - The U.N. Security Council imposes sanctions on Gaddafi and his family , and refers Libya 's crackdown on rebels to the International Criminal Court -LRB- ICC -RRB- . 
February 28 - EU governments approve a package of sanctions against Gaddafi and his closest advisers including an arms embargo and bans on travel to the bloc . 
March 5 - The rebel National Transitional Council meets in Benghazi and declares itself the sole representative for Libya . 
March 10 - France recognizes the National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- as legitimate representative of Libya 's people . 
Libya suspends diplomatic relations with France the next day . 
March 16 - Forces loyal to Gaddafi approach rebel-held Benghazi . 
Gaddafi 's son Saif al-Islam tells France-based TV channel Euronews : `` Everything will be over in 48 hours . '' 
March 17 - The U.N. Security Council votes to authorize a no-fly zone over Libya and `` all necessary measures '' -- code for military action -- to protect civilians against Gaddafi 's army . 
March 19 - The first air strikes halt the advance of Gaddafi 's forces on Benghazi and target Libya 's air defenses . 
March 28 - Qatar becomes the first Arab country to recognize Libya 's rebels as the people 's legitimate representatives . 
March 29 - A London conference of 40 governments and organizations agrees to set up a contact group comprising 20 countries to coordinate efforts in a post-Gaddafi Libya . 
March 30 - Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa defects and flies to Britain . 
April 10 - Gaddafi accepts a roadmap for ending the conflict , South African President Jacob Zuma says after leading a delegation of four African leaders at talks in Tripoli . 
Rebels reject the plan the next day . 
April 30 - A NATO missile attack on a house in Tripoli kills Gaddafi 's youngest son and three grandchildren . 
May 30 - In his first appearance in a month , Gaddafi renews a ceasefire call in talks with visiting South African President Zuma but gives no sign he will heed demands to step down . 
June 1 - Libya 's top oil official Shokri Ghanem appears in Rome , saying he defected because of the relentless bloodshed . 
June 8 - Western and Arab nations meet rebels in Abu Dhabi , discussing what U.S. officials call the `` end-game '' for Gaddafi . 
June 15 - Gaddafi 's government approves $ 31.4 billion budget for the rest of 2011 , to show it is functioning as normal . 
June 27 - The ICC issues arrest warrants for Gaddafi , his son Saif al-Islam and intelligence chief Abdullah al-Senussi on charges of crimes against humanity . 
July 15 - The rebel NTC wins U.S. recognition as the legitimate government of Libya at a meeting in Turkey of the contact group on Libya . 
July 26 - U.N. envoy Abdul Elah al-Khatib says after talks with Libya 's prime minister that the government and the rebels remain far apart in efforts to end the crisis . 
July 27 - Rebels win diplomatic recognition from Britain , which also expels the remaining Gaddafi diplomats from London . 
July 28 - Abdel Fattah Younes , Gaddafi 's former interior minister who defected to the rebels on February 22 and became their military chief , is killed in mysterious circumstances . 
Aug 9 - Gaddafi 's government accuses NATO of killing 85 civilians in an air strike near Zlitan , west of Misrata . 
Aug 14 - Libyan rebels take the center of Zawiyah , 50 km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- west of Tripoli , cutting the coastal highway to Tunisia that keeps the capital supplied with food and fuel . 
Aug 15 - In a barely audible telephone call to state television , Gaddafi calls on his followers to liberate Libya from rebels and NATO . 
`` Get ready for the fight ... The blood of martyrs is fuel for the battlefield , '' he says . 
-- Insurgents say they have captured Garyan , which controls the highway leading south from Tripoli . 
Aug 16 - Rebels say they have completed moves to cut off roads to the capital after rapid advances in the west . 
Aug 20 - Explosions and gunfire rattle Tripoli after days of battlefield defeats leave Gaddafi 's government and troops besieged in the capital . 
Aug 21 - Rebels enter Tripoli with little resistance . 
-- Gaddafi makes two audio addresses over state television calling on Libyans to fight off the rebel `` rats '' and saying he is in the capital and will be `` with you until the end '' -- Rebels reach Green Square , the symbolic showcase the government had until recently used for mass demonstrations in support of Gaddafi . 
Rebels rename it Martyrs Square . 
-- Libyan rebels say they have detained three of Gaddafi 's sons , including Saif al-Islam , wanted for war crimes . 
Aug 22 - Libyan government tanks and snipers put up scattered , last-ditch resistance in Tripoli after rebels sweep into the heart of the capital , cheered on by crowds . 
Aug 23 - Saif al Islam , waving in triumph and taunting his father 's enemies , surfaces in Tripoli overnight to prove he remains a free man , not a captive as rebels had claimed . 
-- Insurgents later pour into Gaddafi 's compound in Tripoli and have been seen firing in the air in celebration , Reuters reporters on the scene say . 
Pro-Gaddafi forces initially resist but the fighting subsequently ends . 
-- Russian chess federation chief Kirsan Ilyumzhinov says Gaddafi has told him by telephone that he is still in Tripoli , alive and well . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
