Intense gun battles as rebel fighters take Muammar Gaddafi 's compound in central Tripoli on Tuesday . 
It appears the man who has ruled Libya for four decades has little or no power left . 
Foreign oil companies with stakes in Libya are intensely interested in who or what will replace him , and how quickly stability can return . 
Libya 's National Transitional Council is the political face of anti-Gaddafi forces . 
Ahmed Jehani is its senior representative for reconstruction . 
In an interview with Reuters Insider TV Jehani said foreign oil companies will still be able to do business in Libya under arrangements made before the fall of Gaddafi 's regime . 
SOUNDBITE : AHMED JEHANI , SENIOR REBEL REPRESENTATIVE FOR RECONSTRUCTION , SAYING -LRB- English -RRB- : `` All contracts will be honored . 
All lawful contracts will be offered , whether they are in the oil and gas complex or in the contracting . 
At the moment it is not for this government to decide whether they will be revoking any contract . '' 
It may not be that easy . 
Before the civil war ignited six months ago Libya exported 1.6 million barrels of oil a day . 
That output has fallen to almost nothing . 
Although oil infrastructure could be quickly repaired divisions between the rebels and Libya 's numerous tribal , regional and ethnic groups will be more difficult . 
Shashank Joshi is an international security expert with Royal United Services in London . 
SHASHANK JOSHI , ASSOCIATE FELLOW , ROYAL UNITED SERVICES , SAYING -LRB- English -RRB- : `` I think though , those divisions which are ineradicable in the short term can be contained without resort to violence as long as the new government is really focused on tolerance and inclusiveness . 
It says it is . 
I think the test will come when it has to make difficult choices like how to divide Libya 's oil wealth or where , for example , to start disarming militias . '' 
Jehani says bringing stability is the National Transitional Council 's primary aim . 
SOUNDBITE : AHMED JAHANI , SENIOR REBEL REPRESENTATIVE FOR RECONSTRUCTION , SAYING -LRB- English -RRB- : `` Right now we are focused like a laser on stabilisation . 
How you stabalise security , the services to your people , humanitarian , you get the governance right , you get the economy right , all of these things you need to do and focus on them , then you move into rehabilitation . '' 
The price of Brent crude oil hovered around $ 109 a barrel on Wednesday , having dropped to $ 106 on Monday . 
Libya once supplied two percent of the world 's oil . 
The country 's former top oil official who defected to London says he thinks the country should be able to resume oil output within a few months , but reaching its pre-war levels could take as long as a year and a half . 
Andrew Potter , Reuters Rebels : Libya will honor oil contracts -LRB- 2:44 -RRB- Aug. 24 - A Libyan rebel government would honor all the oil contracts granted during the Muammar Gaddafi era including those of Chinese companies , senior rebel representative Ahmed Jehani tells Reuters . 
-LRB- Transcript -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
