UNITED NATIONS | Wed Aug 24 , 2011 6:37 pm EDT UNITED NATIONS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The United States on Wednesday asked the U.N. Security Council to unfreeze $ 1.5 billion in Libyan assets , a proposal South African has blocked for weeks because it objects to funding the rebel government . 
The U.S. delegation submitted a draft resolution to the 15-nation body asking it to make the money available for civilian and humanitarian purposes `` as soon as possible . '' 
No vote was held on the draft on Wednesday , but diplomats said a vote could come on Thursday or Friday . 
The U.S. move to ask the Security Council to make a decision on a matter that would normally be handled by the council 's Libya sanctions committee came out of frustration with South Africa , which has refused to consent to the idea of handing over large sums directly to Libya 's rebel leaders . 
White House spokesman Josh Earnest said earlier that the Obama administration wanted to free up funds to provide humanitarian assistance and support to the Transitional National Council -LRB- TNC -RRB- , the rebel government , which controls of most of Libya now thanks to recent gains by rebel fighters . 
The U.S. draft resolution says the money , currently frozen by the U.S. government on the basis of U.N. sanctions adopted earlier this year , was not to be used for military purposes . 
`` None of the funds made available pursuant to this resolution will be provided for the purchase of arms , non-lethal military equipment or any other military-related activity , '' the draft text said . 
Of the $ 1.5 billion , $ 500 million would go to international humanitarian organizations directly , a proposal the South African delegation says it does not object to . 
Diplomats say the South Africans , however , have problems with the U.S. proposal to hand another $ 1.0 billion to `` third-party vendors supplying fuel and other urgently needed humanitarian goods '' and to what the resolution describes as an `` international mechanism '' for providing social services . 
The South African objections , diplomats say , have prevented the sanctions committee from approving the U.S. request to release the funds , first submitted to the committee on August 8 . 
The resolution says fuel from `` third-party vendors '' would not be used for military purposes and that the council would have `` written assurances '' to that effect from the rebel TNC . 
Several council diplomats told Reuters privately that they were uncomfortable with parts of the U.S. proposal . 
They said South Africa was not alone in its reservations about handing funds over to the rebels , although it is the only country formally blocking the U.S. request on the sanctions committee . 
Russia and others have concerns about unfreezing funds for the TNC , they said . 
South African Ambassador Baso Sangqu told reporters his country was concerned that funding the TNC implied recognizing it , something the African Union had not so far done . 
Pretoria was awaiting the outcome of an AU meeting on the issue on Thursday before deciding whether to lift its objections , he said . 
U.N. sanctions committees work on the basis of consensus , which means all 15 Security Council members -- including South Africa -- have a virtual veto . 
By presenting a resolution to the council , the United States was preparing to bypass the sanctions committee and the need for consensus on its request . 
Council resolutions need nine votes in favor and no vetoes from the five permanent council members -- the United States , China , France , Britain and Russia -- to pass . 
If the objections to the U.S. request are lifted in the sanctions committee , there will be no need to vote on the resolution submitted by the U.S. delegation . 
If the objections remain , Washington will demand a vote , envoys say . 
The United States alone has frozen some $ 37 billion in Libyan assets , U.S. officials say . 
The Security Council imposed sanctions in response to Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 's brutal crackdown against pro-democracy demonstrators earlier this year . 
The protests led to a civil war and U.N. approval for NATO intervention . 
The request for the urgent unfreezing of $ 1.5 billion of sanctioned Libyan assets is separate from the longer-term discussions that will be taking place in Paris , Doha and New York about postwar planning for Libya , including the release of tens of billions of dollars of frozen Libyan funds . 
