By Maggie Fox , Health and Science Editor WASHINGTON | Tue Apr 21 , 2009 10:19 pm BST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A new type of swine flu has infected at least two children in California and while both have recovered , U.S. health officials said on Tuesday they were looking for more cases . 
They say it is possible the children were infected by other people and not by pigs , and said they have consulted with officials in Canada , Mexico and at the World Health Organization although there is no evidence that the new virus is circulating widely . 
In a special alert , the CDC asked doctors in California 's San Diego and Imperial counties , on the border with Mexico , to test anyone with flu-like symptoms and send the samples in for testing . 
`` Both of these kids came to our attention because they were seen in clinics which do routine surveillance for influenza infections , '' the CDC 's Dr. Lyn Finelli told reporters in a telephone briefing . 
Neither child , a 10-year-old boy and a 9-year-old girl , had especially severe symptoms , although the girl had had a fever of 104 degrees , Finelli said . 
`` We are not making the assumption that there are widespread infections out there and there is not any action that the public should take right now , '' Finelli said . 
The influenza strain is an H1N1 , the same family as one of the seasonal flu viruses now circulating . 
But it genetically resembles a virus found in pigs and not in people , officials at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said . 
It has never been seen before , the CDC said . 
`` Neither child had known contact with pigs . 
The source of infection is unknown , '' they added . 
`` The lack of known exposure to pigs in the two cases increases the possibility that human-to-human transmission of this new influenza virus has occurred . '' 
In the past two or so years , Finelli said , 12 known cases of infection with swine flu have been reported but 11 of them followed known contact with pigs . 
People were near the children were being questioned by CDC investigators and tested if they remember having been sick recently . 
The boy flew to Texas with his brother and is still there , the officials added . 
Blood tests may show if people were infected in the past with the same virus . 
The virus is usually fairly mild but it still kills between 250,000 and 500,000 people in an average year . 
And every few decades , a completely new strain pops up and it can cause a pandemic , a global epidemic that kills many more than usual . 
Flu experts are afraid a pandemic could come at any time and are monitoring for new strains . 
One big fear is that the H5N1 avian flu virus now mostly affecting flocks in Asia , the Middle East , Europe and Africa might mutate into a form that could cause a pandemic . 
It currently only rarely infects people but has killed 257 out of 420 infected in 15 countries since 2003 , according to the World Health Organization . 
CDC officials said that they do not believe these two cases represent the beginning of such a pandemic . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
