BP PLC CEO Tony Hayward talks to reporters as he visits a Coast Guard command center in Venice , La. , Sunday , May 30 , 2010 . 
AP PORT FOURCHON , La. -- PORT FOURCHON , La. -LRB- AP -RRB- -- The 40-foot-long corrugated steel boxes , resembling oversized white shipping containers , are stacked two high and three wide atop a barge at Port Fourchon , the oil industry 's hub on the Gulf of Mexico . 
The words `` Martin Quarters '' painted in black offer the only clue that they 're not stuffed with cargo . 
This barge is a floating hotel , or `` flotel , '' set up by BP and several subcontractors to accommodate more than 500 workers hired to clean up the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
Temporary housing is the only way to station workers at Port Fourchon , a massive shipyard that serves offshore oil rigs and is surrounded by ecologically sensitive marshes and beaches . 
`` There are no permanent residents here on the port , '' said Dennis Link , a manager from a BP refinery who 's handling logistics at the 1,300-acre site that 's easily accessible by ship , but reachable on land only by a state road that snakes through the bayous . 
With the ambitious `` top kill '' having failed over the weekend and a relief well at least two months away , BP was ramping up its efforts to clean up the Louisiana coast . 
Another temporary fix -- an effort to saw through the pipe leaking the oil and cap it -- could be tried as soon as Wednesday . 
In the meantime , more than 125 miles of the state 's coastline already have been hit with oil , including the resort of Grand Isle near Port Fourchon . 
The cleanup , relief wells and temporary fixes were being watched closely by President Barack Obama 's administration . 
Obama planned to meet for the first time Tuesday with the co-chairmen of an independent commission investigating the spill , while Attorney General Eric Holder was headed to the Gulf Coast to meet with state attorneys general . 
On Monday afternoon , the living quarters on the flotel sat empty . 
Generators pumped in cool air and powered the lights , and at the foot of each bunk sat a towel , washcloth and individually wrapped bar of soap . 
If necessary , four tents on dry land nearby can house 500 more workers . 
Workers will likely be trucked in on the two-lane state road . 
The accommodations on the barge are Spartan , but comfortable -- similar to military barracks . 
Each pod contains 12 bunks , with a bathroom for every four . 
Per Coast Guard standards , each resident gets 30 square feet of space in the quarters . 
The barge has 10 washers , 10 dryers and a kitchen , although food will be served in a tent on land . 
The quarters are typically floated alongside offshore oil rigs to supplement housing on the drilling operations . 
The flotel could be moved if significant amounts of oil wash up at another location . 
Another flotel sits about 15 miles away , off Grand Isle , and BP plans to establish them elsewhere along the coast . 
Port Fourchon and Grand Isle were quiet Monday , with only a handful of people seen walking on the beaches by an Associated Press reporter and photographer flying over in a helicopter . 
BP is hiring local workers and ones from other states , and Link acknowledged that some from Louisiana might prefer a long drive home each to staying on the flotel . 
For Chad Martin , co-owner of Martin Quarters , business is booming . 
His company has 200 living quarters , and 60 were available when a BP subcontractor called . 
The oil giant rented every single one . 
But Martin understands the gravity of the situation . 
`` This is not the way to get work , '' he said Cleanup efforts are being ramped up while BP also tries the latest in a series of patchwork fixes , this one a cut-and-cap process to put a lid on the leaking wellhead so oil can be siphoned to the surface . 
The risky procedure could , at least temporarily , increase the oil flowing from the busted well . 
Using robot submarines , BP plans to cut away the riser pipe this week and place a cap-like containment valve over the blowout preventer . 
On Monday , live video feeds showed robot submarines moving equipment around and using a circular saw-like device to cut small pipes at the bottom of the Gulf . 
BP failed to plug the leak Saturday with its top kill , which shot mud and pieces of rubber into the well but could n't beat back the pressure of the oil . 
The oil company also announced plans Monday to try attaching another pipe to a separate opening on the blowout preventer with some of the same equipment used to pump in mud during the top kill . 
The company also wants to build a new freestanding riser to carry oil toward the surface , which would give it more flexibility to disconnect and then reconnect containment pipes if a hurricane passed through . 
Neither of those plans would start before mid-June and would supplement the cut-and-cap effort . 
But the best chances for sealing off the leak are two relief wells , the first of which wo n't be ready until August . 
The spill has already leaked between 19.7 million and 43 million gallons , according to government estimates . 
For the relief well to succeed , the bore hole must precisely intersect the damaged well , which experts have compared to hitting a target the size of a dinner plate more than two miles into the earth . 
If it misses , BP will have to back up its drill , plug the hole it just created , and try again . 
`` The probability of them hitting it on the very first shot is virtually nil , '' said David Rensink , incoming president of the American Association of Petroleum Geologists , who spent most of his 39 years in the oil industry in offshore exploration . 
`` If they get it on the first three or four shots they 'd be very lucky . '' 
The trial-and-error process could take weeks , but it will eventually work , scientists and BP said . 
Then engineers will then pump mud and cement through pipes to ultimately seal the well . 
On the slim chance the relief well does n't work , scientists were n't sure exactly how much -- or how long -- the oil would flow . 
The gusher would continue until the well bore hole collapsed or pressure in the reservoir dropped to a point where oil was no longer pushed to the surface , said Tad Patzek , chair of the Petroleum and Geosystems Engineering Department at the University of Texas-Austin . 
BP said it does n't know how much oil is in the reservoir because it was starting to collect and analyze data on its size when the rig exploded April 20 . 
In Patzek 's mind , failing to get the relief wells to work is n't an option . 
`` I do n't admit the possibility of it not working , '' he said . 
