WEST PALM BEACH , FLA. -- Paul Pointer was speeding north along Florida 's eastern coast in a rented Ford SUV , guzzling Mountain Dew , heading to a dock to buy tuna and swordfish so fresh the tails were still curled in rigor mortis . 
This was no ordinary business trip for Pointer , who buys seafood for 38 Whole Foods Market grocery stores in the mid-Atlantic region . 
At every step along the journey between what 's caught in the sea and what lands inside Washington area supermarkets , fear about the impact of the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico is palpable : Will the oil creep into the South Atlantic this summer , imperiling Pointer 's reliable bounty of fish ? 
Will this be one of his last big catches of tuna and `` swords '' until the oil comes ? 
`` The oil is going to get here eventually , even if BP capped the well today , '' said Pointer , 42 , head of the Whole Foods mid-Atlantic seafood processing facility in Prince George 's County . 
`` I 'm no scientist , but I 'm also not a moron . 
If oil comes here , it would be a heck of a lot bigger impact for us '' because fish from the South Atlantic is a much larger part of the store 's seafood sales . 
The story of one catch of tuna and swordfish -- starting 120 miles off the Florida coast at Cape Canaveral and ending with Whole Foods customers in Annapolis -- is a chain of rattled players in the seafood industry , all hundreds of miles from the gulf . 
The oil spill has inflated how much Pointer spends on gulf shrimp by $ 2 to $ 4 a pound , but his bigger worry is the fate of his South Atlantic tuna and swordfish . 
Whole Foods prides itself on selling fish with labeling that clearly notes its source . 
But if South Atlantic fisheries are shut down , Pointer would buy more imported fish , which sometimes can not be traced back to ensure that it meets the environmental standards of Whole Foods . 
Or Pointer will pay higher prices for domestic tuna and swordfish caught farther north off the East Coast . 
Either of those strategies would trigger harsh consequences for other players along the supply chain : When Pointer pursues imports , that hurts Scott Taylor , a partner of Day Boat Seafood , a Florida company that relies on buyers such as Whole Foods to pay premium prices for seafood caught using rigorous environmental standards . 
Already , Taylor said , the oil spill has damaged his business , first when tuna and swordfish production in the gulf along Florida 's panhandle declined and then when cheaper foreign imports flooded the market , lowering the price Taylor can command for his domestic tuna and swordfish by $ 1 to $ 1.50 a pound . 
`` The consumer does n't stop eating , '' Taylor said . 
`` It 's just that more dollars are flowing overseas to a different source . 
I had one of my customers tell me that he bought a swordfish from a dealer in Boston '' for less than Taylor charges for a Florida fish -- and that fish was from South Africa . 
The fishing industry 's woes will only worsen if oil lands in South Florida and the South Atlantic . 
Last week , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration released a forecast showing a `` 61 to 80 percent '' chance that oil sheen , tar balls and other oil remnants would come within 20 miles of Florida 's east coast from the Keys to Fort Lauderdale by Aug. 18 . 
Giant Food , based in Landover , said in a statement that the oil spill has `` minimally affected '' its seafood business ; a Safeway spokesman declined to comment . 
On a recent Wednesday morning , Pointer pulled his SUV up to a dock in Fort Pierce , Fla. , about an hour north of West Palm Beach , to meet up with Day Boat Seafood 's Taylor . 
A long-liner docked , and Pointer moved closer to see what was being hauled out : First , dozens of slick yellowfin tuna , beheaded , their yellow pointy fins framing their shiny gray skin , their dark red flesh oozing out . 
Next : swordfish , also beheaded , with white and pink flesh and tight veins embroidering the white meat . 
Pointer needed to buy about 4,500 pounds of fish . 
He had to decide which fish -- ideally , the most aesthetically pleasing meat -- pronto . 
His delivery truck was leaving later that afternoon , scheduled to arrive at the Whole Foods plant in Landover by Friday morning , so the fish could make it to stores that day for the weekend buying rush . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
