By Robyn Bresnahan BBC News Bob Shipp said BP wanted to hire his entire marine science department BP faces more than 300 lawsuits so far . 
In a statement , BP says it has hired more than a dozen national and local scientists `` with expertise in the resources of the Gulf of Mexico '' . 
The BBC has obtained a copy of a contract offered to scientists by BP . 
It says that scientists can not publish the research they do for BP or speak about the data for at least three years , or until the government gives the final approval to the company 's restoration plan for the whole of the Gulf . 
It also states scientists may perform research for other agencies as long as it does not conflict with the work they are doing for BP . 
And it adds that scientists must take instructions from lawyers offering the contracts and other in-house counsel at BP . 
Bob Shipp , the head of marine sciences at the University of South Alabama , was one of the scientists approached by BP 's lawyers . 
They did n't just want him , they wanted his whole department . 
`` They contacted me and said we would like to have your department interact to develop the best restoration plan possible after this oil spill , '' he said . 
Russ Lea from the University of South Alabama : Some clauses in the contract `` were very disturbing '' . 
`` We laid the ground rules - that any research we did , we would have to take total control of the data , transparency and the freedom to make those data available to other scientists and subject to peer review . 
They left and we never heard back from them . '' 
What Mr Nelson is concerned about is BP 's control over scientific research . 
`` Our ability to evaluate the disaster and write public policy and make decisions about it as a country can be impacted by the silence of the research scientists who are looking at conditions , '' he said . 
`` It 's hugely destructive . 
I mean at some level , this is really BP versus the people of the United States . '' 
In its statement , BP says it `` does not place restrictions on academics speaking about scientific data '' . 
But New Orleans environmental lawyer Joel Waltzer looked over the contract and said BP 's statement did not match up . 
Good scientists , they 're going to be giving their opinions based on the facts and they are not going to bias their opinions '' End Quote Professor Irv Mendelssohn Louisiana State University `` They 're the ones who control the process . 
They 're depriving the public of the data and the transparency that we all deserve . '' 
But some scientists who have been approached by lawyers acting on behalf of BP are willing to sign up . 
Irv Mendelssohn is a professor in the Department of Oceanography and Coastal Sciences at Louisiana State University . 
`` What I 'm doing would n't be any different than if I was consulting with one of the natural resource trustees . 
I am giving my objective opinion about recovery . '' 
Some scientists approached by BP lawyers have been offered as much as $ 250 an hour . 
Prof Mendelssohn says he would negotiate his normal consulting fee , which is between $ 150 and $ 300 an hour . 
But he says that is not why he is doing it . 
`` Good scientists , they 're going to be giving their opinions based on the facts and they are not going to bias their opinions . 
What 's most important is credibility . '' 
But Cary Nelson is concerned about the relationship between corporations and academia . 
`` There is a problem for a faculty member who becomes closely associated with a corporation with such powerful financial interests . 
`` My advice would be : think twice before you sign a contract with a corporation that has such powerful economic interests at stake . '' 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
