Get Wonkbook delivered to your inbox or mobile device every morning . 
It 's like reading it on the blog , only much more convenient . 
Your essential source for the latest news on the intersection of Wall Street and Washington . 
Michael Leachman of the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities argues that the stimulus has created more jobs than recovery . 
Bruce Katz , Emilia Istrate , and Jonathan Rothwell note that rising exports would do a lot for metropolitan areas . 
The Sustainable Defense Task Force proposes cuts to the defense budget . 
Barry Eichengreen and Peter Temin compare the Gold Standard and the Euro . 
Flavio Cunha and James Heckman revew research suggesting that non-cognitive skills are important for young people 's life prospects . 
Yale 's Gary Gorton -- gah , so much bold ! 
-- has an interesting new paper called `` Slapped in the Face by the Invisible Hand : Banking and the Panic of 2007 . '' 
Gorton 's paper attempts to explain the `` where '' of the panic . 
The banks did n't fall because individual investors lined up on the street for an old-fashioned bank run . 
They fell because other banks concocted a new sort of bank run . 
This happened , Gorton says , in the `` sale and repossession market '' -LRB- the repo market -RRB- , where large institutional investors deposited big chunks of short-term cash and banks insured that cash by offering collateral -- a senior tranche of securities , say -- in return . 
When the subprime crisis hit , this all fell apart , and fast . 
`` Uncertain about the solvency of counterparties , repo depositors became concerned that the collateral bonds might not be liquid ; if all firms wanted to hold cash a flight to quality then collateral would have to decline in price to find buyers . 
This is the crucial link between the subprime shock and other asset categories . '' 
Here 's the key graph : `` The size of the haircut reflects the credit risk of the borrower and the riskiness of the pledged collateral , '' Gorton writes . 
As the crisis wears on , the system judges the collateral -LRB- in this case , structured debt -RRB- to be riskier and demands much larger haircuts . 
Suddenly the depositor is offering only $ 85 for collateral worth $ 100 in today 's market . 
The reason is simple enough : He 's worried that the collateral will only be worth $ 50 in tomorrow 's market . 
The $ 15 difference is his price on the risk . 
But if the banks ca n't borrow as much off the same pool of collateral , they have to finance their balance sheet some other way . 
Which depresses asset prices . 
And so we 're off to the -LRB- recessionary -RRB- races . 
But the telling bit of that chart , as Steven Pearlstein pointed out to me , is not the area where the line jags upward . 
It 's at the beginning , where it hugs the X axis . 
That 's where the system thinks itself effectively invulnerable : where the people buying structured debt are not asking for any risk premium . 
Where they are n't building in any serious risk of default or decline . 
Where they 're treating collateral almost like cash . 
Like there was no chance any of this could happen . 
Nobody wants to bring up the huge commissions these people were raking in for trading this carp among themselves . 
And somebody thinks we need to pay them these huge bonuses to keep them around . 
They should be paying us back . 
Where they 're treating collateral almost like cash . 
Like there was no chance any of this could happen . '' 
Ezra , it 's not entirely clear from your post whether you realize this , but it 's important to remember that repo trades are margined , typically on a daily basis . 
So if the value falls by more than a certain threshold amount , the `` seller '' has to put up more collateral . 
And of course , even if the collateral defaults or falls to zero , the `` seller '' is still on the hook for the whole cash amount . 
So it 's not strictly true to say that they were n't building in any serious risk of default or decline . 
They were n't building in any serious risk of default or decline combined with the default of the `` buyer '' . 
It 's also worth noting that , at least since the crisis hit , repo trades have been very short term - overnight to a couple of weeks in most cases . 
So even with a subprime RMBS , the chances of it going from AAA to defaulting are pretty damn slim . 
But the essence of the repo market is that it 's supposed to be as riskless as interbank lending gets , hence the large haircuts . 
