Stars performed Jackson 5 hits at the start of the show Stars have been celebrating the life of Michael Jackson in Los Angeles . 
Jackson 's father Joe joined celebrities at the annual Black Entertainment Television -LRB- BET -RRB- Awards show , which was hastily changed to honor the singer . 
It is the first big tribute to Jackson , who collapsed and died last week in the city at the age of 50 . 
His family insisted a second autopsy be carried out on his body because of what they said were `` unanswered questions '' over how he died . 
Speaking on the red carpet , Joe Jackson said he had `` a lot of concerns '' over events surrounding his son 's death . 
Joe Jackson attends award ceremony The Los Angeles County Coroner 's office has ruled out foul play but deferred giving a cause of death until the results of toxicology tests come back . 
Unconfirmed reports suggest the singer had been taking a daily dose of Demerol , a painkiller also widely known as pethidine . 
On Saturday police carried out what they said was an extensive interview with Jackson 's personal doctor , Conrad Murray , who was with the singer when he died . 
A spokeswoman for Dr Murray said he was not a suspect in the case . 
He had `` helped identify the circumstances around the death of the pop icon and clarified some inconsistencies '' , she said . 
The BET awards show was turned into a tribute to Jackson , with major stars re-working their performances in honor of the singer . 
Born : August 29 , 1958 , Gary , Indiana , US Also known as : The King of Pop , Wacko Jacko Biggest hits : I Want You Back , Do n't Stop Til You Get Enough , Billie Jean , Bad , Black or White , Earth Song A Jackson 5 medley was performed and host Jamie Foxx attempted the Moonwalk . 
`` No need to be sad . 
We want to celebrate this black man ... We gonna go through all of Michael Jackson , '' he said . 
Winners praised Jackson as they received their awards . 
`` We all know none of us in this in this room would n't be here for Michael Jackson , '' said Lil Wayne , named best male hip-hop star . 
Late in the show Jackson 's sister Janet took the stage to thank fans for their support . 
`` My entire family wanted to be here tonight , but it was just too painful , so they elected me to be here , '' she said . 
Demand for Jackson 's music has surged since his death on Thursday , with the star dominating sales at music retailers and download sites across the world . 
On Sunday his songs topped Apple 's iTunes download charts in every country except Japan . 
In the UK Jackson scored a posthumous number one album with greatest hits compilation Number Ones , with four other albums reappearing in the top 20 . 
In the singles chart , 43 out of the top 200 singles featured the singer , with Jackson hits accounting for all but one of the new entries in the top 40 . 
