Number Ones last topped the UK album chart in 2003 Michael Jackson has topped the UK album chart and made six new entries in the singles top 40 , six years after his last number one . 
Greatest hits album Number Ones rocketed from 121 to the top spot after a surge in sales since the superstar 's death on Thursday . 
The same album earned Jackson his last number one when first released in 2003 . 
Four of his other hit albums also made a reappearance in the top 20 , the Official Charts Company said . 
Thriller , still the biggest-selling album of all time , raced from 179 to number seven , King of Pop reached 14 , Off The Wall got to 17 and The Essential Michael Jackson came in at number 20 . 
Stores have seen a surge in sales of Jackson 's albums A total of 11 Michael Jackson or Jackson Five albums featured in the top 200 . 
In the singles chart , 43 out of the top 200 singles feature the singer , with Jackson hits accounting for all but one of the new entries in the top 40 . 
Overall , Michael Jackson accounted for over 300,000 record sales across singles and albums in just two days this week . 
Music retailers said that although demand for Jackson 's singles had been high since his death , his extensive back catalogue meant that no one song stood out in sales and he was narrowly denied a posthumous entry in the top 10 . 
Man in the Mirror re-entered the charts at number 11 , nearly 20 years after its original release , while Billie Jean got to 25 , Smooth Criminal to 28 , Beat It reached 30 and Earth Song number 38 . 
2 West Ryder Pauper Lunatic Asylum - Kasabian 3 Sunny Side Up - Paolo Nutini 4 The Circus - Take That 5 The Fame - Lady Gaga Jackson 's return to the charts overshadowed electro-pop newcomer La Roux 's new entry at number one in the singles chart with Bulletproof . 
Kasabian also suffered and was knocked off the number one spot in the albums chart with West Ryder Pauper Lunatic Asylum . 
Gennaro Castaldo , of music retailer HMV , told the BBC the estimated demand for Jackson albums was now 80 times greater than the day before he died . 
`` Once we had the announcement of his death people came into our stores and we had large crowds . 
`` Fortunately we had a lot of stock because we had been preparing for the O2 concerts , but sadly we did n't expect to sell them for this reason . '' 
1 Bulletproof - La Roux 2 When Loves Takes Over - David Guetta ft Kelly Rowland 3 Boom Boom Pow - Black Eyed Peas 4 Paparazzi - Lady GaGa Jackson 's albums have dominated sales at music retailers and download sites across the world since his death . 
Earlier on Sunday his songs topped Apple 's iTunes download charts in every country except Japan . 
The star died after suffering a cardiac arrest at his Los Angeles home on Thursday . 
Police investigating the death said they had carried out an `` extensive interview '' with his doctor , Conrad Murray , who was with the singer at the time . 
A spokeswoman for Dr Murray insisted he was not a suspect in the case and the Los Angeles Police Department said they did not intend to speak to him again . 
Jackson 's family are said to be seeking a second autopsy because they still have questions about his death . 
Born : August 29 , 1958 , Gary , Indiana , US Also known as : The King of Pop , Wacko Jacko Biggest hits : I Want You Back , Do n't Stop Til You Get Enough , Billie Jean , Bad , Black or White , Earth Song The Los Angeles County Coroner 's office said there was no evidence of foul play after an autopsy on Friday , but gave no cause of death . 
It said the results of toxicology tests could take weeks to come back . 
Speaking in an interview with Fox News , Michael Jackson 's father , Joe Jackson , said he doubted that stress over the star 's upcoming residency at London 's O2 Arena was a factor in his death . 
He added he thought his son was going to be larger in death than he was in life , but wished he was around to see the public outpouring of affection since he died . 
