TRIPOLI | Wed Apr 6 , 2011 7:55 pm EDT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya said a U.N.-mandated British air strike had hit its major Sarir oilfield killing three guards and damaging a pipeline connecting the field to a Mediterranean port . 
`` British warplanes have attacked , have carried out an air strike against the Sarir oilfield which killed three oilfield guards and other employees at the field were also injured , '' Deputy Foreign Minister Khaled Kaim told reporters . 
There was no immediate official comment from Britain 's Ministry of Defense on Kaim 's comments about the field . 
Earlier , Muammar Gaddafi 's forces unleashed mortar rounds , tank fire and artillery shells on the western city of Misrata on as a French minister said NATO air strikes in Libya risked getting `` bogged down . '' 
Misrata , Libya 's third city , rose up with other towns against Muammar Gaddafi 's rule in mid-February , and it is now under attack by government troops after a violent crackdown put an end to most protests elsewhere in the west of the country . 
Rebels are angry at what they perceive to be a scaling back of operations since NATO took over an air campaign , following an early onslaught led by the United States , France and Britain that at one stage tilted the war in the rebels ' favor . 
French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said Gaddafi forces were making it harder for alliance pilots to distinguish them from civilians by hunkering down in populated areas . 
`` The situation is unclear . 
There is a risk of getting bogged down , '' he said . 
Juppe told France Info radio he would address the issue of tactics shortly with the head of NATO , adding Misrata 's ordeal `` can not go on . '' 
NATO has accused Gaddafi of using human shields to make targeting harder for its warplanes . 
Civil war in the vast North African desert oil producer ignited in February when Gaddafi tried to crush pro-democracy rallies against his 41-year rule inspired by uprisings that have toppled or endangered other autocrats across the Arab world . 
Stalemate on the battlefield in eastern Libya , defections from Gaddafi 's coterie and the plight of civilians ensnared in fighting or running out of food and fuel has spurred a flurry of diplomacy in pursuit of a peaceful solution . 
But such efforts have made little headway , with the rebels adamant that Gaddafi step down while the government , aware of the limitations of Western intervention , has offered concessions hinting at democratization but insists he stay in power . 
In a blow to rebel finances , Gaddafi forces halted production at rebel-held oilfields in eastern Libya , a rebel spokesman said on Wednesday . 
Rebels want to resume exports to raise revenue for their uprising . 
Oilfields in Misla and the Waha area were hit by Gaddafi 's artillery on Tuesday and Wednesday , spokesman Hafiz Ghoga told reporters in the rebel stronghold of Benghazi . 
The Liberian-registered tanker Equator sailed from Marsa el Hariga , near Tobruk , on Wednesday apparently with the first cargo of crude sold by rebels since the uprising began in February , shipping sources said . 
U.N.-mandated air strikes have so far failed to halt attacks by the Libyan army in besieged Misrata , where residents said snipers on rooftops and tanks firing on populated areas of the city have had a devastating effect . 
`` Gaddafi forces have changed tactics and are using human shields in urban areas , including in Misrata , '' Britain 's Foreign Office said on Wednesday . 
The head of Libya 's rebel army has condemned NATO for its slowness in ordering air strikes to protect civilians , saying the alliance was `` letting the people of Misrata die every day . '' 
Juppe said : `` We 've formally requested that there be no collateral damage for the civilian population ... That obviously makes operations more difficult . '' 
But General Abdel Fattah Younes was adamant that Gaddafi was conducting massacres . 
`` Day by day people are dying . 
Hundreds of families are being wiped off the face of the earth . 
Patience has its limits , '' he said . 
Asked whether he found NATO 's argument that it is trying to prevent civilian casualties convincing he said : `` No , it 's not convincing at all . 
NATO has other means . 
I requested there be combat helicopters like Apaches and Tigers . 
These damage tanks and armored vehicles with exact precision without harming civilians . '' 
Libyan officials deny attacking civilians in Misrata , saying they are fighting armed gangs linked to al Qaeda . 
Accounts from Misrata can not be independently verified as Libyan authorities are not allowing journalists to report freely from there . 
Rebel criticism has put the Western military alliance on the defensive , particularly over Misrata . 
Spokeswoman Carmen Romero said that `` the pace of our operations continues unabated . 
The ambition and the position of our strikes has not changed . '' 
NATO air strikes are targeting Gaddafi 's military infrastructure but only to protect civilians , not to provide close air support for rebels , much to their dismay , as part of a no-fly zone mandated by the U.N. Security Council . 
Relieving the siege of Misrata was a NATO priority but alliance officials conceded that Gaddafi 's army was proving a resourceful and elusive target . 
`` The situation on the ground is constantly evolving . 
Gaddafi 's forces are changing tactics , using civilian vehicles , hiding tanks in cities such as Misrata and using human shields to hide behind , '' Romero told reporters in Brussels . 
Misrata on Wednesday faced another heavy bombardment . 
`` There was firing on three fronts today , the port in the east , the center around Tripoli street and the west of the city . 
Mortars , tank fire , and artillery were used to shell those areas , '' rebel Abdelsalam said by telephone . 
`` NATO needs to either launch a serious operation to take out all the heavy armored vehicles , including tanks ... If they do n't want to do this , they should provide us with weapons to do it ourselves . '' 
Meanwhile , living conditions in Misrata worsened . 
`` People are panicking , especially women , children and old people . 
Most people left their homes for safer areas and found refuge with other families , '' Abdelsalam said , adding : `` No fruit and vegetables have been available in Misrata for over 25 days , bread is also difficult to find . 
People are scared to go out because of the snipers and the indiscriminate shelling . 
The upper-hand is still with Gaddafi 's forces . '' 
On the eastern battlefield , Libyan rebels regained ground in a new advance on the oil port of Brega on Wednesday but also accused NATO of inaction hindering their quest to oust Gaddafi . 
Ill-trained insurgents thrust westwards to the contested port , recovering mostly desert terrain lost in a pell-mell retreat from Gaddafi 's superior firepower the day before . 
Rebels returning to the tiny outpost of al-Arbaeen , midway between Brega and their frontline town of Ajdabiyah , spoke of rocket duels close to Brega 's port as both sides strived to end a ragged stalemate in the civil war . 
Rebel Idriss Abdel Karim complained of a lack of NATO support . '' 
-LRB- Government forces -RRB- are scared of NATO air strikes but NATO does n't bomb anything in the first place , '' he said . 
`` There have been no air strikes . 
We hear the sound , but they do n't bomb anything , '' said Hossam Ahmed , another rebel . 
`` What is NATO waiting for ? 
We have cities being destroyed . 
Ras Lanuf , Bin Jawad , Brega , and Gaddafi is destroying Misrata completely , '' said Ajdabiyah resident Said Emburak . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Younes needs to stop the politics game playing with NATO . 
Let s look at the facts . 
NATO , as requested , has taken command for operations in the Libyan theater . 
Having assumed control it is apparent NATO is interpreting the requirement to protect civilians in a narrower vein to of the coalition ; that is NATO acts where there is an imminent danger to the unarmed civilian population , as opposed to initiating pre-emptive strikes against Qaddafi forces . 
Regrettably much as the West fears and seeks to avoid civilian deaths it is unavoidable . 
The truth is that as a rule , in any conflict civilians will die . 
We continue to lie to ourselves and the public by perpetuating the lie . 
The best that any force can hope to achieve is to limit as far as possible the loss of innocent life . 
Instead of blaming NATO for civilian deaths , Younes needs to question the position of the opposition for the safety of innocent civilians . 
If he truly believes what he professes , that is , that his first priority is the unarmed civilian population , then he as leader of the opposition should call a halt to operations . 
If on the other hand , his aim is free and open representative government for the people , then his needs to recognize the reality of the situation on the ground , and work with NATO to minimize casualties , as opposed to undermining the NATO effort . 
Where is the United States , The Airforce pilots are better trained then other pilots around the world . 
A lot of Pilots around the world apply for trainning in the United States . 
As for the disaster that is going on in Misrata , `` DAFFY '' should n't be allowed to go off into exile . 
That Sick Person -LRB- DAFFY -RRB- should be bought before the World Courts and found guilty , Then Hung by the neck until very dead , the only problem is this faith is an easy way for all the killings over 42 year that him and his sons commited for there amussment . 
Also , Hang his Sons . 
Back to Misrata , United States how long are you going to sit on the side lines while the Blood of Misrata is stainning our Flag . 
Get back into the fight , you know that we can make a differents . 
The USA just ca n't win . 
If we bomb Gaddafi 's military and accidentally hit civilians -LRB- who were allegedly placed near military targets by the enemy -RRB- we are evil and careless ; if we do n't bomb them we are n't helping out even though we `` should '' . 
When we hand over operations to NATO , people complain that they do n't blow stuff up as efficiently as we had been doing . 
Meanwhile , it 's our taxes paying for most of this , during a time when the Federal government is close to shutting down for lack of funds due to them being wasteful and inefficient . 
I am glad that we threw our UN vote towards helping the rebels , but I wish we were less gung-ho about sending our military around the world . 
I have a bad feeling that my taxes are going to pay for rebuilding yet another foreign country instead of paying off our national debt or -LRB- gasp -RRB- improving our own situation . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
