WASHINGTON | Wed Apr 6 , 2011 2:23 am EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A U.S. envoy has arrived in Benghazi to get to know Libya 's opposition and discuss how the United States might help it meet its financial needs , a U.S. official said on Tuesday . 
The visit by Chris Stevens , former deputy chief of mission at the U.S. embassy in Tripoli , reflects a U.S. effort effort to deepen its contacts with the rebels , who are fighting a civil war against Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 's forces . 
NATO-led air power is now maintaining the balance in Libya , preventing Gaddafi 's forces from overrunning the seven-week old revolt but unable for now to hand the rebels outright victory . 
While U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has twice met a top representative of the opposition Transitional National Council , the United States has not followed its allies France and Italy in formally recognizing it . 
U.S. officials say they are still gathering information about the opposition and its objectives , though they have praised its stated commitments to democracy and human rights . 
`` He 's there to get to know the members of the TNC , '' said the U.S. official . 
Stevens will explore what kind of political system the opposition plans to build and how to help it pay its bills given international sanctions on Libya , the official said . 
`` We recognize the TNC will need funds to keep it going and we are looking at ways in which we can assist , '' he said , saying the idea was to look at doing so `` through the international community given the challenges that sanctions pose . '' 
Stevens also plans to discuss humanitarian assistance for the opposition , he said . 
At the Pentagon , Press Secretary Geoff Morrell noted discussions within the U.S. government about the possibility of providing `` non-lethal '' support for the rebels , including medical supplies or personnel protection vehicles . 
Libya is the latest Arab nation this year to witness a popular uprising against an authoritarian leader , following demonstrations that toppled Tunisia 's Zine al-Abedine Ben Ali in January and Egypt 's Hosni Mubarak in February . 
Anti-government protests that began on February 15 descended into civil war after Gaddafi 's forces fired on demonstrators . 
Gaddafi put down uprisings in Libya 's west , leaving the east , including Benghazi , and the city of Misrata in rebel hands . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
