OSLO | Mon Oct 4 , 2010 9:55 am EDT OSLO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Scientists completed a 10-year census of marine life on Monday after finding thousands of exotic new species in a project that will help assess threats to the oceans ranging from climate change to BP 's oil spill . 
The $ 650 million international census , by 2,700 experts in 80 nations , discovered creatures such as a hairy-clawed `` yeti crab , '' luminous fish in the sunless depths , a shrimp thought extinct in Jurassic times and a 7-meter -LRB- 23 ft -RRB- long squid . 
But the project -LRB- www.coml.org -RRB- , which reckoned most types of creatures dodged the census and were still to be found , also documented overfishing of cod or tuna , hazards from oil and other pollution and impacts of global warming . 
`` The news about the oceans is both very good and very bad , '' said Paul Snelgrove , of Memorial University in Canada , who compiled the final report of a census that found more life than expected from the Arctic Ocean to volcanic vents on the seabed . 
It raised the estimate of known marine animals and plants bigger than microbes , from worms to blue whales , to nearly 250,000 from 230,000 . 
And it estimated that far more , or 750,000 other species , were still to be found . 
Scientists said the biggest gaps were in still unexplored tracts of the Arctic , Antarctic and eastern Pacific oceans . 
And much of the deep ocean floor had barely been sampled . 
`` There is an enormous opportunity , '' said Jesse Ausubel , a co-founder of the census and program director at the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation . 
`` There are three species out there to be discovered for every one we know . '' 
The census itself found more than 6,000 potentially new species , led in numbers by crustaceans and molluscs , and made formal descriptions of more than 1,200 of them . 
Among extremes , scientists found a meter-long tube worm an estimated 600 years old , tracked a sooty shearwater bird flying 64,000 km -LRB- 40,000 miles -RRB- in the longest known annual migration and recorded a sailfish swimming at 110 kph -LRB- 69 mph -RRB- . 
Among spinoffs , a 2009 review of the Gulf of Mexico found 8,332 species from fish to mammals in the area hit by BP 's deep water blowout in April 2010 , the worst spill in U.S. history . 
`` It 's become one of the most valuable potential contributions of the census , '' Ausubel said of the Gulf survey . 
Checking the state of the Gulf against the public database would help understand damage -- and costs of BP 's cleanup . 
Two members of a five-strong commission named by U.S. President Barack Obama to investigate the spill - Terry Garcia and Donald Boesch -- had worked on the census . 
In the longer term , monitoring the seas may help understand threats such as climate change and a related acidification of the oceans . 
Examination of the makeup of some of the creatures and plants might yield medical breakthroughs . 
A related project had created a `` barcode of life , '' inspired by the black and white lines on products in supermarkets , that allows scientists to identify species with a quick genetic test . 
That has already exposed mislabeling of sushi in New York City and could have wide economic impact in tracking fraud in fish exports . 
And the scientists said the census had successfully focused public attention on the beauty and variety of marine life and could help rally efforts to safeguard the seas . 
Artists have been inspired by some creatures -- images of the yeti crab , found off Easter Island , has even been emblazoned on skateboards , Snelgrove said . 
`` These critters are tremendous ambassadors for us , '' he added . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
