\* Risk management , diversification is key \* Made money during May 5 crash \* Risk taking in industry to fall By Simon Falush and Dmitry Zhdannikov LONDON , Sept 1 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Deutsche Bank -LRB- DBKGn . 
DE -RRB- expects further growth in its commodities business , including oil , its global head of the asset class told Reuters after cementing the bank among the biggest players in the last five years . 
David Silbert , a U.S. gas trader in the 1990s , who joined Deutsche in 2007 from Wall Street giant Merrill Lynch -LRB- BAC . 
N -RRB- , said he saw tight risk control and diversified portfolios in all commodities as crucial elements of strong performance . 
We are very disciplined around position management In the first quarter , we like most firms , did very well , '' the Deutsche Global Head of Commodities said from his office in the heart of the City of London 's financial district . 
`` I understand many did n't share our success in Q2 , however . 
The market gave us plenty of opportunity to take profit on Q1 risk and initiate new business from many different streams , '' Silbert said . 
Deutsche has said it had its best ever second quarter in commodities trading in April-June 2011 , helping offset an otherwise mixed performance in its fixed-income , credit and commodities division -LRB- FICC -RRB- . 
FICC posted revenues of 2.3 billion euros -LRB- $ 3.3 billion -RRB- , up 8 percent from last year but down 37 percent quarter-on-quarter . 
-LRB- ID : nN1E76P24G -RRB- Deutsche 's results came in sharp contrast to rivals including commodities trading heavyweights Goldman Sachs -LRB- GS . 
N -RRB- , Barclays -LRB- BARC . 
L -RRB- and Morgan Stanley -LRB- MS. N -RRB- , which reported relatively weak performances in commodities divisions in the second quarter -LRB- ID : nL6E7J228A -RRB- The second quarter was particularly volatile , as a more than $ 10 per barrel dive in oil prices on May 5 caught most players unprepared . 
Neither were many ready for an oil price plunge when Western nations released emergency stocks in June . 
What 's more , corn prices tumbled 23 percent in the second half of June , while silver crashed by 30 percent after briefly touching a record high in early May . 
`` Our model is not dependent on huge volatility or having huge directional moves , '' said Silbert , who added that the bank had made profit in commodities trading even on May 5 during the steep crash . 
Silbert said Deutsche has considerably grown in size since he joined from Merrill and by trading revenues the bank was now among the top three globally . 
Industry analysts and market participants estimate Goldman and Morgan hold the top spots by commodities trading revenues , followed by Deutsche , J.P. Morgan and Barclays . 
Silbert said one of the reasons behind the success was his team of experienced traders . 
It helps having leaders with long histories in the markets in which they operate , all of whom are veterans of volatility caused by extreme events . 
Five to 10 ten years does not make a veteran . 
Silbert said efforts by governments to impose greater regulatory oversight on the commodities trading business would lead to greater transparency but was unlikely to have a very large impact on the dynamics of trading . 
Risk taking in commodities may fall , but not because of regulations but because many have not deployed risk successfully as of late . 
Republication or redistribution of Reuters content , including by caching , framing , or similar means , is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters . 
Reuters and the Reuters sphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group of companies around the world . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
