June 30 : Hurricane Alex is seen lashing the Mexico coastline , south of Brownsville , Texas . 
NOAA Alex may have cooled off , but hurricane season is just starting to heat up in the Gulf of Mexico . 
And absurdly warm oceans combined with still air mean storms will continue . 
Could Bonnie , Colin , Danielle and the rest of the forthcoming storms spell disaster for BP 's oil spill ? 
Three major forecasts from the National Hurricane Center -LRB- NHC -RRB- , Accuweather and Colorado State have all called for dramatic hurricane seasons this year . 
Those predictions are n't particularly meaningful , oddly enough -- and that comes straight from the forecasters themselves . 
`` The seasonal forecasts are of interest to a lot of people , but they 're not terribly accurate , '' admitted James Franklin , branch chief of the NHC 's Hurricane Specialists Unit . 
And not particularly meaningful , he says . 
`` Even if we did do a real good job hitting it year after year , it does n't give you a good indication of where storms are going to go . '' 
Still , the guidance is useful . 
And if the first Atlantic hurricane of the season is just a taste of the season to come , we 're in for a bumpy -- and lengthy -- season . 
So what causes hurricanes , and why is this season so dangerous ? 
`` The basic idea of a hurricane is one of a heat engine , '' Franklin told FoxNews.com . 
It converts the energy of the ocean into gale force winds . 
And this year , the ocean has far more energy than usual . 
When waters are above about 80 degrees , conditions are ripe for hurricanes , and they can get much hotter in the tropics . 
`` Waters in the tropical Atlantic between Africa and the Lesser Antilles are just about as warm as we 've ever seen them , '' he said . 
In a recent update to their annual forecast , Colorado State 's Philip J. Klotzbach and William M. Gray describe them as `` running at near-record warm levels . '' 
For a hurricane to be created , some pre-existing disturbance near Africa , a low-pressure system for example , forms the spark from which the hurricane will ignite . 
That tropical weakness moves out into the balmy waters of the Atlantic and gasses up . 
The second big factor is wind . 
Strong winds in the upper air disperse tropical waves , disrupting hurricane formation and scattering pent-up heat . 
The NHC is predicting much more favorable wind patterns this year than last year -- La Nina or neutral conditions , as opposed to the El Nino conditions of strong winds from last year . 
`` In order to make a hurricane go , the heat coming from the ocean and released in a rising motion in the atmosphere has to be concentrated in one place . 
If winds in the atmosphere are blowing in different directions , that disperses heat . '' 
So having uniform winds is important -- and a rare event . 
Dry air also means water vapor ca n't condense , clouds do n't gather , rain does n't fall and hurricanes do n't form . 
A third factor is the cyclical nature of the weather . 
Hurricane activity tends to run in long , 20 - to 30-year cycles . 
Since 1995 , we 've been in a cycle of increased activity . 
Alex did n't move over the Gulf oil spill directly , so scientists and meteorologists were unable to directly observe the effects of the weather on the oil . 
But Franklin thinks we 'll see winds dispersing the oil -- something BP has actively tried to do itself . 
In that sense , hurricane season may be a blessing for the oil crisis . 
`` If the storm tracks to the west of the oil , there is the potential that the counter-clockwise circulation of the hurricane could drive some of the oil further toward the U.S. Gulf Coast . 
Alternatively , a storm tracking to the east of the oil could push the oil further offshore . 
But , little is understood about the interaction of tropical cyclones and oil , '' the scientists write . 
Fortunately , there 's no evidence to suggest storms will suck the crude into the clouds , creating a foul rain of oil on coasts . 
But weather forecasters do n't know enough at present to really predict what will happen . 
And Franklin is optimistic that BP technicians will cap the well and clean the oil before what-ifs turn into learning situations . 
`` Hopefully we wo n't learn anything about it . '' 
