June 28 : About three hundred BP contract workers tend to the beaches in Biloxi , Miss. , to remove tar balls that had washed ashore over the weekend . 
-LRB- AP -RRB- The Obama appointee managing BP 's oil spill disaster fund said Wednesday there 's `` not enough money in the world '' to pay all claims and suggested homeowners with plunging property values could lose out . 
And in another blow to the oil giant , animal welfare groups Wednesday sued BP for burning alive endangered sea turtles as part of its efforts to get rid of the leaking oil . 
The `` not enough money '' warning from prominent U.S. lawyer Kenneth Feinberg came as Hurricane Alex disrupted clean-up operations in the Gulf of Mexico and pushed oil deeper into fragile coastal wetlands and once-pristine beaches . 
About 423 miles -LRB- 681 kilometers -RRB- of American shorelines have now been oiled -- nearly double the amount sullied just two days earlier -- as oil continues to gush into the sea at an alarming rate 10 weeks into the worst environmental disaster in U.S. history . 
Feinberg , tapped by President Barack Obama to administer the $ 20 billion claims fund , insisted BP will `` pay every eligible claim , '' but cautioned that many perceived damages may not qualify . 
`` I use that famous example of a restaurant in Boston that says , ' I ca n't get shrimp from Louisiana , and my menu suffers and my business is off , ' '' Feinberg told the House of Representatives Committee on Small Business . 
`` Well , no law is going to recognize that claim . '' 
Feinberg said he was still sorting out how to deal with indirect claims like hotels that lose bookings because tourists think the beaches are covered in oil , or people who see their property values decline but live several blocks away from an oiled beach . 
`` There 's no question that the property value has diminished as a result of the spill . 
That does n't mean that every property is entitled to compensation , '' he said , adding : `` There 's not enough money in the world to pay everybody who 'd like to have money . '' 
Feinberg , who headed a compensation fund for victims of the September 11 attacks , assured lawmakers the fund would be `` totally independent '' and said BP had agreed to top up the escrow account as needed to meet proper claims . 
The British energy giant has already disbursed more than $ 130 million in emergency payments to fishermen and others affected by the slick . 
Feinberg said lump sum payments would be offered to claimants once the true extent of the damage is assessed . 
`` It sure would help if the oil would stop , '' he told the committee . 
Meanwhile the Animal Welfare Institute -LRB- AWI -RRB- and other groups sued BP over the turtles ' deaths and asked a federal court to stop the company 's `` controlled burns . '' 
`` It is horrifying that these innocent creatures whose habitat has already been devastated by the oil spill are now being burned alive , '' AWI President Cathy Liss told the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana . 
The lawsuit filed by AWI , Center for Biological Diversity , Turtle Island Restoration Network and Animal Legal Defense Fund said BP was violating the Endangered Species Act and other laws with their `` controlled burns '' in the Gulf of Mexico . 
They asked the court for a temporary restraining order to stop all burning activities `` until ... mechanisms are implemented that will prevent any additional sea turtles from being burned alive . '' 
Also on Wednesday , Obama ordered the development of a long-term plan to `` restore the unique beauty and bounty '' of the Gulf Coast . 
The Long-Term Gulf Restoration Support Plan aims to `` ensure economic recovery , community planning , science-based restoration of the ecosystem and environment , public health and safety efforts , and support of individuals and businesses who suffered losses due to the spill , '' a White House memo said . 
An estimated 35,000 to 60,000 barrels of oil a day have been gushing out of the ruptured well since the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig sank on April 22 some 50 miles off the coast of Louisiana . 
Efforts to permanently plug the leak by drilling relief wells continued despite the rough seas which had forced a halt to skimming operations off the coasts of Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama and Florida . 
Two containment ships continued to capture the oil at a rate of about 25,000 barrels per day despite seven-foot -LRB- two-meter -RRB- swells . 
But the rough seas delayed the deployment of a third ship aimed at doubling the containment capacity . 
And officials warned that drilling and containment will be suspended for about 14 days if the spill zone is threatened by a more direct storm hit . 
That could delay the completion of the wells until at least September and would dump an additional 490,000 to 840,000 barrels of extra oil into the Gulf . 
Senior government officials were set to meet with Obama Thursday to discuss whether a new containment system should be installed in the interim . 
That system would further raise capacity , but would require the current cap to be removed and involve careful manipulation some 5,000 feet -LRB- 1,500 meters -RRB- below the surface . 
