Apr. 21 : Fire boat crews battle the blazing remnants of the offshore oil rig Deepwater Horizon . 
Coast Guard via AP June 30 : Oily waves come ashore in Orange Beach , Ala. . 
AP NEW ORLEANS -- BP 's massive oil spill became the largest ever in the Gulf of Mexico on Thursday based on the highest of the federal government 's estimates , an ominous record that underscores the oil giant 's dire need to halt the gusher . 
The oil that 's spewed for two and a half months from a blown-out well a mile under the sea hit the 140.6 million gallon mark , eclipsing the record-setting , 140-million-gallon Ixtoc I spill off Mexico 's coast from 1979 to 1980 . 
Even by the lower end of the government 's estimates , at least 71.7 million gallons are in the Gulf . 
The growing total is crucial to track , in part because London-based BP PLC is likely to be fined per gallon spilled , said Larry McKinney , director of Texas A&M University at Corpus Christi 's Gulf of Mexico research institute . 
`` It 's an important number to know because it has an impact on restoration and recovery , '' McKinney said . 
The oil calculation is based on the higher end of the government 's range of barrels leaked per day , minus the amount BP says it has collected from the blown-out well using two containment systems . 
BP collected a smaller amount of oil than usual on Wednesday , about 969,000 gallons . 
Measuring the spill helps scientists figure out where the missing oil is , hidden below the water surface with some even stuck to the seafloor . 
Oil not at the surface damages different parts of the ecosystem . 
`` It 's a mind-boggling number any way you cut it , '' said Ed Overton , a Louisiana State University environmental studies professor who consults for the federal government on oil spills . 
`` It 'll be well beyond Ixtoc by the time it 's finished . '' 
And passing Ixtoc just before the July Fourth weekend , a time of normally booming tourism , is bitter timing , he said . 
The BP spill , which began after the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig explosion killed 11 workers April 20 , is also the largest spill ever recorded offshore during peacetime . 
But it 's not the biggest in history . 
That happened when Iraqi forces opened valves at a terminal and dumped as much as 336 million gallons of oil in 1991 during the Persian Gulf war , according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . 
Initial estimates put that spill at about 460 million gallons , but government estimates later found it to be smaller . 
As the Gulf gusher continued spewing , the remnants of Hurricane Alex whipped oil-filled waves onto the Gulf Coast 's once-white beaches . 
The government has pinned its latest cleanup hopes on a huge new piece of equipment : the world 's largest oil-skimming vessel , which arrived Wednesday . 
Officials hope the ship can scoop up to 21 million gallons of oil-fouled water a day . 
Dubbed the `` A Whale , '' the Taiwanese-flagged former tanker spans the length of 31\/2 football fields and is 10 stories high . 
It just emerged from an extensive retrofitting to prepare it specifically for the Gulf . 
`` It is absolutely gigantic . 
It 's unbelievable , '' said Overton , who saw the ship last week in Norfolk , Va. . 
The vessel looks like a typical tanker , but it takes in contaminated water through 12 vents on either side of the bow . 
The oil is then supposed to be separated from the water and transferred to another vessel . 
The water is channeled back into the sea . 
But the ship 's never been tested , and many questions remain about how it will operate . 
For instance , the seawater retains trace amounts of oil , even after getting filtered , so the Environmental Protection Agency will have to sign off on allowing the treated water back into the Gulf . 
`` This is a no-brainer , '' Overton said . 
`` You 're bringing in really dirty , oily water and you 're putting back much cleaner water . '' 
The Coast Guard will have the final say in whether the vessel can operate in the Gulf . 
The owner , shipping firm TMT Group , will have to come to separate terms with BP , which is paying for the cleanup . 
`` I do n't know whether it 's going to work or not , but it certainly needs to be given the opportunity , '' Overton said . 
Meanwhile along parts of the Gulf , red flags snapped in strong gusts , warning people to stay out of the water , and long stretches of beach were stained brown from tar balls and crude oil that had been pushed as far as 60 yards from the water . 
Hurricane Alex churned up rough seas as it plowed across the Gulf , dealing a tough setback to cleanup operations . 
It made landfall along a relatively unpopulated stretch of coast in Mexico 's northern Tamaulipas state late Wednesday , spawning tornadoes in nearby Texas and forcing evacuations in both countries . 
Alex weakened to a tropical storm Thursday morning as it moved across Mexico . 
Although skimming operations and the laying of oil-corralling booms were halted across the Gulf , vessels that collect and burn oil and gas at the site of the explosion were still operating . 
Efforts to drill relief wells that experts hope will stop the leak also continued unabated . 
In Florida , lumps of tar the size of dinner plates filled a large swath of beach east of Pensacola after rough waves tossed the mess onto shore . 
Streaks of the rust-red oil could be seen in the waves off Pensacola Beach as cleanup crews worked in the rough weather to prepare the beach for the holiday weekend . 
In Grand Isle , La. , heavy bands of rain pounded down , keeping cleanup crews off the water and tossing carefully laid boom around . 
However , oil had stayed out of the passes . 
`` All this wave action is breaking up the oil very quickly , '' Coast Guard Cmdr. Randal S. Ogrydziak said . 
`` Mother Nature is doing what she does best , putting things back in order . '' 
Natural microbes in the water were also working on the spill . 
The result was a white substance that looked like mayonnaise , that washed up on some spots along the Grand Isle beach . 
`` People will be fishing here again , '' Ogrydziak said . 
`` It may take a while , but people may be surprised that it 's not taking as long as they thought . 
Look at the -LRB- Ixtoc -RRB- oil spill in Mexico . 
It was massive and now people are back to using those waters . '' 
