Contract employees for Miller Environmental Services scrub containment boom the old fashioned way in Grand Isle , La. , Thursday Aug. 5 , 2010 . 
A more effective machine is in its second week of use but they are still using workers to scrub to get as much done as quickly as possible . 
-LRB- AP Photo\/Kerry Maloney -RRB- Kerry Maloney Workers double-check X-Tex fencing in the marsh along Campbell Outside Bayou near the Pearl River in Hancock County , Miss. , on Friday , July 23 , 2010 . 
Put in place by contractor Environmental Protection Systems , the fencing is being used as a containment to protect Mississippi marsh areas and shorelines from the oil spill in the Gulf . 
Workers along the Mississippi Gulf Coast are securing oil spill protection systems ahead of the expected arrival of Tropical Storm Bonnie . 
-LRB- AP Photo\/The Sun Herald , James Edward Bates -RRB- TV OUT ; ONLINE OUT ; MANDATORY CREDIT : MISSISSIPPI PRESS OUT NEW ORLEANS -- BP PLC closed the books on a defining week in an epic battle to defeat its ruptured oil well , with exhausted engineers forcing the surging crude underground with a torrent of mud and cement , preparing to make a final push to plug it from the bottom . 
More than three months after the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded and triggered one of the world 's worst oil spills , authorities weighed how to gather evidence from the mile-deep waters to help investigators determine what happened -- and who could be at fault . 
Even retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , who was brought in by the government to oversee the spill response amid poorly received efforts by the British petroleum giant , began looking ahead to a day when he could hang up his hat . 
He told The Associated Press in an interview Friday that although he 's still signed up `` for the foreseeable future , '' he 's had preliminary discussions with Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano about what 's next for him . 
`` I 'll be the national incident commander until they do n't have one anymore , '' he said , reflecting on the frenetic pace he 's kept in the past few weeks not only by monitoring containment and cleanup progress , but keeping the media and the public updated . 
`` You have to pace yourself , '' he said . 
`` You have to know when you can rest , take a nap . 
I try to achieve an economy of effort . 
It 's obviously a fast pace and there are some long hours . '' 
There was heartening news from other quarters , too , as scientists released a report saying that only about one-quarter of the nearly 207 million gallons of oil that leaked into the Gulf of Mexico is still oozing around the sea . 
Even the amount left , though , would still rank among the nation 's worst spills . 
BP left open the possibility that it could someday drill a new path into the same undersea reservoir of oil , still believed to hold nearly $ 4 billion worth of crude . 
Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles said that BP had n't considered the option yet but that `` we 're going to have to think about what to do with that at some point . '' 
The prospect did n't sit well with Gulf Coast residents and officials . 
`` We ca n't trust 'em , '' said Billy Nungesser , president of Plaquemines Parish in coastal Louisiana , adding that federal authorities should assign special overseers to track BP every step of the way . 
`` We ca n't trust them to clean it up , we ca n't trust them to dig a new well , '' he said . 
`` There 's a lot of mistrust . 
We do n't have any confidence in BP . '' 
The Interior Department cautioned that the blown-out well , a relief well and a backup being drilled to help stop the leak would not themselves be used to pump new oil out of the reservoir . 
`` The well is almost dead . 
Under no circumstances are we going to allow them to reopen the well to extract oil and gas , '' spokeswoman Kendra Barkoff said . 
With the crisis appearing to wind down , BP shuffled its leadership . 
Suttles , who spent more than three months managing the company 's response to the spill , is returning to his regular job in Houston . 
Mike Utsler , a company vice president , will replace him . 
The frenzied week started with BP preparing for the so-called `` static kill , '' the company 's most successful attempt yet to kill the blown-out well for good . 
Crews started pumping mud down the throat of the well on Tuesday , and by Friday engineers were waiting for cement sealing the oil in its underground reservoir to harden . 
Contributing to this report were Associated Press writers Jason Dearen and Jeffrey Collins in New Orleans . 
