The swine flu crisis lays bare the meat industry 's monstrous power The Mexico swine flu outbreak should alert us to a highly globalised industry with global political clout The Mexican swine flu , a genetic chimera probably conceived in the faecal mire of an industrial pigsty , suddenly threatens to give the whole world a fever . 
The initial outbreaks across North America reveal an infection already traveling at higher velocity than did the last official pandemic strain , the 1968 Hong Kong flu . 
Stealing the limelight from our officially appointed assassin , H5N1 , this porcine virus is a threat of unknown magnitude . 
It seems less lethal than Sars in 2003 , but as an influenza it may be more durable than Sars . 
Given that domesticated seasonal type-A influenzas kill as many one million people a year , even a modest increment of virulence , especially if combined with high incidence , could produce carnage equivalent to a major war . 
Meanwhile , one of its first victims has been the consoling faith , long preached by the World Health Organisation , that pandemics can be contained by the rapid responses of medical bureaucracies , independent of the quality of local public health . 
Since the initial H5N1 deaths in Hong Kong in 1997 , the WHO , with the support of most national health services , has promoted a strategy focused on the identification and isolation of a pandemic strain within its local radius of outbreak , followed by a thorough dousing of the population with antivirals and -LRB- if available -RRB- vaccine . 
An army of sceptics has contested this viral counter-insurgency approach , pointing out that microbes can now fly around the world -LRB- quite literally in the case of avian flu -RRB- faster than WHO or local officials can react to the original outbreak . 
They also pointed to the primitive , often non-existent surveillance of the interface between human and animal diseases . 
But the mythology of bold , preemptive -LRB- and cheap -RRB- intervention against avian flu has been invaluable to the cause of rich countries , like the US and UK , who prefer to invest in their own biological Maginot lines rather than dramatically increasing aid to epidemic frontlines overseas , as well as to big pharma , which has battled developing-world demands for the generic , public manufacture of critical antivirals like Roche 's Tamiflu . 
The swine flu may prove that the WHO\/Centres for Disease Control version of pandemic preparedness without massive new investment in surveillance , scientific and regulatory infrastructure , basic public health , and global access to lifeline drugs belongs to the same class of Ponzified risk management as Madoff securities . 
It is not so much that the pandemic warning system has failed as it simply does n't exist , even in North America and the EU . 
Perhaps it is not surprising that Mexico lacks both capacity and political will to monitor livestock diseases , but the situation is hardly better north of the border , where surveillance is a failed patchwork of state jurisdictions , and corporate livestock producers treat health regulations with the same contempt with which they deal with workers and animals . 
Similarly , a decade of urgent warnings by scientists has failed to ensure the transfer of sophisticated viral assay technology to the countries in the direct path of likely pandemics . 
Mexico has world-famous disease experts , but it had to send swabs to a Winnipeg lab in order to ID the strain 's genome . 
Almost a week was lost as a consequence . 
But no one was less alert than the disease controllers in Atlanta . 
According to the Washington Post , the CDC did not learn about the outbreak until six days after Mexico had begun to impose emergency measures . 
There should be no excuses . 
The paradox of this swine flu panic is that , while totally unexpected , it was accurately predicted . 
Six years ago , Science dedicated a major story to evidence that `` after years of stability , the North American swine flu virus has jumped onto an evolutionary fasttrack '' . 
Since its identification during the Great Depression , H1N1 swine flu had only drifted slightly from its original genome . 
Then in 1998 a highly pathogenic strain began to decimate sows on a farm in North Carolina and new , more virulent versions began to appear almost yearly , including a variant of H1N1 that contained the internal genes of H3N2 -LRB- the other type-A flu circulating among humans -RRB- . 
Researchers interviewed by Science worried that one of these hybrids might become a human flu -LRB- both the 1957 and 1968 pandemics are believed to have originated from the mixing of bird and human viruses inside pigs -RRB- , and urged the creation of an official surveillance system for swine flu : an admonition , of course , that went unheeded in a Washington prepared to throw away billions on bioterrorism fantasies . 
But what caused this acceleration of swine flu evolution ? 
Virologists have long believed that the intensive agricultural system of southern China is the principal engine of influenza mutation : both seasonal `` drift '' and episodic genomic `` shift '' . 
But the corporate industrialisation of livestock production has broken China 's natural monopoly on influenza evolution . 
Animal husbandry in recent decades has been transformed into something that more closely resembles the petrochemical industry than the happy family farm depicted in school readers . 
In 1965 , for instance , there were 53m US hogs on more than 1m farms ; today , 65m hogs are concentrated in 65,000 facilities . 
This has been a transition from old-fashioned pig pens to vast excremental hells , containing tens of thousands of animals with weakened immune systems suffocating in heat and manure while exchanging pathogens at blinding velocity with their fellow inmates . 
Last year a commission convened by the Pew Research Center issued a report on `` industrial farm animal production '' that underscored the acute danger that `` the continual cycling of viruses in large herds or flocks -LRB- will -RRB- increase opportunities for the generation of novel virus through mutation or recombinant events that could result in more efficient human to human transmission . '' 
The commission also warned that promiscuous antibiotic use in hog factories -LRB- cheaper than humane environments -RRB- was sponsoring the rise of resistant staph infections , while sewage spills were producing outbreaks of E coli and pfiesteria -LRB- the protozoan that has killed 1bn fish in Carolina estuaries and made ill dozens of fishermen -RRB- . 
Any amelioration of this new pathogen ecology would have to confront the monstrous power of livestock conglomerates such as Smithfield Farms -LRB- pork and beef -RRB- and Tyson -LRB- chickens -RRB- . 
The commission reported systemic obstruction of their investigation by corporations , including blatant threats to withhold funding from cooperative researchers . 
This is a highly globalised industry with global political clout . 
Just as Bangkok-based chicken giant Charoen Pokphand was able to suppress enquiries into its role in the spread of bird flu in southeast Asia , so it is likely that the forensic epidemiology of the swine flu outbreak will pound its head against the corporate stonewall of the pork industry . 
This is not to say that a smoking gun will never be found : there is already gossip in the Mexican press about an influenza epicentre around a huge Smithfield subsidiary in Veracruz state . 
But what matters more -LRB- especially given the continued threat of H5N1 -RRB- is the larger configuration : the WHO 's failed pandemic strategy , the further decline of world public health , the stranglehold of big pharma over lifeline medicines , and the planetary catastrophe of industrialised and ecologically unhinged livestock production . 
Time for a ban . 
