After last week 's exploration of the Middlesbrough Evening Gazette 's postcode mini-websites , my appetite for tiny new techno-local-news innovation in the North knows no bounds . 
This week I 've been exploring the community pages of the Yorkshire Evening Post , my doorstep paper here in Leeds , which is zero-ing in like the Gazette on the city 's constituent parts . 
Instead of a postcode map , they have a slightly more old-fashioned list of 19 `` community websites '' from Kippax to Calverley but the point and content are much the same . 
If you fancy a change of life , for example , the Crossgates page announces the sale of the Red Lion pub , familiar to anyone who uses the York Road , which comes , unusually , with nearly two acres of woodland . 
An immigration official wearing a surgical mask stands at Juan Santameria international airport in Cost Rica . 
Photograph : Juan Carlos Ulate\/Reuters Live blog : The WHO has raised its pandemic alert level as Mexico is shut down for five days and new cases of swine flu have been confirmed in Peru and Switzerland . 
Follow the latest updates and reactions to the spread of the virus Send us your pictures of masked , flu-phobic commuters An electron micrograph of the A H1N1 swine influenza virus . 
Photograph : Centres for Disease Control\/Reuters Live blog : A 23-month-old child has become the first victim of the outbreak outside Mexico , as three more cases were confirmed in the UK . 
Follow the latest updates and reactions to the spread of the virus Travellers wearing masks due to the swine flu outbreak in Mexico . 
Photograph : KPA\/Zuma\/Rex Live blog : The British couple being treated for swine flu have been named , as fears of a pandemic increases and the death toll in Mexico continues to rise . 
Follow the latest updates on the spread of the virus People wearing surgical masks as a precaution against infection , wait for a subway train in Mexico City . 
Photograph : Miguel Tovar\/AP Live blog : As the death toll from swine flu in Mexico rises to more than 100 people , governments around the world are on high alert for a possible flu pandemic . 
Follow the latest updates on the spread of the virus 
