What is swine flu ? 
Swine influenza is a highly contagious disease that causes respiratory illness in pigs . 
Most outbreaks happen on farms in late autumn and winter , when the virus kills around 1 % to 4 % of the animals it infects . 
The disease is caused by a type A influenza virus , and the new strain belongs to the most common subtype , known as H1N1 . 
Experts are particularly anxious about flu viruses that spread from pigs to humans , because the animals can harbor several flu viruses at once , which can swap genes around and become more virulent . 
Influenza viruses are made up of only eight genes . 
The new strain has six genes from a swine flu virus known to be circulating in North America , but this virus is itself a mixture of human , pig and avian flu viruses . 
The other two genes come from a swine virus found in European and Asian pigs . 
How do humans catch it ? 
Swine flu spreads to people in two ways . 
They contract the virus after being in contact with infected pigs or areas where the pigs have been , or they catch it from an infected person . 
The disease spreads in the same way as human flu , through coughs and sneezes , or by touching a contaminated surface and then touching the nose or mouth . 
The latest outbreak appears to have started in Mexico City . 
Swine flu viruses rarely infect humans , but there have been sporadic cases in the past . 
In most cases , the infection makes people unwell but is not life-threatening . 
In 1976 , a swine flu outbreak in New Jersey made more than 200 people seriously ill and killed one . 
The virus is thought to have circulated for a month before disappearing . 
In 1988 , a pregnant 32-year-old woman in Wisconsin died in hospital after becoming infected . 
Between 2005 and January 2009 , there were 12 human cases of swine flu in America , but none were fatal . 
The infection can not be spread by eating pork or pork products . 
The symptoms of swine flu are similar to normal flu , and include fever , cough , sore throat , body aches , chills and fatigue . 
Some patients have also reported diarrhoea and vomiting . 
In very young children , the warning signs include fast or troubled breathing , a bluish skin tone , a failure to interact with others , and being highly irritable . 
As with seasonal flu , swine flu varies in severity , with the worst cases leading to fatal pneumonia and respiratory failure . 
The new strain seems to be more lethal to those in the 25 to 45 age range - an ominous sign , as this was a hallmark of the Spanish 1918 flu pandemic that killed tens of millions worldwide . 
Younger people were probably hit harder by the 1918 flu virus because their immune systems over-reacted . 
Why is it spreading so fast ? 
This is a key question the World Health Organisation needs to answer . 
So far , the virus is not well enough understood to know why it is so transmissible and virulent . 
Over the next few days , epidemiologists will use information from the outbreak to work out if a global pandemic is likely . 
Further tests are needed to confirm whether the fatalities in Mexico were caused by the same virus that is causing more mild illness in America and other countries . 
What steps are being taken to contain the outbreak ? 
Most experts think it is impossible to contain the virus now it has spread from Mexico to the US and New Zealand and probably other countries . 
In Mexico , officials have banned the traditional greetings of handshakes and kisses on the cheek , barred spectators from football matches , closed museums and advised churchgoers to stay at home in an attempt to halt the spread of the disease . 
Other countries have begun screening air travellers for the disease and have set up quarantines for people who might be infected . 
In Britain , health officials have stepped up surveillance for the infection . 
The chief medical officer , Liam Donaldson , issued an alert to hospitals outlining the symptoms to look for , and what tests should be done if doctors suspect they have an infected patient . 
If the virus arrives in Britain , doctors will use the government 's # 500m stockpile of tamiflu anti-viral drugs to treat patients and protect frontline hospital staff . 
Is there a vaccine for swine flu ? 
The seasonal flu jab given to the elderly over the winter months works well against human flu viruses , but swine flu is so different , the vaccine is unlikely to be effective . 
Any decision to produce fresh vaccine for the swine flu virus will be made by the World Health Organisation . 
Making enough for Britain alone could take four to six months , an expert at the Health Protection Agency said . 
South Park nails it . 
