Professionals may be better prepared to deal with a pandemic . 
But it does n't mean we are safe For the first time since 1976 , a strain of influenza virus - apparently related to the 1918-19 pandemic - has infected the public . 
More than 1,000 cases have been reported in Mexico , with over 80 deaths . 
And the disease has now spread to several areas within the United States and to New Zealand . 
The virus has been identified by the American Centres for Disease Control and Prevention -LRB- CDC -RRB- as type H1N1 , containing a mixture of swine , avian and human genetic material . 
This outbreak of influenza is viewed with alarm by public health workers . 
First , because the earlier pandemic was so deadly ; second , because this is the first clear demonstration of human-to-human spread of the infection ; and third , because it apparently started its spread after the normal '' flu season '' in the northern hemisphere . 
However , the world may be much better prepared to cope with this outbreak than before . 
One reason is that an earlier swine flu outbreak in the US , in 1976 , found both the political and medical\/public health worlds unprepared to cope with what appeared to be a serious threat of pandemic spread . 
Fortunately , the outbreak never came , but many of the lessons of that era were well learned - especially by the public health community . 
Thus , when avian flu seemed to threaten the world in recent years , both national public health bureaus around the world and the World Health Organisation organised themselves for action and began to stockpile anti-flu drugs and to ramp up the facilities for vaccine formation . 
These efforts have facilitated the early response measures for the current swine flu threat . 
Both the CDC and the WHO have mobilised to assist the Mexicans , and health offices across the world are becoming active . 
It is clear from the above that public health workers are better prepared to deal with this threat . 
Science is also better prepared than it was earlier - the genome of the virus was quickly analyzed and seed stocks for vaccine production isolated -LRB- although it will take many months to prepare enough doses to immunise large populations against the prevalent strain of virus -RRB- . 
Medicine is also better prepared , since it can distribute the already stockpiled antiviral drugs , and has far better treatments for the pneumonias and other secondary problems that threaten life . 
This is not to say that a pandemic , if it does indeed come , will not be serious . 
The illness of large numbers of people , even when the infection itself is not directly life-threatening , is often accompanied by severe social disruptions . 
Schools close , normal pursuits suffer , and emergency rooms and the entire healthcare system become seriously overloaded . 
History demonstrates that the greatest threat from even a mild disease that affects large numbers of individuals simultaneously may come from the accompanying social disruption and lack of nursing care available to the sick . 
Thus , while the professionals may be better prepared to deal with a threatened pandemic , it is not yet clear that the politicians around the world have learned the same lessons . 
Governments might have to nationalise their healthcare systems in order to cope , just as they have had to do recently with their financial systems - something that might be far more difficult in the US than in Britain and elsewhere . 
cents Dr Arthur Silverstein , a professional immunologist and professor emeritus at Johns Hopkins University medical school , is author of Pure Politics and Impure Science : The Swine Flu Affair Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Arthur Silverstein : Taking on the strain This article appeared on p28 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 00.01 BST on Monday 27 April 2009 . 
Time for a ban . 
