Christopher de Bellaigue : A move towards detente with Armenia will lift the taboo and ease Turkey 's path to EU membership Robert Weintraub : From coast to coast , expensive new baseball stadiums stand empty , monuments to an era of corporate wealth now gone The Wall Street Bull awaits quarterly reports from top US firms Photograph : Michael Nagle\/Getty Images US jobless claims fell 14,000 this week , and consumer confidence rose by the most since 2005 this month , suggesting that the recession may be easing . 
Is the worst over ? 
We got scooped by Drudge ! 
Russell Crowe and Rachel McAdams in State of Play Jenna McWilliams : For a movie that tries so hard to be up to date , State of Play is laughably old-fashioned in its view of modern journalism A pig is seen inside its enclosure at a pig farm in Ratchaburi province , west of Bangkok . 
Photograph : Chaiwat Subprasom\/Reuters Barack Obama caps his pen after signing an executive order closing the Guant namo Bay prison . 
Photograph : Charles Dharapak\/AP Barack Obama won last year 's presidential election on a message of hope and change . 
One hundred days into his term of office in the White House , how would you grade Obama 's administration on its record so far ? 
After three weeks of silence Boris Johnson , sometime defender of freedom against the long arm of the state , has at last emerged from hiding to address the crisis that has gripped London policing since the G20 demonstrations . 
His strategy has been to join the Met in a concerted counter offensive again the forces of disquiet . 
London 's mayor had n't uttered a public word about the events of 1 and 2 April until the middle of last week when reporters dragged him off the message of the latest of the themed and therefore more controlled press conferences he favors . 
His remarks , made from a platform shared with the Met commissioner , Sir Paul Stephenson , served as a preview for those he made the following day to SunTalk Radio 's jeering hard right foghorn Jon Gaunt , which boiled down to `` our police are wonderful '' and `` the media have overdone it '' . 
Continue reading ... What can a president do in 100 days ? 
Not much , really . 
Chiefly this : establish a mood . 
Send signals about how he envisions both state and nation . 
These , of course , are different things . 
The state is the government . 
Barack Obama wants a larger and more activist state . 
This much is obvious . 
He will get there . 
How much more activist no one yet knows . 
This will depend largely on Congress . 
Snarling dogs and enforced nudity were among the techniques used to force terror suspects to talk at Baghdad 's Abu Ghraib prison . 
Photograph : AP Andy Worthington : Five years after the Abu Ghraib scandal , those who authorised the systemic abuse of prisoners may finally be investigated Continue reading ... Editorial : Inequality holds back millions of people from living fairly rewarded and fulfilled lives Paul Collier : Aid programs can go badly awry if there are no conditions . 
Just look at China 's huge US bailout An electron micrograph of the A H1N1 swine influenza virus . 
Photograph : Centers for Disease Control\/Reuters With the death toll attributed to swine flu in Mexico rising rapidly , and cases reported as far afield as Scotland , Spain and New Zealand , does the possiblity of a deadly global pandemic justify the level of worldwide fear ? 
Natalie Hanman : Harman 's equality bill addresses the problem of gender roles , which , 250 years after the feminist pioneer , is still to be resolved Anne Perkins : Harriet Harman 's equality bill aims to outlaw discrimination , but it 's not such an easy concept to nail down Continue reading ... The congregation during a service for the gay community at All Souls Church , London . 
Photograph : Paul McErlane The question : Is gay marriage a religious issue ? 
: Should full marriage be extended to same-sex couples ? 
And does it have anything to do with religion ? 
