When Ros Atkins , a BBC radio presenter , came back to the UK after working in Mexico City , family and friends avoided him like he had , well , swine flu . 
After reading his account , we wondered about others who have visited Mexico recently and experienced the same sort of reaction upon returning home . 
If you have been to Mexico since the outbreak of the H1N1 virus , what was the reaction from loved ones ? 
Or have you changed your travel plans as a result of the disease ? 
Share your thoughts by sending us a response on our GuardianUS Twitter page . 
You can do this by logging on to your Twitter account , typing @GuardianUS and then your comment of 140 characters or less . 
Of course , you can always comment on this blog post . 
Thank you for contributing . 
It appears US television network Fox made the right move when they opted not to air Barack Obama 's press conference last night . 
The network won the primetime 8pm time slot , drawing 7.88 million viewers to their show Lie To Me starring London-born actor Tim Roth . 
The show snagged more viewers at that time slot than any other network . 
However , 19 million people tuned in to Obama 's White House press conference from the combined ratings of NBC , ABC and CBS . 
Rahm Emanuel , Barack Obama 's chief of staff , is on People magazine 's Most Beautiful People list . 
Photograph : Brendan Smialowski\/Getty As the Obama administration marks the president 's first 100 days , People magazine offers its own contribution with the Barack 's Beauties section of its annual Most Beautiful People list . 
First lady Michelle Obama makes the cut along with speechwriter Jon Favreau and personal assistant Reggie Love . 
US treasury secretary Tim Geithner is also featured , most likely for maintaining his boyish looks despite inheriting the task of fixing the world 's economic ills . 
More widely known for his profane tirades , White House chief of staff Rahm Emanuel also rightfully takes his place among the country 's attractive A-listers . 
People magazine staffers should be on standby for letters of appreciation , laced with expletives . 
Deadline USA : James Wilkie to have new baby sisters Here are a couple we have received so far . 
Freestyle is asking Obama to end the Cuban embargo . 
Arlen Specter 's surprise switch to the Democratic party has sent shockwaves through the American political landscape . 
The move pushes Democrats close to the filibuster-proof majority in the Senate needed to pass Barack Obama 's legislation . 
Although liberals are giddy over the prospect of not having to work with Republicans , is the change bad for the balance of power in Washington ? 
Share your thoughts by sending us a response on our GuardianUS Twitter page . 
You can do this by logging on to your Twitter account , typing @GuardianUS and then your comment of 140 characters or less . 
Of course , you can always comment on this blog post . 
Here are a couple we have received so far . 
This message by james_h_leblanc indicates he is not impressed with Obama 's promise of hope and change . 
Feeble_grandad begs to differ and feels dignity has been restored to the White House . 
Please keep your messages coming . 
We will continue to highlight them here on the Deadline USA blog over the next few days . 
Richard Phillips , the captain of the Maersk Alabama who was held hostage by Somali pirates , did n't realize he was being rescued by the US navy until he heard an American accent . 
`` I did n't know what happened , '' Phillips said in an interview with NBC 's Matt Lauer . 
`` I can tell you what I thought happened . 
But I did n't think it had anything to do with military I thought it was a disagreement . '' 
`` For me it felt like five minutes . 
It was probably seven , eight seconds . 
I have no idea . 
Time was fractured for me . 
So it felt very long for me . 
It probably indeed was n't , '' Phillips said . 
The captain also reiterated the pirates never gained control of the Maersk Alabama and praised his crew : `` There were acts of heroism on the part of the crew . 
They got one of the pirates into some darkened space , stabbed him in the hand and overpowered him . 
Chief mate Shane Murphy was integral to them never getting control of the ship . '' 
Phillips talked about the days he was stuck on on the lifeboat : `` It was very , very hot on that lifeboat . 
You are soaked in sweat . 
When the sun came up , I sort of dreaded the sun because of the heat , and it would be up then for the next 12 to 13 hours . 
I looked forward to the sun going down . 
I am from Vermont . 
I like the cold weather . '' 
After the rescue , Phillips said he still could n't comprehend what had transpired : `` I was in elation and I was in limbo , away from the lifeboat -LRB- and -RRB- coming up next to the navy ship with some military people in the boat . 
I was still trying to get over what happened . '' 
The captain commended the commandos who rescued him : `` These Seals and the navy did an impossible job . 
They 're unbelievable people . 
We really owe it to the military for what they do day in and day out that we never even hear about . '' 
Phillips 's revealing interview came as Richard E Hicks , chief cook of the Maersk Alabama , filed a lawsuit against the companies that own the ship and provide the crew . 
Hicks alleges the businesses ignored requests to improve safety measures for vessels sailing along the Somali coast . 
As members of the media argue over the effectiveness of Barack Obama 's first 100 days in office , there 's one issue they probably all agree on . 
The president is a terrible gift giver . 
During Gordon Brown 's visit to Washington , Obama presented the PM with a box set of 25 DVDs . 
Michelle Obama also committed a gaffe when she gave the Brown children , Fraser and John , two toy models of Marine One after Sarah Brown carefully picked out Top Shop dresses and books by British authors for the Obama daughters . 
When the president made a trip to the UK for the G20 summit , he gave the Queen an iPod . 
And now we learn the Obamas have resorted to giving magazines to the school his daughters are attending . 
MSNBC is reporting the only items the Obamas gave to Sidwell Friends school for a fundraiser are a signed copy of a Rolling Stone magazine featuring the president and the January edition of Vogue with the first lady 's signature . 
Members of the school are disappointed with the gift and recall Bill Clinton 's donation when daughter Chelsea attended : a round of golf with the then president that brought in nearly $ 100,000 . 
As the milestone of Barack Obama 's first 100 days approaches on Wednesday , we are asking readers to send a message to the president by uploading a photo to our Flickr group . 
Following Obama 's historic election , readers have sent over 1,000 images to the group with messages ranging from the humorous ... 
