UNITED NATIONS | Wed Nov 9 , 2011 12:47 pm EST UNITED NATIONS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - An increasing number of Syrian soldiers are defecting to the opposition , raising the risk of a Libyan-style civil war in Syria , U.N. human rights chief Navi Pillay said on Wednesday . 
`` Where basic human rights are trampled and peaceful demands for change met by brutal violence , people are eventually compelled to have recourse to rebellion against tyranny and oppression , '' Pillay told the U.N. Security Council . 
`` It happened in Libya , it may happen in Syria , '' she said during a debate on protecting civilians in armed conflict . 
`` More and more soldiers refuse to become complicit in international crimes and are changing sides . 
There is a serious risk of Syria descending into armed struggle . '' 
Illustrating Pillay 's point Syrian activists said that an armored government force stormed an area northwest of the city of Hama on Wednesday in pursuit of army defectors challenging President Bashar al-Assad 's rule . 
Pillay reiterated U.N. estimates that `` well over 3,500 '' people have been killed in Syria since anti-government demonstrations began in March . 
`` Tens of thousands of people , including doctors , nurses and wounded patients , have been arbitrarily arrested and many remain detained incommunicado , placing them at serious risk of torture , '' she said . 
Syria agreed to an Arab League plan on November 2 , pledging to pull its military from restive cities , set political prisoners free and start talks with the opposition , which wants to remove Assad and introduce more democratic freedoms . 
Pillay told the 15-nation Security Council she was `` concerned that the killing of civilians has not stopped . '' 
She urged Damascus to allow a human rights monitoring mission to help ensure that Syria complies with the Arab League agreement . 
Last month Russia and China joined forces to veto a European-drafted Security Council resolution that would have condemned the Syrian government 's crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators and threatened possible sanctions . 
U.S. and European diplomats have repeatedly said that they are ready to submit a new draft resolution along similar lines as soon as Russia and China change their positions . 
But so far Moscow and Beijing remain adamantly opposed to the idea , Western diplomats say . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
maybe they have no hidden agenda in the matter like you do . . 
maybe what they really want to see is a peaceful resolution to the crisis in Syria instead of Libya style destruction . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
