Strange and dangerous hydrocarbon offers no room for human error The deadly explosion caused 3 million gallons of crude oil to pour into the Gulf . 
Photograph : KPA\/Zuma\/Rex Features The vast deepwater methane hydrate deposits of the Gulf of Mexico are an open secret in big energy circles . 
They represent the most tantalizing new frontier of unconventional energy a potential source of hydrocarbon fuel thought to be twice as large as all the petroleum deposits ever known . 
For the oil and gas industry , the substances are also known to be the primary hazard when drilling for deepwater oil . 
Methane hydrates are volatile compounds natural gas compressed into molecular cages of ice . 
They are stable in the extreme cold and crushing weight of deepwater , but are extremely dangerous when they build up inside the drill column of a well . 
If destabilized by heat or a decrease in pressure , methane hydrates can quickly expand to 164 times their volume . 
Survivors of the BP rig explosion told interviewers that right before the April 20 blast , workers had decreased the pressure in the drill column and applied heat to set the cement seal around the wellhead . 
Then a quickly expanding bubble of methane gas shot up the drill column before exploding on the platform on the ocean 's surface . 
Even a solid steel pipe has little chance against a 164-fold expansion of volume something that would render a man six feet six inches tall suddenly the height of the Eiffel Tower . 
Scientists are well aware of the awesome power of these strange hydrocarbons . 
A sudden large scale release of methane hydrates is believed to have caused a mass extinction 55 million years ago . 
Among planners concerned with mega-disasters , their sudden escape is considered to be a threat comparable to an asteroid strike or nuclear war . 
The Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory , a Livermore , Ca.-based weapons design center , reports that when released on a large scale , methane hydrates can even cause tsunamis . 
So it is not surprising to anyone who knows about the physics of these compounds that the Deepwater Horizon rig was lost like a waterfly crumpled by a force of nature scientists are still just getting to know . 
Number One Deepwater Drilling Issue SolveClimate contacted scientists at the Colorado School of Mines , Center for Hydrate Research , who focus on the fundamental science and engineering of methane hydrates to gain further insight . 
They did not want to speculate on the role that methane hydrates could have played in the BP disaster , but they were willing to provide a basic understanding of the nature and behavior of these familiar but little understood substances . 
`` Gas hydrates are the number one flow assurance issue in deepwater drilling , '' Carolyn Koh , an associate professor and co-director of the Hydrate Center , told us in an exclusive interview . 
She explained that the oil and gas industry has a lot of experience with methane hydrates , because they have to be kept from forming in pipes or they will clog the lines , stop the flow of oil , and pose a danger . 
Drillers use inhibitors such as methanol to keep the hydrates from crystallizing inside drill rigs operating at great depth , where conditions for methane hydrate formation are ideal . 
This film clip of an experiment conducted on the ocean floor near the Deepwater Horizon drilling site demonstrates how quickly and easily methane hydrates can form . 
It was conducted by the Gulf of Mexico Hydrates Research Consortium aboard the Seward Johnson in September 2006 . 
The voices of the scientists conducting the experiment are clearly audible . 
The clip shows with remarkable clarity a robotic arm maneuvering a clear tube over a stream of hydrate bubbles emanating from a crater on the sea floor . 
Within minutes , gas trapped in the tube begins to form a visible solid a white ice matrix thanks to the extreme cold and pressure of the ocean depth . 
When the tube is inverted , the hydrate , less dense than seawater , floats out of the tube , dissociating into its components , gas and water . 
Oil and gas drillers encounter far greater volumes of methane hydrate than the gentle stream of bubbles escaping from a small fissure that are shown in the film . 
Amadeu Sum , an assistant professor at the Colorado School of Mines and also a co-director of the Hydrate Center , explained that methane hydrates can be encountered by drillers in the deep ocean where methane hydrates are trapped in sediments beneath the ocean floor . 
Vast Deposits in Ocean Sediments Professor Sum explained gas and oil flow up the pipe together in normal drilling operations . 
These hydrocarbons occur naturally together in conventional drilling operations . 
The deepwater of the Gulf of Mexico , and other places where methane hydrates exist , present drillers with special safety challenges . 
For one thing , methane hydrates are believed to exist in vast deposits underneath the ocean floor , trapped by nature in ocean sediments . 
Deepwater drillers could find themselves drilling through these natural hydrate deposits . 
Professor Sum said geologists know much less about these hydrate-bearing sediments than conventional ocean sediments , and that there is `` little knowledge of the risks '' of drilling into them . 
The Deepwater Horizon rig was drilling in Block 252 of an area known as the Mississippi Canyon of the Gulf , thought to contain methane hydrate-bearing sediments , according to government maps . 
The platform was operating less than 20 miles from a methane hydrate research site located in the same canyon at Block 118 . 
From the sea floor a mile down , the Deepwater Horizon rig had penetrated another 18,000 feet almost another five miles down into the earth 's crust with pipe . 
According to the National Academy of Sciences , which published a bullish report on the energy potential of methane hydrates , `` Industry practice is to avoid methane-bearing areas during drilling for conventional oil and gas resources for safety reasons . '' 
Professor Sum explained that because `` with oil there is usually gas present , '' it is possible for methane hydrates to form in the pipe even when not drilling through hydrate-bearing sediments . 
The pressure and cold of the deepwater create conditions that encourage gas flowing into the pipe to form hydrates , and if the rate of crystallization is rapid enough , the hydrates can clog the pipe . 
The cofferdam that BP lowered over the broken pipe gushing oil to contain the spill was almost immediately clogged by methane hydrates , which formed spontaneously . 
Gas escaping with the oil from the well , when trapped in the steel structure with cold water under great pressure , rapidly accumulated into an ice-like matrix . 
In a book about methane hydrates , which Professor Koh co-authored , brief mention is made of a case in which methane hydrates caused a gas pipe to rupture on land , leading to loss of life . 
Two workers were attempting to clear a line in which a hydrate plug had formed . 
The authors say that `` the impact of a moving hydrate mass '' caused the pipe to fail . 
The explosion caused a large piece of pipe to strike the foreman , killing him . 
The book then quotes from the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers Hydrate Guidelines to describe proper procedures for safely removing a hydrate plug in a pipe on land . 
SolveClimate was not able to find more detailed public documentation of this incident in Alberta , but mention is made in an article in a publication of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory , a federal research center associated with the Department of Energy , of a different unspecified incident on a drilling rig . 
`` Forces from methane hydrate dissociation have been blamed for a damaging shift in a drilling rig 's foundation , causing a loss of $ 100 million , '' the article reports . 
Although public discussion of damage from methane hydrate accidents appears to be minimal , the danger is well-recognized within the industry . 
Last November , one Halliburton executive gave a presentation before a meeting of the American Association of Drilling Engineers in Houston , titled `` Deepwater Cementing Consideration to Prevent Hydrate Destabilization . '' 
It recognizes that the cementing process releases heat which can destabilize methane hydrates , and presents something called Cement System 2 as a solution to the problem . 
One of the graphs shows that the system does n't achieve gel strength for four hours . 
Yet according to an eyewitness report broadcast on Sunday on 60 Minutes , BP managers made the decision to decrease pressure in the well column by removing drilling mud before the cement had solidified in three plugs Halliburton had poured . 
When a surge of gas started shooting up the well , a crucial seal on the blowout preventer at the well head on the ocean floor failed . 
It had been damaged weeks before and neglected as inconsequential by Transocean managers , according to the CBS news broadcast , even after chunks of rubber emerged from the drilling column on the surface . 
According to the Associated Press , the victims of the Deepwater Horizon explosion said the blast occurred right after workers `` introduced heat to set the cement seal around the wellhead . '' 
It is not known if Halliburton was employing Cement System 2 , and testifying before the Senate last week , a Halliburton executive made no mention of methane hydrate hazards associated with cementing in deepwater . 
Professors Koh and Sum are concerned that a focus on the dangers of methane hydrates in deepwater drilling will obscure their promise as an energy solution of the future . 
They are conducting research in the laboratory to create methane hydrates synthetically in order to take advantage of their peculiar properties . 
With their potential to store gas -LRB- both natural gas and hydrogen -RRB- efficiently within a crystalline structure , hydrogen hydrates could one day offer a potential solution for making fuel cells operate economically . 
Still at the fundamental stage , their work on storage is not yet complete enough to apply to commercial systems . 
At the same time , there is an international competition underway to develop technology to harvest the vast deposits of methane hydrates in the world 's oceans . 
Japan has joined the US and Canada in pursuit of this energy bonanza , motivated by the $ 23 billion it spends annually to import liquefied natural gas . 
According to a Bloomberg News article called `` Japan Mines Flammable Ice , Flirts with Environmental Disaster , '' the Japanese trade ministry is targeting 2016 to start commercial production , even as a Tokyo University scientist warned against causing a massive undersea landslide that could suddenly trigger a massive methane hydrate release . 
The U.S. has a research program underway in collaboration with the oil industry , authorized by the Methane Hydrate Research and Development Act of 1999 . 
The National Methane Hydrates R&D Program is housed at the National Energy Technology Laboratory -LRB- NETL -RRB- of the Department of Energy . 
The National Academy of Sciences provided a briefing for Congress last January on the energy potential of methane hydrates based on its report which asserts that `` no technical challenges have been identified as insurmountable '' in the pursuit of commercial production of methane hydrates . 
In the wake of the BP oil disaster , SolveClimate attempted to contact Dr. Charles Paull of the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute , the lead author of the report . 
He was unavailable for comment , attending an international workshop on methane hydrates research in New Zealand from May 10-12 , and according to his assistant , out of email contact . 
