Campaigners unfurl flag calling company British Polluters in protest over Gulf of Mexico disaster Greenpeace activists hoist a flag after climbing on to a balcony at BP headquarters in London . 
Photograph : David Sandison\/Greenpeace\/PA Two activists scaled the BP building in London today in protest at the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
The Greenpeace campaigners hoisted a flag depicting the multinational 's logo smothered in oil and emblazoned with the words `` British Polluters '' from a balcony above the entrance of the company 's UK headquarters in St James 's Square , near Pall Mall . 
BP chief executive Tony Hayward reportedly returned to the UK last night for the first time since the BP-operated Deepwater Horizon rig exploded in the Gulf of Mexico and sank on 20 April , killing 11 workers . 
He is expected to chair a board meeting this morning to discuss the long-term impact of the disaster . 
Greenpeace said banner-waving protesters planned to greet executives at a side entrance . 
One of the climbers , Ben Stewart , 36 , from north London , said : `` The oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico can be traced back to decisions made in this building . 
`` Under Tony Hayward 's leadership BP has taken huge risks to pump oil from ever more remote places , while slashing investment in the clean energy projects that could actually help reduce our dependence on oil and beat climate change . '' 
He said BP 's bright green logo was `` a pathetic attempt to distract our attention from the reality of what this company is doing '' in the Gulf of Mexico and in the tar sands of Canada . 
He added : `` Tony Hayward 's reckless approach will cause more disasters unless action is taken to stop him . '' 
A Metropolitan police spokesman said two protesters were thought to be on the balcony , with several others demonstrating outside the building . 
He said : `` Police were called at approximately 5am to reports of protesters on the roof of a building in St James 's Square , SW1 . 
`` Officers are in attendance and have been speaking to the protesters . 
There have been no arrests . '' 
