Health care is one of the greatest concerns , official says Hundreds of thousands are seeking refuge along borders Washington -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- As the debate continues over whether the U.S. should involve itself directly in the upheaval in Libya , millions of dollars of American aid is arriving there already . 
Safety concerns mean U.S. disaster experts have been unable to enter Libya to see first-hand the dimensions of the humanitarian crisis , State Department officials said Monday , but U.S. partners are dispensing assistance . 
Most of that aid is moving to the eastern part of the country , controlled by rebels fighting Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi . 
Nancy Lindborg , assistant administrator of the United States Agency for International Development , said the U.S. is working with the United Nations and private organizations to provide urgently needed supplies inside Libya . 
`` One of the greatest concerns inside Libya is , first of all , health needs , both urgent and just the regular primary health care needs , and ongoing food security challenges , which is why the emphasis for work inside Libya has been on the health and on food security needs , '' Lindborg said at the State Department . 
Inside a Libyan rebel training camp Included in the U.S. supplies are two emergency health kits , which provide primary health care supplies for 10,000 people for three months , Lindborg said . 
`` I want to underscore that we are already and have been for some time now providing assistance directly inside of Libya , '' Lindborg said . 
She and Eric Schwartz , assistant secretary of state for population , refugees and migration , just returned from the Libyan border with Tunisia , where thousands have sought refuge from the political upheaval . 
An estimated 140,000 people remain in Tunisia , and more than 110,000 are on the Egyptian side of the border . 
The U.S. has provided $ 21 million for assistance both inside Libya and to refugees along its border . 
The U.S. says that despite lack of direct American supervision , the aid is reaching people in need . 
`` I think we can say with a high degree of confidence that the assistance that has gone in is going to good use , '' Schwartz said . 
`` The international and non-governmental organizations with which we work , we have worked with for many , many years . 
They have established very careful protocols for the distribution of assistance , even in highly uncertain and fragile environments . '' 
