Mahmoud Ahmadinejad -LRB- pictured March 8 -RRB- said military invention by the U.S. and Europe in Libya would make matters worse . 
But Ahmadinejad said he condemns `` massacres '' in Libya Madrid , Spain -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The United States and Europe should not intervene militarily in strife-torn Libya because it would make matters worse , Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad told Spanish state television TVE on Tuesday . 
`` I think a military intervention would be even worse . 
The experience of Iraq and Afghanistan is before us . 
It made things worse , not better , '' Ahmadinejad told TVE in an interview at the presidential palace in Tehran , Iran , which was televised in Spain . 
He condemned Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's bombardment of rebels , saying , `` We condemn these massacres and we have condemned them previously . 
Whomever bombs his own people should be condemned . '' 
But Ahmadinejad -- speaking in his native Farsi that was translated to Spanish -- also warned , `` A Western intervention will just complicate the situation . 
The West needs to leave behind its colonialist vision . '' 
He accused the United States and Europe of having provided weapons and backing to Gadhafi and other autocratic regimes in the region in the past . 
`` Previously they helped the government and today they are pretending to help the people , '' he said . 
`` If they do n't intervene in Libyan affairs I think the Libyan people can decide their future . '' 
On Saturday , the Arab League recommended a no-fly zone over Libya . 
In a private session on Monday , the U.N. Security council has expressed doubts and concerns about the measure , meaning quick approval likely will not occur . 
Asked about Iran , Ahmadinejad denied any repression against opposition at home . 
`` Never , never . 
We have never done that . 
During the past 30 years we have had 30 free elections , '' he said . 
The TVE reporter , Ana Pastor , then requested information about Iranian opposition leaders Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi . 
`` Are you their lawyer ? '' 
`` In all countries there are opponents . 
And there is also the law . 
If there is an opposition , can they break the law ? '' 
