The World Health Organization last declared a pandemic 41 years ago A sharp increase in swine flu cases in Australia may mean the infection has become a pandemic , the World Health Organization says . 
For that to happen , officials would have to verify that the disease had become established outside North America , where the crisis began . 
`` Once I get indisputable evidence , I will make the announcement , '' said WHO director general , Margaret Chan . 
More than 1,200 people have contracted the virus in Australia - none fatally . 
The total means Australia has seen a four-fold increase in a week . 
Less than a month ago the country had only a handful of cases of the H1N1 virus but it now has the highest number of infections outside North America . 
Victoria and the state capital , Melbourne , are the worst-hit with more than 1,000 confirmed cases . 
Most of those affected are suffering only a mild illness , but the Health Minister of Australia 's Queensland state , Paul Lucas , has warned that the contagious respiratory condition would inevitably claim lives . 
It does not mean that the severity of the situation has increased The head of the WHO 's global influenza program , Keiji Fukuda , said the situation had `` evolved a lot '' in recent days . 
`` We are getting close to knowing that we are in a pandemic situation , '' he said . 
But Dr Fukuda urged calm . 
`` It does not mean that the severity of the situation has increased or that people are getting seriously sick at higher numbers or higher rates than before , '' he said . 
Following the major outbreaks in North America the flu alert is currently at phase five of a six-level scale . 
The virus has infected more than 26,500 people in 73 countries . 
The WHO held a conference call with governments on Wednesday , but afterwards said no decision had been taken on moving to phase six - the pandemic stage - at the moment . 
Gregory Hartl , WHOs spokesperson for epidemic and pandemic diseases , said if a pandemic was announced it would not be the `` apocalyptic situation '' envisaged when bird flu looked liked it would be the cause . 
`` What we are seeing now with H1N1 is that in most cases the disease is self-limting , lets say 98-98 % of the people we know to be affected recover without any need for hospitalisation , as far as we can tell . 
`` We do understand that the natural reaction of people if and when we declare phase six could be very strong . 
`` But we would hope that there would be quiet quickly an adjustment reaction , as happened in the US , when people realized they were n't getting seriously ill . '' 
The media must play a part here , emphasising the facts about this virus and not over-reacting BBC medical correspondent Fergus Walsh says it is true that the word `` pandemic '' sounds scary . 
But it simply means a global epidemic of an infectious disease . 
He says it is not a signal that the virus is getting more virulent - only a measure of its geographical spread . 
As the number of H1N1 cases in Australia passes 1,200 , Singapore has urged its citizens to avoid travel to Victoria . 
Authorities in New South Wales and South Australia , as well as the national capital , Canberra , have told children who have recently traveled to Melbourne to stay away from school for a week on their return home . 
The entire squad and staff of the Brisbane Broncos rugby league club have been put into quarantine as tests are carried out on a player suspected of contracting swine flu . 
Have you had the virus ? 
Send us your comments using the form below : A selection of your comments may be published , displaying your name and location unless you state otherwise in the box below . 
The BBC may edit your comments and not all emails will be published . 
Your comments may be published on any BBC media worldwide . 
