The clean-up costs are mounting for BP BP has said the cost of cleaning up the oil leak in the Gulf of Mexico has now reached $ 2.65 bn -LRB- # 1.76 bn -RRB- . 
The oil giant said this included the cost of the spill response , containment , relief well drilling , grants to Gulf states and claims paid . 
The total has risen to an average of $ 100m a day over the past three days - the highest daily average so far . 
Later , BP said Tropical Storm Alex would delay plans to boost its oil-siphoning capacity until next week . 
More than 39,000 people are now involved in the response effort , the company said , as oil from the spill washed onto the beaches of Mississippi resort town Biloxi for the first time . 
More than 80,000 claims have so far been submitted and the company has made 41,000 payments totalling more than $ 128m . 
BP added it was too early to quantify other potential costs and liabilities arising from the incident . 
BP 's embattled chief executive Tony Hayward is in Moscow where he has held meetings with Russian officials including Deputy Prime Minister Igor Sechin . 
A spokesperson for Mr Sechin said Mr Hayward had given assurances about BP 's commitment to its strategic partnerships in Russia . 
BP has denied speculation in recent weeks that it is planning to sell some of its Russian investments , which include joint venture TNK-BP and a small stake in state-run oil company Rosneft . 
Before the meeting , Mr Sechin had told reporters that Mr Hayward was about to resign . 
The claim was quickly and categorically denied by BP . 
`` The issue of Hayward 's resignation was not discussed , '' a spokesperson for Mr Sechin said . 
BP 's operations in the country account for a quarter of the company 's total oil production . 
BP 's shares made a rare move higher on Monday , climbing 3.66 % to 315p in early trading . 
It later fell back to close just over 1 % higher . 
On Friday they hit a 14-year low of 298p amid speculation that the company may have to seek extra funds to pay for its oil spill costs . 
BP 's share price has more than halved since the oil disaster began in April , wiping about $ 90bn off the value of the company . 
The company made an annual profit of nearly $ 14bn last year , but there is great uncertainty over the impact that legal action and compensation claims could have . 
BP has already said it will not be paying any dividends to its shareholders this year , after agreeing to finance a $ 20bn -LRB- # 13.5 bn -RRB- clean-up and compensation fund for the oil spill . 
On Sunday , US President Barack Obama and UK Prime Minister David Cameron discussed BP 's problems at the G20 summit in Canada . 
A Downing Street statement issued after the meeting between Mr Obama and Mr Cameron , said : `` The leaders agreed that BP should meet its obligations to cap the leak , clean up the damage and meet legitimate compensations . 
`` They also agreed that it was to both countries ' advantage for BP to remain a strong and stable company . '' 
There was no official response from Washington , though a senior US official emphasised to reporters at the summit that BP 's obligations `` have got to be met '' . 
BP will be hoping the talks put an end to political attacks on the company . 
Officials in the US administration have criticised BP 's response to the spillage , and mounted strong attacks on chief executive Tony Hayward . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
