Prime Minister David Cameron leaves 10 Downing Street in London August 12 , 2011 . 
WITNEY , England | Tue Aug 16 , 2011 12:10 am BST WITNEY , England -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Prime Minister David Cameron on Monday promised a law and order `` fightback '' and robust action to mend what he called Britain 's broken society after riots and looting last week shocked Britons and tarnished its reputation abroad . 
But he faced renewed questions over how far his plans to cut government spending may further alienate the young and the poor . 
In a speech full of tough language likely to please his traditional Conservative supporters , Cameron vowed more `` no-nonsense policing '' and tougher sentencing to tackle gang culture and known troublemakers , and said he would to do more to promote families , boost discipline in schools and encourage hard work . 
In north London , where riots began nine days ago , many welcomed his hard line -- but young people ushered in to hear his speech in rural Oxfordshire doubted it would do much to close a growing gap between rich and poor , or heal troubled communities facing his government 's deep public spending cuts . 
`` We have been too unwilling for too long to talk about what is right and wrong , '' Cameron said in a speech at a youth center in his mostly affluent constituency of Witney , near Oxford . 
More than 2,800 people have been arrested since a protest over a fatal shooting by police on August 4 prompted rioting and looting in the poor London district of Tottenham . 
That spread across the capital and sparked violence in other English cities . 
Cameron , who returned from holiday abroad last week after days of unrest , is seeking to tap into widespread public anger over the violence . 
They came 15 months after he took office at the head of a centre-right coalition committed to cuts in welfare and other spending that critics say will hit the poor . 
`` I think he 's right , '' Nicola Pastore , 26 , told Reuters as she pushed a pram in Tottenham . 
`` I do n't think the police have enough control . 
My kids are scared to go to sleep at night . '' 
Cameron , who faces criticism for plans to cut spending on police and for his management of the crisis , said the riots had been a `` wake-up call '' for Britain , whose reputation abroad was tarnished by the images of groups rampaging through its cities . 
Behind him as he spoke was a graffiti-style mural centred on characters in the kind of hoods and masks worn by many looters . 
The stakes are high for Cameron . 
Any repeat of last week 's lawlessness , in which shops were smashed and set on fire and five people died , will sap public confidence in his government . 
However , analysts say the 44-year-old premier , a former public relations executive from a wealthy establishment background , could benefit politically if he provides the tough law and order response some voters are seeking . 
Cameron has taken a hard line in rhetoric . 
His speech on Monday talked of the dangers of indiscipline in schools and family breakdown , succor to traditional Conservatives who feel their young leader has been too liberal on social issues . 
Cameron and his centre-left Liberal Democrat coalition partners will review their program over the coming weeks , looking at issues like welfare and substance addiction in an effort to promote more stable communities . 
But the prime minister has ruled out easing spending cuts which some critics on the left say are fuelling tensions in Britain 's cities , where the gap between rich and poor is gaping . 
Planned austerity has put Cameron on a collision course with the police , still smarting over his criticism of their initial response to the riots . 
Police chiefs say a 20 percent cut in their budget over the next four years will make it harder for them to maintain law and order . 
London 's Conservative mayor , Boris Johnson , has also said now is not the time for cuts to spending on police . 
But Cameron has refused to budge on plans to ease austerity measures , believing jittery financial markets will take fright at any sign of backtracking on plans to erase by 2015 a budget deficit that peaked at over 10 percent of national output . 
At Witney Ecumenical Youth Trust , where Cameron gave his speech , young people questioned how spending cuts squared with his plans to deal with social problems , and felt his speech created even more of a sense of ` them and us ' . 
Cameron was subjected to hostile whistling on arrival . 
After his televised speech , he took questions from journalists until a reporter chided him for not responding directly to young people in the audience . 
The prime minister later left to the sounds of hecklers clucking like chickens to accuse him of cowardice . 
`` He tried putting it across like everyone who 's had a broken family was wrong . 
It 's like he 's having a dig at us , '' said Jesse Day , 19 . 
She and her friends stressed the importance of community organizations like theirs -- a charity which relies on donations and which almost closed a few months ago . 
`` He says he wants people to get in touch with their families . 
But for some people , their families are n't there and the youth center 's the only people to talk to , '' said Ryan Clayton , 15 . 
`` But he 's shutting all the youth centres . '' 
Others in Witney welcomed Cameron 's emphasis on behavior . 
`` I agree entirely , '' said 74-year-old Colin Bayliss . 
`` Discipline 's gone out the window . 
The family identity has gone out the window . 
There 's more single parents around . 
More people need to take responsibility for their families and their children . '' 
Opposition Labor leader Ed Miliband said a lack of morality was not confined to a `` feral underclass '' but was also displayed by risk-taking bankers , legislators who fiddled their expenses and newspaper reporters who hacked telephones for stories -- all major topics of debate in Britain in the past couple of years . 
`` When we talk about the sick behavior of those without power , let 's also talk about the sick behavior of those with it , '' he said in a speech at his old school in London on Monday . 
It was a line echoed by Cameron . 
Leaders are conscious that voters , disillusioned by what many see as a failure to punish bankers they hold responsible for the financial crisis , could take unkindly to being lectured by politicians , the press and police , all institutions hit by scandal in the recent past . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The country is finished -- besides you 'd better ask your mates in NewLieMore about the effects of their Rights for All policy -- their HRA giving rights to muggers , rapists , illegal immigrants who kill & get away scot free . 
About hijackers allowed to stay & no doubt given benefits ! 
Also , why you were so soft on those thugs who looted , burned , murdered & rampaged through London & a number of other cities -- why YOU did n't use water cannon & rubber bullets -- instead let them get away with it . 
No , matey , the UK is finished -- my kids WILL be leaving & I 'll buy them an air ticket ! 
I hope that David Cameron uses this opportunity with his coalition government to get really tough on law on order . 
Make life imprisonment exactly that , life imprisonment ! 
I would give these rioters lengthy jail terms and I would ensure that people who are a severe danger to society -LRB- murderers , rapists , child abusers -RRB- are jailed for life . 
While I make no excuses for what I call bad and criminal behavior , I do think that we need a global economy where there is hope . 
Instead , there is a strong risk of another recession which is something the world 's politicians need to get to grips with urgently . 
Is Cameron first nog going to ask Murdoch what he is allowed to say ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
