A Qantas plane takes off at Sydney 's domestic airport June 22 , 2011 . 
SYDNEY | Tue Aug 16 , 2011 8:03 am BST SYDNEY -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The in-flight entertainment on some planes run by Australian airline Qantas currently contains a somewhat unusual offering -- a movie that purports to elucidate the mysteries of female sexual pleasure . 
The 50-minute French film `` The Female Orgasm Explained , '' which includes naked scenes , is carried on long-haul `` Video on Demand '' aircraft in the airline 's `` The Edge '' channel -- complete with a warning that it is for mature audiences only . 
`` In general programs are selected according to quality of content , box office\/ratings , topicality and Qantas customer demographics , '' Qantas said in a statement , adding that programs were screened by their program team before licensing . 
`` With the Edge , we source programs that are out of the ordinary across all genres . '' 
Airline crews are able to block content to the seats of minors and at the requests of their parents , it added . 
The film will be run until November . 
The choice of film may be a bit risky given the fact that airlines are usually quite careful about what they show , said Catriona Eider , an associate professor at the Department of Sociology and Social Policy , Sydney University . 
`` I think sociologically it 's interesting they are showing something that has the potential in that quite confined space to have people say ` Oh , what are you watching ? ' 
or shows that might be understood as titillating as porn , '' she said . 
But she added that changing social norms mean that off-limit topics have shifted . '' 
` In Sex and the City ' , the orgasm is something pretty much spoken in everyday levels . 
It 's no longer the taboo subject it was . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Pauline Askin ; editing by Elaine Lies -RRB- -LRB- This story was corrected to fix the final quote to `` Sex and the City '' -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
