BENGHAZI , Libya | Sat Jun 18 , 2011 10:52 am EDT BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya 's rebel oil chief accused the West on Saturday of failing to keep up its promises to deliver urgent financial aid , saying his authority had now run out of cash completely after months of fighting . 
Libya 's economy relies on oil exports and the rebels have struggled to make ends meet as damage to energy infrastructure caused by the civil war has brought production to a halt in what used to be a major OPEC oil producer in North Africa . 
Western powers are helping the rebels with daily air strikes against forces loyal to Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi , and have promised to expand aid backed by Libyan assets frozen abroad . 
Speaking to Reuters in a rare interview in the eastern rebel stronghold of Benghazi , oil and finance minister Ali Tarhouni said the cash had yet to arrive four months into the war . 
`` We do n't have any -LRB- cash -RRB- . 
We are running out of everything . 
It 's a complete failure . 
Either they -LRB- Western nations -RRB- do n't understand or they do n't care . 
Nothing has materialized yet . 
And I really mean nothing , '' he said . 
`` All of these people we talk to , all of these countries , at all these conferences , with their great grand speeches -- we appreciate -LRB- them -RRB- from the political side , but in terms of finances they are a complete failure . 
Our people are dying . '' 
The economy in east Libya is in tatters . 
The authorities are struggling to find cash to pay for military operations as well as salaries in a society where , thanks to the legacy of Gaddafi 's centralized rule , most people depend on state wages . 
Western states have offered to help . 
The European Union has pledged support and Washington , which took a leading role in securing a U.N.-backed no-fly zone over Libya , has promised more aid and offers of loans to keep the rebels afloat . 
Asked why he thought it was taking Western nations so long to produce money , Tarhouni said : `` No idea . 
... I am tired of asking them . '' 
He had earlier estimated the rebels were spending up to 100 million Libyan dinars -LRB- $ 86 million -RRB- per day . 
`` I do n't expect us to produce oil any time soon . 
The refineries have no crude oil , so they are not working , '' he said . 
`` People died for this revolution and are still dying . 
We will find a way -LRB- to raise money -RRB- . 
One thing is for sure : We will never give up . '' 
Supplies of fuel , vital to keeping eastern towns supplied and maintaining the campaign against Gaddafi , are tight . 
Tarhouni said that refineries , including the one in Misrata , and other crucial installations had been damaged by the fighting , but the pipelines were still intact . 
Libya produced 1.6 million barrels per day before the war and exported about 1.3 million bpd . 
Rebels sold their first tanker full of crude to U.S. refiner Tesoro in April , but production has since ground to a halt due to concerns over the security of the oil fields . 
Rebels now rely on imports of fuel . 
Asked about the mechanism of deliveries , Tarhouni said : `` We have signed -LRB- fuel supply -RRB- contracts and we have companies that were gracious enough to delay those payments for the future . 
`` We get it -LRB- fuel -RRB- basically from these contractors . 
I personally do n't know where they get it from , but I think it 's just from the spot market , most of it . 
The companies are international companies . '' 
He said the rebel authority had put together a budget totaling 3.6 billion Libyan dinars -LRB- $ 2.98 billion -RRB- . 
`` But my immediate needs are much less than that . 
I can deal with whatever that I can have access to , '' he said . 
Tarhouni said the rebel government was holding direct talks with foreign companies on future cooperation , adding that he had no qualms about dealing with those which had earlier worked closely with Gaddafi 's government in the capital Tripoli . 
Asked which companies he was talking to , he named Germany 's Wintershall and France 's Total . 
`` We need help , we said we respect and abide by all contracts . 
The only enemy that I have is Gaddafi and his killers and thugs , '' he said . 
`` In terms of commerce and companies I have no enemies . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Maria Golovnina ; editing by David Stamp -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
How many times have Western leaders gone to Africa to promise and then failed to deliver ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
