US says BP move to curb oil leak ` no solution ' A boom is erected in Louisiana to counter the spill The success of a move by oil giant BP to curb a leak in the Gulf of Mexico is `` not clear '' and the technique provides `` no solution '' , the US has said . 
It was responding to BP 's move to siphon oil from the leaking well head to a tanker on the surface . 
A government statement said it would not rest until the leak was permanently sealed and the spill cleaned up . 
BP executive Kent Wells earlier said that the siphoning process was `` working extremely well '' . 
This was the third attempt it had made to insert a long narrow tube into the leaking pipe , using underwater robots . 
It is thought that BP 's 6in-wide -LRB- 15cm -RRB- tube and stopper could capture more than three-quarters of the leak , although a smaller spill nearby also has to be contained . 
Mr Wells said on Sunday at the firm 's US headquarters in Houston , Texas , that over the next few days the company planned to slowly increase the amount of oil and gas flowing through the pipe to the tanker . 
But a joint statement by Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano and Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar said the latest technique was `` not a solution to the problem and it is not yet clear how successful it may be '' . 
The US government 's aggression against BP has n't lessened ... I wonder whether the assault makes other big companies nervous It added : `` We will not rest until BP permanently seals the well head , the spill is cleaned up , and the communities and natural resources of the Gulf Coast are restored and made whole . '' 
It was the second strong statement to BP by the government officials on the current crisis . 
Earlier they sent a letter saying they wanted to be sure BP would honor commitments not to limit costs to a US statutory cap of $ 75m -LRB- # 50m -RRB- . 
BP responded by saying it had already made clear its position on paying damages for the disaster . 
It said last week the cap was irrelevant and it would settle all legitimate damages claims . 
`` What they are requesting in the letter is absolutely consistent with all our public statements on the matter , '' said BP spokesman David Nicholas on Sunday . 
Earlier , scientists said they had found vast underwater plumes of oil , one 10 miles -LRB- 16km -RRB- long and a mile wide . 
Researchers from the National Institute for Undersea Science and Technology said they had detected the slicks lurking just beneath the surface of the sea and at depths of 4,000 ft -LRB- 1,200 m -RRB- . 
Samantha Joye , a marine science professor at the University of Georgia , said : `` It could take years , possibly decades , for the system to recover from an infusion of this quantity of oil and gas . 
`` We 've never seen anything like this before . 
It 's impossible to fathom the impact . '' 
Chemical dispersants BP has been dumping underwater may be preventing the oil from rising to the top of the ocean , the scientists said . 
The find suggests the scale of the potential environmental disaster is much worse than previously feared since the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig blew up on 20 April , killing 11 workers . 
Some scientists cast doubt on BP 's estimate of the oil flow rate , saying the widely repeated figure of 5,000 barrels per day dramatically understates the real amount . 
A week ago , BP tried to cap the well with a 100-tonne box , but gave up after it became encrusted with ice crystals . 
Mississippi has become the third US state to have traces of oil wash up on its coast , along with Louisiana and Alabama . 
The spill is threatening to eclipse the 1989 Exxon Valdez leak off Alaska as America 's worst environmental disaster . 
