NATO can not verify rebel claims that Gadhafi may be hiding rockets at the UNESCO World Heritage site of Leptis Magna . 
The president of South Africa lashed out Tuesday at NATO 's enforcement of the U.N. resolution authorizing the organization to act to protect innocent civilians threatened by Libya 's civil war . 
`` We strongly believe that the resolution is being abused for regime change , political assassinations and foreign military occupation , '' said Jacob Zuma at a budget vote debate before the National Assembly in Cape Town . 
`` These actions undermine the efforts of the African Union in finding solutions to the problems facing its member states , '' he said in an appeal that called on all parties to respect international humanitarian law and called further for reform of the U.N. Security Council . 
When the council adopted the resolution in March , it was backed by the Arab League and supported by African countries in the council . 
But Zuma said NATO 's actions have exceeded the authority that the resolution granted . 
Arab Spring unrest , country by country `` We have spoken out against the misuse of the good intentions in Resolution 1973 , '' said Zuma , who led two African Union delegations to Libya , where he met with leader Moammar Gadhafi in failed attempts to broker a cease-fire . 
Unlike some other world leaders , Zuma has not called for the longtime leader to step down . 
Neither has Zuma 's African National Congress party nor the African Union , which he was representing and which Gadhafi once led . 
The AU also has criticized the NATO airstrikes . 
In April , Zuma led an AU delegation to Tripoli , Libya 's capital , where hopes were raised briefly when it was announced that Gadhafi had agreed , in principle , to the AU 's `` road map '' proposal for peace . 
But Gadhafi continued his attacks and the Libyan opposition rejected the proposal because it did not meet its demand that he give up the power he has held for 42 years . 
U.S. officials and those of some other countries have called for Gadhafi to step down . 
Separately , NATO refused to say Tuesday whether it would bomb ancient Roman ruins in Libya if it knew Gadhafi was hiding military equipment there . 
Time magazine gallery : Libya 's stunning Roman ruins `` We will strike military vehicles , military forces , military equipment or military infrastructure that threaten Libyan civilians as necessary , '' a NATO official in Naples , Italy , said , declining to give his name in discussing internal NATO deliberations . 
