BP tries to thread tube into leaking pipe to stop flow Forecasters predict the slick will begin washing ashore in more states soon BP is using undersea robots in a bid to jam a tube into a broken pipe that is gushing oil into the Gulf of Mexico . 
The attempt to divert the oil flow came as workers readied a so-called `` top hat '' containment dome to be lowered over the leak . 
Some scientists have significantly raised their estimate of the rate of oil flow , as the surface slick has grown to 3,650 sq miles -LRB- 9,500 sq km -RRB- . 
Several US senators have proposed a ban on drilling off the Pacific coast . 
Five thousand feet -LRB- 1,500 m -RRB- below the surface on Friday , remote-controlled robots were attempting to thread a six-inch -LRB- 15cm -RRB- tube surrounded by a stopper into the 21-inch pipe spewing crude oil and natural gas at a high rate into the water . 
If the attempt is successful , the tube could siphon leaking oil and gas into a tanker on the surface , allowing oil workers to concentrate on cleaning up the already-spilled crude . 
In addition , BP was preparing to deploy a metal box , or top hat , to cap the leak . 
A previous attempt to lower a bigger box on to the well site failed . 
President Barack Obama has stressed that BP must pay for the clean-up from the disaster . 
Senators from coastal states have proposed a ban on oil drilling on the Pacific coast . 
On Friday , Mr Obama was due to meet advisers to discuss the spill response , and he is expected to discuss the latest efforts to plug the leak in remarks later . 
As of late Thursday , more than 500 vessels and 13,000 people were involved in the spill containment and clean-up effort . 
Workers had deployed more than 1.4 million feet of boom to arrest the spread , and had dumped more than 475,000 gallons of chemical dispersant into the gulf waters . 
Meanwhile , oil has begun washing ashore on the barrier islands in the gulf in the form of tar balls and patties . 
US officials forecast the slick could make landfall on Saturday in Florida , Mississippi and Alabama . 
The spill is poised to become the worst environmental disaster in US history . 
Some scientists have begun to cast doubt on official estimates of the rate of oil flow , saying the widely repeated figure of 5,000 barrels of oil per day dramatically understates the amount . 
Florida State University oceanographer Ian MacDonald has estimated the rate is four or five times the government figure , the New York Times reported . 
Other researchers who have analyzed underwater video of the leak released by BP told US news media outlets the leak was spewing about 70,000 barrels per day , with a margin of error of plus or minus 20 % . 
The spill began on 20 April , when the Deepwater Horizon oil rig , leased by BP from Swiss drilling giant Transocean , exploded into flames and sank two days later , killing 11 workers . 
In testimony before US House and Senate committees this week , BP , Transocean and US oil services company Halliburton each pointed the finger of blame at the others . 
Underwater efforts to cap oil leak Initially , BP tried to lower a 125-tonne , 18-metre -LRB- 59 feet -RRB- high container dome over the main leak on the sea floor . 
However , this failed when gas leaking from the pipe mixed with water to form hydrates , ice-like crystals , that blocked up the steel canopy . 
Instead , engineers have lowered a smaller device onto the site . 
Dubbed the Top hat , it will sit over the tear in the pipe and partially stop the leak . 
To prevent the build up of hydrates , methanol is pumped into the top hat to disperse the water and gas . 
The top hat is 1.5 m -LRB- 5 feet -RRB- high and 1.2 m in diameter . 
Two special side lines are used to pump methanol into the top hat to displace water and gas leaking from the broken oil pipe . 
This should prevent the build-up of hydrates . 
Once in place , oil can be pumped up to the surface . 
BP plan to lower the original subsea containment dome over the top hat to provide a better seal over the leaking site and pump oil up to the surface . 
This time , it will be attached to a pipe that can pump warm water into the dome to prevent the build-up of hydrates . 
