June 23 , 2010 : This image from video provided by BP shows oil gushing from the broken wellhead at the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
AP BP officials on Friday left open the door to someday drilling again into the same lucrative undersea pocket of oil that spilled millions of gallons of crude , wrecked livelihoods and fouled beaches along the Gulf of Mexico -- and , for now , the Obama administration is n't shooting the idea down either . 
The Interior Department would only go as far as to say that BP would n't regain access to the now-capped well that began gushing oil after the deadly April 20 explosion at a company-run rig off Louisiana . 
`` The well is almost dead . 
Under no circumstances are we going to allow them to reopen the well to extract oil and gas from the Macondo well , '' Interior spokeswoman Kendra Barkoff told FoxNews.com . 
But BP may be interested in the vast oil reservoir beneath the blown well that is still believed to hold nearly $ 4 billion worth of crude . 
With the company and its partners facing tens of billions of dollars in liabilities , the incentive to exploit the wells and the reservoir could grow . 
`` There 's lots of oil and gas here , '' Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles said at a news briefing Friday when asked about the possibility . 
`` We 're going to have to think about what to do with that at some point . '' 
BP spokesman Daren Beaudo emphasized to FoxNews.com that the company has no plans to develop the reservoir . 
`` We 're focused 100 percent on the job at hand , which is killing the well , cleaning up the oil and restoring the Gulf Coast economy , '' he said . 
Retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , the government 's point man on the spill , said he had no information on BP 's future plans . 
`` I would assume that 's a policy issue related to the management of the lease , '' he told reporters . 
`` Frankly , it has n't been raised to my level at this point . 
I 'm not sure I can comment on it . '' 
A senior official with the Interior Department told FoxNews.com that the agency has had no communications with BP about drilling in the reservoir . 
`` It is too premature to talk or even speculate about them drilling there , '' the official said . 
Suttles has spent more than three months managing BP 's response efforts on the Gulf but is now returning to his day job in Houston , the company said . 
Mike Utsler , a vice president who has been running BP 's command post in Houma , La. , since April , will replace him . 
The personnel shift comes as BP appears to be gaining the upper hand on plugging the leak . 
Engineers this week poured in cement to complete a plug at the top of the well bore as part of a process dubbed a `` static kill , '' but they needed to wait at least a day for the cement to harden . 
Once it does , crews can finish the last stretch of a relief well intersecting the blown well just above the oil 's source , injecting more mud and cement from the bottom to form a final plug . 
Suttles confirmed Friday that crews for now plan to use the 18,000-foot relief well to seal off with mud and cement the underground reservoir feeding the blown well . 
The company had been hedging on how exactly it would use the relief well , which it has been digging for three months , as federal officials insisted it should be used to perform the so-called `` bottom kill . '' 
If not used for the bottom kill , the relief wells could have conceivably offered a way for BP or another company to pump oil from the reservoir and sell it , an idea unlikely to sit well with Gulf Coast residents and families of workers who died on the rig . 
The static kill started Tuesday with engineers pumping enough mud down the top of the well to push the crude back to its underground source . 
Suttles said engineers plan to monitor the cement newly pumped in from the top and test the plug to make sure it 's sealed . 
`` All the indications so far look very encouraging , '' he said . 
A federal report this week indicated that only about a quarter of the spilled crude remains in the Gulf and is degrading quickly . 
`` There 's essentially no skimmable oil left on the surface , no recoverable oil left on the surface , '' Suttles said . 
Some scientists disputed the report 's veracity , and much of the remaining crude has permeated deep into marshes and wetlands , complicating cleanup . 
BP had 31,000 workers along the Gulf on Friday , down from 48,000 at the height of the response , Suttles said . 
As BP pulled brought in 33-year employee Utsler to take over the response and the blown well appeared to have flatlined , some Gulf residents who still see the oil wreaking havoc worried the nation 's attention was shifting . 
Utsler told them not to worry , saying the spill 's effects are `` a challenge that we continue to recognize with more than 20,000-plus people continuing to work . '' 
Willie Davis , a 41-year-old harbormaster in Pass Christian , Miss. , feared his area would be forgotten if BP pulls out too soon . 
`` I 'm losing trust in the whole system , '' Davis said . 
`` If they do n't get up off their behinds and do something now , it 's gonna be years before we 're back whole again . '' 
The Associated Press contributed to this report . 
