Rory Carroll ventures out on patrol with US troops in Baghdad Tuesday 28 June 2005 01.53 BST The hatch slams shut and the metal monster trundles from the base into a Baghdad night , another roll of the dice for a crew which , all things being equal , would rather be in Ohio . 
Through smeared windows the four soldiers eye a landscape of rubble , anti-American graffiti and impassive faces . 
No Iraqi aged over three returns their waves . 
The six-wheel , 23-tonne `` Buffalo '' is designed to absorb blasts but with roadside bombs becoming bigger and more sophisticated it is a potential coffin , another smouldering wreck to appear on CNN . 
The crew are edgy , aware that improvised explosive devices -LRB- IEDs -RRB- , account for more than half of this year 's US combat deaths . 
Wearing earplugs , goggles , helmets and body armor , their job is to drive very slowly in one of the most hostile parts of Baghdad , looking for IEDs . 
Aged 20 to 25 , the four friends are ambivalent about the war but upbeat about their role in it and have no regrets about volunteering . 
The feedback from home , however , is unsettling . 
Later today , George Bush will address an increasingly sceptical nation about Iraq , where sentiments have changed since the invasion two years ago . 
In a recent Gallup poll 56 % said the war `` was n't worth it '' . 
Enthusiasm for action that has already claimed 1,730 American lives has turned to disquiet , and this is trickling down to the troops . 
Sgt Brad Wilson , the radio controller , shuddered at the latest batch of letters from well-meaning primary school pupils . 
`` It 's all , ` Please do n't die in that place . ' 
My God , it 's so depressing . '' 
The driver , Sgt Marcus Smith , laughed . 
`` My mom just got a passport so she can go to Germany in case I get injured and end up evacuated there . 
I 'm not sure if it 's sweet or demented . '' 
The importance of having strong support back home is not lost on the soldiers , or on General John Abizaid , who commands US forces in the Middle East . 
He says troops fight best when they know people are behind them . 
`` When my soldiers say to me and ask the question whether or not they 've got support from the American people or not , that worries me , and they are starting to do that . '' 
About 40 % of the 135,000-strong US force in Iraq are reservists and National Guards , part-time soldiers who have civilian jobs and are not wedded to a military career . 
The Buffalo crew are National Guards from the 612th Engineering battalion from Norwalk , Ohio . 
Back home they are a policeman , a waiter , a student and a church youth director . 
In the Buffalo they are targets . 
`` Sure , I 'm homesick , '' said Specialist Sean Hollinger , the waiter . 
`` It 's 9pm . 
I could be out with my buddies watching hockey and ordering some wings . '' 
Instead he was peering at a sack by the road with a suspicious bulge . 
Spc Hollinger used an orange control box to probe the bag with a 30ft mechanical claw . 
The four Humvee escorts blocked traffic and kept their distance . 
The Buffalo 's V-shaped hull deflects blasts but insurgents are getting better at penetrating armor with bombs - often hidden in sacks , animal carcasses or fake concrete blocks - which are detonated by remote control . 
This sack was harmless and the crew exhaled as one . 
Sgt Smith opened a packet of M&M s and launched into another joke . 
`` A duck goes into a bar ... '' Minutes later a black Mercedes emerged from an alleyway and stopped alongside the Buffalo . 
`` Put a round in his hood . 
Oh man I 'm just waiting for that to blow . '' 
It was not a suicide bomber but the adrenaline took its time to ebb away . 
Scouring roadside debris for bombs which killed Iraqis as well as Americans earned the crew no smiles from those rushing home before curfew . 
`` People here do n't like us very much , '' said Sgt Wilson . 
The crew was puzzled . 
The US had toppled a dictatorship and was now fighting terrorists . 
Why were Iraqis not supportive ? 
Not interested in oil or occupation , the four discussed putting a sign on the rear bumper : `` Trust us , we do n't want to be here . '' 
They were unsure about whether Saddam Hussein was linked to the September 11 attacks but knew all about WMD . 
`` Weapons of moderate destruction , that 's what we 're looking for , '' said Sgt Smith . 
`` No one wants to get blown up but this is a good mission . 
Everybody has to do their turn . '' 
The year-long tour was also an adventure with a chance to save up to $ 2,000 -LRB- # 1,090 -RRB- a month . 
All four had been blown up at least once . 
The Buffalo , shared with another crew , was scarred and dented . 
After six hours of false alarms but no bombs the convoy headed back , weaving and accelerating through a particularly hazardous street known as `` RPG Alley '' . 
The vehicle shuddered to a halt . 
Sgt Smith , drenched in sweat , opened the hatch and took a bow . 
`` Thank you all for flying Buffalo Airlines . '' 
His mother 's passport could stay closed for another day . 
