TRIPOLI | Sun Sep 4 , 2011 11:57 am EDT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The proliferation of weapons in Libya is a major concern and the new rulers need to establish a proper police force and army to replace the hundreds of armed groups who patrol the streets , the United Nations special adviser on Libya said on Sunday . 
Ian Martin , in Libya to compile a report for UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon on rebuilding the country after its civil war , also said the interim government needed to start the electoral process soon if it is to honor its commitment to establish democracy . 
The disintegration of Muammar Gaddafi 's rule after a six-month war has left a security vacuum in Libya , with no state security forces , rebel fighters who are not part of any formal structure and huge quantities of unsecured weapons . 
`` Proliferation of weapons is a major concern , '' Martin told Reuters in an interview on the second day of a visit to the Libyan capital . 
`` It 's a concern to Libya 's neighbors , quite naturally . 
The European Union was working on border security issues here in the past and I think it has made clear that it 's willing to assist Libya in future if asked to do so . '' 
`` Clearly it 's a matter of moving from the current situation in which there are many people with weapons who are fighting in this conflict to one where there is a single public security force and the kind of proper state army that did n't exist in Libya in the past , '' he said . 
`` I 've just been discussing with the Minister of the Interior the challenge that they face in terms of public security , in terms of getting police more fully back on the streets and weapons off the streets and building a democratically accountable police force . '' '' 
-LRB- That is -RRB- not an easy matter in any society , let alone one which is just coming out of 42 years of oppressive security and conflict . '' 
The National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- , Libya 's de facto government since Gaddafi 's stronghold in the capital was overrun last month , says that it is in the process of integrating the armed rebel groups into the government . 
`` None of the groups is intent on staying as armed forces independent of the national army or the police and there is consensus on that , '' Aref El-Nayed , director of the NTC 's stabilization team , said earlier on Sunday . 
`` This process is already ongoing ... We are emerging with a unified structure . '' 
The NTC has committed itself to building a democratic system in Libya to replace Gaddafi 's authoritarian rule . 
It has set itself a timetable to establish a formal government and schedule elections . 
However , it has said that process will not get underway until `` national liberation '' -- without defining when or what that is . 
`` I think it is understandable that while there are still parts of the country that are not fully controlled by the new authorities , then they may not want to start the clock running on those commitments until they have the security throughout the country that would be necessary to carry them forward , '' said Martin . 
`` I do n't know exactly when that moment will be . '' 
`` The National Transitional Council has made strong commitments to proceed along a democratic path and has made clear it would like United Nations assistance in that area and although elections may be a little way ahead , that needs to begin soon to keep the commitment that they have made . '' 
He said there were no discussions with the new Libyan authorities about sending any kind of UN military or police force to help establish security . 
`` We 're not talking about a United Nations peacekeeping of any form here . 
We 're looking ahead to an essentially political , civilian mission with a number of advisory functions that could assist the authorities that they 've clearly identified . '' 
Martin said it was likely he would report on the situation in Libya to the UN Security Council at the end of next week . 
`` I certainly think that the commitments the leaders of the NTC are expressing to us are absolutely the right commitments . 
Of course they face a major challenge in implementing them in practice , and our commitment is to try to help them to do so , '' he said . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
