The Next World War ? 
It Could Be Financial . 
A bank customer holds a handful of Icelandic crowns in downtown Reykavik , Iceland . 
-LRB- Pall Stefansson\/Getty Images -RRB- The global financial outlook grows more dire by the day : The United States has been forced to shore up Wall Street , and European governments are bailing out numerous commercial banks . 
Even more alarmingly , the government of Iceland is presiding over a massive default by all the country 's major banks . 
This troubling development points not only to an even more painful recession than anticipated , but also to the urgent need for international coordination to avoid something worse : all-out financial warfare . 
The ramifications of Iceland 's misery are probably more serious than people realize . 
The country 's bank assets are more than 10 times greater than its gross domestic product , so the government clearly can not afford a bailout . 
This is going to be a large default , affecting many parties . 
In the United Kingdom alone , 300,000 account holders face sudden loss of access to their funds , and the process for claiming deposit insurance is not entirely clear . 
But there 's a broader concern . 
With European governments turning down his appeals for assistance , Iceland 's prime minister , Geir Haarde , warned last week that it was now `` every country for itself . '' 
This smacks of the financial autarchy that characterized defaulters in the financial crisis in Asia in the late 1990s . 
Similarly , when Argentina defaulted on its debt in 2001 - ' 02 , politicians there faced enormous pressure to change the rule of law to benefit domestic property holders over foreigners , and they changed the bankruptcy law to give local debtors the upper hand . 
In Indonesia and Russia after the crises of 1998 , local enterprises and banks took the opportunity of the confusion to grab property , then found ways to ensure that courts sided with them . 
This is a natural outcome of chaotic times . 
Iceland 's promise to guarantee domestic depositors while reneging on guarantees to foreigners may be just a first step . 
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown 's decision last week to sue Iceland over this issue may escalate the crisis . 
The use of counterterrorist legislation to take over Icelandic bank assets and operations in the United Kingdom also has a potentially dramatic symbolic effect . 
Most of the time , financial war of this kind is painful and costly . 
It will lead to decades of lower international capital flows and could have other far-reaching effects on politics and global peace . 
Unless the leading industrial countries take concerted action , there 's a very real danger that we will all suffer more . 
In addition , we 're now likely to see substantially more defaults and credit panics in smaller countries and emerging markets . 
After Iceland 's fall , every creditor to other nations with large deficits and substantial external debt must be looking for ways to reduce its exposure . 
The obvious risks include much of Eastern Europe , Turkey and parts of Latin America . 
Russia 's difficulties show that seemingly solvent countries can be high-risk : While the Russian central bank has gold and foreign exchange reserves of $ 556 billion , the private sector has recently built up an estimated $ 450 billion of debt . 
Creditors do n't want to roll over the debt , so the government is using its reserves to do it . 
It has already ordered $ 200 billion channeled through state banks to companies repaying debt . 
If oil prices fall , a seemingly highly solvent country could quickly look nearly insolvent . 
Some other rising stars , such as Brazil and even India , may have similar problems . 
Added to this are worrying signs that the credibility of U.S. authorities is on the decline . 
Despite Washington 's moves to stabilize the financial system , credit and equity markets continue to drop . 
This pattern is reminiscent of the 1997-98 Asian crisis , when successive International Monetary Fund programs provided briefer and briefer respites from market routs in emerging economies . 
There is now a risk that continued corporate and bank defaults within nations , matched by large shifts in capital flows across nations , will lead to a chaotic series of national and local defaults . 
If governments do n't respond with sensible , coordinated policies , there 's a risk of financial war . 
Here are six steps toward avoiding a situation of `` each nation for itself '' : 1 . 
The world 's leading financial powers -- at a minimum , the United States , the United Kingdom , France and Germany -- should jointly announce national plans to require recapitalization of banks -LRB- i.e. , restructuring their debt and equity mixture -RRB- so that they have sufficient capital to weather a major global recession . 
How this is done can be determined internally by each nation , but this should be a common goal , so that citizens and companies can again trust their banks . 
The countries should announce a temporary blanket guarantee on all existing bank deposits and debts . 
This will , in effect , promise creditors that they can safely expect the institutions to function until the recapitalization takes place , and it will help prevent the large flows of funds that could occur as some banks or countries conduct recapitalizations earlier than others . 
This guarantee should only be temporary -LRB- say , for six months -RRB- . 
The monetary authorities of these countries need to lower interest rates dramatically . 
Europe , Canada and the United States recently announced a coordinated 0.5 percent reduction in rates . 
This is a good start , but only a start . 
More will be needed , and it wo n't stop the credit crunch within or across countries . 
The events of the last nine months have set us on course for a global recession in which commodity prices will continue to fall and demand will remain weak . 
Inflation will be low , and deflation -LRB- falling prices -RRB- is a risk . 
More interest-rate cuts will be needed . 
The monetary authorities also need to remain committed to pumping liquidity into the financial system as long as credit markets and interbank lending remain weak . 
This should be promised for at least one year . 
