If the global economy survives the autumn and our cable-TV companies are still in business come Christmas , Americans surfing the channels for classic Yuletide movies may finally figure out exactly whom they have to blame for the housing bubble and everything that has followed . 
Forget the predatory lenders , Wall Street sharks and their government enablers : It all started with George Bailey . 
Yes , that George Bailey -- the hero of Frank Capra 's `` It 's a Wonderful Life , '' the most popular man in Bedford Falls , the man so indispensable that he earned a private visitation from a guardian angel just to show him how dreadful a world without him would have been . 
It 's easy to forget , so potent is the supernaturally charged final act of Capra 's classic , that before he was visiting looking-glass worlds where he 'd never been born or scampering through the snow and shouting `` Merry Christmas ! '' 
till his lungs burst , Jimmy Stewart 's George Bailey was actually a pretty savvy businessman . 
And it 's even easier to forget the precise nature of his business : putting the downscale families of Bedford Falls into homes they could n't quite afford to buy . 
This is the substance of the great war between Bailey and Lionel Barrymore 's Mr. Potter , the richest , meanest man in Bedford Falls . 
Potter is against easy credit and the suburban dream , against the rabble moving out of his tenements and buying homes , while the Bailey Building and Loan exists to make suburbia possible . 
The Bailey vision is economic and moral all at once . 
In a mid-movie peroration , the hero lectures Potter and a gaggle of local entrepreneurs on the virtues of democratizing homeownership : `` You 're all businessmen here , '' he presses them , sounding for all the world like a politician defending Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac against their critics in 2004 or so . 
`` Does n't it make them better citizens ? 
Does n't it make them better customers ? 
... What 'd you say a minute ago ? 
They had to wait and save their money before they even ought to think of a decent home . 
... Do you know how long it takes a working man to save five thousand dollars ? '' 
In the movie , George Bailey has God on his side , but a real-life Bailey would have had Uncle Sam . 
`` It 's a Wonderful Life '' debuted in 1946 , more than a decade after Franklin D. Roosevelt 's National Housing Act kicked off a half-century of federal policymaking aimed at making it dramatically easier for working-class Americans to buy and keep their homes . 
As a political text , Capra 's movie enjoys obvious bipartisan appeal -- liberals can thrill to its attacks on Potter 's corporate fat-cattery , while conservatives can retort that the film asks us to root for a rival businessman and the tight-knit community that supports him , not for a government regulator or welfare office . 
Likewise , the movie 's vision of working-class Americans fanning out from the slums to the suburban promised land of Bailey Park has animated government policy in Republican and Democratic eras alike -- from Roosevelt 's New Deal down to George W. Bush 's `` ownership society . '' 
For three generations , suburban homesteading has been underwritten by our infrastructure spending , our zoning policies , our banking regulations and our tax code . 
Easy credit , inexpensive mortgages , cheap gasoline , wide-open highways , the heavy hand of federal regulators on any bank that declined to lend in low-income or minority neighborhoods -- if it made homeownership cheap and suburbia accessible , Americans were for it , never mind what the critics said . 
Potter-style skepticism about these trends endured , but it was safely marginalized . 
The Potters of the right griped that banks and government agencies were being forced to take on too much risk in the name of expanding minority homeownership -- and that besides , renting was often more economically sensible and investing your money in the stock market instead of your home delivered higher long-term returns . 
But their arguments fell upon deaf ears . 
The Potters of the left , increasingly vocal since the 1960s , argued that the whole business was unsustainable : If overpopulation or oil shocks or anomie did n't bring suburbia crashing down , then global warming would , and the only thing to do was to de-sprawl and retrench . 
But as suburbs gave way to exurbs , Levittowns to `` sprinkler cities , '' Americans were too busy watching HGTV and fantasizing about `` great rooms '' and three-car garages to listen . 
Until 2008 , that is , which may be remembered as the year when the American Dream 's excesses -- from gas-guzzling SUVs to subprime mortgages -- suddenly threatened to strangle the dream itself . 
This summer and fall , George Bailey 's vision has endured a stunning one-two punch . 
First , months of skyrocketing gas prices -LRB- along with dire forecasts about `` peak oil '' -RRB- made suburbia seem unsustainable , conjuring up a future in which Americans huddle together around subway stops and light-rail stations , exchanging the backyard and the garage for townhouses and apartments . 
And then this autumn came the mortgage-fueled financial sector meltdown , in which Potter 's warnings about letting the working poor buy homes on credit seemed to find their vindication in a worldwide economic crisis . 
The next decade , then , seems likely to belong to Potters from both sides of the aisle . 
Once the bailouts end , bankers and bureaucrats alike will grow increasingly tightfisted . 
Easy credit will become a privilege of wealth and mortgages vastly more difficult to get . 
No president in the near future -- and certainly no Republican president -- will unveil any sweeping plans to add 5.5 million more minority homeowners by reducing down-payment requirements the way Bush , eager to woo Hispanics and exurban voters , did with his minority homeownership initiative in 2002 . 
Meanwhile , America 's infrastructure priorities will probably take a distinctly European turn -- especially under Democratic leadership -- with a greater focus on mass transit , walkable cities and `` smart growth '' and declining support for the kind of subdivided , car-connected sprawl that has flowed outward from our cities since the days of Bailey Park . 
Gas will probably get more expensive , thanks to stricter environmental regulations as well as market pressures ; so will McMansions and big lawns , vaulted ceilings and master suites . 
More Americans may well eschew the suburbs entirely , opting for the denser , mixed-use neighborhoods that New Urbanists have been urging on us for decades -- kinder , gentler and hipper versions of the Pottersville depicted in George Bailey 's nightmare vision , dotted with coffee shops and farmers ' markets instead of honky-tonks and gin joints . 
