-LRB- By M. Spencer Green -- Associated Press -RRB- The facade of the New York Stock Exchange , where shares have tumbled . 
The Dow Jones industrial average is off 36 percent for the year ; many would-be retirees are anxious about their savings . 
-LRB- By Daniel Acker -- Bloomberg News -RRB- Rep. George Miller , chairman of the House Committee on Education and Labor , convened a hearing on 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s. -LRB- By Dennis Cook -- Associated Press -RRB- For many Americans , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans were supposed to be their own little golden parachutes into retirement . 
Now , it seems , those parachutes may not open in time . 
The global financial crisis that revealed the flaws of Wall Street has also exposed the vulnerability of America 's retirement system . 
Employers have increasingly abandoned traditional pensions , forcing workers to rely on 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s and similar plans that have a lot more exposure to the stock market . 
The assumption was that even if the market suffered short-term losses , over time it would rise , allowing workers to recoup their savings . 
But the steepness of this year 's market collapse and the still-uncertain depth of the economic downturn has prompted lawmakers , academics and economists to question the wisdom of letting workers hitch their retirement fortunes to the precariousness of the stock market . 
So far this year , the Dow Jones industrial average is down 36 percent , eroding the savings of millions of Americans and forcing those who had planned to retire in the next few years to reconsider their plans . 
`` Right now , we 're really seeing the risks come home , and people are recognizing the extent to which their retirement savings are on the line when the stock market goes down drastically , '' said Jacob Hacker , a political science professor at the University of California at Berkeley who chronicled the advent of 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans in `` The Great Risk Shift . '' 
Until three decades ago , Social Security and pensions , formally known as defined-benefit plans , were the main sources of retirement income . 
Now , Social Security is in danger of eventually running out of money . 
And defined-benefit plans , in which employers made the investment decisions and promised to pay employees a set amount each month for the rest of their lives , are quickly disappearing . 
Favored by the `` ownership society '' movement , defined-contribution plans , which 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s fall under , have picked up the slack . 
In 1985 , there were 29 million participants in defined-benefit plans and 10 million in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s. In 2005 , there were 21 million in defined-benefit plans and 47 million in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s. The government has encouraged that shift , providing $ 80 billion in tax breaks each year to people who store their money in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s. But in return , workers have had to assume the investment responsibilities even if they know little about the stock market . 
They have also had to give up their lifetime guarantee of income . 
`` Everyone wiped their hands of any obligation for retirement , and the burden shifted from the employer to the employee , and the risk is shifted from the employer to the employee , '' said Rep. George Miller -LRB- D-Calif . -RRB- 
, chairman of the House Committee on Education and Labor , who last week convened a hearing to examine 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s. `` In the beginning , no one ever said , ` Would this be sufficient ? 
Would it work ? ' 
and what you see is a plan that is highly responsive to external events unlike Social Security , unlike defined-benefit plans , unlike a public pension plan . '' 
Proponents of 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s say with those greater risks come greater rewards . 
`` If you own equities , you really have to believe in the American capitalist system in that the dollars will find the highest and best use , '' said Mickey Cargile , a managing partner for WNB Private Client Services , a financial advisory firm in Texas . 
`` Along with that , there will be a period in which the excesses in the market will be purged . 
That 's what we 're seeing now . 
That 's what we saw in 1987 . '' 
In the past15 months , Americans have lost about $ 2 trillion worth of retirement savings both in pensions and 401 -LRB- k -RRB- - style plans , Peter R. Orszag , director of the Congressional Budget Office , told Miller 's committee last week . 
Because 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s tend to have more stocks in their portfolios than pensions do , Orszag concluded that 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s have been the biggest losers . 
This year , the average account balance of 401 -LRB- k -RRB- participants has dropped 7.2 to 11.2 percent , according to an analysis of 2.2 million plans by the District-based Employee Benefit Research Institute . 
But many workers have seen even sharper declines in recent months , analysts and economists say . 
Further draining retirement accounts is that many workers have been allowed to dip into their 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s for loans or so-called hardship withdrawals . 
That trend has been increasing in recent months because people can no longer tap the equity in their homes to pay down credit card debt . 
The experts disagree over how long it takes to recover from a bear market . 
The financial firm T. Rowe Price found that in the past five bear markets going back to 1976 , the longest it took for stocks to recover from their peak and then provide a 10 percent annual compound return was eight years . 
The shortest was five months . 
