Representatives of BP , Transocean and Halliburton speak to senators Oil executives have traded blame in Congress over the Gulf Coast oil spill , as the battle to contain it continues . 
British oil giant BP told a Senate hearing a crucial safety device used by drilling contractor Transocean failed . 
Senators heard Transocean argue in turn that BP had been in charge and that a third firm , a BP contractor , did not plug the exploratory well properly . 
President Barack Obama was said by the White House to be `` deeply frustrated '' the oil leak had yet to be stopped . 
The Obama administration has announced a break-up of the federal oil industry watchdog amid fears of a conflict of interest . 
There 's been plenty of technical detail in Washington as three companies try to explain what went wrong ... In simple language it 's a blame game Eleven people died when an explosion destroyed the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig on 20 April . 
Some 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons -RRB- of oil a day have been gushing into the sea since then , threatening the delicate ecosystem of the US Gulf coast . 
Soldiers using helicopters and bulldozers , helped by prison inmates , are battling to contain the slick . 
BP 's efforts to cap the well were set back at the weekend when a giant metal funnel lowered over the site suffered a build-up of ice-like crystals and had to be put aside . 
BP hopes to make a second attempt this week to seal the well . 
The oil giant 's latest plan is to ram rubbish such as golf balls and shredded tyres into the leak to block the hole , says BBC North America editor Mark Mardell . 
The broken pipe is almost a mile -LRB- 1.6 km -RRB- below the ocean 's surface , with little visibility for remote-controlled vehicles . 
A relief well is being drilled but may take up to three months to complete . 
In Washington , BP , Transocean and a third firm , Halliburton , gave senators technical explanations of what went wrong . 
But in simple language it was a blame game , our North America editor says . 
Booms have been partly successful although rough seas have washed oil over them Some controlled burning of oil has taken place , but it causes serious air pollution About 325,000 gallons of dispersant have been used , although scientists warn it may kill marine life A relief well is being drilled but could take many weeks A huge steel funnel suffered a build-up of ice-like crystals and had to be put aside Deepwater Horizon was owned and operated by Swiss-based Transocean , but was working on behalf of BP . 
Lamar McKay , head of BP America , focused on a critical safety device , the 450-tonne blowout protector -LRB- BOP -RRB- . 
It was supposed to shut off oil flow on the ocean floor in the event of a well blowout , but he said it had `` failed to operate '' . 
He noted that BP had not owned the rig and so `` responsibility for the safety of drilling operations '' belonged to Transocean . 
But Transocean chief executive Steven Newman said there was no reason to believe the BOP had been at fault . 
`` Offshore oil and gas production projects begin and end with the operator , in this case BP , '' he said . 
He also pinned blame on the failure of a cement oil-well casing built by BP contractor Halliburton . 
However , Halliburton executive Tim Probert argued his firm had followed all requirements set out by BP and industry practices . 
Senate Energy Committee Chairman Jeff Bingaman said the oil rig explosion had probably been due to a `` cascade of errors , technical , human and regulatory '' . 
The BBC 's North America editor says the details of the engineering may be obscure , but the motivation is clear enough : no-one wants to say the loss of lives , the environmental impact or the economic effect was their fault . 
Accepting blame will have huge financial consequences . 
And President Obama wants new laws to lift the cap on how much firms are liable to pay for such disasters from millions to billions of dollars - and that would apply to this accident , our North America editor adds . 
Announcing a shake-up at the Minerals Management Service -LRB- MMS -RRB- , Interior Secretary Salazar said it was important to build `` a strong and independent organization holding energy companies accountable '' . 
`` The tragedy aboard the Deepwater Horizon and the massive spill for which BP is responsible has made the importance and urgency of our reform agenda even clearer , '' he added . 
Critics say the MMS - a branch of Mr Salazar 's Department of the Interior - has been riddled with conflicts of interest . 
They argue that the two core responsibilities of the MMS are diametrically opposed - making money off the industry by collecting royalties , while cracking down on it in ways that may affect the industry 's bottom line . 
A 2008 internal investigation found some MMS employees had taken drugs and had sex with energy company representatives . 
Some staff had also accepted gifts and free holidays amid `` a culture of ethical failure '' , according to the investigation . 
The interior secretary has been conducting a 30-day review of offshore drilling at the request of President Obama . 
