Hair and fur stuffed into tights are the latest tool in the Deepwater Horizon clean-up . 
The hairy booms wo n't plug leaks on the seabed , but will be floated off beaches to mop up oil washing towards shore . 
Making one of the oil spill hair booms How 's your hair - shower-fresh , or a bit greasy around the roots ? 
We wash our hair because it collects the oils our bodies produce . 
And it 's this property of hair - and fur and wool - that means it will be used to help tackling the oil spewing from BP 's ruptured well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
It 's adsorbent rather than absorbent , meaning oil clings to the many tiny scales on each strand of hair . 
`` Each follicle -LRB- strand -RRB- of hair has an enormous amount of surface area . 
It 's not soaking up the oil , it 's not blowing up like a sponge - the oil is coating the outside , '' says Lisa Gautier , founder of the ecological charity Matter of Trust , which runs an international Hair for Oil Spills program to collect off-cuts from hair salons and pet groomers , sheep farmers and individuals . 
The donated hair and fur is then stuffed into nylon tights to make sausage-shaped booms to string out along beaches , as officials have said there are not enough manufactured booms to protect the coastline from the looming oil slick . 
Oil coats surface of each strand of hair or fur This is because hair is adsorbent , not absorbent like a sponge `` Hair is an extremely efficient material for taking in all kinds of oils including petroleum - it clings to the hair because it 's spiky , '' says Ms Gautier . 
The technique has been tested and approved by the United States Environmental Protection Agency . 
It was used in past disasters , such as 2007 's Cosco Busan oil spill in San Francisco Bay and in the Philippines in 2006 , when prisoners shaved their heads and chests to donate hair to the clean-up effort . 
And in the first Iraq war in 1991 , when retreating Iraqi soldiers released million tonnes of oil into the Persian Gulf , New Zealand sent booms filled with sheep 's wool that could soak up 40 times their weight in oil to help with the clean-up . 
At the time , Malcolm Fox , a chemist and visiting professor at Leeds University , studied the use of low-grade wool in oil spill clean-ups . 
`` An oil company sent me a drum of the crude oil\/water emulsion and we tried soaking it up with mats of the wool . 
It was reasonably successful and we recycled the wool mats by putting them through an old washing mangle to recover the oil , which could also be used again . '' 
Human hair , however , proved more effective - in part because the wool had been processed and so lost its lanolin coating , which naturally repels water and holds grease to keep sheep warm . 
`` Human hair grease acts as a spreading agent , to help the oil form a film on the surface . '' 
The idea of using human hair to mop up oil spills dates from the Exxon Valdez accident in 1989 . 
Watching the unfolding disaster on television , Alabama hair stylist Phil McCory noticed how hard it was for volunteers to clean oil from otters ' fur , and thought to himself : `` If animal fur can trap and hold spilled oil , why ca n't human hair ? '' 
Prisoners in Manila bagged up their hair for a 2006 oil spill So he staged a home oil spill to test this theory , pouring a gallon of used motor oil into his son 's paddling pool . 
He then dunked in a pair of his wife 's pantyhose stuffed with clippings from his salon . 
Within two minutes , the DIY boom had sucked up all the oil . 
He then parlayed this brainwave into a business making oil spill mats from hair purchased in China . 
For the past 10 years , his company has worked with the Matter of Trust charity to establish a hair recycling system to find a use for the all the hair and fur cut off by stylists and pet groomers each day . 
The charity 's figures suggest this amounts to 370,000 pounds of hair , and 300,000 pounds of fur , a day in the US alone . 
While fur , horse hair and feathers are also used in the booms , the charity says human hair seems to be most effective as it has less natural oil and so more capacity to catch spilled oil . 
A regular part of the BBC News Magazine , Who , What , Why ? 
aims to answer some of the questions behind the headlines To make a hair boom , first cut the legs off a pair of tights , and fit the open end over a wide plastic pipe - this makes it easier to feed the hair and fur into the stocking . 
Once it 's full , tie off the end and cover the resulting sausage in a strong mesh . 
While the charity welcomes all donations , there are a few caveats - it prefers freshly-washed hair and fur , and hair to be from the head only . 
This is because each boom is hand-made , and its volunteers are unlikely to want to handle filthy - or intimate - off-cuts . 
But what happens to all the oil-soaked hair ? 
Among the options tried by the charity include feeding the whole mess to worms to break down into fertiliser . 
