No worse than a bad cold , say many of the Britons diagnosed with swine fever . 
So is it time for pig flu parties , to spread a mild version to build immunity ? 
As this is a new strain of H1N1 , we have no herd immunity Dotted up and down the UK , Tamiflu has been dispensed to swine flu sufferers and those who may have been exposed to the highly contagious virus . 
Some fret about taking the powerful antiviral drug - with its unpleasant side effects - and wonder if it might be wiser to catch swine flu now , priming our bodies to fight back if a more vicious form surfaces in winter . 
`` It would be quite a dangerous thing to do , '' says John Oxford , professor of virology at St Barts and the Royal London Hospitals , Queen Mary College . 
`` The scenario is that you get your mates together to spread swine flu . 
But then you take it home . 
Perhaps you take your dear old granny a cup of tea . 
You might recover fast , but those you expose might not It 's highly contagious , with the potential to infect many people Anyone can develop serious complications For this new version of H1N1 is highly contagious . 
Someone in rude health might recover quickly , albeit after enduring a fever , vomiting and diarrhoea . 
But they might pass it on to someone less able to fight it off - someone with diabetes , asthma or a weak immune system . 
`` A swine flu party would only work if you all then put yourselves in quarantine , or returned to your hermit hole , and did not touch anyone for at least 10 days . '' 
And while chickenpox or rubella parties were once popular as these illnesses are more straight-forward in childhood , swine flu is in a different league , warns Professor Oxford . 
Chickenpox can be fatal - but that is rare Although chickenpox can be fatal - that is rare . 
Dangerous complications can happen in a small number of healthy children or those with other chronic health problems . 
People have died from swine flu and less is known about the current strain . 
Health authorities do n't yet know enough about it to predict how it will affect individuals , how it will mutate and whether it will come back . 
The effects have so far been less dramatic than initially feared - Mexico has scaled back its death toll from 159 to 56 , and precautions such as school closures seem to have slowed its spread . 
But it has `` full pandemic potential '' , the World Health Organization says . 
A pandemic occurs when a new flu virus appears against which we have no immunity , resulting in outbreaks worldwide . 
Already cases have been confirmed in 30 countries , from Mexico to New Zealand , Canada to Thailand , Germany to the UK . 
`` What 's reassuring is that the UK has stockpiles of antiviral drugs , enough to treat those who contract swine flu or who are exposed to it , and to protect frontline medical staff , '' says Professor Oxford . 
`` My daughter 's a GP . 
If -LRB- swine flu -RRB- takes off and people come in to see her , she can take it prophylatically , one tablet a day for six weeks . '' 
A regular part of the BBC News Magazine , Who , What , Why ? 
aims to answer some of the questions behind the headlines And although swine flu is a new virus , our bodies encounter other strains of H1N1 in the seasonal flu that does the rounds each year . 
`` We 're not as vulnerable as we were in 1957 's pandemic , which was a totally new virus . 
We 've come into contact with distant relatives of swine flu before . 
If you catch it , your body will say ' I know this family , I 've fought off its cousin , six times removed ' and go to work to fight it off . '' 
Prior exposure , through seasonal flu or swine flu vaccination when one becomes available , prompts the immune system to produce suitable antibodies to fight off the invader . 
`` And once exposed , you have lifetime memory of those antibodies and can produce them again , '' says Professor Oxford . 
