Obama addresses Congress last night . 
-LRB- AP Photo\/Pablo Martinez Monsivais -RRB- Simply by being there , President Obama and Vice President Biden created powerful imagery of change at last night 's joint session of Congress . 
There was no Dick Cheney skulking over the president 's right shoulder . 
Gone was the tongue-tied Texan staring blankly into the TelePrompter , replaced by a commanding and self-possessed African-American Democrat . 
And up there in the first lady 's box ? 
A radiant black woman . 
But sometimes bygones wo n't be bygones . 
Indeed , absolutely central to Obama 's argument last night for his massive economic recovery package and his hugely ambitious plans in the areas of energy , health and education was his conclusion that the previous administration so utterly failed to rise to the challenges facing the nation that we are now facing `` a day of reckoning . '' 
Here 's the transcript , as delivered . 
Obama went into last night 's address with enormous popular support . 
But he still needed to turn the country 's faith in him into faith in his far-reaching agenda . 
To fully make the case for such dramatic action , he had to more clearly explain his thought process . 
He did that in three fundamental steps . 
First , by describing the profound irresponsibility that brought us here in the first place . 
Then by reminding us that the American government has a history of achieving greatness in times of crisis . 
Then by hearkening to this country 's indomitable spirit . 
It was a potent combination . 
And that first part amounted to possibly the most damning summary of the Bush legacy yet . 
`` The fact is , our economy did not fall into decline overnight . 
Nor did all of our problems begin when the housing market collapsed or the stock market sank , '' Obama said . 
`` We have known for decades that our survival depends on finding new sources of energy , yet we import more oil today than ever before . 
The cost of health care eats up more and more of our savings each year , yet we keep delaying reform . 
Our children will compete for jobs in a global economy that too many of our schools do not prepare them for . 
And though all of these challenges went unsolved , we still managed to spend more money and pile up more debt , both as individuals and through our government , than ever before . 
`` In other words , we have lived through an era where too often short-term gains were prized over long-term prosperity , where we failed to look beyond the next payment , the next quarter , or the next election . 
A surplus became an excuse to transfer wealth to the wealthy instead of an opportunity to invest in our future . 
Regulations -- regulations were gutted for the sake of a quick profit at the expense of a healthy market . 
People bought homes they knew they could n't afford from banks and lenders who pushed those bad loans anyway . 
And all the while , critical debates and difficult decisions were put off for some other time on some other day . 
`` Well , that day of reckoning has arrived , and the time to take charge of our future is here . 
`` Now is the time to act boldly and wisely , to not only revive this economy , but to build a new foundation for lasting prosperity . '' 
Since the day after the election , Obama has been accused of overreaching . 
But in what I consider the second major part of his central argument , he argued that now is not the time to think small : `` I reject the view that says our problems will simply take care of themselves , that says government has no role in laying the foundation for our common prosperity , for history tells a different story , '' he said . 
`` History reminds us that , at every moment of economic upheaval and transformation , this nation has responded with bold action and big ideas . 
In the midst of civil war , we laid railroad tracks from one coast to another that spurred commerce and industry . 
From the turmoil of the Industrial Revolution came a system of public high schools that prepared our citizens for a new age . 
In the wake of war and depression , the G.I. Bill sent a generation to college and created the largest middle-class in history . 
And a twilight struggle for freedom led to a nation of highways , an American on the moon , and an explosion of technology that still shapes our world . 
`` In each case , government did n't supplant private enterprise ; it catalyzed private enterprise . 
It created the conditions for thousands of entrepreneurs and new businesses to adapt and to thrive . 
`` We are a nation that has seen promise amid peril and claimed opportunity from ordeal . 
Now we must be that nation again . 
`` That is why , even as it cuts back on programs we do n't need , the budget I submit will invest in the three areas that are absolutely critical to our economic future : energy , health care , and education . '' 
And Obama made the third part of his central argument with the help of a Skutnik -- one of the carefully-selected guests in the first lady 's box that presidents have held out as examples to the nation ever since Ronald Reagan in 1982 lauded Lenny Skutnik , the government worker who weeks before had leapt into the icy Potomac River to rescue a survivor of an Air Florida crash . 
Obama 's chief Skutnik was Ty'Sheoma Bethea , an eighth-grade student from a crumbling junior high school in South Carolina . 
`` She had been told that her school is hopeless , '' Obama explained . 
`` But the other day after class , she went to the public library and typed up a letter to the people sitting in this chamber . 
She even asked her principal for the money to buy a stamp . 
`` The letter asks us for help and says , ` We are just students trying to become lawyers , doctors , congressmen like yourself , and one day president , so we can make a change to not just the state of South Carolina , but also the world . 
We are not quitters . ' 
`` That 's what she said : ` We are not quitters . ' 
These words -- -LRB- APPLAUSE . -RRB- 
These words and these stories tell us something about the spirit of the people who sent us here . 
They tell us that , even in the most trying times , amid the most difficult circumstances , there is a generosity , a resilience , a decency , and a determination that perseveres , a willingness to take responsibility for our future and for posterity . 
`` Their resolve must be our inspiration . 
Their concerns must be our cause . 
And we must show them and all our people that we are equal to the task before us . '' 
Of his three major priorities , Obama was most emphatic about health care . 
Almost shouting , he declared : '' -LRB- L -RRB- et there be no doubt : Health care reform can not wait , it must not wait , and it will not wait another year . '' 
He also responded to several populist concerns about his financial rescue plan . 
Notably , he placed a good deal of distance between himself and how the Bush administration apportioned the first chunk of bailout money : `` Now , I understand that when the last administration asked this Congress to provide assistance for struggling banks , Democrats and Republicans alike were infuriated by the mismanagement and the results that followed . 
So were the American taxpayers ; so was I. `` So I know how unpopular it is to be seen as helping banks right now , especially when everyone is suffering in part from their bad decisions . 
I promise you : I get it . 
But I also know that , in a time of crisis , we can not afford to govern out of anger or yield to the politics of the moment . '' 
He vowed : `` This time -- this time , CEOs wo n't be able to use taxpayer money to pad their paychecks , or buy fancy drapes , or disappear on a private jet . 
Those days are over . '' 
And he offered one big reason to discount the largely negative judgment of Wall Street on his bank rescue plan thus far : `` I understand that , on any given day , Wall Street may be more comforted by an approach that gives bank bailouts with no strings attached and that holds nobody accountable for their reckless decisions , but such an approach wo n't solve the problem . '' 
Obama defended his anti-foreclosure plan , alluding to the fact that it wo n't cover investors or people who ca n't make even reduced payments : `` It 's a plan that wo n't help speculators or that neighbor down the street who bought a house he could never hope to afford , but it will help millions of Americans who are struggling with declining home values , Americans who will now be able to take advantage of the lower interest rates that this plan has already helped to bring about . '' 
And he identified some modest cuts he intends to make in his budget , including `` direct payments to large agribusinesses that do n't need them , '' `` no-bid contracts that have wasted billions in Iraq , '' and `` Cold War-era weapons systems we do n't use . '' 
He said he would raise taxes by ending tax breaks for the wealthiest 2 percent of Americans : `` Let me be absolutely clear , because I know you 'll end up hearing some of the same claims that rolling back these tax breaks means a massive tax increase on the American people . 
If your family earns less than $ 250,000 a year , a quarter million dollars a year , you will not see your taxes increased a single dime . 
I repeat : not one single dime . '' 
One of the biggest surprises of the night was his rousing call for individuals to pursue their schooling . '' 
-LRB- D -RRB- ropping out of high school is no longer an option . 
It 's not just quitting on yourself ; it 's quitting on your country , '' he said , also asking `` every American to commit to at least one year or more of higher education or career training . '' 
He also asked Congress `` to send me legislation that places a market-based cap on carbon pollution . '' 
There were only a few lines in his speech that actively pit the two sides of the aisle against each other . 
One came when Obama spoke of the importance of drawing down the debt . 
`` See , I know we can get some consensus in here , '' Obama ad-libbed . 
But when he returned to his text -- saying `` With the deficit we inherited ... '' -- it was the Democrats ' turn to roar . 
And rather than explicitly reaching out to Republicans on any particular issue , Obama chose instead to speak more generally about common ground : `` I know that we have n't agreed on every issue thus far , '' he said . 
`` There are surely times in the future where we will part ways . 
But I also know that every American who is sitting here tonight loves this country and wants it to succeed . 
That must be the starting point for every debate we have in the coming months and where we return after those debates are done . 
That is the foundation on which the American people expect us to build common ground . '' 
By Dan Froomkin | February 25 , 2009 ; 12:08 PM ET Thanks , Dan . 
This is the first review of the President 's address that makes sense to me . 
Other commenters seem to be more interested in the response in the polls or crabbing about their pet peeves . 
My reaction to the speech was that the President put Congress on notice that it better not get in his way or those who oppose his policies will face political death . 
The Nation rightly stands behind him to face the challenges ahead . 
I cried out as Pelosi jumped to her feet for the thousandth time . 
I thought she was trying to steal the spotlight or perhaps to bask in his glow -- either way it was not appealing . 
And the same old back and forth between the two sides of the house seemed dreadfully inappropriate -- very adolescent -- a kind of Terrel Owens approach to politics . 
A Bronx cheer to congresspeople on both sides of the aisle . 
It was an ambitious speech . 
It will be interesting to see how much actually gets accomplished . 
Where , exactly , is the analysis here ? 
I thought I would check out one column in the post-Bush era to see if Froomkin could get over his snide lunacy and actually honestly live up to the name of this column `` White House Watch . '' 
Mission failed , Dan . 
At least I wo n't have to read you ever again , so thanks for sparing me those few minutes . 
He was raised as a Hindu but now says he 's a Christian . 
Do you think he 's a stealth Christian and that his inner Hindu is lying in wait ? 
Who is the real Piyush Jindal ? 
Who 's he been palin ' around with ? 
His speech reminded me of the infamous McCain `` lime green '' speech in Philadelphia in response to Obama 's nomination . 
`` That 's not change we can believe in ! 
-LRB- grin grin -RRB- '' When Obama came down the gauntlet and met Richard Shelby I expected him to pull out his birth certificate to show Shelby during their amicable chat . 
Cut those taxes , that 's all we need . 
It worked so well the last eight years . 
Where did Froomkin demonstrate snide lunacy in covering Bush ? 
I do n't see what 's wrong with contrasting the present administration with the previous administration 2 months in . 
I 'm glad I wo n't have to waste 10 seconds reading any more of your inane comments . 
Anyway , I agree on the whole standing ovation issue . 
At least Obama seems to be consistently following his theme of not avoiding tough decisions . 
He is n't going to put off energy issues , education or health care reform simply because they are divisive . 
One of my usual thinly-disguised-nasty incoming e-mails this morning was of the typical `` yes , but ... '' variety . 
Guy made a silly faint attempt at portraying himself as bipartisan , then got down to the same old stuff . 
He pointed out that the stock market is continuing to fall under Obama . 
This is an administration that has been at the helm for all of 5 weeks ... and my blindly conservative acquaintance wants to totally dismiss from consideration the Bush years that effected the present near-terminal bleeding of the stock market ! 
He 's found a way in his own mind to blame everything on Barack Obama . 
Our Congress appears to be a microcosm of the American public at large , what with its mule-headed , heels-dug-in , self-absorbed conservatives . 
Obstructionism is pursued with a sort of vengeance -- as if the Bush years were `` the good old days . '' 
Personally , I 'm in my 81st year , and this is the best president I 've seen yet -- back to and including Franklin Roosevelt . 
That 's rich !! try every column ever written . 
Now we get the man crush articles . 
Oh obama looked at me !! oh obama shook my hand , I will never wash it again ! 
Oh Obama looked my way ! 
Froomkin is a joke only good for laughs ... Posted by : pwaa | February 25 , 2009 2:44 PM | Report abuse '' Personally , I 'm in my 81st year , and this is the best president I 've seen yet -- back to and including Franklin Roosevelt . '' 
well grandpa time to take your meds apparently . 
FDR , who defeated the Nazis and Japanese , served for 4 terms , tackled the depression ? 
And after 5 weeks , Obama is his equal ? 
What idiocy Posted by : pwaa | February 25 , 2009 2:47 PM | Report abuse Last nights address may be the most honest speak given to congress since Ford 's speech . 
The speech where he said the state of the country was not good . 
Well that was 35 years ago and the state of affairs are in the ditch again . 
We need mules to pull us out , not muleheaded stubborness keeping us there . 
We should leave the nit pickers in the dust as the majority of us try to move forward . 
For god 's sake any bill drafted in Congress will have a few flea 's . 
The last 8 years of tax breaks to the top 2 % and job 's being done away with for the remaining 98 % just do n't seen to be working . 
It is a time for a new begining , a new dawn . 
Last night was the latest shot across the bow for the future . 
The chat today was cool , too . 
Looks like bobmoses\/Pugi\/PWAA needs a nap . 
There are rather deranged mental defectives who support the blue blooded aristocrat elitist crime family booschie . 
These would be known as traitors , warmongers , thuggish bullies , juvenile loudmouths , and loathsome racist class war artists . 
You disagree with a person 's views -- lay it on . 
But when you attack a person because of their age -LRB- in this case -RRB- , race , or gender , you step over a line which should not be tolerated in a civil society . 
Back under the bridge , troll ! 
That has never been a long suit with Republicans , so maybe you are a Republican . 
People who have watched a string of politicians over 80 years , and studied some actual history along the way , are in a pretty good position to judge their merits . 
I am only 72 , so I do n't have as many years invested . 
At one time early in my life I was a Goldwater conservative , but the Republican Party has lost its way and seems to be wandering in the desert . 
People like Jindal do not inspire confidence as guides to lead them out of the wilderness . 
My father , a longtime treasurer for a Republican county committee , complained about them on his deathbed , and they have gone downhill since then . 
A good hard slap to instill some respect for his elders is called for . 
What would Obama do ? 
, and how would he confront a totally hostile and obstructionist democratic house ? . 
You see people , grand ideas and plans are only that , the success or failure rests on the shoulders of everyone , the institutions that must put them in practice and many other factors . 
Former president Bush is no more responsible for the collapse of the economy , than Mr. Obama will be if his plans succeed or fail . 
To state otherwise is at best naive and at worse stupid . 
Some people even think that a speech alone will improve the economy , it reminds me of those who think that we humans can somehow change the climate . 
Give Dan a break . 
Sooner or later he will start making sense . 
Drink the kool aid , inanely walk around chanting O-BAM-A , O-BAM-A . 
Blame Bush for everything . 
Liberals are the only people who when they form a firing squad , form a circle ... . . 
Describing this important tragedy in DC history as `` an Air Florida crash '' is a bit like calling the 911 attack on the Pentagon as `` a fire in government building '' Posted by : billx2001 | February 25 , 2009 5:14 PM | Report abuse Exorcising Bush 's ghost will take years of painfully hard efforts by all Americans , unfortunately . 
That much is certain now . 
Shamefully , we have children disguised as adults who are stomping their feet in a hissy fit over the President 's refusal to keep doing the same thing over that is not working and over again expecting different results . 
That is the layman 's definition of insanity and I am a happy Kool-Aid drinker since we do n't have a President doing crazy things like cutting taxes more for the rich and letting the banks sell , well trash that we the little people have to work to pay . 
I am happy with this President ! 
Dan , YOU just keep on him because we have no loyal opposition to keep his feet to the fire we have merely a bunch of negative nabobs of negativity disguised as Republicans . 
As a born and raised Louisianan I am deeply ashamed of Gov. Jindal who merely wants to be President not a public servant . 
Folks just need to grow up ! 
Well , actually Obama 's approval rating is less than 60 % and less than Bush 's a month into office . 
If Froomkin was a journalist instead of a partisan hack , he would acknowledge this . 
We `` get it . '' 
Democrats = good , smart . 
Republicans = evil , stupid . 
Such drivel is commonplace in your missives . 
The fact is that you are incapable of being objective , or at least you have never shown the ability to be objective . 
Yet another reason why newspapers , and those who write for them , are fading into irrelevance . 
Enjoy preaching to your choir . 
While the sheeple manage to keep Obama 's approval about average for this time in his presidency , the real news -- not discussed here because it would n't support the agenda -- is that Obama 's disapproval ratings are at record levels . 
It seems that his failure to lead Pelosi and friends is beginning to alienate the centrists who put him over the top . 
Oh , and Dan , can we just quit with the `` black '' thing . 
He 's the post-racial president , remember ? 
His mother was white ! 
And the `` radiant black woman '' you speak of looked like an absolute buffoon in a sleeveless , knee-length dress in February . 
Ca n't discuss a presidential speech on the issues ? 
Each one of you that posts about Mrs. Obama , or denigrates someone 's age , or refers time and time again to the worn out `` kool aid '' simply reinforces the reputation of Republicans ; childish , petulant , and ignorant . 
President Obama 's speech was brilliant . 
It will go down in history as one of the great Presidential speeches . 
It was the right speech at the right time and he delivered it with passion . 
Some of you note that it 's all just words . 
It 's a speech . 
They call it a speech because it 's spoken . 
If it was action they would call it an activity . 
Give the President more than five weeks before you start busting a gut . 
You have eight years to go , do n't want to have blow all your arteries in the first two months now do you ? 
That being said , I must offer a few comments that are less than positive : First , I found the president 's speech to be too much a reiteration of his past speeches , both as a candidate and as president , with too much emphasis on principles and a lack of detail . 
Second , there is a contradiction that must be explained to me , and perhaps to millions of others , in that we are castigated for having lived above our means , for having made irresponsible financial decisions , based in large part on easy credit , and at the same time we are hammered with the concept that the nation 's economy is built on credit and wo n't recover until credit is less tight , i.e. , easier . 
If there is n't a contradiction here , a better explanation is necessary . 
I do sense a message , however , which is conveyed by the president 's insistence on going forward on his plans regarding education , health care , etc. . 
The message is that Mr. Obama is not here to put Humpty Dumpty back together and let things go on as before , to merely restore a business and governmental culture that continues America 's spiral of decline , softened and camouflaged by bubbles of prosperity -LRB- dotcom , housing -RRB- that pop or deflate , with devastating results . 
The nation needs Mr. Obama to succeed , not just satisfy us with the image of success . 
I wish him the best . 
The compost and most of the other liberal old media are toast . 
There might be a job opening at MSNBC , though most likely that 's toast as well . 
As far as the speech , does n't Obie do a great con job ... Posted by : steve4 | February 25 , 2009 7:55 PM | Report abuse Nice analysis of the speech . 
I especially liked when he said that dropping out of high school is n't even an option -- it would be quitting on the country . 
The Air Florida crash happened in January 1981 , not 1982 . 
Reagan invited Lenny Skutnik to the State of the Union a couple of weeks later . 
Republicans beware , if you continue to be horses arses , the people will hold you accountable and you will be further marginalized . 
Obama has a real vision for this country , the whole country , not just country club . 
Suspension of disbelief can only stretch so far . 
There is no Bush apologist on this comment board today that I can see who a sense of history . 
Had such MENSA members any sense of history , they 'd know that Dubya is Herbert Hoover . 
But without the lifelong charitable contributions and philanthropy . 
A reader of history also would know that in a deficit situation , a tax cut is not truly a cut ; it is only tax deferred . 
Rant on , professor . 
I 'm remembering that flap a few years ago when the news staff complained so much about you , and so many of us came forward to support you . 
A column like this makes them look like pompous fools . 
If this is n't real reporting , I do n't know what is . 
`` Could n't you just save some time and write `` Obama is awesome ; Bush sucked '' for every entry ? '' 
No , he ca n't . 
The job of a columnist is to point out the subtleties we might not otherwise notice . 
`` Obama is awesome ; Bush sucked '' is already obvious to everyone in the world . 
-- faye kane , homeless brain Posted by : FayeKane_HomelessSmartypants | February 25 , 2009 8:50 PM | Report abuse President Obama was a commanding presence , full of ideas , clearly conveyed . 
he told us what he was going to do , why it needed done , and how he is going to do it . 
He is dead on right . 
Since the days of reagan the nation has ignored anything difficult , with the exception of Clinton draggin republicons along a little way , albiet kicking and screaming . 
bush erased the benefits of the Clinton era in about a month , and within a year had turned a record surplus right back in to reagan like deficits . 
jindal was worse than a joke . 
Do republicons see a brown person and automatically think they can win over minority support ? 
jodal was condescending , inarticulate , creepy at times , and his message - really , tax cuts will work this time was disgraceful . 
His trying to pretend that because bush gutted FEMA that it was proof that government ca n't work . 
He is also showboating `` rejecting '' less than 3 % of the stimulus money headed to Loiusianna , omitting the fact that because Loiusianna has gotten so incredibly much federal money - 3rd largest amount of any state in the nation - already that he has the leeway to pull a stunt like that . 
Especially if it just keeps a few poor people from eating . 
Who cares about poor people in the gop anyway ? 
President Obama is the once in a lifetime leader that tends to emerge in the face of real adversity . 
Our real tragedy on 9\/11 is that we had a nincompoop in office who people sort of voted for -LRB- not as many as his opponenet , but we all know bush cheated to becaome president -RRB- based on the notion that since things were so good following the Clinton era that it did n't really matter all that much . 
Froomkin is a retard , wait that is an insult to the mentally handicapped . 
Froomie is a lightweight of epic proportions . 
His idea of a deep thought is `` Bush bad , dems good ... '' Obama has created a 2 trillion dollar deficit . 
He didnt inherit it . 
He and his fellow Dems gleefully passed every recent budget : 2007 , 2008 , now this mess . 
The next few years will be a disaster of epic proportions ! 
And it 's been years in the making ... . . 
bush has left our great nation a flaming wreck . 
The treasury is empty , the bureacracy is badly damaged , our environment has been raped , our reputation is tarnished , we fought and continue to fight a war based on what everyone on earth now knows from documented evidence was lies , he even dragged the United States down to the level of communist North korea by making torture and illegal detention and kangaroo courts national policy . 
It is not derangement to state facts . 
bush was rated 36th among presidents . 
He got such a high rating because the three criteria they used - he ranked 40th and 41st on economic and national security , inculded the bogus criteria of `` promtin equal rights '' which was not something any presdient in the 19th century would have considered their duty . 
So bush scoring 24th there pulled out of a digging match with buchanan for the basement . 
President Obama is a once in a generation , once in a lifetime phenomenon . 
republicons hate him exactly because of that . 
They know he represents the end of the road for their ideology , and he represents their being in the political wilderness for decades . 
Just like when FDR took office in 1933 following a disasterous string of years of republicon leadership . 
Joe Biden is an honorable statesmen and one that has some good accomplishment so its good to see him sitting there . 
I do wish this president the best and he is trying hard . 
If the republicans can not be of interest to be a help then shut up and sit down . 
They let their own leader and president run amuck for 8 years and put this country in a mess it may never recoup from . 
But I do look forward to seeing more of this president and family . 
I feel like the country has a real intact good family at the helm and we just got rid of a dysfunctional president that made the entire country dysfunctional . 
Mr. Froomkin and all you Obama-loving bloggers , explain the following : Dawn Johnsen as head of Treasury 's Office of Legal Council ; `` I do n't sweat ; '' `` We won ; '' and all Obama 's cabinet picks that uncovered brazen crooks . 
Your repeated and tiring insults directed to Bush are vile and illustrate a simple mind short of ideas , originality and decency . 
Froomkin 's hatred is on a par with Obama 's arrogance . 
Your hatred of Bush and your child-like adulation of a corrupt Obama are pathetic as well as pathological , Posted by : david-mckenzie | February 26 , 2009 12:43 AM | Report abuse I did n't like the new format at all , but I 'm beginning to realize it does have this good feature : all the Johnny One-notes tend to gravitate to one of the threads and leave the rest more pleasant . 
I read this blog because it makes a nice precis of editorial opinion from elsewhere , and editorials can be a great way to find out about things . 
I think it 's a high complement to the quality of Dan 's work as a journalist that there are so many lost souls who return here again and again like moths to the flame , whining about his politics . 
The poster ragging on the first lady 's frock : that is definitely the sound of a wing-nut 's head exploding . 
McCain\/Palin fan , no doubt . 
Music to my ears . 
Do n't burn out , fella . 
You 've got most of two terms left to go . 
Perhaps you watched Oliver Stone 's movie ? 
Bush , unlike Agamemnon , did not go off to war for a long absence , abandoning Froomkin -LRB- Clytemnestra -RRB- . 
To the contrary , Bush stayed home and sent others to do his battles with the enemy . 
Froomkin did not exhibit jealousy of Bush 's cavorting with a lover , a jealousy that resulted in Clytemnestra killing both Agamemnon and his concubine . 
Froomkin exhibits no hatred or a lovers jealousy , he starts with facts and demonstrates linkages , then draws conclusions . 
His writing is dispassionate and devoid of emotion , unlike Clytemnestra . 
Head back to class and improve your critical writing skills . 
Yet it 's painfully obvious that capitalism alone can not pull us out of this massive financial mess without crushing and perhaps revolutionary problems lasting a generation . 
I 'll say it again , anyone who thinks otherwise ca n't do math . 
There literally is n't enough global liquidity and appetite for risk to place bets . 
- The Bush years raise the question of what is the Republican 's definition of government . 
The last 8 years demonstrate the lack of government for the common good . 
Reasonable regulation is a good thing , even for us inventors and capitalists . 
The SEC was euthanized in January 2001 . 
The FTC , FCC , FDA , EPA , FEMA soon followed . 
The FAA survived , but has been contracted out to Lockheed -LRB- a terrible , act -RRB- . 
I compare good regulation to gravity . 
I do n't like them , but I can engineer around them , or use them to my advantage in novel ways - hey , I 'm an inventor ! 
Regulations are important for leveling the playing field . 
As an inventor , the patent office protects me as much as IBM -LRB- well , they used to before Bush gutted them and gave priority to big company ideas -RRB- . 
A major problem with government during the last 8 years was that even my startups were advised to hire DC lobbyists to game the system for a price . 
Here in Silicon Valley , that 's anathema to our culture . 
But within 15 minutes of my first call to a friend , we were given the name of Jack Abramoff 's firm , Greenberg Traurig , and told if we could pay mid 6 figures we too could score a $ 49 million contract . 
I can look into my call logs in October 2001 and give you the time of the call . 
Suffice to say , such behavior made me sick and we never did so . 
We 've also turned down `` introductions '' through uniformed military revolving door types with multiple stars . 
Again , behavior that Harry Truman would have pilloried as war profiteering . 
I 'm still not sanguine about new format , but I can appreciate your desire to get stories out while news . 
Being on the west coast , everything I see is old anyway . 
However there is something he has yet to learn . 
Occasionally , whether reading from a teleprompter or notes , he needs to look at the camera . 
This is where his audience is , and how you get a point across . 
He also needs to change either his speech writers or advisers . 
Every time he talks , the stock market drops . 
I think there is a message there . 
With the Republicans , again it 's about power and not the people who , coincidentally , made it possible for them to have their job . 
I listened to Jindle 's -LRB- sp ? -RRB- 
speech and laughed so hard I could barely contain myself . 
He spoke to the American people as if we were a bunch of five year olds . 
If this is the best the Republicans can do , they need to go back to the drawing board . 
As for me , I am ashamed to admit that Eric Cantor is from Va. . 
What a waste of space this man is . 
He ca n't see the current problems of the country for the star that he is trying so hard to reach for . 
The Republicans just ca n't seem to get it through their heads that the current problems will not be solved with their reaching for power . 
This country needs help and it seems to me that the Republicans would want to help since it was them that managed to get us where we are today . 
So glad you agree . 
So glad you agree . 
And Bush still sucks . 
Do n't upper income folks pay the vast majority of income taxes in the country ? 
Do n't the poorest workers pay none , but instead receive the Earned Income Tax Credit ? 
Are n't those the facts of the existing Pre-Obama income tax structure ? 
