Still the best political coverage . 
In Speech to Congress , Obama Outlines His Plans for Economic Recovery President Obama offered a grim portrait of America 's plight in an address to a joint session of Congress last night , but he promised to lead an economic renewal that would lift the country out of its current crisis without bankrupting its future . 
Striking an optimistic tone that has been absent from his speeches in recent weeks , the president said his stimulus plan , bank bailout proposal , housing programs and health-care overhaul would work in concert to turn around the nation 's struggling economy . 
And while he bluntly described a country beset by historic economic challenges and continued threats abroad , he said the solution lies in directly confronting -- not ignoring -- those problems . 
`` The weight of this crisis will not determine the destiny of this nation , '' he said . 
`` The answers to our problems do n't lie beyond our reach . 
They exist in our laboratories and universities , in our fields and our factories , in the imaginations of our entrepreneurs and the pride of the hardest-working people on Earth . '' 
In an address that largely shunned foreign policy to focus on the economy , Obama added : `` Now is the time to jump-start job creation , restart lending , and invest in areas like energy , health care and education that will grow our economy , even as we make hard choices to bring our deficit down . '' 
The 52-minute speech was greeted with sustained applause in the House chamber , which he had helped populate with more members of his party . 
Republican and Democratic lawmakers alike rose repeatedly to offer their approval of the president 's rhetoric and his promise of recovery . 
Obama received a standing ovation when he vowed that corporate chief executives would no longer travel on private jets at the same time they laid off thousands of workers . 
`` Those days are over , '' he said . 
Lawmakers leapt to their feet again when he declared that `` health-care reform can not wait , it must not wait , and it will not wait another year . '' 
While he largely avoided partisan rhetoric and did not directly point the finger of blame at his predecessor , George W. Bush , Obama did describe an `` era '' of greed and short-term profit that he said the nation is now leaving behind , and he stressed that he had not created but rather `` inherited '' the $ 1 trillion deficit , along with what he called `` a financial crisis and a costly recession . '' 
The `` day of reckoning has arrived , '' he declared , warning members of both parties in Congress that they will be forced to sacrifice `` worthy priorities '' as the crisis continues . 
But he made it clear that he is not prepared to retreat from his own ambitious agenda . 
The president called on Congress to pass a market-based cap on carbon pollution . 
He vowed a renewed effort to provide health care to all Americans . 
And he called on Americans to attend at least one year of college or vocational training , pledging that by 2020 , the country will again lead the world in the proportion of college graduates . 
Obama did seek to temper expectations in his address , acknowledging that he can not `` solve every problem or address every issue . '' 
But he promised to deliver a budget tomorrow that will serve as a new `` vision for America -- as a blueprint for our future . '' 
He avoided in-depth discussion of his Iraq policy , saying only that in the coming days he will `` announce a way forward in Iraq that leaves Iraq to its people and responsibly ends this war . '' 
That announcement could come as early as Friday , during a trip to North Carolina . 
Advisers said he is considering a plan to withdraw all U.S. combat troops from Iraq as soon as August 2010 , three months later than promised during the campaign . 
After weeks of persistent questions about whether he had grown too downcast and pessimistic in describing the economic crisis to the American people , White House officials said Obama was seeking to strike an appropriate balance between hope -- the mantra of his campaign -- and realism in an era of serious problems . 
He sought to juxtapose those ideas repeatedly , saying at one point : `` While our economy may be weakened and our confidence shaken , though we are living through difficult and uncertain times , tonight I want every American to know this : We will rebuild , we will recover , and the United States of America will emerge stronger than before . '' 
