FACING AN economic crisis , a banking crisis , a housing crisis and an auto industry crisis , President Obama used the opportunity of his address to a joint session of Congress Tuesday night to load his plate with even more . 
Mr. Obama said he would press ahead with plans to overhaul the nation 's health-care system , bolster education and lead the transition to new forms of energy -- all while curing cancer and getting the deficit under control . 
We understand the president 's instinct not to let short-term demands obscure the need to meet the country 's long-term challenges . 
His priorities for fundamental reform , the causes that animated his campaign , are admirable ones . 
Yet we can not help wondering : Is n't the most critical task to ensure a swift and effective response to the stomach-churning downturn ? 
Does a new , understaffed administration have the capacity to try so much so fast ? 
And does the political system have the bandwidth to accommodate all that Mr. Obama is asking from it ? 
`` The recovery plan and the financial stability plan are the immediate steps we 're taking to revive our economy in the short-term , '' Mr. Obama said . 
`` But the only way to fully restore America 's economic strength is to make the long-term investments that will lead to new jobs , new industries and a renewed ability to compete with the rest of the world . 
The only way this century will be another American century is if we confront at last the price of our dependence on oil and the high cost of health care ; the schools that are n't preparing our children and the mountain of debt they stand to inherit . '' 
Mr. Obama said the budget he will submit tomorrow will reflect `` the stark reality of what we 've inherited -- a trillion-dollar deficit , a financial crisis and a costly recession , '' and that `` worthy priorities '' will have to be sacrificed . 
But his message was more about what could be done than what would have to be left out . 
Mr. Obama said his administration has `` already identified two trillion dollars in savings over the next decade , '' but about half of that involves his long-promised rollback of tax cuts from the previous administration . 
In this economic emergency , the most important goal for Mr. Obama is one he laid out near the beginning of his speech : `` We will rebuild , we will recover , and the United States of America will emerge stronger than before . '' 
As he acknowledged last night , to enable that recovery the administration may well need to go back to Congress to seek more money for ailing banks . 
Given the public mood and lawmakers who feel burned by the handling of the first $ 350 billion infusion , that will be a hard enough lift in and of itself . 
As Mr. Obama also noted , the American public is understandably skeptical about whether the money Washington has already committed to spend will be wasted . 
Even the political capital of the popular Mr. Obama is not unlimited . 
We hope he does not spread it so broadly that he is left without the means to extinguish the fires raging now . 
Do you have a different take on Obama 's address and his agenda ? 
Debate a member of the editorial board in the Editorial Judgment discussion group . 
