Further legislation to deal with the economic crisis should not wait until the new president takes office . 
Fortunately , the president-elect will be a senator and can propose legislation without waiting to be sworn in as president . 
Immediately after Nov. 4 , the winner could , and should , take the lead in the legislative process . 
The economy faces two separate problems : the downward spiral of home prices , which hangs over the financial markets , and the decline in aggregate spending , which could cause a deep and prolonged recession . 
Home prices have already fallen about 25 percent from their peak in 2006 , and experts say they must fall an additional 10 to 15 percent to get back to pre-bubble levels . 
But they could fall much further than that as a result of mortgage defaults and foreclosures . 
Further declines from the current level would increase the number of homeowners whose mortgages exceed the value of their homes , creating a strong incentive to default . 
Defaults and the resulting foreclosures would put more homes on the market , driving down prices even more . 
And this fear of a deep drop in home prices depresses the value of mortgage-backed securities , contributing to the difficulty that banks are having raising funds and to their reluctance to make loans . 
Although home prices must get back to pre-bubble levels , Congress should enact policies to reduce defaults that could drive prices down much further . 
Direct help to the 12 million homeowners who already have negative equity in their homes could help to stop foreclosures . 
But it is important for Congress to go further and stop declining prices from pushing a large portion of the other 37 million homeowners with mortgages into negative equity , which could tempt them to default . 
The mortgage replacement loan plan that I suggested in June , essentially a congressionally enacted mortgage `` firewall '' to prevent prices from dropping too far , is one possible way to do that . 
Falling home prices have already reduced homeowner wealth by about $ 3 trillion ; the stock market decline has cut wealth by an additional $ 8 trillion . 
This reduced household wealth is causing consumers to cut spending , leading to lower employment , lower incomes and , therefore , further cuts in consumer spending . 
Other components of aggregate demand are also falling . 
The decline in consumer spending will lead to less business investment in plants and equipment . 
And the recession in Europe and Japan will further reduce our net exports . 
With the Fed 's benchmark interest rate down to 1 percent , there is no scope for an easier monetary policy to stop the downward spiral in aggregate demand . 
Another round of one-time tax rebates wo n't do the job . 
The rebates that Congress enacted this spring failed to stimulate consumer spending : More than 80 percent of tax rebate dollars were saved or used to pay down existing debt . 
The only way to prevent a deepening recession will be a temporary program of increased government spending . 
Previous attempts to use government spending to stimulate an economic recovery , particularly spending on infrastructure , have not been successful because of long legislative lags that delayed the spending until a recovery was well underway . 
But while past recessions lasted an average of only about 12 months , this downturn is likely to last much longer , providing the scope for successful countercyclical spending . 
A fiscal package of $ 100 billion is not likely to be large enough to revive the economy . 
The fall in household wealth resulting from the collapse of the stock market and the decline of home prices may cut aggregate spending by $ 300 billion a year or more . 
The president-elect should focus on developing a mechanism for identifying and funding spending initiatives that can occur quickly and that would otherwise not be done . 
While it would be good if some of the increased spending also contributed to long-term productivity , the key is to stimulate demand . 
Any plan to finance this spending by raising taxes , even if postponed , as Sen. Barack Obama has suggested , would hurt the recovery by causing affected taxpayers to cut their spending now . 
The increased government spending should include not only money for infrastructure such as bridges and roads but also for a wide range of equipment . 
Rebuilding some of the military capacity that has been depleted by the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan could be done relatively quickly and should be part of the overall package . 
Although the economy is facing severe challenges , the president-elect can turn the situation around by introducing legislation to deal with the downward spiral in home prices and with the declining level of aggregate demand . 
It is important that such legislation be enacted as quickly as possible . 
The writer , an economics professor at Harvard University and an adviser to the McCain campaign , is president emeritus of the National Bureau of Economic Research . 
