BP chief tells MPs Gulf spill was `` devastating to me '' `` The Gulf of Mexico is a more challenging drilling environment than many other parts of the world '' BP 's departing boss Tony Hayward has told MPs that the Gulf of Mexico oil spill was `` devastating '' to him . 
Mr Hayward 's personal responses to the explosion , which killed 11 workers , have been criticised in the past . 
On a visit to Louisiana to view the spill 's damage , Mr Hayward had told reporters he `` wanted his life back '' . 
The Commons Energy Committee is questioning both Mr Hayward and BP 's head of safety , Mark Bly , on the firm 's attitude to safety . 
Asked whether BP paid sufficient regard to safety matters , Mr Hayward told the committee that over the past three years the company had made a major investment in safety , spending $ 14bn -LRB- # 9bn -RRB- and recruiting thousands of people . 
`` And it is undeniably the fact that because of all of that , this particular incident is so devastating to me personally because we have made an enormous amount of progress in that three-year period , '' he said . 
My Hayward 's demeanor was in contrast to when he faced a US Congressional committee , when he appeared crushed and evasive . 
He was then pilloried for failing to answer the committee 's questions . 
In a veiled reference to that hearing , Tim Yeo , the chairman of the energy and climate change committee , has warned his colleagues not to use Mr Hayward 's appearance for `` point scoring '' rather than serious inquiry . 
One issue the UK committee is considering is whether UK offshore oil safety rules need to be changed as a result of the Gulf of Mexico spill . 
My Hayward said no changes would be made to its # 12bn -LRB- $ 18.5 bn -RRB- investment in the North Sea energy fields . 
He told the panel : `` BP remains very committed to oil and gas exploration in the North Sea and intends to make absolutely sure all the lessons , in all the dimensions we have discussed today , are fully applied to everything we do in the U.K. '' Meanwhile , in the US on Wednesday , the interior department said it was set to require oil companies to plug 3,500 non-producing oil wells in the Gulf of Mexico , in an effort to prevent future leaks . 
The department will also require companies to dismantle 650 unused oil and gas platforms , some of which have sat idle for decades without inspection for leaks . 
On Wednesday , the Financial Times newspaper said offshore inspection records showed BP did not comply with rules about regular training for offshore operators on how to respond to an oil spill . 
Mark Bly told MPs the issue had been addressed : `` It is true a handful of people - less than 10 - had not undergone all the training , which was mostly a computer-based refresher . '' 
Mr Bly led an internal investigation by BP into the reasons for the explosion . 
It found BP was responsible in part for the tragedy , but also placed some blame on rig owner Transocean and cement contractor Halliburton . 
`` No single factor caused the accident , and multiple parties including BP , Haliburton and Transocean were involved , '' he said . 
Mr Hayward strongly denied cost-cutting was a factor in the Deepwater Horizon disaster , telling MPs that `` safety is the first call on every dollar BP invests . 
Before we invest in anything , we invest in safety '' . 
Mr Hayward will step down next month from the position of chief executive to be replaced by the man in charge of the Gulf clean-up operation , BP managing director Bob Dudley . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
