Jackson family left ` speechless and devastated ' by star 's death Los Angeles police investigating the death of Michael Jackson say they have carried out an `` extensive interview '' with his doctor , Conrad Murray . 
Dr Murray - who was with the singer when he collapsed last Thursday - had provided information that `` will aid the investigation '' , the police said . 
A spokeswoman for Dr Murray insisted he was not a suspect in the case . 
On Sunday the Los Angeles Police Department said they did not intend to speak with him again . 
Michael Jackson 's family are said to be seeking a second autopsy because they still have questions about his death . 
The Los Angeles County Coroner 's office said there was no evidence of foul play after an autopsy on Friday , but gave no cause of death . 
It said the results of toxicology tests could take weeks to come back . 
A spokesman for the coroner 's office said Jackson had taken `` some prescription medication '' , without specifying which . 
Unconfirmed reports suggest the 50-year-old singer had been taking a daily dose of Demerol , a painkiller also widely known as pethidine . 
A woman who worked for Jackson for 17 years - 12 of those as nanny to his children - is quoted as saying he took combinations of drugs . 
`` I had to pump his stomach many times . 
He always mixed so much of it , '' Grace Rwaramba , 42 , said in remarks reported by the Sunday Times . 
`` There was one period that it was so bad that I did n't let the children see him . '' 
Jackson 's body was released to the family on Friday night . 
A spokeswoman for Dr Murray said he had been interviewed for three hours by police on Saturday . 
Dr Murray is doing all he can to help the inquiry , his spokeswoman says Miranda Sevcik said the doctor had `` helped identify the circumstances around the death of the pop icon and clarified some inconsistencies '' . 
`` Investigators said the doctor is in no way a suspect and remains a witness to this tragedy , '' she said . 
She told the BBC Dr Murray `` feels so deeply about his relationship with Michael Jackson that anything he can do to help this investigation come to a resolution , he is doing '' . 
She said Dr Murray had traveled in the ambulance with Jackson after he collapsed last Thursday , had stayed for hours at the hospital comforting the family and would stay in Los Angeles to help with the police inquiry . 
Dr Murray had been hired by Jackson in May to accompany him as he prepared to embark on a gruelling series of 50 concerts in London in July . 
The 51-year-old doctor is said to have tried to resuscitate Jackson until the paramedics arrived . 
Earlier , veteran politician Rev Jesse Jackson , who has been counselling the family , said they had a flurry of questions of their own for Dr Murray . 
`` When did the doctor come ? 
What did he do ? 
Did they inject him , if so with what ? '' 
Born : August 29 , 1958 , Gary , Indiana , US Also known as : The King of Pop , Wacko Jacko Biggest hits : I Want You Back , Do n't Stop Til You Get Enough , Billie Jean , Bad , Black or White , Earth Song The civil rights leader claimed Dr Murray had gone missing in the hours following the singer 's death , which raised `` questions of substance that will not go away until they are answered '' . 
`` He owes it to the family and to the public to say : ` These were the last hours of Michael 's life and here 's what happened ' . '' 
He said the family were `` clearly not satisfied '' with the results of the autopsy so far , `` that 's why there 's been the concern about an independent autopsy ... which anybody would recommend in these circumstances '' . 
Michael Jackson 's father Joseph described his son 's death as `` one of the darkest moments of our lives '' . 
`` It leaves us , his family , speechless and devastated to a point where communication with the outside world seems almost impossible at times , '' he said in a statement . 
There has been a huge outpouring of grief from fans , and tributes have been paid around the world since news of his death broke . 
Sunday 's Black Entertainment Awards show has been turned into a tribute show for Jackson with stars such as Beyonce re-working their performances in honor of the singer . 
There has also been a huge surge in demand for Jackson 's music with the star dominating sales at music retailers and download sites across the world . 
Earlier on Sunday his songs topped Apple 's iTunes download charts in every country except Japan . 
In the UK Jackson scored a posthumous number one album with greatest hits compilation Number Ones , with four other albums reappearing in the top 20 . 
In the singles chart , 43 out of the top 200 singles featured the singer , with Jackson hits accounting for all but one of the new entries in the top 40 . 
