Jackson family left ` speechless and devastated ' by star 's death Relatives of Michael Jackson will seek a second autopsy on the star because they still have unanswered questions about his death , family friends say . 
Veteran politician Rev Jesse Jackson , who has been counselling the family , said they were upset the official cause of death might not be known for weeks . 
He said the family wanted answers from the star 's personal doctor , Conrad Murray , who was with him when he died . 
Coroners ruled out foul play after an initial autopsy on the 50-year-old . 
But they gave no cause of death , saying the results of toxicology tests could take weeks to come back . 
Late on Saturday , a spokeswoman for Dr Murray said that he had met police for a second time , for a three-hour meeting . 
Born : August 29 , 1958 , Gary , Indiana , US Also known as : The King of Pop , Wacko Jacko Biggest hits : I Want You Back , Do n't Stop Til You Get Enough , Billie Jean , Bad , Black or White , Earth Song He met investigators to `` clarify some inconsistencies '' , but police believed `` the doctor is in no way a suspect and remains a witness '' , Miranda Sevcik said . 
The doctor would continue to co-operate fully with the authorities , she said . 
Police confirmed that Dr Murray had been co-operative and had provided information that would assist their investigation . 
But earlier Jesse Jackson said the family had a flurry of questions of their own for Jackson 's personal doctor . 
`` When did the doctor come ? 
What did he do ? 
Did they inject him , if so with what , '' he said . 
The rights leader claimed Dr Murray had gone missing in the hours immediately following the singer 's death , which raised `` questions of substance that will not go away until they are answered '' . 
`` He owes it to the family and to the public to say : ` These were the last hours of Michael 's life and here 's what happened . ' '' 
Jackson , who had a history of health problems , collapsed at his Los Angeles home at about midday on Thursday . 
A recording of the telephone call made to emergency services from his home was released on Friday . 
Jesse Jackson : ` We are hurt ' The caller is heard to say Jackson is unconscious and has stopped breathing , and that a doctor is trying to revive him . 
The singer was pronounced dead at the UCLA medical center two hours after the call was made . 
Jackson 's family have spoken of their grief at his sudden death . 
In a statement issued by his father Joseph Jackson , the star 's relatives called it `` one of the darkest moments of our lives '' . 
`` It leaves us , his family , speechless and devastated to a point where communication with the outside world seems almost impossible at times , '' the statement said . 
The family also thanked fans for their messages of support . 
The Reverend Al Sharpton , a family friend , said that Jackson 's relatives were considering the idea of simultaneous global celebrations to commemorate his life . 
This was because they wanted people to focus on the entertainer 's music rather than his problems , Rev Sharpton said . 
