US oil spill : Fishing villages ` on the edge ' Some fishing boats are now being used to help BP control the slick George Barisich 's fishing boat has survived three major hurricanes - Gustav , Ike and Katrina . 
`` My house was underwater , but she survived , '' he says , giving the boat a loving pat . 
But Mr Barisich fears what will sink his commercial fishing business once and for all is not a natural disaster , but a man-made one . 
A man 's got to have a hope , some kind of light at the end of the tunnel '' End Quote George Barisich Louisiana fisherman `` People laugh at us when we say this oil spill could be worse than Katrina , but we ai n't joking , '' he says . 
As he heats up a huge plate of shrimp pasta in the boat 's microwave , George says he is worried that the spill will be last straw for many people in this tight-knit fishing community of Bayou La Loutre , Louisiana . 
`` I 'm seeing the same gazed look that we saw after Katrina , the same look of hopelessness and despair . 
People are just going to give up . 
They 've been through too much , '' he says . 
Until more toxicity testing is completed on the waters where Mr Barisich usually fishes for seafood , his boat is anchored . 
`` And that 's the hardest part , because fishing is in our blood here . 
When you 're not doing it , you do n't know what to do , '' he says . 
Many fishermen have taken work with contractors for BP , trying to contain the spill . 
Mr Barisich 's good friend , Charles Robin III , is one of them . 
`` My shrimping nets ai n't catching shrimp now , they 're catching oil , '' he says . 
The fishermen blame BP , but there is also anger at the government Fishing is in his blood too . 
He is a fifth-generation shrimper , and has passed the trade on to two of his sons . 
He says he can smell the oil and the dispersant on most days . 
He has also noticed an oily sheen on the canal in Bayou La Loutre that he has never seen before . 
`` It 's getting closer , and that ai n't good , '' he says . 
Mr Robin 's wife , Lisa , says the spill has had a dramatic impact on the whole family . 
`` At home , it does n't feel like home any more . 
The stress level is so high , '' she says . 
`` We 're watching the news every day to see the areas impacted by the oil . 
It 's the first thing I think about when I get up in the morning and the last thing I think about when I go to bed at night . '' 
The eldest son in the Robin family breaks down in tears when he thinks about the prospect of the oil spill ruining their livelihoods . 
`` It really makes you mad because , all my life , I 've been working with my daddy . 
To think this oil could ruin that , '' he says as he puts his head in his hands and sobs . 
Mr Robin says he blames BP for a disaster that could have been prevented , but he also wants President Barack Obama to stop giving press conferences and start giving his family help . 
`` I was actually mad when I saw President Obama on television , '' he says . 
`` He said his little girl pokes her head around the corner while he 's brushing his teeth and asks if the hole in the well has been plugged . 
`` That 's a fact in his family . 
My little boy gets up in the morning and asks , ` Daddy , are we ever going to fish again ? ' '' 
Mr Barisich comes over with a plate of shrimp pasta and hands it to his friend . 
He agrees that Mr Obama has not done enough , but puts most of the blame on BP . 
`` BP makes statements like ` Oh , it 's a big Gulf ' , and the chairman says it 's just business and says that he sleeps well at night , '' he says . 
`` You wonder why we get upset . '' 
Mr Barisich says he has not been sleeping because he is so worried for the future . 
`` A man 's got to have a hope , some kind of light at the end of the tunnel , '' he says . 
`` Without it , you 're gonna get so low and just say , screw it , I 'm done . '' 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
