There is increasing anger in local communities at the failures The Gulf of Mexico oil spill is the worst environmental disaster the US has faced , a senior official has said . 
White House energy adviser Carol Browner also said the US was `` prepared for the worst scenario '' that the leak might not be stopped before August . 
BP is to try a new tactic after its latest failure to halt the leak , but says there is no guarantee of success . 
BP chief operating officer Doug Suttles said even if it worked it would only halt a majority of the spill . 
At least 20 million gallons have now spilled into the Gulf of Mexico , affecting more than 70 miles -LRB- 110km -RRB- of Louisiana 's coastline . 
Eleven rig workers died when the Deepwater Horizon exploded and sank nearly six weeks ago . 
Ms Browner , talking on NBC 's Meet The Press , said : `` More oil is leaking in the Gulf of Mexico than at any other time in our history . 
It means there is more oil than the Exxon Valdez -LRB- in Alaska in 1989 -RRB- . '' 
Carol Browner on ` the biggest eco-disaster ever ' , on NBC 's Meet the Press She said she hoped the latest plan would work but admitted it would be a temporary measure and that a relief well currently being drilled might turn out to be the permanent solution . 
However , that will not be ready for at least two months . 
Ms Browner said BP had been told to drill another relief well in case the first did not work . 
In the meantime , BP is setting up its Lower Marine Riser Package -LRB- LMRP -RRB- to stem the flow . 
It will use undersea robots to slice through the damaged pipe to make a clean cut that can be connected to another pipe , capturing the leaking oil . 
The plan will take four days to set up . 
However , BP said the operation had never been carried out at a depth of 5,000 ft and `` the successful deployment of the containment system can not be assured '' . 
The White House said the president had been informed that the flow rate could increase by as much as 20 % until the containment device was applied over the leak . 
University of Alabama engineering professor Philip W Johnson told Associated Press news agency that although he was hopeful the plan would succeed , if the new cap could not be placed on the fresh cut , `` things will get much worse '' . 
The system is similar to a previous containment dome plan that failed . 
Speaking on US television on Sunday , BP managing director Robert Dudley vowed the company would learn from its failed attempts and continue trying . 
Oil booms - partly successful Dispersant used - scientists warn it may kill marine life Huge dome placed over leak - became blocked by ice crystals Mile-long tube - fails to suck up large amount of oil `` Top-kill '' method to pump heavy mud - abandoned He said the company would know by the end of the week if the latest attempt had succeeded . 
Mr Suttles earlier admitted its `` top kill '' operation to blast waste material and heavy mud into the ruptured well had failed . 
`` We have been unable to overcome the flow from the well , so we now believe it 's time to move on to the next of our options , '' he said . 
Mr Suttles said he `` did not know for certain '' why it had failed . 
Meanwhile at least 12,000 barrels -LRB- 504,000 gallons -RRB- are leaking into the Gulf every day . 
BP has spent more than $ 940m -LRB- # 645m -RRB- so far in trying to contain the disaster . 
President Obama earlier expressed anger at the latest failure . 
`` It is as enraging as it is heartbreaking , and we will not relent until this leak is contained , until the waters and shores are cleaned up , and until the people unjustly victimised by this man-made disaster are made whole , '' he said . 
Mr Obama toured the oil-hit areas on Friday and said he would triple the manpower to contain and clean up the spill . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
