Get Wonkbook delivered to your inbox or mobile device every morning . 
It 's like reading it on the blog , only much more convenient . 
Your essential source for the latest news on the intersection of Wall Street and Washington . 
Michael Leachman of the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities argues that the stimulus has created more jobs than recovery . 
Bruce Katz , Emilia Istrate , and Jonathan Rothwell note that rising exports would do a lot for metropolitan areas . 
The Sustainable Defense Task Force proposes cuts to the defense budget . 
Barry Eichengreen and Peter Temin compare the Gold Standard and the Euro . 
Flavio Cunha and James Heckman revew research suggesting that non-cognitive skills are important for young people 's life prospects . 
Politics , politicians , big business and the economy Could the BP oil spill increase GDP ? 
Annie Lowrey notes a J.P. Morgan Chase analysis suggesting the BP spill will actually raise the country 's GDP , at least in the short term . 
`` Cleaning up the spill will likely be enough to slightly offset the negative impact of all this on GDP , J.P. Morgan said , '' summarizes Luca Di Leo . 
`` The bank cites estimates of 4,000 unemployed people hired for the cleanup efforts , which some reports have said could be worth between $ 3 and $ 6 billion . '' 
This is a nice object lesson in the inadequacy of GDP as a measurement of societal well-being . 
I could blow up the biggest building in every city in the country and the resulting reconstruction effort could mean a big temporary increase in GDP . 
But blowing up buildings is not a sustainable way to grow your economy . 
GDP , of course , has its uses , and as Bruce Bartlett points out , it provides a rich source of historical data and we would n't want to abandon it completely . 
But there 's no reason we could n't also use more comprehensive measures , and this Urban Institute report -LRB- pdf -RRB- gives a nice overview of what they would look like . 
Photo credit : Spencer Platt\/Getty Images By Ezra Klein | June 15 , 2010 ; 11:35 AM ET Of course the oil spill will increase the GDP . 
Car crashes do , too . 
Please crash your car today . 
The brothers in the body shop need to eat just like everyone else . 
But then his other policies , and the negative effects of the war -LRB- increased energy prices , debt , distractions from domestic issues -RRB- overshadowed all else and , Voila ! 
, the great recession . 
I have long said not all ten trillion dollars in GDP are the same , or create the same total societal utils , or future growth . 
One of the biggest flaws of the GDP measure is that it includes crime and security costs as production , rather than a cost of production . 
The Economist 's Voice -LRB- edited by Nobel Prize winning economist Joseph Stiglitz -RRB- had an excellent article on this and the great societal costs of crime and security ; quoting : The extent of guard labor depends on exactly what you count , of course . 
But by our preferred estimates -LRB- which we explain shortly -RRB- , roughly one in four in the United States economy is now engaged in guard labor providing security for people and property and imposing work discipline . 
Since 1890 the guard labor fraction of the United States labor force has increased four-fold . 
And in Sweden today the guard labor fraction is less than half that of the United States . 
Our measures of guard labor in the United States are necessarily incomplete and our definitions difficult to implement -LRB- Are lawyers guard labor ? 
Even some economists ? -RRB- 
... We have also ignored labor involved in the production of weapons for self protection , of locks and security cameras , and surveillance devices such as the trackers attached to long haul trucks to monitor their drivers speed and routes . 
We do not think we have overestimated the number of supervisors ; we have certainly missed some types of work that could be termed guard labor . 
Ezra , I hope you eventually read this short article . 
It really shows one of the great costs of a generation of Republican dominance which has brought us to a level of income inequality beyond even that of the gilded age . 
Our economy is still in the toilet , the `` Markets '' have no clue about what to do outside of more executive bonuses , and our Gulf Coast is going to be devestated - again . 
If throwning money and resources lessens the decades of suffering they now have to endure , then I 'll sign off ... at least it 's being spent on the relative betterment of middle\/lower class Americans here in the US . 
Ezra , your comparison is useless since it anticipates the destruction as a genesis for spending money ... like with Lomillialor 's Iraq comparison . 
No one , ever , will say we should create an environmental disaster to ruin people and the environment to initiate a destructive\/creative cycle . 
On the other hand , the least we can do is try and make the best of this nightmare . 
What 's important is HOW money gets spent , and it 's good to see that Ezra agrees at least in principle . 
forever , the primest commercial and residential real estate made totally devoid of any value . 
Short term growth of a percentage point or two will not offset the loss of tens of percentage points in total US assests . 
If the article were n't so absurd it would be obscene . 
