July 17 , 2010 : The containment stack is shown at the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
NEW ORLEANS -- BP and the Obama administration offered significantly differing views Sunday on whether the capped Gulf of Mexico oil well will have to be reopened , a contradiction that may be an effort by the oil giant to avoid blame if crude starts spewing again . 
Pilloried for nearly three months as it tried repeatedly to stop the leak , BP PLC capped the nearly mile -LRB- kilometer -RRB- - deep well Thursday and wants to keep it that way . 
The government 's plan , however , is to eventually pipe oil to the surface , which would ease pressure on the fragile well but would require up to three more days of oil spilling into the Gulf . 
`` No one associated with this whole activity ... wants to see any more oil flow into the Gulf of Mexico , '' Doug Suttles , BP 's chief operating officer , said Sunday . 
`` Right now we do n't have a target to return the well to flow . '' 
An administration official familiar with the spill oversight , however , told The Associated Press that a seep and possible methane were found near the busted oil well . 
The official spoke on condition of anonymity Sunday because an announcement about the next steps had not been made yet . 
The concern all along -- since pressure readings on the cap were n't as high as expected -- was a leak elsewhere in the wellbore , meaning the cap may have to be reopened to prevent the environmental disaster from becoming even worse and harder to fix . 
The official , who would not clarify what is seeping near the well , also said BP is not complying with the government 's demand for more monitoring . 
When asked about the official 's comments , BP spokesman Mark Salt would only say that `` we continue to work very closely with all government scientists on this . '' 
Retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , the Obama administration 's spill response chief , insisted Sunday that `` nothing has changed '' since Saturday , when he said oil would eventually be piped to surface ships . 
The government is overseeing BP 's work to stop the leak , which ultimately is to be plugged using a relief well . 
Allen decided to extend testing of the cap that had been scheduled to end Sunday , the official who spoke on condition of anonymity said . 
That means the oil will stay in the well for now as scientists continue run tests and monitor pressure readings . 
The official did n't say how long that would take . 
Officials at the Department of Homeland Security referred questions to a statement issued by Allen ; neither he nor BP officials could explain the apparent contradiction in plans . 
Suttles ' comments carved out an important piece of turf for BP : If Allen sticks with the containment plan and oil again pours forth into the Gulf , even briefly , it will be the government 's doing , not BP 's . 
The company very much wants to avoid a repeat of the live underwater video that showed millions of gallons of oil spewing from the blown well for weeks . 
`` I can see why they 're pushing for keeping the cap on and shut in until the relief well is in place , '' said Daniel Keeney , president of a Dallas-based public relations firm . 
The government wants to eliminate any chance of making matters worse , while BP is loath to lose the momentum it gained the moment it finally halted the leak , Keeney said . 
`` They want to project being on the same team , but they have different end results that benefit each , '' he said . 
Oil would have to be released under Allen 's plan , which would ease concerns that the capped reservoir might force its way out through another route . 
Those concerns stem from pressure readings in the cap that have been lower than expected . 
Scientists still are n't sure whether the pressure readings mean a leak elsewhere in the well bore , possibly deep down in bedrock , which could make the seabed unstable . 
Oil would be have to be released into the water to relieve pressure and allow crews to hook up the ships , BP and Allen have said . 
So far , there have been no signs of a leak . 
`` We 're not seeing any problems at this point with the shut-in , '' Suttles said at a Sunday morning briefing . 
Allen said later Sunday that scientists and engineers would continue to evaluate and monitor the cap through acoustic , sonar and seismic readings . 
They 're looking to determine whether low pressure readings mean that more oil than expected poured into the Gulf of Mexico since the BP-leased Deepwater Horizon rig exploded April 20 , killing 11 people and touching off one of America 's worst environment crises . 
`` While we are pleased that no oil is currently being released into the Gulf of Mexico and want to take all appropriate action to keep it that way , it is important that all decisions are driven by the science , '' Allen said in a news release . 
`` Ultimately , we must ensure no irreversible damage is done which could cause uncontrolled leakage from numerous points on the sea floor . '' 
Both Allen and BP have said they do n't know how long the trial run will continue . 
It was set to end Sunday afternoon , but the deadline -- an extension from the original Saturday cutoff -- came and went with no word on what 's next . 
After little activity Sunday , robots near the well cap came to life around the time of the cutoff . 
It was n't clear what they were doing , but bubbles started swirling around as their robotic arms poked at the mechanical cap . 
To plug the busted well , BP is drilling two relief wells , one of them as a backup . 
The company said work on the first one was far enough along that officials expect to reach the broken well 's casing , or pipes , deep underground by late this month . 
The subsequent job of jamming the well with mud and cement could take days or a few weeks . 
It will take months , or possibly years for the Gulf to recover , though cleanup efforts continued and improvements in the water could be seen in the days since the oil stopped flowing . 
Somewhere between 94 million and 184 million gallons -LRB- 356 million and 697 million liters -RRB- have spilled into the Gulf , according to government estimates . 
The spill has prevented many commercial fishermen from their jobs , though some are at work with the cleanup . 
Some boat captains were surprised and angry to learn that the money they make from cleanup work will be deducted from the funds they would otherwise receive from a $ 20 billion compensation fund set up by BP . 
The fund 's administrator , Kenneth Feinberg , told The Associated Press on Sunday that if BP pays fishermen wages to help skim oil and perform other cleanup work , those wages will be subtracted from the amount they get from the fund . 
Longtime charter boat captain Mike Salley said he did n't realize BP planned to deduct those earnings , and he doubted many other captains knew , either . 
`` I 'll keep running my boat , '' he said Sunday on a dock in Orange Beach , Alabama , before heading back into the Gulf to resupply other boats with boom to corral the oil . 
`` What else can I do ? '' 
