Thoughts , comments , suggestions or criticisms about The Post 's Live Q&A s ? 
Send us an e-mail . 
Founder and CEO , Citizens for Affordable Energy and Fmr . 
Shell Oil President Monday , July 19 , 2010 ; 10:30 AM A day that seemed destined for success ended in ambiguity Sunday . 
The blown-out well at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico remained shut for the fourth day , but the national incident commander reported concerns about seepage around the well and ordered BP to improve its monitoring of possible problems . 
Fairfax , Va. : Thad Allen has authorized keeping the well shut for another 24 hours provided that BP engineers monitor it carefully . 
What is going on now with the well ? 
How dangerous is the leakage ? 
Could it all explode all over again ? 
John Hofmeister : The biggest concern is the integrity of the well casing . 
It is an under designed well . 
The pressure and the explosive force of the original blowout could have damaged the well casing in one or more locations . 
Especially at the mouth of the reservoir . 
If oil is seeping on the outside of the casing because of the cap a lot or a little it can not be controlled by the cap , that may be the source of the current seepage . 
Santa Rosa Beach , Fla. : If it 's determined that there are leak -LRB- s -RRB- coming from the well casing -LRB- possibly causing the reported seepage , and\/or other manifestations of a leak -RRB- , what 's the probability that the relief well -- if executed as planned -- will stem those leaks ? 
-LRB- I would think it depends on whether the leak -LRB- s -RRB- occur along the section of well casing between the relief well and the sea bed -RRB- . 
Thanks much ... Washington , D.C. : It may be obvious to others but not to me : What is the reason for drilling the relief wells ? 
Louisiana : If the leak is stopped , what have we learned from this that will help if there 's another similar blowout in the future ? 
Cedar Crest , New Mexico : Can they attach a pipe to the well cap and siphon the oil up to a tanker ? 
That way , the pressure on the well will be reduced and the oil wo n't spill in the gulf . 
Arlington , Va. : Even if it were mechanically sound and viable for BP or someone else to pump from this particular well again at some point , it would never happen because of the politics and PR of it , right ? 
MMS : Who can we trust to say that this is under control -- I do n't particularly believe BP or MMS at this point . 
Washington , D.C. : You used to be president of Shell Oil . 
What would you have done if this was Shell Oil 's problem and not BP 's ? 
Washington DC : Why do they need to continue drilling the relief wells ? 
Can not cement be pumped down the original pipe ? 
Was the new cap not designed for this or is there some other answer ? 
Editor 's Note : washingtonpost.com moderators retain editorial control over Discussions and choose the most relevant questions for guests and hosts ; guests and hosts can decline to answer questions . 
washingtonpost.com is not responsible for any content posted by third parties . 
To Refresh Page : Press the F5 key on your keyboard or click here . 
: Christless Christianity Guest : Dr. Michael S. Horton Viewpoint is a paid discussion . 
The Washington Post editorial staff was not involved in the moderation . 
