ON SAND BERM E-4 IN THE GULF OF MEXICO -- In theory , Louisiana 's plan to hold back the BP oil spill sounds awe-inspiring , like an ancient myth made possible with oil-company money : To keep out an offshore invader , the state wants to make new land rise from the sea . 
Here , more than 15 miles offshore , a dredging company is building an island about as wide as an interstate highway . 
This sandy strip is slowly getting bigger , as dredged-up mud gurgles and creaks down its spine in a rusty pipe and shoots out to form new land at its end . 
But this island is still less than a mile long : a spot , not a wall , in a vast sea tainted by oil . 
Officially called Sand Berm E-4 , it is part of this state 's most ambitious plan to combat the oil and at the same time help stave off long-term coastal erosion . 
It is at the heart of a politically touchy spat between Louisiana and the federal government , and between Louisiana and some of its scientists , over how to fight the oil that has leaked from the Macondo well . 
Louisiana officials say the most reliable way to stop the oil from reaching sensitive marshes is to put solid land -- built from sandbags , sand piles or plain old rocks -- in its way . 
But many scientists and environmentalists say they are not convinced that these efforts will do much good . 
`` They are going to cost a lot of money , and their ultimate value is very much in question , '' said Aaron Viles , of the nonprofit Gulf Restoration Network . 
In some places , he said , the state 's land-building `` may be doing more harm than good . '' 
Louisiana is the closest land to the blown-out BP well , and its salt marshes are far harder to clean than the sandy beaches that dominate the coast in Mississippi , Alabama and Florida . 
Louisiana , led by Gov. Bobby Jindal -LRB- R -RRB- , has reacted with furious work to keep oil out of those marshes -- and with criticism of the Obama administration for holding its efforts up . 
State officials say they chose to build land barriers because they extend to the ocean floor , unlike the floating `` containment boom . '' 
They can also stay put in a storm , unlike the barges used to block marsh inlets . 
The state says the land-building plan will still be necessary , even if the BP well remains capped . 
There is already far too much oil in the water , Louisiana officials say , for skimming and controlled burns to eradicate it . 
`` There 's not enough assets in this world right now to skim this thing offshore , '' said Deano Bonano , an official in Jefferson Parish who is overseeing efforts to protect the parish 's marshes . 
`` You 're talking about an ocean of oil . '' 
The state has already filled in 14 inlets that connected the marshes with the Gulf of Mexico , using mounds of dirt and giant sandbags in metal frames . 
But this man-made island is part of a far more ambitious effort : The state has proposed building 128 miles of islands in arcs off the coast , based on existing plans to rebuild lost barrier islands to fight erosion . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
