Rig sinks in Gulf of Mexico , oil spill risk looms Fire boat response crews battle the blazing remnants of the off shore oil rig Deepwater Horizon , off Louisiana , in this handout photograph taken on April 21 , 2010 and obtained on April 22 . 
Eleven workers were missing and 17 injured in an explosion at the Transocean oil drilling rig , and crews were fighting the fire 16 hours later , the U.S. Coast Guard said on Wednesday . 
An estimated 126 people were aboard the Deepwater Horizon at the time of the explosionA Coast Guard MH-65C dolphin rescue helicopter and crew document the fire aboard the mobile offshore drilling unit Deepwater Horizon , while searching for survivors April 21 , 2010 . 
Multiple Coast Guard helicopters , planes and cutters responded to rescue the Deepwater Horizon 's 126 person crew . 
Picture taken April 21 , 2010 . 
HOUSTON | Thu Apr 22 , 2010 7:30 pm EDT HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - An oil drilling rig that had burned for 36 hours in the Gulf of Mexico sank on Thursday as hopes dimmed for 11 missing workers and the risk of a major oil spill loomed , officials said . 
The fire went out as the Deepwater Horizon , operated by Transocean Ltd , sank below the surface at 10:21 a.m. CDT -LRB- 1521 GMT -RRB- , about 42 miles off the Louisiana coast . 
The rig was drilling BP Plc 's Macondo project with 126 workers on board when it was ripped by an explosion and fire on Tuesday night . 
Some 115 workers escaped , including 17 helicoptered to New Orleans area hospitals with injuries . 
Search and rescue operations turned up two empty lifeboats , and officials cited dim hopes that the 11 workers missing since the blast about 10 p.m. CDT Tuesday night would be rescued . 
`` We do continue with search and rescue activities , '' the 8th District Coast Guard Commander Rear Admiral Mary Landry said . 
`` As time passes , however , the probability of success in locating the 11 missing persons decreases . '' 
Transocean , based in Zug , Switzerland and the world 's largest offshore drilling contractor , said some of the missing may not have been able to escape the rig . 
`` Based on reports of crew members , at the time of the incident , they believe they may have been on board and not able to evacuate , '' said Adrian Rose , a vice president of Transocean . 
U.S. lawmakers called for the Coast Guard and Minerals Management Service to investigate the incident . 
`` It is critical that these agencies examine what went wrong and the environmental impact this incident has created , '' said Sen. Mary Landrieu , Louisiana Democrat . 
The explosion comes almost three weeks after President Barack Obama unveiled plans for a limited expansion of U.S. offshore oil and gas drilling . 
It was unclear whether the rig sank to the bottom in about 5,000 feet of water , or how much oil still flowed or had spilled from the well , officials said . 
By Thursday afternoon , a five-mile long oil slick extended from the accident site , which has the potential to be a `` major '' oil spill , the Coast Guard said . 
Officials said floating oil spill barriers , skimmers and airplanes to drop dispersant were being prepared to control and clean up the spill . 
A remotely operated unmanned submarine , commonly used in the industry , was deployed to determine the exact location and condition of the rig and the situation of the well , which extends 5,000 feet through water and 13,000 feet beneath the seabed . 
`` We continue to assist Transocean in the effort to halt the flow of oil from the well through the use of a remotely operated vehicle to activate the subsea blowout preventer , '' said David Rainey , vice president of Gulf of Mexico Exploration for BP , a leading oil and gas operator in the Gulf . 
Officials said an investigation was being launched to determine exactly what happened . 
Sometimes oil and gas well drilling hits pockets of high pressure that were not anticipated and can not be controlled , experts said . 
The well in Tuesday 's accident was the first of a series to be drilled and was in the process of being temporarily plugged pending production . 
`` The well had been cased off . 
We were actually in process of running the final plug , '' Rainey said . 
`` At this point , we do n't understand what happened . '' 
The rig explosion did not have an effect on crude oil prices because the well was not in production mode . 
Shares of Transocean traded on the New York Stock Exchange fell 8 cents to $ 90.29 , while shares of BP traded on the NYSE were off 54 cents at $ 59.55 . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
When is Earth Day ??? Wonderful example of what we are doing to our ecosystem . 
We 're all just a bunch of parasites taking over the earth , until we totally kill it . 
Only problem is , we do n't have another host to move to . 
I can think of a few CEOs we can sacrifice for sake of the planet . 
>> -RRB- subhrajit -- yeah , at least the pollution will go into the sea instead , killing loads of sea creatures instead of increasing the global temperature by 0.0000001 degrees . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
