Friday 14 January 2005 02.44 GMT The trial of the man labeled by the Pentagon the `` primary torturer '' at Abu Ghraib prison ended abruptly yesterday after the defendant decided at the last minute not to take the stand . 
Specialist Charles Graner , who features prominently in some of the most graphic images from the Iraqi prison , had been expected to argue that he had only been following orders . 
But his defense team said it had made its case in full to the military jury and saw no reason for the soldier to testify . 
`` We came in with a checklist with everything we wanted to present to the jury , '' said his defense attorney Guy Womack . 
`` Once we accomplished that there was no reason to continue . '' 
A verdict is expected as early as today . 
Throughout the proceedings in the small , dark-panelled court room in Fort Hood army base , the burly Graner had been almost ebullient . 
`` I feel fantastic . 
I 'm still smiling , '' he said after proceedings wound down yesterday . 
Asked on the opening day of his trial if he felt any remorse for what went on at Abu Ghraib , the soldier rolled his eyes and smirked . 
If he is found guilty by a jury of 10 soldiers , he could face 17 and a half years in prison for conspiracy , assault , maltreatment of detainees , indecency and dereliction of duty . 
Graner 's last-minute decision yesterday afternoon not to testify must in some ways have arrived as a relief for the Pentagon , removing any threat that the defiant soldier would try to implicate his superiors in the abuse . 
In the Pentagon 's view , the abuse at Abu Ghraib stopped at the enlisted ranks , and Graner was the `` primary torturer '' , a brutal sadist who whistled as he administered beatings - once so hard that he broke a chair over a detainee - and threw prisoners ' rations into the toilet . 
Graner is already linked indelibly in the public mind with the most horrifying images from Abu Ghraib : giving a thumbs up over a pyramid of naked Iraqi detainees , and cajoling his then lover , Private Lynndie England , to pose with a dog leash around the neck of another prisoner . 
Although Graner 's defense put on an air of optimism yesterday , the decision to rest their arguments comes after the judge repeatedly refused their attempts to introduce evidence from use-of-force experts and other testimony to advance their case that piling naked detainees into a human pyramid and other practices were a legitimate form of prisoner control . 
However , the trial did hear for the first time that officers ordered the sexual humiliation of an Iraqi detainee as an interrogation strategy . 
Megan Ambuhl , who it emerged yesterday also had a sexual relationship with Graner , told the court interrogators used female guards to sexually humiliate prisoners . 
`` They asked me to sit in the shower , and to point and laugh at the detainees , '' said Ms Ambuhl , who pleaded guilty last year for her role in the abuse . 
Another guard , Sgt Kenneth Davis , who has not been charged , said : `` I thought the military intelligence was doing some pretty weird things with the detainees . '' 
