So , Mr Bremer , where did all the money go ? 
At the end of the Iraq war , vast sums of money were made available to the US-led provisional authorities , headed by Paul Bremer , to spend on rebuilding the country . 
By the time Bremer left the post eight months later , $ 8.8 bn of that money had disappeared . 
Ed Harriman on the extraordinary scandal of Iraq 's missing billions When Paul Bremer , the American pro consul in Baghdad until June last year , arrived in Iraq soon after the official end of hostilities , there was $ 6bn left over from the UN Oil for Food Programme , as well as sequestered and frozen assets , and at least $ 10bn from resumed Iraqi oil exports . 
Under Security Council Resolution 1483 , passed on May 22 2003 , all these funds were transferred into a new account held at the Federal Reserve Bank in New York , called the Development Fund for Iraq -LRB- DFI -RRB- , and intended to be spent by the Coalition Provisional Authority -LRB- CPA -RRB- `` in a transparent manner ... for the benefit of the Iraqi people '' . 
The US Congress also voted to spend $ 18.4 bn of US taxpayers ' money on the redevelopment of Iraq . 
By June 28 last year , however , when Bremer left Baghdad two days early to avoid possible attack on the way to the airport , his CPA had spent up to $ 20bn of Iraqi money , compared with $ 300m of US funds . 
The `` reconstruction '' of Iraq is the largest American-led occupation program since the Marshall Plan - but the US government funded the Marshall Plan . 
Defense secretary Donald Rumsfeld and Paul Bremer have made sure that the reconstruction of Iraq is paid for by the `` liberated '' country , by the Iraqis themselves . 
The CPA maintained one fund of nearly $ 600m cash for which there is no paperwork : $ 200m of it was kept in a room in one of Saddam 's former palaces . 
The US soldier in charge used to keep the key to the room in his backpack , which he left on his desk when he popped out for lunch . 
Again , this is Iraqi money , not US funds . 
The `` financial irregularities '' described in audit reports carried out by agencies of the American government and auditors working for the international community collectively give a detailed insight into the mentality of the American occupation authorities and the way they operated . 
Truckloads of dollars were handed out for which neither they nor the recipients felt they had to be accountable . 
The auditors have so far referred more than a hundred contracts , involving billions of dollars paid to American personnel and corporations , for investigation and possible criminal prosecution . 
They have also discovered that $ 8.8 bn that passed through the new Iraqi government ministries in Baghdad while Bremer was in charge is unaccounted for , with little prospect of finding out where it has gone . 
A further $ 3.4 bn appropriated by Congress for Iraqi development has since been siphoned off to finance `` security '' . 
Although Bremer was expected to manage Iraqi funds in a transparent manner , it was only in October 2003 , six months after the fall of Saddam , that an International Advisory and Monitoring Board -LRB- IAMB -RRB- was established to provide independent , international financial oversight of CPA spending . 
-LRB- This board includes representatives from the United Nations , the World Bank , the IMF and the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development . -RRB- 
The IAMB first spent months trying to find auditors acceptable to the US . 
The Bahrain office of KPMG was finally appointed in April 2004 . 
`` KPMG has encountered resistance from CPA staff regarding the submission of information required to complete our procedures , '' they wrote in an interim report . 
`` Staff have indicated ... that cooperation with KPMG 's undertakings is given a low priority . '' 
KPMG had one meeting at the Iraqi Ministry of Finance ; meetings at all the other ministries were repeatedly postponed . 
The auditors even had trouble getting passes to enter the Green Zone . 
There appears to have been good reason for the Americans to stall . 
At the end of June 2004 , the CPA would be disbanded and Bremer would leave Iraq . 
There was no way the Bush administration would want independent auditors to publish a report into the financial propriety of its Iraqi administration while the CPA was still in existence and Bremer at its head still answerable to the press . 
So the report was published in July . 
The auditors found that the CPA did n't keep accounts of the hundreds of millions of dollars of cash in its vault , had awarded contracts worth billions of dollars to American firms without tender , and had no idea what was happening to the money from the Development Fund for Iraq -LRB- DFI -RRB- , which was being spent by the interim Iraqi government ministries . 
This lack of transparency has led to allegations of corruption . 
An Iraqi hospital administrator told me that when he came to sign a contract , the American army officer representing the CPA had crossed out the original price and doubled it . 
The Iraqi protested that the original price was enough . 
The American officer explained that the increase -LRB- more than $ 1m -RRB- was his retirement package . 
When the Iraqi Governing Council asked Bremer why a contract to repair the Samarah cement factory was costing $ 60m rather than the agreed $ 20m , the American representative reportedly told them that they should be grateful the coalition had saved them from Saddam . 
Iraqis who were close to the Americans , had access to the Green Zone or held prominent posts in the new government ministries were also in a position personally to benefit enormously . 
Iraqi businessmen complain endlessly that they had to offer substantial bribes to Iraqi middlemen just to be able to bid for CPA contracts . 
Iraqi ministers ' relatives got top jobs and fat contracts . 
Further evidence of lack of transparency comes from a series of audits and reports carried out by the CPA 's own inspector general 's office -LRB- CPAIG -RRB- . 
Set up in January 2004 , it reports to Congress . 
Its auditors , accountants and criminal investigators often found themselves sitting alone at cafe tables in the Green Zone , shunned by their CPA compatriots . 
Their audit , published in July 2004 , found that the American contracts officers in the CPA and Iraqi ministries `` did not ensure that ... contract files contained all the required documents , a fair and reasonable price was paid for the services received , contractors were capable of meeting delivery schedules , or that contractors were paid in accordance with contract requirements '' . 
Millions of dollars in cash went missing from the Iraqi Central Bank . 
Between $ 11m and $ 26m worth of Iraqi property sequestered by the CPA was unaccounted for . 
The payroll was padded with hundreds of ghost employees . 
Millions of dollars were paid to contractors for phantom work . 
Some $ 3,379,505 was billed , for example , for `` personnel not in the field performing work '' and `` other improper charges '' on just one oil pipeline repair contract . 
Most of the 69 criminal investigations the CPAIG instigated related to alleged theft , fraud , waste , assault and extortion . 
It also investigated `` a number of other cases that , because of their sensitivity , can not be included in this report '' . 
One such case may have arisen when 19 billion new Iraqi dinars , worth about # 6.5 m , was found on a plane in Lebanon that had been sent there by the American-appointed Iraqi interior minister . 
At the same time , the IAMB discovered that Iraqi oil exports were unmetered . 
Neither the Iraqi State Oil Marketing Organisation nor the American authorities could give a satisfactory explanation for this . 
`` The only reason you would n't monitor them is if you do n't want anyone else to know how much is going through , '' one petroleum executive told me . 
Officially , Iraq exported $ 10bn worth of oil in the first year of the American occupation . 
Christian Aid has estimated that up to $ 4bn more may have been exported and is unaccounted for . 
If so , this would have created an off-the-books fund that both the Americans and their Iraqi allies could use with impunity to cover expenditures they would rather keep secret - among them the occupation costs , which were rising far beyond what the Bush administration could comfortably admit to Congress and the international community . 
In the few weeks before Bremer left Iraq , the CPA handed out more than $ 3bn in new contracts to be paid for with Iraqi funds and managed by the US embassy in Baghdad . 
The CPA inspector general , now called the Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction -LRB- Sigir -RRB- , has just released an audit report on the way the embassy has dealt with that responsibility . 
The auditors reviewed the files of 225 contracts totalling $ 327m to see if the embassy `` could identify the current value of paid and unpaid contract obligations '' . 
`` Our review showed that financial records ... understated payments made by $ 108,255,875 '' and `` overstated unpaid obligations by $ 119,361,286 '' . 
The auditors also reviewed the paperwork of a further 300 contracts worth $ 332.9 m : `` Of 198 contract files reviewed , 154 did not contain evidence that goods and services were received , 169 did not contain invoices , and 14 did not contain evidence of payment . '' 
Clearly , the Americans see no need to account for spending Iraqis ' national income now any more than they did when Bremer was in charge . 
Neither the embassy chief of mission nor the US military commander replied to the auditors ' invitation to comment . 
Instead , the US army contracting commander lamely pointed out that `` the peaceful conditions envisioned in the early planning continue to elude the reconstruction efforts '' . 
This is a remarkable understatement . 
It 's also an admission that Americans ca n't be expected to do their sums when they are spending other people 's money to finance a war . 
Lack of accountability does not stop with the Americans . 
In January this year , the Sigir issued a report detailing evidence of fraud , corruption and waste by the Iraqi Interim Government when Bremer was in charge . 
They found that $ 8.8 bn - the entire Iraqi Interim Government spending from October 2003 through June 2004 - was not properly accounted for . 
The Iraqi Office of Budget and Management at one point had only six staff , all of them inexperienced , and most of the ministries had no budget departments . 
Iraq 's newly appointed ministers and their senior officials were free to hand out hundreds of millions of dollars in cash as they pleased , while American `` advisers '' looked on . 
`` CPA personnel did not review and compare financial , budgetary and operational performance to planned or expected results , '' the auditors explained . 
One ministry gave out $ 430m in contracts without its CPA advisers seeing any of the paperwork . 
Another claimed to be paying 8,206 guards , but only 602 could be found . 
There is simply no way of knowing how much of the $ 8.8 bn has gone to pay for private militias and into private pockets . 
`` It 's remarkable that the inspector general 's office could have produced even a draft report with so many misconceptions and inaccuracies , '' Bremer said in his reply to the Sigir report . 
`` At liberation , the Iraqi economy was dead in the water . 
So CPA 's top priority was to get the economy going . '' 
The Sigir has responded by releasing another audit this April , an investigation into the way Bremer 's CPA managed cash payments from Iraqi funds in just one part of Iraq , the region around Hillah : `` During the course of the audit , we identified deficiencies in the control of cash ... of such magnitude as to require prompt attention . 
Those deficiencies were so significant that we were precluded from accomplishing our stated objectives . '' 
They found that CPA headquarters in Baghdad `` did not maintain full control and accountability for approximately $ 119.9 m '' , and that agents in the field `` can not properly account for or support over $ 96.6 m in cash and receipts '' . 
The agents were mostly Americans in Iraq on short-term contracts . 
One agent 's account balance was `` overstated by $ 2,825,755 , and the error went undetected '' . 
Another agent was given $ 25m cash for which Bremer 's office `` acknowledged not having any supporting documentation '' . 
Of more than $ 23m given to another agent , there are only records for $ 6,306,836 paid to contractors . 
Many of the American agents submitted their paperwork only hours before they headed to the airport . 
Two left Iraq without accounting for $ 750,000 each , which has never been found . 
CPA head office cleared several agents ' balances of between $ 250,000 and $ 12m without any receipts . 
One agent who did submit receipts , on being told that he still owed $ 1,878,870 , turned up three days later with exactly that amount . 
The auditors thought that `` this suggests that the agent had a reserve of cash '' , pointing out that if his original figures had been correct , he would have accounted to the CPA for approximately $ 3.8 m more than he had been given in the first place , which `` suggests that the receipt documents provided to the DFI account manager were unreliable '' . 
So where did the money go ? 
You ca n't see it in Hillah . 
The schools , hospitals , water supply and electricity , all of which were supposed to benefit from these funds , are in ruins . 
The inescapable conclusion is that many of the American paying agents grabbed large bundles of cash for themselves and made sweet deals with their Iraqi contacts . 
And so it continues . 
The IAMB 's most recent audit of Iraqi government spending talks of `` incomplete accounting '' , `` lack of documented justification for limited competition for contracts at the Iraqi ministries '' , `` possible misappropriation of oil revenues '' , `` significant difficulties in ensuring completeness and accuracy of Iraqi budgets and controls over expenditures '' and `` non-deposit of proceeds of export sales of petroleum products into the appropriate accounts in contravention of UN Security Council Resolution 1483 '' . 
In the absence of any meaningful accountability , Iraqis have no way of knowing how much of the nation 's wealth is being used for reconstruction and how much is being handed out to ministers ' and civil servants ' friends and families or funnelled into secret overseas bank accounts . 
Given that many Ba'athists are now back in government , some of that money may even be financing the insurgents . 
Both Saddam and the US profited handsomely during his reign . 
He controlled Iraq 's wealth while most of Iraq 's oil went to Californian refineries to provide cheap petrol for American voters . 
US corporations , like those who enjoyed Saddam 's favor , grew rich . 
Today , the system is much the same : the oil goes to California , and the new Iraqi government spends the national wealth with impunity . 
Bremer maintained one slush fund of nearly $ 600m in cash for which there is no paperwork : $ 200m of it was kept in a room in one of Saddam 's former palaces 19 billion new Iraqi dinars , worth about # 6.5 m , was found on a plane in Lebanon that had been sent there by the new Iraqi interior minister One ministry claimed to be paying 8,206 guards , but only 602 could be found One American agent was given $ 23m to spend on restructuring ; only $ 6m is accounted for This is an edited version of an article that appears in the current issue of the London Review of Books -LRB- lrb -RRB- . 
This article appeared on p1 of the G2 section of the Guardian on 00.35 BST on Thursday 7 July 2005 Follow all the top stories of the day on Twitter with the Guardian 's world news team john_hooper : #Benedict decided to resign after visit to Mexico & Cuba last March , says tonight 's edition of #pope 's daily L'Osservatore Romano #news 
