\* Global market volatility weighs on IPO \* Prada valued at $ 13 bln ; LVMH market cap of $ 80 bln By Elzio Barreto , Elisa Anzolin and Gianluca Semeraro HONG KONG\/MILAN , June 17 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Italian fashion house Prada SpA floated at the low end of its target price range on Friday , raising $ 2.1 billion as investors baulked at its rich valuation while global markets are weak . 
The maker of luxury bags and Miu Miu dresses , which had originally hoped to raise as much as $ 2.6 billion , priced its initial public offering -LRB- IPO -RRB- at HK$ 39.50 a share , three sources with direct knowledge of the deal said on Friday . 
Fund managers said that while luxury investors are used to paying more for high-end discretionary brands , Prada had to adapt its initial ambition due to market volatility . 
A poor Hong Kong debut by luggage brand Samsonite International on Thursday augured ill for Prada 's offering , the biggest on the exchange so far this year . 
`` Luxury demand is very self explanatory , and it makes a lot of sense for companies like Samsonite and Prada to list in Hong Kong , but we 're talking about quite a volatile market , '' said Selina Sia , head of consumer research at Mirae Asset . 
Prada had set an indicative price range of HK$ 36.5 to HK$ 48 per share , before narrowing it to between HK$ 39.50 and HK$ 42.25 a share on Thursday . 
At the top of its original range , Prada would trade at 27 times projected 2011 earnings , far higher than an average of 20.4 times for luxury retailers such as LVMH and Hermes International SCA , according to Phillip Securities ' forecasts . 
At the revised guidance Prada would trade at a P\/E of 22.8-24 .4 times , more in line with global rivals . 
Prada and shareholders Prada Holding BV and Intesa Sanpaolo sold 423.3 million shares in the offering , raising HK$ 16.72 billion -LRB- $ 2.14 billion -RRB- , said the sources . 
The IPO valued Prada at about $ 13 billion , compared with the nearly $ 80 billion market capitalization of LVMH , $ 28.5 billion for Hermes and $ 21 billion for PPR SA . 
Prada , set up in 1913 by Mario Prada as a business selling leather bags , trunks and silverware to the European elite , has become a global fashion empire , with 319 directly operated stores , a third of which are in Asia Pacific . 
The move by retailers such as Prada to list in Hong Kong is part of a trend to raise brand awareness in China . 
As part of the marketing for its offering , Prada hosted a fashion show for top fund managers , who jostled for space at the glitzy Grand Hyatt Hotel in Hong Kong to see Miuccia Prada 's creations and hear about China 's booming demand for luxury goods . 
China 's consumption of luxury goods is forecast to grow 18 percent annually to about $ 27.5 billion by 2015 , from about $ 12.2 billion in 2010 , according to consultancy McKinsey . 
But some investors were concerned that Prada 's growth targets -- it expects sales to rise more than 20 percent over the next three years if the global economy continues to improve -- were too ambitious . 
`` Prada is a very strong brand , but it has an aggressive growth strategy which looks more difficult to achieve in the current economic environment , '' said Scilla Huang Sun , who runs a luxury fund for Swiss and Global Asset management . 
Despite volatile markets casting a cloud over Prada 's offering , it was nevertheless nearly three times oversubscribed at the listing price , one source said . 
Market uncertainty , which has also hit new listings in Europe this year , with more than 15 deals pulled and others performing poorly after their flotations , is expected to continue to affect offerings in Hong Kong in the short term . 
`` The market is going through a very difficult phase , '' said Philippe Espinasse , a former investment banker with Nomura and UBS in Hong Kong and author of `` IPO : a Global Guide '' . 
The benchmark Hang Seng Index has declined in 11 of the last 12 sessions , losing 7.6 percent , and world stocks hit a three-month low on Thursday , weighing on investor demand for new issues . 
Of the larger IPOs in Asia this year , only MGM China has posted a first-day gain . 
Prada 's listing was organised by Goldman Sachs , Credit Agricole 's CLSA brokerage and Italian banks UniCredit SpA and Intesa Sanpaolo 's Banca IMI unit , which are both represented on Prada 's board . 
-LRB- $ 1 = 7.801 Hong Kong Dollars -RRB- -LRB- Additional reporting by Antonella Ciancio , Astrid Wendlandt , Kylie MacLellan ; Editing by Denny Thomas , Dhara Ranasinghe and Will Waterman -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
