Nicholas Lezard on Eliot Weinberger 's What I Heard About Iraq , a simple but effective anti-war commentary What I Heard About Iraq , by Eliot Weinberger -LRB- Verso , # 7.99 -RRB- Every war has its classic anti-war book ; and here , you might think , is Iraq 's . 
It is a very simple and straightforward idea . 
It consists of about 250 paragraphs -LRB- this is a very rough count indeed -RRB- , over about 70 pages -LRB- that 's a bit more accurate -RRB- , each beginning , or almost beginning , with the words `` I heard '' . 
So , for example : `` I heard Donald Rumsfeld say that there was ` no question ' that American troops would be ` welcomed ' : ` Go back to Afghanistan , the people were in the streets playing music , cheering , flying kites , and doing all the things that the Taliban and al-Qaida would not let them do . ' '' 
And , 40-odd pages later : `` I heard a reporter say to Donald Rumsfeld : ` Before the war in Iraq , you ... said they would welcome us with open arms . ' 
And I heard Rumsfeld interrupt him : ` Never said that . 
You may remember it well , but you 're thinking of somebody else . 
You ca n't find , anywhere , me saying anything like those things you just said I said . ' '' 
Eliot Weinberger is a poet , essayist and translator -LRB- most notably of Octavio Paz -RRB- . 
I have often thought that your best bet , if you need intelligent , lapidary prose in a hurry , is to ask a poet to do it , even , or rather particularly , if it 's about politics . 
-LRB- Admittedly , this was not such a sure-fire proposal in the second world war . 
Think of Ezra Pound . -RRB- 
In 9\/12 , a meditation on the consequences of the World Trade Centre atrocity , Weinberger had already proved himself the master of the provoking juxtaposition : `` We are bombing Afghanistan because it is believed that the terrorists who attacked the Trade Centre and the Pentagon were housed and trained for their mission in Afghanistan . 
There is , as yet , no evidence for this assertion . 
What has been proven , however , is that the terrorists were housed and trained for their mission in Florida . '' 
There is little , if any , such humor in What I Heard About Iraq . 
We know more about the number of people who have died , and about the conduct of the war , and it 's not funny . 
-LRB- From the top-secret minutes of the prime minister 's meeting on July 23 2002 : Blair was told that `` military action was now seen as inevitable . 
Bush wanted to remove Saddam , through military action , justified by the conjunction of terrorism and WMD . 
But the intelligence and facts were being fixed around the policy ... There was little discussion in Washington of the aftermath . '' 
But we all kind of knew that all along , did n't we ? -RRB- 
But this is a very necessary book , for it presents an almost irrefutable case against the war . 
There are many people - I have , from time to time , been one of them - who , when hearing outraged conversation about the subject in our bien-pensant , brie-munching liberal circles , have preferred to go all quiet . 
After all , as PG Wodehouse said , if not about Saddam , `` slice him where you like , a hellhound is always a hellhound '' ; and there are a lot of people who are n't going to be tortured to death by his goons any more . 
-LRB- Which is why the last paragraph , depicting Saddam writing poetry , reading the Koran and placing a circle of white stones around a plum tree , is as grotesque and revolting as a photo of him in his underwear . 
It is the book 's only lapse of judgment . -RRB- 
But the folly , mendacity and vicious stupidity of the war is brought chillingly home throughout . 
The paragraphs are arranged so as to present a chronological version of what we have heard about the war . 
The rise of the reported death counts , civil and military , is particularly appalling . 
The book , understandably if frustratingly , is free of notes citing sources , but these would have marred its elegance ; and besides , we 've heard most of this stuff ourselves . 
Moreover , the `` I heard ... '' approach parodies the whole process of sexed-up rumor which supposedly justified the business in the first place . 
It is very one-sided . 
A pro-war writer could produce a mirror image - but I suspect it would be harder . 
