While the BP well was still gushing , the Obama administration issued an order that limited the spreading of controversial dispersant chemicals on the Gulf of Mexico 's surface . 
Their use , officials said , should be restricted to `` rare cases . '' 
But in reality , federal documents show , the use of dispersants was n't rare at all . 
Despite the order -- and concerns about the environmental effects of the dispersants -- the Coast Guard granted requests to use them 74 times over 54 days , and to use them on the surface and deep underwater at the well site . 
The Coast Guard approved every request submitted by BP or local Coast Guard commanders in Houma , La. , although in some cases it reduced the amount of the chemicals they could use , according to an analysis of the documents prepared by the office of Rep. Edward J. Markey -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- . 
The documents indicate that `` these exemptions are in no way a ` rare ' occurrence , and have allowed surface application of the dispersant to occur virtually every day since the directive was issued , '' Markey wrote in a letter dated Aug. 1 to retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad W. Allen , the government 's point man on the spill . 
Markey chairs the House Select Committee on Energy Independence and Global Warming . 
Some of them dealt with separate dispersant applications on the same day . 
Markey said it appeared that the order `` has become more of a meaningless paperwork exercise '' than a real attempt to curb use of the dispersants . 
In an interview Saturday , Allen defended the decisions to grant the waivers , saying that overall use of dispersants declined sharply after that May 26 order to limit their use . 
The total use of dispersants underwater and on the surface declined about 72 percent from its peak , according to the Environmental Protection Agency . 
Allen said that on some days the amount of oil on the surface justified a `` tactical '' decision , by on-scene Coast Guard commanders , to spray some dispersants . 
`` There 's a dynamic tension that goes on when you 're managing an incident that has no precedent , '' Allen said . 
`` You establish general rules and guidelines , but knowing that the people on scene have the information '' means trusting them to make decisions , he said . 
In the end , Allen said : `` You can quibble on the semantics related to ` rare . ' 
I like to focus on the effects we achieved '' by dispersing the oil . 
Officials have said that , in the days since the gusher was stopped , thick sheets of oil have nearly disappeared from the gulf 's surface . 
EPA Administrator Lisa P. Jackson conceded that there had been `` frustration in the field '' from EPA officials about the waivers . 
But Jackson said it was partly alleviated June 22 , nearly a month after the order was issued , when Coast Guard officials began giving the EPA a greater role in the discussions over whether to approve dispersant use . 
`` EPA may not have concurred with every single waiver , '' Jackson said . 
But , she said , the Coast Guard had the ultimate say : `` The final decision-making rests with the federal on-scene coordinator . 
That 's where the judgment , the ultimate decision-making ability , had to lie . '' 
The dispersants -- variants of a Nalco product called Corexit -- break up the oil , acting like a detergent on kitchen grease . 
They are intended to keep the oil from reaching shore in large sheets and to make it easier for microbes to consume the oil underwater . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
