Wednesday 26 January 2005 17.05 GMT US CH-53 Sea Stallion helicopters of the type that crashed in Iraq today . 
Photograph : Charles Whitehouse\/AP Thirty-one US marines were killed today when the helicopter they were traveling in crashed in the desert in western Iraq , causing the largest loss of life among US forces in a single incident since the beginning of the Iraq war . 
The helicopter went down near Rutba , about 220 miles west of Baghdad , while conducting security operations , the military said in a statement . 
A Pentagon source said the helicopter was a CH-53 Sea Stallion , which normally carries 37 passengers , but can take up to 55 . 
It was not immediately known how many people were on board , nor whether it was shot down or crashed in an accident . 
The aircraft was transporting personnel from the 1st Marine Division . 
A search and rescue team has reached the site and an investigation into what caused the crash is underway . 
The US president , George Bush , expressed his sorrow at the news at the first White House press conference of his new term . 
`` Obviously , any time we lose life , it is a sad moment , '' he said . 
Asked about the cause of the crash , Mr Bush said , `` I 've heard rumors , but let 's wait for the facts '' . 
The US military has lost at least 33 helicopters since the war began in March 2003 , according to the Brookings Institution . 
At least 20 were brought down by hostile fire . 
The previous most deadly incident involving US troops was on November 15 2003 , when two Black Hawk helicopters collided in Mosul while trying to avoid ground fire , killing 17 soldiers . 
Last month , a suicide bomb explosion at a mess tent in a base near Mosul killed 22 people including 14 US soldiers and three US contractors . 
The Iraqi government announced today that it would ban travel between provinces and extend the hours of a curfew as part of security measures for this weekend 's election . 
Falah al-Naqib , the Iraqi interior minister , said the curfew - currently 8pm to 6am - would begin an hour earlier at 7pm . 
It would be enforced from Friday until Monday , the day after voting . 
During that period , only vehicles with special permits would be allowed to travel between Iraq 's 18 provinces . 
Baghdad international airport is to be closed and the nation 's borders sealed during the election period . 
Weapons will be banned and rewards given to Iraqis who turn in `` terrorists '' . 
Mr Naqib also announced the arrest of an alleged aide to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi , al-Qaida 's purported leader in Iraq . 
Khamees Mohsen al-Egaily , was said to have been involved in explosions and murders . 
Militants continued their campaign of violence today , attacking US forces , schools to be used as polling stations , and political party offices . 
Three car bombs exploded in Riyadh , around 40 miles south-west of Kirkuk , killing at least five people , including three policemen . 
One of the bombs targeted a US convoy , but there were no reports of casualties . 
The others targeted a police station and the mayor 's office . 
Four US soldiers were injured in a car bombing in Saddam Hussein 's hometown , Tikrit , the US military said . 
Witnesses also reported a US convoy being attacked near Baghdad airport , with at least one vehicle being destroyed . 
In the Sadr City area of Baghdad , Iraqi forces , backed by US troops , raided a Shia mosque overnight , detaining up to 25 followers of the radical cleric Moqtada al-Sadr , police and the cleric 's supporters said . 
Insurgents fired on the Baquba offices of the Communist party , the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the United Iraqi Gathering , with one traffic policeman being killed , police said . 
Residents of Ramadi , west of Baghdad , reported clashes between US troops and rebels when a US patrol came under attack from rocket-propelled grenades . 
One Iraqi was killed and two wounded , a Ramadi general hospital doctor said . 
In Mosul , insurgents released a video recording , seen by Reuters correspondents , apparently showing three Iraqi captives with weapons pointed at them , saying they worked for the Iraqi electoral commission . 
Two militants appeared on the video without the hostages . 
One read a statement , saying : `` We are mujahideen in the province of Nineveh . 
What they call elections have no basis in the Islamic religion and that 's why we will hit all election centres . '' 
The militants did not threaten to kill the election workers . 
The election will be Iraq 's first multi-party poll in half a century . 
Voters will elect a 275-member assembly that will pick Iraq 's new transitional government and draft a permanent constitution . 
The prime minister , Tony Blair , today indicated that Britain and the US could begin handing over large parts of Iraq to the country 's security forces after the election . 
Mr Blair told the Financial Times that Washington and London were set to agree `` timelines '' with the new government indicating the pace at which Iraqi forces could take over less difficult areas . 
`` Both ourselves and the Iraqis want us to leave as soon as possible . 
The question is , what is as soon as possible ? 
And the answer is when the Iraqi forces have the capability to do the job , '' he said . 
`` There are areas where we would be able to hand over to those Iraqi forces . 
Remember , 14 out of the 18 provinces in Iraq are relatively peaceful and stable . '' 
