By the CNN Wire Staff A man fleeing Libya crosses the border into Tunisia on Sunday . 
NEW : Nearly 36,000 Chinese have left Libya , China 's biggest-ever evacuation , Xinhua reports Some nation 's citizens , such as Bangladeshis , have been forced to fend for themselves The British government says it will repatriate 500 Bangladeshis An official says three people die , 14 are missing from a ship headed to Crete from Tripoli Djerba , Tunisia -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Four more U.S. military flights were headed to Cairo from Tunisia on Sunday , evacuating Egyptians fleeing the Libyan conflict , a U.S. official said . 
The first of the C-130 cargo planes landed in Cairo at about 3 p.m. Sunday , carrying 82 passengers , the U.S. embassy in Cairo reported . 
Two more planes were en route with 90 and 72 passengers , respectively . 
The fourth plane was yet to depart from Tunisia . 
On Saturday , U.S. military planes carried out similar evacuations , returning passengers to Egypt . 
There are a few thousand Egyptians left in Tunisia awaiting evacuation after more than 40,000 were taken home , said Firas Kayal , a spokesman for the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , on Saturday . 
Many countries , such as India , conducted well-organized evacuation operations for their citizens . 
Nearly 36,000 Chinese nationals , for instance , have been evacuated from Libya since February 22 -- the largest such effort in the Communist state 's 61-year history , the state-run Xinhua news agency reported Sunday . 
The last 149 of those evacuees touched down in Shanghai late Saturday , having arrived back in China after a stop in Malta , according a statement from China 's foreign ministry . 
Beijing coordinated evacuations using 91 China-based charter flights , 35 rental charter flights from non-Chinese airlines , 12 flights on military airplanes , 11 non-Chinese passenger ships , five cargo ferries and one escort ship , in addition to 100 bus runs , Xinhua reports . 
But people from other countries , including Egyptians and Bangladeshis , have been left to fend for themselves . 
Kayal said Saturday more than 10,000 Bangladeshis are awaiting transport in Tunisia . 
Many of them have had to walk to the border because their money was stolen by soldiers and they could not pay for transportation costs . 
One man suffered a heart attack and died , aid officials confirmed . 
On Sunday , the British government said it would provide emergency evacuation flights to repatriate 500 stranded Bangladeshis . 
Three commercial charter planes will take the Bangladeshis home from Djerba airport later Sunday , the British government said . 
`` I have seen for myself the scale of the humanitarian situation on the Libyan border with Tunisia , '' said Andrew Mitchell , the international development secretary . 
`` I vowed that we would do everything possible to give those stranded shelter and get them back home as quickly as possible . '' 
Meanwhile , three people died and 14 were missing when they tried to get off a ship headed from Libya 's capital , Tripoli , to Crete , the Greek Ministry for the Protection of Civilians said Sunday . 
The ship -- flying under Cyprus ' flag -- was carrying about 1,280 passengers , mostly Bangladeshis . 
The ministry said passengers were killed or went missing as they were trying to get off the ship using a rope . 
Nigeria 's National Emergency Management Agency announced Sunday that 1,243 Nigerians `` who had been stranded in Tripoli '' arrived in Nigeria . 
In total , nearly 2,300 Nigerians have been evacuated , the agency 's director general , Muhammad Sani-Sidi , said in a statement . 
The operation has involved large chartered planes and commercial aircraft , the statement said . 
The violence in Libya has generated an exodus from the north African nation . 
Almost 200,000 people , a majority of them foreign workers , have fled Libya -- nearly 100,000 to Tunisia and a similar number to Egypt -- according to the United Nations refugee agency . 
The numbers of people entering Tunisia daily from Libya dropped to 1,800 Thursday and Friday and stood at 3,000 Saturday . 
Previously , they averaged 10,000 to 15,000 people . 
Hovig Etyemezian , a field officer for the U.N. refugee agency , attributed the drop in part to fear and the manipulation of the flow of refugees by Libyan authorities . 
`` A lot of them were scared from leaving because of the fighting , so they were staying in their houses , '' he said Saturday . 
`` We fear the regime might be blocking refugees from the border . '' 
The U.S. State Department said Saturday it would donate $ 3 million to the International Organization for Migration as part of a partnership to help thousands of Egyptians and other nationals from Africa , South Asia and Southeast Asia get home . 
U.S. government video footage from Sunday showed Army soldiers working with Italian nationals at the Leghorn Army Depot in Italy to pack and ship aid destined to help refugees in Tunisia , along the Libyan border . 
CNN 's Ivan Watson and Jomana Karadsheh contributed to this report 
