Libya crisis sends U.S. gas prices up 33 cents in two weeks March 06 , 2011 | By Mariano Castillo , CNN The national average for a price of self-serve unleaded gasoline at $ 3.51 , says the Lundberg Survey . 
U.S. gasoline prices increased nearly 33 cents in two weeks , the second-biggest two-week jump in the history of the gasoline market , according to a new survey of filling stations . 
The latest Lundberg Survey of cities in the continental United States was conducted Friday . 
It showed the national average for a price of self-serve unleaded gasoline at $ 3.51 , an increase of 32.7 cents from the last survey two weeks earlier , survey publisher Trilby Lundberg said . 
The jump was the biggest since a 38-cent hike between August and September 2005 . 
At the time , the price increase was driven by damage caused by Hurricane Katrina . 
`` This time around , the spike comes not from nature , but from people , '' Lundberg said . 
`` The armed struggle in Libya has shocked international oil markets and here it is at the pump . '' 
As the fighting between opposition forces and Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's troops begins to look more like a civil war , expect prices to continue to rise , she said . 
Prices have risen nearly 82 cents since September 2010 , the survey found . 
While Libya is not among the top suppliers of U.S. oil , and only 3 % of Libyan oil exports head to the United States , global economics link the events there to the pumps at home . 
Libya produces a light , high-gravity crude oil that is most in demand by less complex refineries around the world , Lundberg said . 
As this oil becomes unavailable , it forces buyers of crude to substitute crude with similar properties from other oil producers , thereby increasing demand and starting a chain reaction that raises prices of crude and gasoline in the United States . 
The current average price of $ 3.51 is 61 cents below the all-time high price recorded in July 2008 . 
Today 's price is 78 cents higher than a year ago , Lundberg said . 
On a side note , Lundberg noted that the rising gas prices could dampen the nation 's economic recovery . 
Gas demand -- one of the reflections of the American economy -- has been growing at a rate of 1 % , she said . 
`` Higher prices today are certainly capable of halting that gasoline demand growth , which would reflect bad news in the economy , '' she said . 
The Lundberg Survey sampled prices at about 2,500 gas stations . 
Of the cities surveyed , the highest average price in the continental United States was in San Diego at $ 3.87 per gallon . 
The lowest price was in Billings , Montana , at $ 3.15 . 
California has garnered headlines lately for its high gas prices , though the average price in the state remained below $ 4 , at $ 3.83 per gallon for regular gas . 
The average California price for premium does break that barrier , at $ 4.04 per gallon . 
Average per-gallon prices in other cities : 
