Advert warns about the dangers of swine flu It is too early to assume the swine flu outbreak is a mild infection just because no-one in the UK has died , England 's chief medical officer says . 
Sir Liam Donaldson warned against complacency because flu viruses could change character `` very rapidly '' . 
A new case of the H1N1 virus in England has taken the confirmed UK total to 28 , the Department of Health said . 
Leaflets suggesting ways people can treat and prevent catching swine flu have begun dropping through doors . 
We must not be complacent . 
We know that flu viruses can change their character very rapidly as they move through populations Sir Liam , who updated the government 's weekly cabinet meeting on the flu situation , told BBC News : `` We may see an apparent peak in the incidents over the next month or so , but that does n't mean it 's gone away . 
`` It could be that we 'll see a resurgence of the virus in the autumn and winter when the normal flu season starts . 
`` We must not be complacent . 
We know that flu viruses can change their character very rapidly as they move through populations . '' 
He added : `` These next few months are vitally important in understanding what sort of virus we 're dealing with . '' 
The latest case of swine flu , confirmed on Tuesday , was in an adult from the Slough area of Berkshire , the South Central Strategic Health Authority said . 
The individual , who is associated with travel to Mexico , is responding well to antiviral drugs , the authority added . 
It brings the overall totals to 24 in England and four in Scotland . 
A spokesman said : `` It is right that we are preparing for the possibility of a global pandemic . 
`` The UK 's arrangements are continuing to ensure that we are well-placed to deal with this new infection . '' 
Five UK schools hit by the virus have begun rescheduling GCSEs and A-levels as the summer exam season begins . 
Three of the schools are in London , with one in Devon and one in South Gloucestershire . 
Four are secondary schools . 
The latest to be hit by the virus is Alleyn 's School in Dulwich , London , where five year-seven pupils were diagnosed on Monday . 
A sixth pupil from the independent school , who visited the US during the Easter holidays , was diagnosed with the virus on Sunday . 
The school said it was rescheduling A-level exams in art , biology and foreign languages for next week . 
In a statement it said : `` In line with procedure , the school will be writing to the examination boards who are always sympathetic to students in these circumstances . '' 
Most computers will open this document automatically , but you may need Adobe Reader Nine out of 10 of the parents had now collected the Tamiflu anti-viral medication offered by the Health Protection Agency , the school added . 
More than 1,200 private schools have been given legal advice by the Independent Schools Council , which suggests setting up `` quarantine rooms '' for pupils suspected of having the virus . 
It also says schools should provide a policy on what to do in case of a pandemic . 
Governors at Dolphin School in Battersea , London , closed its doors as a precaution after it emerged that two pupils - siblings of pupils at Alleyn 's - had been confirmed with the virus . 
Swine flu has already closed South Hampstead High School in north west London , Downend in South Gloucestershire and Paignton Community and Sports College in Devon . 
Around 300 other people in the UK are currently awaiting the results of tests to determine whether they have the virus . 
Members of the public can call 08001513513 for recorded information about swine flu . 
The number for NHS 24 in Scotland is 08454 24 24 24 . 
Have you or has anyone you know been tested for swine flu ? 
Has your school been affected ? 
Send us your comments and experiences using the form below : A selection of your comments may be published , displaying your name and location unless you state otherwise in the box below . 
The BBC may edit your comments and not all emails will be published . 
Your comments may be published on any BBC media worldwide . 
