May 29 : This image made from video released by British Petroleum -LRB- BP PLC -RRB- shows the gushing oil well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
AP In what is measuring up to be the biggest environmental disaster in U.S. history , the government is nearly helpless to stop the oil flowing from the Deepwater Horizon well that exploded in the Gulf of Mexico on April 20 . 
The White House said Sunday that it expects the spill to grow by 20 percent after BP gets started with its latest effort to contain the spill , beginning Monday or Tuesday . 
The White House also said it is tripling its environmental cleanup crew . 
But the additional spillage is opposite what BP Managing Director Bob Dudley said on `` Fox News Sunday '' -- that the decision to cut open the pipes in order to put a cap on the well will likely not add to the amount of oil flowing into the water . 
`` What we need is a clean cut across the top of that riser package at the bottom of the sea . 
The amount of oil will not change . 
The oil was coming out anyway from just above it at a broken area of the pipe at the end of the pipe . 
So that is not going to change the flow , '' he said . 
President Obama 's top environmental adviser Carol Browner said Sunday the government is responding with what she called the largest environmental mobilization effort ever , but it looks like it could be up to BP to dig a new well before the gushing spill stops pouring into the Gulf of Mexico . 
`` There 's not just one being dug , there are two . 
Because we insisted -- the government insisted that there be a second one in case something went wrong with the first one , '' Browner said on NBC 's '' Meet the Press . '' 
That 's after BP 's `` top kill '' effort to plug the hole with hundreds of thousands of pounds of mud failed . 
BP is looking at the next alternative -- trying to grab the oil that 's spilling into the water and move it onto a vessel that will pull the oil onshore . 
`` Obviously that 's not the preferred scenario . 
We always knew that the relief well was the permanent way to close this , to get it killed so there was n't oil coming up while the relief well was being drilled was the second option . 
Now we move to the third option which is to contain it , '' Browner said . 
The federal government has placed 150 scientists on the case , and concerns have been raised to BP about putting additional pressure on the leaking well that could make the spill worse . 
The government estimates that 12,000-19 ,000 barrels of oil are being released daily from 5,000 feet below the sea . 
Estimates are at about 18 million to 40 million gallons have been dumped into the Gulf since the explosion . 
Dudley said after the last containment dome failed because ice crystals formed in the pipe , scientists learned to pump warm sea water down the column of the pipe to prevent the same kind of problems while trying to get the oil up into the vessel . 
Dudley said he was hopeful the odds of success are greater than the 60 to 70 percent odds put on the top kill method . 
`` We feel like the percentages are better that we 'll be able to contain the oil . 
The question is how much of the oil we 'll be able to contain , and the objective is to try to collect the majority of it through this vessel , '' he said . 
Rep. Ed Markey , D-Mass . 
, chairman of the House energy committee investigating the oil spill , told CBS he has no faith in BP to get the gusher contained . 
`` I have no confidence whatsoever in BP . 
I think that they do not know what they are doing . 
They started off talking about golf balls going in as a junk shot . 
People thought they would be dependent on MIT or Cal Tech instead of the PGA and golf balls . 
That was in the first couple of weeks . 
So I do n't think that people should really believe what BP is saying in terms of the likelihood of anything that they 're doing is going to turn out as they 're predicting , '' he said . 
Browner said whatever the worst-case scenario , if there is any good news , it is that the environmental response is up and running , and systems have been put in place `` to manage and decrease the amount of oil that comes onshore . '' 
Among those , Browner said 80 burns have been conducted to get the oil off the top of the water , but those are limited by weather . 
In addition , booms have been set in place to capture the oil slicks before they come ashore . 
Lastly , 1,400 vessels are using skimmers to try to get the oil out of the water . 
`` We are using skimmers that skim up the oil sheen , they bring up water , I think they over 11 billion barrels of oil and water that have been skimmed up , '' Browner said . 
But Louisiana Sen. David Vitter and other lawmakers and state officials have complained that not enough booms have been put up to shield Louisiana 's shores , where 150 miles of coastline are already affected . 
He said he is very dissatisfied with the administration 's response . 
`` The state and locals came up with a plan on emergency dredging barrier islands well over two weeks ago . 
For over two weeks , the corps and other federal agencies dragged their feet . 
9:16:49 Then , they approved moving forward with 2 percent of that plan , '' he told CNN . 
Vitter said the disaster has not turned him against offshore drilling -- that would be like saying he 's opposed to air travel after a plane crash . 
More importantly , Vitter said , the key is to finding out what went wrong and making sure it does n't happen again . 
To that extent the Republican senator is on the same page as the administration , though Vitter and Browner part ways on stopping deep water drilling until that investigation is complete , a situation Browner acknowledged only compounds economic troubles for the region and the country . 
`` In the Arctic they 've been shut down . 
In the Gulf of Mexico they 've been shut down , including 33 rigs that were out there drilling right now , which we understand is going to be hard on those people , '' she said . 
`` We have to learn from this accident . 
In the interim we have shut down all deep water drilling in the Gulf of Mexico until we have an answer to , one , how can you make sure that these operations are safe , that there are redundancies in place ? 
... Secondly , what happens when those redundancies do n't work ? '' 
In the meantime , the nation 's top environmental advocate acknowledged that the devastation is beyond any scope the U.S. has ever seen . 
`` More oil is leaking into the Gulf of Mexico than as any other time in our history . 
It means there 's more and more -- more oil than the Exxon Valdez , '' she said . 
Fox News ' Malini Wilkes contributed to this report . 
