BP and Russia in Arctic oil deal BP 's chief executive Bob Dudley : '' This is a historic moment for BP '' The `` strategic global alliance '' will see the firms exchange expertise in exploring the region . 
As part of the deal Rosneft will take 5 % of BP 's shares in exchange for approximately 9.5 % of Rosneft 's shares . 
It is BP 's first deal since the Deepwater Horizon spill last year , which cost it billions . 
The BP shares stake is worth just under $ 8bn -LRB- # 5bn -RRB- . 
`` BP executives see this as the first piece of good news since that disastrous oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico last April , '' said the BBC 's business editor Robert Peston . 
But he said the deal was a controversial one , with Russia not seen as an entirely transparent society nor as a stable place to do business . 
`` This unique agreement underlines our long-term , strategic and deepening links with the world 's largest hydrocarbon-producing nation , '' said BP 's chief executive Bob Dudley . 
Robert Peston Business editor , BBC News For BP executives it 's a hugely exciting moment - the first bit of what they see as seriously good news since that devastating oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico last April . 
For BP what matters is that the area of the Russian Arctic to be explored has the potential to produce as much oil as the North Sea in its heyday . 
But the deal will be hugely contentious . 
First Russia is widely viewed as not a desperately stable environment for Western businesses . 
Second it involves Rosneft , Russia 's biggest oil company , taking a 5 % stake in BP worth just under # 5bn . 
Rosneft is 75 % owned by the Russian government . 
So it will look to many as though the Russian government is taking a 5 % stake in a company with strategically important oil reserves all over the world , including - of course - the US . 
He said the `` historic '' deal would `` create value , deliver growth , and meet the world 's demand for energy '' . 
Mr Dudley said the agreement would meet the needs of consumers , shareholders and governments . 
The firms will explore in three areas - known as EPNZ 1,2,3 - on the Russian Arctic continental shelf . 
The areas covers 125,000 square kilometres in an area of the South Kara Sea . 
`` Our future joint venture will utilize the experience and expertise of BP , one of the leaders in the global oil and gas industry , '' said Rosneft 's President , Eduard Khudainatov . 
`` This project is unique in its complexity and scale both for Russia and the global oil and gas industry . 
We see it as the next step in developing our relations with BP . '' 
Referring to the Deepwater Horizon blast Mr Dudley said that the firm had `` learned many lessons over the past year '' . 
He also said the Russian deal had not been precipitated by the backlash it had experienced in the US because of the Gulf of Mexico spill . 
We are creating an entirely new strategic alliance between what I know are two great companies '' End Quote Bob Dudley BP chief executive Since the rig disaster in the US Gulf of Mexico BP has been disposing of assets . 
Mr Dudley is the former chief executive of Russian joint venture TNK-BP , and was forced out of the country in 2008 after falling out with other shareholders . 
But he said he was pleased to now be working with Rosneft in `` one of the world 's last remaining unexplored basins '' . 
`` We are today building a relationship between BP and Rosneft that has been forged over 12 years but going far beyond anything that has gone before , '' he said . 
`` We are creating an entirely new strategic alliance between what I know are two great companies . '' 
UK Energy Secretary Chris Huhne : '' It 's a ground-breaking deal '' BP and Rosneft have also agreed to set-up an Arctic technology center in Russia which will work with Russian and international research institutes to develop technologies for the extraction of hydrocarbon resources from the Arctic shelf . 
UK Energy Secretary Chris Huhne hailed the agreement as a groundbreaking development . 
`` From what we know , it sounds like it 's potentially good for BP , '' said Phil Weiss , analyst at New York equities firm Argus Research . 
`` BP gets access to resources , Rosneft gets access to expertise and knowledge . '' 
However in the US Congressman Edward Markey , who is leading Democrat on the House Natural Resources Committee , called for a review of the deal by US regulators . 
BP had a terrible 2010 with the Gulf of Mexico spill , which is going to cost them at least $ 40bn . 
But in November BP announced it was back in profit in the three months to September after last quarter ' s record loss . 
The firm said its replacement cost profit for the period was $ 1.85 bn -LRB- # 1.15 bn -RRB- , as against the $ 17bn loss recorded from April to June . 
The previous loss reflected the massive costs of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill crisis . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
