The tabloid press had speculated that Jackson was in very poor health Pop star Michael Jackson had a strong heart and was a `` fairly healthy '' 50-year-old , according to an autopsy report obtained in the US . 
His weight was in the acceptable range for a man of his height , according to the Associated Press . 
But the singer , who died of a heart attack in June , had punctured arms , tattooed lips and eyebrows and suffered from lung damage and some arthritis . 
Jackson 's death was ruled as homicide caused by a powerful anesthetic . 
The Los Angeles coroner disclosed in August that Propofol and the sedative Lorazepam were the `` primary drugs responsible for Mr Jackson 's death '' . 
The drugs were administered by Jackson 's physician Dr Conrad Murray , and the verdict has been considered likely to increase the chances of criminal charges being brought against his doctors . 
According to the document , Jackson 's most serious health problem was his chronically inflamed lungs , but this was not serious enough to be a contributing factor to his death . 
The post mortem did not uncover any physical problems that may have limited Jackson 's ability to perform . 
`` His overall health was fine , '' said Dr Zeev Kain of the University of California , who reviewed the report for AP but was not involved in the post-mortem examination . 
`` The results are in normal limits , '' he added . 
The report also revealed that Jackson had a number of scars on his body , including behind his ears and beside each of his nostrils . 
Dr Kain concluded they were likely to have been caused by cosmetic surgery , while others , including on the knee , were likely to have been created by medical procedures . 
The document also states that the singer was bald at the front of his head and had what appeared to be a dark tattoo stretching across his head . 
His remaining hair was described as short and tightly-curled , it added . 
The coroner reported that Jackson had depigmentation of the skin around his face , chest , abdomen and arms . 
The full autopsy report has yet to be officially released to the public , but the conclusion that Jackson 's death was homicide has been disclosed . 
