The Post asked experts about the political winners and losers of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
Below are contributions from Ed Rogers , Scott Keeter , Douglas E. Schoen and Donna Brazile . 
White House staffer to Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush ; chairman of BGR Group So far there are no political winners from the gulf oil spill debacle . 
And there probably wo n't be any winners , just various degrees of losers . 
I was working at the White House during the Exxon Valdez spill , and I appreciate the challenges of many of the players . 
President Obama 's political managers are all being told that the president needs to `` do something . '' 
But when he does he becomes more closely associated with the ugly problem and more responsible for the nearly impossible task of stopping the flow and managing a cleanup that will leave most people unsatisfied . 
The governors of the affected states have to be busy and make demands of BP and the feds , yet they must not appear to be ineffective when not much happens . 
In Washington , among those with no real responsibility , there is a contest to see who can kick BP the hardest and promise the most restitution to all those affected by the spill . 
Ultimately , there will not be enough money to make everybody happy , much less quiet . 
So we are entering a political cycle of blame , promises and poor results , which leads to more blame and another layer of promises . 
All the while , the results of the spill get worse , and the pictures of the failure appear on every TV in America several times a day . 
Using contrived criminal and civil tools , Obama may decide that the death of BP is his best political cover ; governors will do what real work can be done and hope for the best ; Congress will no doubt commission a study , release a report and pass new laws whose effects , intended and unintended , are hard to imagine . 
This is a great American tragedy whose political consequences will linger for years . 
No one will emerge as a hero , savior or indispensable leader . 
Instead , the revelation of the limits of our technology , leaders , laws and energy options will leave us all frustrated and in a mood to blame everybody involved . 
Until now President Obama has avoided serious political damage from the government 's handling of the spill , but this may be changing . 
Recent polling finds pluralities or majorities of the public disapproving of the administration 's response or giving it low marks for its handling of the situation . 
Even among Democrats , ratings of the administration 's performance have been tepid . 
The spill is unfolding at a time of exceptionally low levels of trust in government , which may make the public even less forgiving . 
Still , unlike Hurricane Katrina , where the government had primary responsibility for dealing with the crisis , until now its role has been secondary to that of BP . 
And the public has been far more critical of BP for its handling of the crisis . 
Although the spill may cause Obama political damage in the short run , it could help him in the longer run with key legislative priorities for his administration : the passage of a comprehensive energy bill and efforts to address environmental protection more generally . 
The spill has spurred an increase in support for environmental protection , which had declined over the past two years as concerns about the economy pushed aside many other public priorities . 
While polling by Pew Research and other organizations continues to find at least plurality support for offshore oil drilling , the level of support is much lower than before the spill . 
With President Obama 's approval rating dropping to close to 45 percent , driven in large part by his handling of the worst oil spill in U.S. history , the Obama presidency is facing a real crisis . 
And while it was certainly welcome news Thursday that the president took full responsibility for the situation , that will do little to stem the ever-increasing political fallout from both sides of the aisle -- from James Carville to Sarah Palin . 
The president has to stop seeking to both blame and distance himself from BP , all the while asserting federal authority and responsibility . 
He needs a fundamentally different approach . 
He has to make it clear that we are all in this together -- not as corporations or populists , not as Democrats or Republicans , but as Americans working to solve the problem collectively . 
This would be similar to how , in his National Defense Review , Obama spoke of the need for developing and enhancing alliances around the world to confront common enemies and solve common problems . 
He must emphasize results and outcomes -- not partisanship , populist bashing , or divide and conquer . 
This is how he ran his campaign , how he said he would govern and how he has to govern now . 
If he does n't rally Americans , no amount of rhetorical parsing or political gamesmanship will solve a problem that has the potential to undermine the credibility and perceived competence of the Obama presidency . 
Author and political commentator ; manager of Al Gore 's 2000 presidential campaign ; served on the Louisiana Recovery Authority from 2005 to 2008 Even if some good comes out of BP 's oil flood , it still looks like a lose-lose situation for everyone involved . 
Not only has the spill caused a substantial loss of marshland for the gulf and the livelihoods of residents , it will have lasting effects far into the future . 
Both Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal -LRB- R -RRB- and President Obama may still emerge as political winners . 
Jindal may already have won as much as he can , politically . 
The perception had been that Jindal cared more for a national office than the governor 's mansion , but the perception has changed . 
His handling of this crisis has made him look competent , concerned and in charge . 
But since Louisiana must rely on the feds , Jindal is in a dilemma he ca n't control . 
Things are up to the president now . 
Jindal may claim he energized Washington , but winning big in his state may make Jindal less attractive nationally . 
To be a `` winner , '' Obama must accomplish , then publicize , the following : -LRB- 1 -RRB- Emphasize the flood and the plug -- that he fixed what BP 's greed and big oil 's conceit broke . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- Change the regulatory culture , and not just at the Minerals Management Service . 
Make regulation effective at all agencies . 
-LRB- 3 -RRB- Take charge , make BP pay -- and make sure the public knows both . 
-LRB- 4 -RRB- Aggressively push for the progressive energy policy he campaigned on -- no more spill , baby , spill or mine , baby , mine . 
-LRB- 5 -RRB- Dam the flood and clean up the marsh . 
Prioritize the wetlands and the coast , promising restoration and restitution for both . 
Even more , turn `` Obama 's Katrina '' into a success story , by finally recompensing New Orleans and the region . 
Show how the federal government should work . 
