BP 's three-day effort to throttle the leaking gulf oil well with multiple blasts of heavy mud has failed . 
The attempted `` top kill '' of the well was abandoned late Saturday afternoon , leaving the huge Macondo field deep beneath the sea floor once again free to pump at least half a million gallons of crude a day into the gulf . 
`` I can say we tried . 
But what I can also say is this scares everybody , the fact that we ca n't make this well stop flowing , or have n't succeeded in that so far , '' Doug Suttles , BP 's chief operating officer , said in a late-day news conference . 
`` There 's no silver bullet to stop this leak , '' Coast Guard Rear Adm. Mary Landry said . 
The top kill -- a term most Americans had never heard until it became part of the new national vocabulary along with `` blowout preventer , '' `` containment dome '' and `` junk shot '' -- had been seen as the best hope for turning the oil spill into something finite in volume . 
Now BP must fall back on a containment strategy in the near term , hoping to capture as much oil as possible . 
Sitting on the sea floor and awaiting deployment is a new containment dome , what the company calls the Lower Marine Riser Package cap . 
With robotic submarines , the company will sever the leaking , kinked riser pipe that emerges from the top of the blowout preventer , the five-story-tall contraption on top of the wellhead . 
Then engineers will guide the LMRP cap onto the pipe . 
The cap is fitted with a grommet designed to keep out seawater and prevent the formation of slushy methane hydrates that bedeviled an earlier containment dome effort . 
The cap procedure will take four to seven days , officials say . 
`` This operation should be able to capture most of the oil , '' Suttles said . 
`` I want to stress the word ` most , ' because it 's not a tight , mechanical seal . '' 
After that , the company could place another blowout preventer on top of the existing one . 
Meanwhile two drilling rigs at the surface continue to drill relief wells . 
That 's a long-term strategy that requires engineers to hit a seven-inch target , the bottom of the leaking well , 31\/2 miles below the surface of the gulf . 
The first of the two relief wells to hit the target will send a massive dose of cement to seal the leaking well . 
That will not be until August , BP predicts . 
Saturday 's news was hardly a shock , given the doubts expressed by engineers and even by BP itself about whether it 's possible to kill a well 5,000 feet below the surface and accessible only with robotic vehicles . 
But the gulf was still hoping for good news . 
After BP executives began the top kill Wednesday , chief executive Tony Hayward said the effort was proceeding as planned . 
Then the national incident commander , Thad Allen , gave news media interviews Thursday and Friday suggesting that the effort was going well . 
As he put it , `` We 'll get this under control . '' 
The well had other ideas . 
It ceased to spew oil only when it was force-fed the drilling mud . 
When the pumping stopped , the well returned to form , churning out oil and gas . 
It was like hitting a Bozo punching dummy -- it goes down , then springs back up . 
Though some might prefer the analogy of the slasher-movie villain who always comes back for the sequel . 
`` This well is evil , '' moaned energy analyst Byron King . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
