Argentinian fights with Libyan rebels From Nicolas Garcia , For CNN Anti-Gadhafi rebels have been battling for control of towns across Libya for months Jose Emmanuel Piaggesi says the revolutionary Che Guevara inspires him He says he is fighting `` for liberty '' alongside Libyan rebels in Misrata The battle is unpopular with many of the Latin American leftists he typically supports `` He was always a guy who felt good helping , '' his father tells a newspaper Misrata , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Jose Emmanuel Piaggesi was a teacher in Argentina , but now the piercing staccato of gunfire punctuates his conversations . 
The 23-year-old has traded books for bullets , saying Che Guevara inspires him as he fights alongside Libyan rebels in Misrata . 
He is ready to give his life in the battle to end Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's nearly 42-year rule . 
It 's an unpopular war with many of the Latin American leftists he typically supports . 
`` I invite them to look a little more closely at the situation , who is here fighting and why is he fighting , '' Piaggesi said as he took a break to prepare for the next round of clashes . 
`` He is going to say that it is for liberty -- not for NATO or for anybody , simply for liberty . '' 
It 's a question of inadvertently dodging bullets . 
And when it 's your turn , it 's your turn . 
The unlikely story of an Argentinian fighting with the Libyan opposition has drawn national attention in Piaggesi 's home country . 
His father , Pablo Piaggesi , told Argentina 's Perfil newspaper that he was not surprised his son had chosen to fight for a cause he supports . 
`` He was always a guy who felt good helping , and was disinterested in money . 
He is a very special person , very talented . 
He speaks four languages . 
He learned to speak Arabic on the Internet in two months , '' he said . 
Pablo Piaggesi told the newspaper that his son was a longtime admirer of Guevara , and had recently visited the museum honoring the Argentinian revolutionary . 
Jose Emmanuel Piaggesi said he was proud to be fighting for a new revolution . 
But he noted that many have already fallen . 
`` I think it 's a question of inadvertently dodging bullets . 
And when it 's your turn , it 's your turn , '' he said . 
But despite the danger , the teacher said he has no plans to head back to the classroom anytime soon . 
After speaking to CNN , he returned to his post on the battlefield , where he pledged to stay until Gadhafi is removed from power . 
