01 February 12 04:27 GMT A day of debate at the United Nations Security Council meeting on Syria has ended without agreement . 
The council was discussing whether to adopt an Arab League plan calling for an end to violence and for President Bashar al-Assad to stand down . 
Qatar 's prime minister urged council members to take action against what he called Mr Assad 's `` killing machine '' . 
But China and Russia said the plan amounts to regime change and remain opposed to the Arab League proposal . 
`` I do n't think Russian policy is about asking people to step down , '' Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said . 
`` Yes , we condemn strongly the use of force by government forces against civilians . 
But we condemn in the same strong way the activities of the armed extremist groups who attack government positions , '' Mr Lavrov added . 
`` China ... resolutely opposes pushing for forced regime change in Syria , as it violates the United Nations Charter and the basic norms guiding the practice of international relations , '' Chinese Ambassador to the United Nations Li Baodong said at the meeting , China 's state-run news agency Xinhua reported . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton later suggested negotiations would continue over the text . 
`` We will have a concerted effort over the next days to reach agreement in the Security Council to put forth a resolution that sends a message to President Assad and his regime , '' she said , according to AP . 
The BBC 's Barbara Plett at the UN says Western nations had been hoping that Tuesday 's session would soften Russian resistance . 
In a note of optimism , Russian UN envoy Vitaly Churkin said the draft resolution contained elements of an earlier Russian text rejected by Western powers and the Arab League as too weak . 
`` This gives rise for hope , '' he said . 
`` We hope that the council will come to consensus on the Syrian issue , as is not only possible but also necessary . '' 
The UN estimates more than 5,400 people have been killed since the unrest began last March . 
The violence appears to be intensifying - more than 100 people were reported to have been killed across the country on Monday and at least 37 people on Tuesday , say rights groups . 
The draft resolution strongly condemns human rights abuses by the Syrian government and calls on all sides to cease the use of violence . 
It calls on countries to stop the flow of arms to Syria , but does not impose an arms embargo . 
Speaking at the start of the UN debate , Qatari Prime Minister Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim al-Thani said all previous initiatives had failed `` because the Syrian government failed to make any sincere effort to co-operate with us and the only solution available to it was to kill its own people '' . 
`` Bloodshed continued and the killing machine is still at work , '' he said , urging members to act but stressing that it was for the Syrian people to decide whether they wanted a change in leadership . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said during the debate that the situation in Syria risked spinning out of control , but that Mr Assad 's `` reign of terror '' would end . 
`` The question for us is how many more innocent civilians will die before this country is able to move forward , '' she said . 
Mrs Clinton dismissed concerns that Syria could follow the same pattern as Libya and result in military intervention . 
She said the Arab League 's plan , under which Mr Assad would hand over power to his deputy , represents `` the best effects and efforts of Syria 's neighbors to chart a way forward and deserves a chance to work '' . 
`` The alternative - spurning the Arab League , abandoning the Syrian people , emboldening the dictator - would compound this tragedy and would mark a failure of our shared responsibility and shake the credibility of the United Nations Security Council . '' 
Arab League Secretary-General Nabil el-Arabi said the plan aimed to avoid foreign military intervention . 
On Saturday , the Arab League announced it was suspending its month-old monitoring mission in Syria because of an upsurge of violence . 
UK Foreign Secretary William Hague said the League ' s plan was the only `` credible and viable '' way to stop the `` horrifying violence '' in Syria , and would mark the start of an inclusive political process . 
`` How long do Syrian families have to live in fear that their children will be killed or tortured , before the Security Council will pass a meaningful resolution ? 
, '' Mr Hague asked . 
France called for an end to the `` scandalous silence '' of the UN , and said it must `` assume its responsibilities toward a suffering people '' . 
But Syria 's representative at the UN , Bashar Jaafari , rejected the proposals , saying Syria was protecting its security and would `` stand firm in confronting its enemies '' . 
There were further reports of violence on Tuesday evening , with anti-government activists saying troops had again attacked suburbs in the capital , Damascus . 
The Local Co-Ordination Committee -LRB- LCC -RRB- said 37 people had been killed on Tuesday , including two children and five soldiers who had defected from the army . 
There are also reports of heavy explosions near the hill town of Rankous , just to the north of Damascus . 
Government forces are said to have arrested dozens of young men . 
In the opposition stronghold of Homs , the main crude oil pipeline feeding the refinery was set on fire by an explosion . 
Opposition activists say government artillery set off the blaze in order to deprive residents of heating fuel . 
