By Artyom Krechetnikov BBC Russian The Kremlin is against the call for President Assad to step down Syria 's President Bashar al-Assad has at least one ally on the UN Security Council : Russia , an ally adamant in its opposition to sanctions against Damascus . 
Many analysts believe this stance brings little benefit to Russia , and is more a product of domestic considerations and psychological complexes of the Kremlin 's ruling elite . 
Last October , Russia and China used their vetoes to stop a UN resolution that condemned the government of Mr Assad for the suppression of anti-government protests . 
Now , Moscow has once again threatened to wield its veto , demanding changes to the latest text . 
While Moscow does not wholly support the actions of the Syrian government , it opposes sanctions and has repeatedly stressed its opposition to even the slightest hint of intervention along the lines of that in Libya . 
The Kremlin is also against the call for President Assad 's resignation , and insists that the blame for the crisis and thousands of civilian deaths can not be attributed to the Syrian authorities alone . 
`` We 're not ecstatic about Mr Assad , who always makes promises and does not keep his word , but we are convinced that Assad and Syrian society can talk to each other , and the political dialogue has not been exhausted , '' the Deputy Chairman of the Russian parliament 's foreign affairs committee , Konstantin Kosachev , told the BBC . 
The draft resolution does not mention any possible military action against Syria . 
But Russia wants to delete from it a call for Bashar al-Assad to hand over power to his deputy and a proposal to ban the sale of arms to Syria . 
Russia is a key weapons supplier for Damascus . 
Protesters in Homs step on an image of Russian PM Vladimir Putin Moscow 's most desirable outcome would appear to be saving President Assad , who would then implement some reforms . 
On Monday Russia 's foreign ministry once again called for talks between the Syrian authorities and the opposition and suggested Moscow as a venue . 
While Russia insists on talks `` without preconditions '' , the Syrian opposition demands a ceasefire and an end to repression by government forces . 
Of particular concern for the West is the continuing delivery of Russian arms . 
According to some estimates , some 10 % of Russia 's global arms sales go to Syria , with current contracts estimated to be worth $ 1.5 bn -LRB- # 950m -RRB- . 
Moscow argues that is has not signed up to Western sanctions and has contracts with Damascus which must be honored . 
Western observers generally see the situation in terms of geopolitical pragmatism : Syria is Russia 's long-time ally in the Middle East , and Russia maintains a naval base in the Syrian port of Tartus . 
But Russia 's pragmatism is now being called into question . 
It sends a simple and clear message to the population - we are strong , we are not afraid of anybody '' End Quote Alexei Vorobyov Political analyst Over the past 15 years the same scenario has been played out three times in different countries . 
Although with some reservations , Moscow supported first Slobodan Milosevic in Serbia , then Saddam Hussein in Iraq , and more recently Muammar Gaddafi in Libya , even though it had no means to translate that support into action , and even though the Kremlin did not want seriously to undermine its relations with the US and Europe . 
The West achieved its aims in each case , while Russia appeared impotent and suffered political and economic losses . 
`` Russia is constantly losing allies . 
With the exception of Belarus , Kazakhstan and Venezuela , there are practically no countries that may be called our friends , '' political analyst Alexei Vorobyov told the BBC . 
So why are the Kremlin and foreign ministry following the same path again ? 
`` Although Putin likes the European way , he sees many parallels between himself and Assad , '' says the former head of Russia 's National Strategy Institute , Stanislav Belkovsky . 
`` It is a question of personal sympathy , and a feeling of possibly sharing the same fate . '' 
Some observers , especially from the opposition camp , are keen to suggest that Putin is mindful of the fate of Hosni Mubarak and Muammar Gaddafi , fearing that he might be next . 
But others find such parallels too far-fetched . 
It is difficult to imagine a civil war or military intervention in a nuclear state like Russia . 
Alexei Vorobyov has no doubt that the Kremlin 's foreign policy is largely addressed to a domestic audience . 
`` It 's not a struggle for Syria or Iran , it is a struggle against the West . 
Of course , it is just a pretend struggle . 
But it sends a simple and clear message to the population - we are strong , we are not afraid of anybody . '' 
Among those who shape Russian foreign policy , there is a widespread belief that if Moscow sticks to its guns it will eventually gain a strategic advantage . 
They reason that sooner or later the West will stumble , either because of the economic crisis , or for some other reason . 
In these circumstances , being seen as a leader of the camp rejecting Western values could bring great dividends . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
