Barack Obama owes his victory in large measure to the prospect of the longest and deepest economic downturn in a quarter-century and perhaps since the Great Depression . 
If he performs well , he could become a great president . 
If he flubs it , he could get the same reception as Jimmy Carter . 
In the crassest political terms , it was good luck to have the financial crisis hit so close to the election . 
But Obama 's lucky streak will end in a hurry if he ca n't find a way out of this mess . 
He will also have to manage expectations : Even if he does everything perfectly , we probably wo n't turn the corner for 18 months , and the downturn could last far longer than that . 
The first task facing President-elect Obama , after eight years of misguided economic policies , will be to begin the recovery -- or at least forestall a further decline . 
It wo n't be easy . 
Some 1.2 million jobs have already been shed this year , and some three-quarters of a million Americans are about to exhaust their limited unemployment-insurance benefits . 
By October , only 32 percent of unemployed Americans were receiving unemployment checks . 
To make matters worse , when Americans lose their jobs , they typically lose their health insurance , too . 
Meanwhile , 3.8 million homes are under foreclosure , and states are facing massive revenue shortfalls ; without assistance , they will have to cut spending , plunging the economy deeper into recession . 
So some steps are obvious : assistance to homeowners and bankruptcy reform ; extending unemployment insurance ; and making up for the gap in state revenue . 
The United States also has an infrastructure deficit , not just a fiscal and trade deficit , which means that spending more on infrastructure -LRB- such as public transport and technology -- especially of the green variety -RRB- will stimulate the economy in the short term and help us be more competitive in the long run . 
But then matters start to get trickier . 
The economy obviously needs a direct shot in the arm , but the 44th president needs to be careful about the design of the stimulus he proposes . 
That 's because President Bush will bequeath him a national debt -- $ 10.5 trillion and rising -- that has almost doubled since he took office , even before you factor in the full costs of the financial bailout and the Medicare prescription benefit , as well as the price tag for providing for the hundreds of thousands of returning Iraq war veterans . 
To his credit , Obama knows much of this . 
During the campaign , he argued against cutting taxes on upper-income Americans , who have done so well in recent years . 
In addition to repealing the 2001-03 tax cuts for the wealthiest , Obama should also consider taxing dividends and capital gains at the same rate as ordinary income : It would reduce the deficit , have few short-term adverse effects on an already reeling economy and make the tax code more fair . 
After all , why should speculators -- whether on oil , food or real estate -- be taxed less than those who work long hours to make a living ? 
Another major problem Obama has to tackle is growing inequality in this country . 
Some of these trends will take decades to reverse , but ensuring that no Americans are denied a college education because they ca n't afford it , providing adequate funding for public primary and secondary schools and so forth would be a good beginning Obama has also promised to wind down the war in Iraq . 
Spending a fraction of the war 's cost -- my estimate places the total at $ 3 trillion for our entire economy -- on investments within the United States would help reduce the deficit and boost economic growth at home . 
While the federal deficit looms over the Obama administration 's economic deliberations , we must be careful not to let it block bold action . 
Sometimes , we 're wiser to pay now rather than later . 
Borrowing for high-yielding investments -LRB- not just Wall Street bailouts -RRB- is common sense . 
The decisions not to reinforce the levees in New Orleans or upgrade the bridges in Minneapolis were penny-wise , pound-foolish blunders that we lived to regret . 
The root of so many of our problems is the reeling financial sector . 
The plan cooked up by Bush and his Treasury secretary , Henry M. Paulson Jr. , is n't likely to work , or work well enough . 
So Obama 's team will have to wade in . 
Already , the banks have been talking about using taxpayers ' money for dividends , bonuses and acquiring other banks , rather than doing more lending , which was clearly what Congress had in mind for the $ 700 billion . 
U.S. taxpayers got a raw deal , compared to the terms won by other governments -LRB- such as Great Britain -RRB- or by the legendary investor Warren Buffett , who provided capital to the best capitalized investment bank , Paulson 's own Goldman Sachs . 
Want further proof that Washington got a lousy deal ? 
Look at how the markets reacted . 
The share prices of the bailed-out banks shot up , showing that investors expected net profits to rise substantially . 
The U.S. financial sector , once the emblem of our economic success , has failed us . 
Financial markets are supposed to allocate capital and manage risk ; instead , they squandered capital and created risk . 
Even more galling , the banks ' chiefs raked in private rewards totally out of whack with what scant good they were doing for the wider society . 
