SAO PAULO , Brazil , Nov. 8 -- Brazilian President Luiz In cio Lula da Silva told international finance ministers Saturday that developing countries must be given a greater role in finding solutions to the world 's financial crisis . 
`` This is a global crisis and demands global solutions , '' Lula said in opening remarks at a meeting of the Group of 20 , an organization of major industrialized and developing nations . 
`` The crisis started in advanced economies . 
It is a result of the blind belief in the market 's self-regulation capacity and , by and large , of the lack of control of the activities of financial agents . '' 
During the two-day gathering in Sao Paulo , officials are expected to discuss how the economic downturn has affected their countries and how governments can coordinate responses and stimulus efforts . 
Lula called on the group to come up with proposals for `` substantial change of the world 's financial architecture , '' saying the global credit crunch is hurting the world 's poor . 
Brazil and many other developing countries want to be included in meetings of the largest industrial nations , where the recent crisis originated . 
The G-20 began in 1999 during the Asian financial crisis , but the group 's meetings , notwithstanding the emergency session in Washington scheduled for this week , have not included presidents and prime ministers . 
Brazilian Finance Minister Guido Mantega said Saturday that his country refused to be `` mere coffee drinkers '' on the sidelines of the richer nations ' meetings . 
Many developing countries want to restructure organizations such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to give the nations more of a voice in decision making , said Jenilee Guebert , a senior researcher with the G20 Research Group at the University of Toronto . 
`` Right now , the emerging economies essentially have no voice within the IMF-World Bank system , '' she said . 
`` They want to be included . 
They want a bigger role in the international system ... We live in a globalized world , and they just feel that seven countries or eight countries should n't be representing the whole world . '' 
Canadian Finance Minister James M. Flaherty said the countries are also discussing further interest rate cuts , Bloomberg reported . 
`` The U.K. made a fairly dramatic rate drop this week , and there 's more discussion here about that subject , '' Flaherty said . 
Emerging economies have suffered during the crisis as investment funds fled for safer places , stock markets tumbled and local currencies lost value against the U.S. dollar . 
With the tightening of international credit markets , companies in emerging markets have had difficulty getting loans . 
In Latin America , falling commodity prices have hit particularly hard because of a dependence on exporting oil , minerals and agricultural products . 
`` Many developing countries are moving into a new danger zone , '' the World Bank said in a recent paper . 
`` With this latest financial crisis , growth is slowing and is likely to weaken even more sharply . 
Developing-country exports to developed countries are falling , capital is being withdrawn from emerging markets , and short-term credit is drying up . '' 
Lula said his main concern was the impact of the crisis on trade , fearing that rich countries will reduce imports . 
`` Brazil believes countries must avoid the temptation of resorting to financial and trade protectionism as a mechanism to overcome the crisis , '' he said . 
The International Monetary Fund said last week that growth in the advanced economies would contract next year for the first time since World War II . 
The United States is represented at the G-20 summit by David H. McCormick , undersecretary for international affairs at the Treasury Department , and Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke . 
McCormick said in a statement that Lula `` presented a constructive overview of the challenges we face and the need for developed and developing nations to work together in addressing those challenges . '' 
