Colin Smith offers a magisterial account of the British retreat along the Malay peninsula in Singapore Burning , says Neal Ascherson The Australians at Singapore broke and ran . 
Anyone old enough to remember hearing that story must have wondered if it was n't just another of those sour wartime myths , brewed in British hearts to compensate for losing an empire and getting bread rationing . 
This tremendous book shows that it was . 
General Gordon Bennett 's infantry gave way and fled by the thousand as the Japanese stormed ashore . 
But seen across 60 years and by the standards of today , running away made sense . 
War is a mad island , on which reasonable behavior is reversed . 
People ` put themselves in harm 's way ' , as opponents of the Iraq war touchingly put it , instead of moving out of danger . 
They are required to disconnect instinct and stay in position as a mortar barrage approaches . 
They must try to kill other people who , if left unchallenged , might not try to kill them back . 
Three states of mind can help soldiers achieve this reversal . 
One is blind obedience , becoming an institutionalised patient in the madhouse . 
The second is believing that the safety of the family or community you love is genuinely at stake . 
The third is to have an at least credible expectation of winning this war . 
The Australians at Singapore had none of these . 
As free men , they found it hard to risk their necks on the orders of officers they considered dangerous idiots . 
As citizens , they would have been happy to biff Jerries in defense of poor old England , but what were they doing defending the privileges of stuck-up Poms in this Asian colony ? 
As soon as they got into action on the Malay peninsula , it became obvious the Japanese were going to win . 
Churchill sent telegrams about fighting to the bitter end and dying in the ruins of Singapore to save the honor of the race . 
Thousands of Australians , who were to fight fiercely and expertly in later campaigns , did n't see the point of that and headed for the docks . 
Reading Smith 's account , you see their logic . 
How could the British and Australians have hoped to win with the resources they had ? 
The Japanese assault force was numerically smaller than the defense , but mostly composed of highly trained and battle-hardened troops . 
Malaya was defended by a strange assortment of British regulars , inexperienced Australians and Indian army divisions whose men were often half-trained teenagers . 
The Japanese brought tanks and a large tactical airforce . 
The British had no tanks and , worse , very few anti-tank weapons . 
Their airforce , mainly composed of slow and obsolete machines without modern fighters until the last few days , lost half its strength in the first 24 hours after the Japanese landed in northern Malaya on 8 December 1941 . 
When bombs and torpedoes sank the battlecruiser Repulse and the battleship Prince of Wales two days later , Japan achieved naval as well as air supremacy . 
It 's true that the defenders were plagued by terrible mistakes and bad luck . 
These nourish fantasies that the outcome could have been different . 
If the British had entered southern Thailand , instead of dithering until it was too late , could n't they have slaughtered the invaders on the beaches ? 
If Admiral Phillips had set off earlier to attack the invasion fleet , or turned back as soon as he knew his warships had been spotted , could n't the Japanese troopships have been scattered ? 
If the ship with more anti-tank guns had n't been sunk ; if the RAF had possessed Hurricanes at the start instead of the old Brewster Buffalos ; if the Australian artillery had received the signals that the Japanese assault landing on Singapore island had begun ... But none of these possibilities was the case . 
Even if they had been , Smith 's book suggests that the attack would have still prevailed . 
The defenders , often heroically brave , were simply not up to it . 
Symptomatic is their shocking failure to communicate . 
The radios did not work , the field-telephone cables broke , the signals routines were chaotic . 
When the first landings began at Kota Baharu , all communications with Singapore jammed so that it was 90 minutes before local aircraft were ordered to bomb the beaches . 
It was also true that the Japanese were better soldiers . 
Smith points out that they were neither suicidal fanatics nor trained jungle fighters . 
Their personal weapons were slightly inferior . 
` What -LRB- they -RRB- had in abundance was courage , endurance and a discipline that , in their eagerness to see that orders were carried out , did not stifle initiative but encouraged it . ' 
Most of this book is an account , from hundreds of sources on both sides , of the long British retreat down the Malay peninsula , punctuated by desperate battles . 
Colin Smith knows how it feels to be a soldier , and his story - the experiences of named men and units as they fought , retreated with terrible wounds or died - is unforgettably well told . 
So is his history of the aftermath : the fall of the great city , the bayoneting of the hospital wounded , the murder of the Australian nurses , the massacre of the Chinese population . 
The British commander , General Percival , lost 7,500 dead in the 10-week campaign . 
Then he went with his men into captivity , where more than 12,000 died . 
General Gordon Bennett bolted and got a boat to Sumatra . 
History should be rougher with him than with his soldiers . 
They asked themselves what they were dying for and found no convincing answer . 
The defense of Malaya and Singapore was a war which could not be won , but which had to be fought . 
Because nobody knew an alternative . 
Write your review of this or any other book , find out what other readers thought or add it to your lists Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@observer.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : 00.50 BST on Sunday 12 June 2005 Find books to review , discuss , buy Search all -LRB- title , author or ISBN -RRB- Latest news and views from the Guardian 's books team paullaity : Read this : clever and funny and rightly cutting . 
