Spielberg 's The War of the Worlds is the latest version of HG Wells 's 1898 novel . 
Peter Conrad traces our fascination with invaders from outer space Young , sappy cultures devise myths about creation . 
Cosmos , according to the ancient fables of the Greeks , emerged from the uterine gulf of chaos . 
Or perhaps the God of Genesis personally ordained and organised our world , complimenting Himself on its goodness and stocking it with species which were commanded to increase and multiply . 
In the lore of the Australian aborigines , the earth is dreamed into existence by spirit-ancestors who walk across the land and sculpt it . 
We are too far from those fresh origins to take such - stories seriously : our urgent concern is to understand how the world will end , not to imagine its beginning . 
Cast : Dakota Fanning , Justin Chatwin , Miranda Otto , Tim Robbins , Tom Cruise As ever , Steven Spielberg understands the communal mood . 
Having imagined aliens as benign cerebral angels in Close Encounters of the Third Kind and ET , he has now chosen to film a more fatally grisly account of the collision between cultures or species in War of the Worlds . ' 
9\/11 , ' as Spielberg has remarked , ` changed everything . ' 
On the posters for his film , a rotating globe pauses to display the US , extended between its shining seas . 
But nothing shines : red prehensile suckers that belong to some unseen , unclassifiable life-form grip Texas , while the Midwest is a scorching maelstrom . 
As befits a summer blockbuster , the film piles up catastrophes , and its promised highlights include a crashing plane , a capsizing ferry , and the usual mobs of traumatised extras . 
The last hope of mankind appears to be Tom Cruise in a leather jacket and tactically ripped jeans . 
In 1898 , society prepared to confront a fin-de-sicle that seemed likely , as a witty nihilist puts it in a play by Oscar Wilde , to be the fin du monde . 
Man had recently killed off God ; having destroyed its creator , could our species expect to survive much longer ? 
Anticipating that terminus , HG Wells wrote an apocalyptic romance about it , The War of the Worlds . 
We have been retelling his story ever since . 
In Wells 's novel Martians on skeletal tripods descend to trample or gobble up earthlings who seem , to their superior intellects , mere noxious insects . 
Our frail blue planet is overrun by mechanised conquerors from a world which is red , bellicose , unmerciful . 
Wells considered this outcome to be just and logical . 
European empires , enslaving or exterminating new worlds elsewhere on our globe , had been equally remorseless . 
His novel reminded Europeans that their tenure of power was insecure , and - quite apart from its critique of imperialism - pointed out that we live on an ailing planet in a moribund universe , doomed by the cooling of the sun . 
Wells had no doubt about where the end of the world should take place . 
When he wrote , Britain was the global overlord . 
His Martians therefore bump to earth in the Home Counties . 
They advance into London and demolish it to clear a nursery for the red weed that sustains them , before expiring - brought low by measly bacteria , not by human force or divine intervention - in rancid heaps in Regent 's Park . 
The book ends with the narrator looking down from Primrose Hill , delighted to see the chimneys of the reconstructed capital smoking again . 
His contentment seems absurdly complacent now , and also sadly provincial . 
The course of empire soon moved westward , so when Orson Welles performed a radio adaptation of Wells 's story in October 1938 , he inevitably altered the setting . 
Now the Martian rocket cylinder lands in New Jersey , and its stilted warriors stalk across the countryside towards New York . 
They wade over the Hudson River , dwarfing the Manhattan skyline as they rise like a series of new , spiked towers ; they stride down the avenues of the current imperial capital , and terrorised multitudes hurl themselves into the East River ` like rats ' . 
Welles 's transmission breaks off as a reporter drops his microphone and collapses , asphyxiated by lethal fumes . 
` This is the end now , ' he gasps . 
Welles immediately explained that the broadcast had been a Halloween prank , with the Martians as those ridiculous revenants who are supposed to quit their graves on All Souls ' Night . 
But by then , the damage was done ; listeners unaware of the practical joke had panicked , and by spreading the news provoked a communal nervous breakdown . 
Welles exposed the psychological vulnerability of his society , which was ready to believe in the certainty of its own extinction . 
Welles was made to feel like Judas , as he said next morning . 
Every time The War of the Worlds is retold , God - the upholder of human supremacy , for we are supposed to be his pet species - is put to death again . 
The myth made itself at home in 1938 , and demonstrated its credentials as a prophetic fiction . 
Howard Koch 's script found a contemporary relevance in the artilleryman Wells 's hero meets on Putney Hill . 
Newly encountered near the Holland Tunnel leading into Manhattan , he becomes a gloating fascist who rejoices in the assault on the city and on liberal illusions about progress and democracy ; barbarism , he predicts , will reinvigorate the world . 
By 1952 , when Byron Haskin directed a film version , the war of the worlds seemed already to have happened . 
The prophecy had fulfilled itself , so the film used newsreels of European cities flattened by bombs during the Second World War to document the Martian advance . 
As if in retreat from the old , bankrupt , ruined continent , the action was moved further westwards . 
The Martian craft now land in California , and the city they topple is Los Angeles . 
Early in the Cold War , the story turned into a trial of competing technical and military might . 
HG Wells 's Martians cannibalise humans , but in 1952 they rely on radiating weapons that reduce men to gray piles of ash . 
A scientist in the Haskin film suggests that they belong to a superior culture . 
That , for the Pentagon generals who manage reprisals , is reason enough to destroy them , and an atomic bomb is lobbed at their mother ship ; they repel it by raising an electronic umbrella . 
The conflict turns into a holy war against what Reagan - whose geopolitical world-view was formed by such vacuous Hollywood products - would surely have called an ` evil empire ' . 
The menaced citizens of Los Angeles hole up in their churches , and fervently pray for deliverance ; the comeuppance of the Martians is a consequence of atheistic hubris , when one of them smashes a stained glass window and instantly lunges out of the sky . 
It 's still microbes that vanquish them , but the film 's narrator , piously altering Wells 's bleaker text , assumes that God created those germs for exactly this purpose . 
The deity remains a loyal American . 
It 's apt that Tom Cruise - aware that he had signed up for a crusade - insisted on installing a Scientology tent on Spielberg 's set , so he could proselytise for his cult between takes . 
Wells 's story satirised the lazy rapacity of men by exposing them to a race of even more implacable predators . 
In successive retellings , it grew blunter and began to pander to the very complacency it first condemned . 
Jeff Wayne 's rock opera The War of the Worlds - recorded in 1978 with Richard Burton narrating and David Essex among the singers - cosily redeems the Hitlerian artilleryman who fantasises about revenge in the Welles broadcast . 
Now , as he huddles in the sewers , he sings a rousing anthem about the ` brave new world ' men will build below ground , with railway tunnels to the coast so they can have holidays at the beach . 
Poverty , he casually promises , will be abolished . 
Not even the Martians can resist the optimism of music . 
Wayne 's adaptation did have a serious point , and a computer game developed from it interprets The War of the Worlds as an allegory about the fight to sequester our planet 's diminishing resources . 
If you play on the home team , you battle to conserve supplies of steel , coal and oil ; the Martians want copper and human blood , their favorite tipple . 
Still , to reduce this eschatological war to a game implies a jaunty incomprehension of its meaning . 
Interestingly , Haskin 's 1952 film mocked such frivolous profiteering : the hicks in whose town the Martians land plan to open their own amusement park , with enchiladas for sale at the site . 
` We 've got a goldmine in our backyard , ' they gloat just before they are atomised . 
During the 1980s Spielberg planned to transform The War of the Worlds into a roller-coaster ride for the Universal Studios theme parks in Los Angeles and Orlando . 
At that stage he too thought of it as a ludic fantasy ; now , after 9\/11 , he sees it as a baleful premonition of the end . 
In 1996 Tim Burton 's Mars Attacks ! 
The film was based on a set of bubble-gum cards in which Martians with heads full of green guano make miscegenated love to nubile female earthlings . 
Its farcical mayhem strays far from the story told by Wells , yet it is closer than any other adaptation to the pessimistic spirit of the original book , because it refuses to assume that the human race has any automatic right to prevail . 
Just who , in this film , are the monsters ? 
Not , surely , the extra-terrestrials ; I 'd sooner vote for Danny DeVito as a gambling midget , Rod Steiger as a demented general , Jack Nicholson as the vain , dumb , useless American President , or Tom Jones as himself . 
For once , the rampages of the invaders are not to be regretted . 
Annette Bening , as a blissed-out hippy , says that the human race does n't deserve to live , and Sylvia Sidney , playing a dotty tribal elder , whoops with hilarity at the latest atrocity : ` They blew up Congress ! 
When Sarah Jessica Parker , an air-brained chat-show hostess , says that the Martians look gross , the professorial Pierce Brosnan sucks on his pipe and reminds her that we probably look just as repellent to them . 
The invaders in his film are immune to the usual microbes , but have a fatal allergy to the country and western yodellings of Slim Whitman . 
If civilisation is saved by the ululations of a forgotten folk singer , is it worth saving at all ? 
For Spielberg 's screenwriter David Koepp , the story trips up that triumphal civilisation . 
His Martians , he claims , are merely conducting the belligerent foreign policy of the US , even though this time they happen to be stomping into New York . 
What stops the armored , insensitive global power is ' a local insurgency ' ; the film , he says , is his commentary on the Iraq war . 
We may at last be getting back to what Wells had in mind a century ago . 
The War of the Worlds is not about a combat with aliens : actually it dramatises the self-destructiveness of our own small , over-heated , apopleptic planet . 
We delude ourselves if we expect our world to have a happy ending . 
War of the Worlds is released on 1 July Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@observer.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : 11.36 BST on Sunday 12 June 2005 . 
