From the first days of the US-British invasion of Iraq , oil workers have resisted foreign occupation Friday 18 February 2005 00.00 GMT We lived through dark days under Saddam Hussein 's dictatorship . 
When the regime fell , people wanted a new life : a life without shackles and terror ; a life where we could rebuild our country and enjoy its natural wealth . 
Instead , our communities have been attacked with chemicals and cluster bombs , and our people tortured , raped and killed in our homes . 
Saddam 's secret police used to creep over the roofs into our homes at night ; occupation troops now break down our doors in broad daylight . 
The media do not show even a fraction of the devastation that has engulfed Iraq . 
Journalists who dare to report the truth of what is happening have been kidnapped by terrorists . 
This serves the agenda of the occupation , which aims to eliminate witnesses to its crimes . 
Workers in Iraq 's southern oilfields began organising soon after British occupying forces invaded Basra . 
We founded our union , the Southern Oil Company Union , just 11 days after the fall of Baghdad in April 2003 . 
When the occupation troops stood back and allowed Basra 's hospitals , universities and public services to be burned and looted , while they defended only the oil ministry and oilfields , we knew we were dealing with a brutal force prepared to impose its will without regard for human suffering . 
From the beginning , we were left in no doubt that the US and its allies had come to take control of our oil resources . 
The occupation authorities have maintained many of Saddam 's repressive laws , including the 1987 order which robbed us of basic union rights , including the right to strike . 
Today , we still have no official recognition as a trade union , despite having 23,000 members in 10 oil and gas companies in Basra , Amara , Nassiriya , and up to Anbar province . 
However , we draw our legitimacy from the workers , not the government . 
We believe unions should operate regardless of the government 's wishes , until the people are able finally to elect a genuinely accountable and independent Iraqi government , which represents our interests and not those of American imperialism . 
Our union is independent of any political party . 
Most trade unions in Britain only seem to be aware of one union federation in Iraq , the regime-authorised Iraqi Federation of Trade Unions , whose president , Rassim Awadi , is deputy leader of the US-imposed prime minister Ayad Allawi 's party . 
The IFTU 's leadership is carved up between the pro-government Communist party , Allawi 's Iraqi National Accord , and their satellites . 
In fact , there are two other union federations , which are linked to political parties , as well as our own organization . 
Our union has already shown it is able to stand its ground against one of the most powerful US companies , Dick Cheney 's KBR , which tried to take over our workplaces with the protection of occupation forces . 
We forced them out and compelled their Kuwaiti subcontractor , Al Khourafi , to replace 1,000 of the 1,200 employees it brought with it with Iraqi workers , 70 % of whom are unemployed today . 
We also fought US viceroy Paul Bremer 's wage schedule , which dictated that Iraqi public sector workers must earn ID 69,000 -LRB- $ 35 -RRB- per month , while paying up to $ 1,000 a day to thousands of foreign mercenaries . 
In August 2003 we took strike action and shut down all oil production for three days . 
As a result , the occupation authorities had to raise wages to a minimum of ID 150,000 . 
We see it as our duty to defend the country 's resources . 
We reject and will oppose all moves to privatise our oil industry and national resources . 
We regard this privatisation as a form of neo-colonialism , an attempt to impose a permanent economic occupation to follow the military occupation . 
The occupation has deliberately fomented a sectarian division of Sunni and Shia . 
We never knew this sort of division before . 
Our families intermarried , we lived and worked together . 
And today we are resisting this brutal occupation together , from Falluja to Najaf to Sadr City . 
The resistance to the occupation forces is a God-given right of Iraqis , and we , as a union , see ourselves as a necessary part of this resistance - although we will fight using our industrial power , our collective strength as a union , and as a part of civil society which needs to grow in order to defeat both still-powerful Saddamist elites and the foreign occupation of our country . 
Bush and Blair should remember that those who voted in last month 's elections in Iraq are as hostile to the occupation as those who boycotted them . 
Those who claim to represent the Iraqi working class while calling for the occupation to stay a bit longer , due to `` fears of civil war '' , are in fact speaking only for themselves and the minority of Iraqis whose interests are dependent on the occupation . 
We as a union call for the withdrawal of foreign occupation forces and their military bases . 
We do n't want a timetable - this is a stalling tactic . 
We will solve our own problems . 
We are Iraqis , we know our country and we can take care of ourselves . 
We have the means , the skills and resources to rebuild and create our own democratic society . 
Hassan Juma'a Awad is general secretary of Iraq 's Southern Oil Company Union and president of the Basra Oil Workers ' Union Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Follow all the top stories of the day on Twitter with the Guardian 's world news team john_hooper : #Benedict decided to resign after visit to Mexico & Cuba last March , says tonight 's edition of #pope 's daily L'Osservatore Romano #news 
