Photographs of detainees being sexually humiliated Friday 18 February 2005 02.35 GMT New evidence has emerged that US forces in Afghanistan engaged in widespread Abu Ghraib-style abuse , taking `` trophy photographs '' of detainees and carrying out rape and sexual humiliation . 
Documents obtained by the Guardian contain evidence that such abuses took place in the main detention center at Bagram , near the capital Kabul , as well as at a smaller US installation near the southern city of Kandahar . 
The documents also indicate that US soldiers covered up abuse in Afghanistan and in Iraq - even after the Abu Ghraib scandal last year . 
A thousand pages of evidence from US army investigations released to the American Civil Liberties Union after a long legal battle , and made available to the Guardian , show that an Iraqi detained at Tikrit in September 2003 was forced to withdraw his report of abuse after soldiers told him he would be held indefinitely . 
Meanwhile , photographs taken in southern Afghanistan showing US soldiers from the 22nd Infantry Battalion posing in mock executions of blindfolded and bound detainees , were purposely destroyed after the Abu Ghraib scandal to avoid `` another public outrage '' , the documents show . 
In the dossier , the Iraqi detainee claims that three US interrogators in civilian clothing dislocated his arms , stuck an unloaded gun in his mouth and pulled the trigger , choked him with a rope until he lost consciousness , and beat him with a baseball bat . 
`` After they tied me up in the chair , then they dislocate my both arms . 
He asked to admit before I kill you then he beat again and again , '' the prisoner says in his statement . 
`` He asked me : Are you going to report me ? 
You have no evidence . 
Then he hit me very hard on my nose , and then he stepped on my nose until he broken and I started bleeding . '' 
The detainee withdrew his charges on November 23 2003 . 
He says he was told : `` You will stay in the prison for a long time , and you will never get out until you are 50 years old . '' 
A medical examination by a US military doctor confirmed the detainee 's account , yet the investigation was closed last October . 
`` It is further proof that the army is not seriously investigating credible allegations of abuse , '' said Jameel Jaffar , a lawyer for the ACLU . 
The latest allegations from Afghanistan fit a pattern of claims of brutal treatment made by former Guantnamo Bay prisoners and Afghans held by the US , and reported by the Guardian last year . 
In December the US said eight prisoners had died in its custody in Afghanistan . 
In a separate case , which the Guardian reveals today , two former prisoners of the US in Afghanistan have come forward with claims against their American captors . 
In sworn affidavits to a British-American human rights lawyer , a Palestinian says he was sodomised by American soldiers in Afghanistan . 
Another former prisoner of US forces , a Jordanian , describes a form of torture which involved being hung in a cage from a rope for days . 
Both men were freed from US detention last year after being held in Afghanistan and Guantnamo Bay . 
Neither has been charged by any government with any offence . 
Hussain Adbulkadr Youssouf Mustafa , a Palestinian living in Jordan , told the lawyer , Clive Stafford-Smith , that he was sodomised by US soldiers during his detention at Bagram air force base in 2002 . 
He claims to have been blindfolded , tightly handcuffed , gagged and had his ears plugged , forced to bend down over a table by two soldiers , with a third soldier pressing his face down on the table , and to have had his trousers pulled down . 
`` They forcibly rammed a stick up my rectum , '' he reports . 
`` It was excruciatingly painful ... Only when the pain became overwhelming did I think I would ever scream . 
But I could not stop screaming when this happened . '' 
In a second affidavit , the Jordanian citizen , Wesam Abdulrahman Ahmed Al Deemawi , detained from March 15 2002 to March 31 2004 , says that during a 40-day period of detention at Bagram he was threatened with dogs , stripped and photographed `` in shameful and obscene positions '' and placed in a cage with a hook and a hanging rope . 
He says he was hung from this hook , blindfolded , for two days although he was occasionally given hour-long `` breaks '' . 
The Guardian asked the US military 's central command , which has responsibility for Afghanistan , to respond to the allegations on Wednesday . 
By the time of going to press last night no response had been received other than an email from a Major Steven Wollman in Kabul , saying he was researching the question . 
