In gulf oil spill 's long reach , ecological damage could last decades Snorkeling along a coral reef near Veracruz , Mexico , in 2002 , Texas biologist Wes Tunnell spotted what looked like a ledge of rock covered in sand , shells , algae and hermit crabs . 
He knew , from years of research at the reef , that it probably was n't a rock at all . 
He stabbed it with his diving knife . 
His blade pulled up gunk . 
`` Sure enough , it was tar from the Ixtoc spill , '' Tunnell said . 
Twenty-three years earlier , in 1979 , an oil well named Ixtoc I had a blowout in 150 feet of water in the southern Gulf of Mexico . 
The Mexican national oil company Pemex tried to kill the well with drilling mud , and then with steel and lead balls dropped into the wellbore . 
It tried to contain the oil with a cap nicknamed The Sombrero . 
Finally , after 290 days , a relief well plugged the hole with cement and the spill came to an end -- but only after polluting the gulf with 138 million gallons of crude . 
That remains the worst accidental oil spill in history -- but the Deepwater Horizon blowout off the Louisiana coast is rapidly gaining on it . 
The spill has now been partially contained with the cap that BP engineers lowered onto the mile-deep geyser Thursday night . 
That means roughly a quarter to half of the flow is being piped to a surface ship , the national incident commander , Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , said Saturday . 
BP hopes to improve the rate captured in coming days . 
If official government estimates are correct , 23 million to 47 million gallons of oil have spewed so far . 
Ecosystems can survive and eventually recover from very large oil spills , even ones that are Ixtoc-sized . 
In most spills , the volatile compounds evaporate . 
The sun breaks down others . 
Some compounds are dissolved in water . 
Microbes consume the simpler , `` straight chain '' hydrocarbons -- and the warmer it is , the more they eat . 
The gulf spill has climate in its favor . 
Scientists agree : Horrible as the spill may be , it 's not going to turn the Gulf of Mexico into another Dead Sea . 
But neither is this ecological crisis going to be over anytime soon . 
The spill will have ripple effects far into the future , scientists warn . 
`` This spill will be lasting for years if not decades , '' said Doug Inkley , senior scientist at the National Wildlife Federation . 
Some of the immediate effects of a spill are obvious -- witness the gut-wrenching images of soaked and suffocating seabirds in the gulf . 
But some types of ecological damage are hard to measure and can take years to document . 
Many of the creatures that die will sink to the bottom , making mortality estimates difficult . 
Damage to the reproduction rate of sea turtles may take years to play out . 
The Exxon Valdez spill of 11 million gallons killed as many as 700,000 sea birds and 5,000 sea otters initially , but even 21 years later , populations of sea otters in areas of Prince William Sound have n't recovered . 
The Pacific herring population collapsed after the spill for reasons that remain in dispute among scientists . 
Two intensely studied pods of killer whales in the sound suffered heavy losses in the spill and have struggled since . 
One of the two pods has no more reproductive females . 
It is doomed to extinction . 
`` It 's still sitting there , '' said Stan Rice , program manager for habitat studies at the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration 's Auke Bay Fisheries Lab . 
`` It 's still liquid , you can still smell it and touch it . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
