Former Labor secretary Robert Reich wants to place BP 's U.S. operations in temporary receivership . 
Sen. Ron Wyden -LRB- D-Ore . -RRB- 
wants the oil giant to suspend its dividend payments . 
Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. is weighing criminal charges . 
And lawyers in more than a hundred lawsuits want BP to pay billions of dollars in damages for harm done to people 's health , the environment and businesses . 
`` At this stage , it is impossible to predict the longer-term cost of environmental remediation , claims and litigation , but they will be sizable , '' BP chief executive Tony Hayward said in a conference call with investment analysts Friday . 
So would anyone in his right mind buy shares in this company ? 
Despite the fatal explosion on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig that triggered the massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , 10 of the 14 leading investment analysts tracking BP have `` buy '' ratings on the company , including one who has upgraded his recommendation . 
The reason : BP is a colossus with more than 18 billion barrels of proven reserves , operations in more than 100 countries , oil production everywhere from Angola to Russia to Alaska and a new agreement in Iraq . 
Even after paying out its regularly quarterly dividends at a rate of $ 10.5 billion a year , BP will still have $ 5 billion to $ 10 billion in cash flow , depending on the price of oil . 
And its relatively modest debt level means that it could also borrow money if necessary . 
`` So we 've got considerable firepower here to deal with the costs , any costs as they accrue , '' Byron Grote , BP 's chief financial officer said in the conference call . 
Many analysts think the staggering drop in the price of BP 's stock since the April 20 explosion has been too steep . 
Mark Gilman , an analyst with Benchmark , boosted his rating to `` buy back '' May 26 , saying that the reduction in BP 's market value since the spill began `` implies gross , pre-tax environmental claims and costs to be in the $ 80 billion to $ 110 billion range , which we believe to be unrealistically high . '' 
In an interview Thursday , he said , `` while we 're not prepared to make a cost estimate , we 're comfortable saying it 's not going to be in that magnitude . '' 
Most people , however , have n't been following Gilman 's advice . 
After he upgraded his rating , BP 's shares have plunged even further . 
Since the disaster , the stock has sunk 39 percent , erasing more than $ 70 billion of market value . 
-LRB- Other companies involved in the well have also tumbled , including rig-owner Transocean , with shares down 46 percent and service-provider Halliburton , down 33 percent . 
Lease partner Anadarko Petroleum 's shares are off 40 percent . -RRB- 
BP shareholders are nervous , and while the oil giant has the resources to survive such a crisis , estimates of the cost to the company keep rising . 
Credit Suisse on Thursday issued a report that clean-up costs could total $ 15 billion to $ 23 billion and that legal claims could drain $ 14 billion more from BP 's coffers . 
Raymond James & Associates this week nearly tripled its estimate of costs to $ 7.5 billion -- not including any criminal or civil liabilities . 
And the three leading ratings agencies -- Moody 's Investor Service , Fitch Ratings and Standard & Poor 's -- lowered their credit ratings on BP 's debt . 
Pavel Molchanov , an analyst with Raymond James , downgraded the stock to market perform -- neither better nor worse than the market average -- April 29 , nine days after the accident , and does n't expect an improvement as long as the negative headlines and oil continue to flow from the gulf . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
