The BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico is the latest of several recent disastrous events for which the country , or the world , was unprepared . 
Setting aside terrorist attacks , where the element of surprise is part of the plan , that still leaves the Indian Ocean tsunami of 2004 , Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , the global economic crisis that began in 2008 -LRB- and was aggravated by Greece 's recent financial collapse -RRB- and the earthquake in Haiti in January . 
In all these cases , observers recognized the existence of catastrophic risk but deemed it to be small . 
Many other risks like this are lying in wait , whether a lethal flu epidemic , widespread extinctions , nuclear accidents , abrupt global warming that causes a sudden and catastrophic rise in sea levels , or a collision with an asteroid . 
Why are we so ill prepared for these disasters ? 
It helps to consider an almost-forgotten case in which risks were identified , planned for and averted : the Y2K threat -LRB- or `` millennium bug '' -RRB- of 1999 . 
As the turn of the century approached , many feared that computers throughout the world would fail when the two-digit dates in their operating systems suddenly flipped from 99 to 00 . 
The risk of disaster probably was quite small , but the fact that it had a specific and known date made it irrational to postpone any remedies -- it was act now or not at all . 
Such certainty about timing is rare ; indeed , a key obstacle to taking preventive measures against unlikely disasters is precisely that they are unlikely to occur in the near future . 
Of course , if the consequences of the disaster would be very grave , the fact that the risk is low is hardly a good reason to ignore it . 
But there is a natural tendency to postpone preventive action against dangers that are likely to occur at some uncertain point in the future -LRB- `` sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof , '' as the Bible says -RRB- , especially if prevention is expensive , and especially because there is so much else to do in the here and now . 
Our tendency to procrastinate is aggravated by three additional circumstances : when fixing things after the fact seems like a feasible alternative to preventing disaster in the first place ; when the people responsible have a short time horizon ; and when the risk is uncertain in the sense that no objective probability can be attached to it . 
All these forces came together to permit the economic crisis , despite abundant warnings from reputable sources , including economists and financial journalists . 
Risky financial practices were highly profitable , and giving them up would have been costly to financial firms and their executives and shareholders . 
The Federal Reserve and most academic economists believed incorrectly that in the event of a crash , remedial measures -- such as cutting interest rates -- would be enough to jump-start the economy . 
Meanwhile , depending on how they were compensated , many financial executives had a limited horizon ; they were not worried about a collapse years down the road because they expected to be securely wealthy by then . 
Similarly , elected officials have short time horizons ; with the risk of a financial collapse believed to be low , and therefore a meltdown unlikely in the immediate future , they had little incentive to push for costly preventive measures . 
This in turn discouraged the appointed officials of the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies from taking such measures . 
`` We 've never had a decline in housing prices on a nationwide basis , '' Ben Bernanke , then chairman of President George W. Bush 's Council of Economic Advisers , said in 2005 . 
It happened the next year . 
Finally , with no reliable probability estimate of a financial collapse available , it seemed natural and perhaps even sensible to wait and see , hoping that with the passage of time , at least some of the uncertainty about risks to the economy would dissipate . 
The BP oil leak reveals a similar pattern , though not an identical one . 
One difference is that the companies involved must have known that in the event of an accident on a deepwater rig , prompt and effective remedies for an oil leak would be unlikely -- meaning that there was no reliable alternative to preventing an accident . 
But the risk of such an accident could not quantified , and it was believed to be low because there had n't been many serious accidents involved in deepwater drilling . 
-LRB- No one knew how low ; the claim by BP chief executive Tony Hayward that the chance of such an accident was `` one in a million '' was simply a shorthand way of saying that the company assumed the risk was very small . -RRB- 
But other forces were similar in the leak and the financial crisis . 
If deepwater oil drilling had been forbidden or greatly curtailed , the sacrifice of corporate profits and of consumer welfare -LRB- which is dependent on low gasoline prices -RRB- would have been great . 
The regulators who could have insisted on greater preventive efforts were afflicted with the usual short horizons of government officials . 
Elected representatives did not want to shut down deepwater drilling over an uncertain risk of a disastrous spill , and this reluctance doubtless influenced the response -LRB- or lack of it -RRB- of the civil servants who do the regulating . 
The horizon of the private actors was foreshortened as well . 
Stockholders often do n't worry about the risks taken by the firms in which they invest , because diversified stock holdings can help insulate them . 
Managers worry more , but they are not personally liable for the debts of the firms they oversee and , more important , the danger to their own livelihood posed by seemingly small threats is not enough to discourage risk-taking . 
It seems that no one has much incentive to adopt or even call for safeguards against low-probability , but potentially catastrophic , disasters . 
