God spoke to Moses through a burning bush on Mount Horeb . 
He apparently speaks to Republicans through a spewing oil well at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico . 
Rep. Tom Cole -LRB- R-Okla . -RRB- 
delivered the startling revelation last week that the BP oil spill was caused not by a faulty blowout preventer but by the Almighty Himself . 
He explained the spill to an Oklahoma City radio station like this : '' Acts of God are acts of God . '' 
With this curious theology , Cole has joined the ministry of Texas Gov. Rick Perry , a fellow Republican , who last month said of the oil spill : `` From time to time there are going to be things that occur that are acts of God that can not be prevented . '' 
So if God is responsible for the spill , and BP is the spill 's `` responsible party , '' what these men are really saying is that BP is ... God ? 
This interpretation is at the very cutting edge of ecclesiastical thought . 
In the past , our Heavenly Father has involved himself in floods , droughts and the occasional earthquake , but this may be his first foray into industrial disasters . 
The Valdez spill was an act of Exxon . 
Bhopal was an act of Union Carbide . 
But the BP spill is an act of God . 
Oiliness is next to godliness . 
Forgive this blasphemy , but is it perhaps time to question the Doctrine of Boardroom Infallibility ? 
In Washington , belief in corporate divinity has become a bipartisan religion , and it 's polytheistic : Lawmakers , despite the occasional bit of populist rhetoric , routinely provide generous offerings to the automotive , aerospace , financial , pharmaceutical and insurance industries , along with petroleum . 
An article by The Post 's Dan Eggen explains why : More than 1,400 former members of Congress , staffers and federal employees registered as lobbyists in the financial services sector alone since the start of 2009 , according to a study by Public Citizen and the Center for Responsive Politics . 
Many of these lobbyists , of course , moonlight as fundraising captains for lawmakers . 
No wonder politicians have got the corporate religion . 
Rep. Don Young -LRB- R-Alaska -RRB- , furthering the act-of-God view , asserted that `` this is not an environmental disaster '' in the gulf `` because it is a natural phenomena . '' 
Rand Paul , the GOP Senate candidate in Kentucky , said the administration 's vow to keep a boot on the throat of BP is '' un-American . '' 
Former GOP presidential candidate Rudy Giuliani said the criminal investigation of BP is a `` mistake . '' 
Democrats have been only slightly less devout . 
They 're giving no serious consideration to the demand from some on the left , including Robert Reich , to put BP into temporary receivership . 
The administration 's criminal investigation of BP has little chance of getting executives locked up . 
BP CEO Tony Hayward wo n't even commit to suspending BP 's dividend -LRB- more than $ 10 billion last year -RRB- , as some Democratic senators have demanded , and he put the clean-up cost at a paltry $ 3 billion over six months , far less than what many analysts say the real cost will be . 
That 's just one more contemptuous utterance from a man who has already dubbed the spill `` tiny , '' called environmental damage `` very modest , '' denied the existence of underwater oil plumes , suggested that sickened oil cleanup workers had food poisoning and complained that he wanted his '' life back . '' 
Americans feel the outrage more than their leaders do . 
A recent Gallup poll shows that 73 percent think BP has done a poor or very poor job . 
Overall , Americans are just as distrustful of corporations as they are of the federal government . 
A Pew Research Center poll released in April found that 64 percent think large corporations are having a negative effect on the country , compared with 65 percent who say that of the government . 
Yet the faux populists of the Tea Party train their anger on the government while giving corporations a pass . 
And Obama , accused of being a socialist , has actually been a no-fault capitalist , cleaning up corporate messes without winning much in the way of new laws to prevent a recurrence . 
Too many corporations have survived their misdeeds with no more than an angry hearing or two : GM , Chrysler , Toyota , Goldman Sachs , Citibank , Bank of America , Massey Energy . 
The legislative dressing-down obviously is n't sufficient deterrent . 
Neither is firing the CEO , because he 's invariably replaced by another just like him . 
Pardon the sacrilege , but for a real deterrent , it 's time to institute a corporate death penalty -- and BP is a perfect candidate . 
That sort of retribution would be divine . 
