U.S. consumers are venting frustration over the BP oil spill , demonstrating at gas stations and corporate offices , drumming up support on Facebook and waging a mock public relations campaign on Twitter . 
But their opposition to BP 's handling of the crisis has yet to achieve critical mass , and any attempt to dissuade customers from fueling their cars with BP is likely to hurt the small-business owners who run the stations and have little or no effect on the British oil giant 's revenue . 
Most Americans -- seven out of 10 -- say BP has done a poor or only fair job in handling the April 20 well blowout and spill in the Gulf of Mexico , according to the Pew Research Center , which tracks public opinion . 
The Obama administration received slightly better marks , with 57 percent rating the government 's response poor or only fair . 
In light of this discontent , BP may have trouble charging a premium price at the pump for its products , said Tom Kloza , chief oil analyst at Oil Price Information Service . 
`` We are starting to see some impact so far , and a percent of decline or two can have a dramatic impact , '' Kloza said . 
`` Unfortunately , it has an impact on what you might say are the victims : the marketers and the dealers that made commitments to fly the BP flag . '' 
BP 's petroleum products can be sold at other outlets under other brand names , making a consumer boycott tough to pull off . 
In any case , he said , price is the biggest factor determining where customers buy gas . 
Several U.S. groups , including the consumer watchdog Public Citizen and Vermont-based Democracy for America , have called for a BP boycott . 
Historically , energy boycotts have had minimal impact on companies ' revenue . 
Seize BP , a campaign aimed at getting the U.S. government to seize BP 's assets and redistribute them to those damaged by the spill , plans a week of demonstrations at gas stations and BP offices across the nation . 
The movement to seize BP 's assets is gaining ground on Facebook , where at least five groups are pushing the cause . 
There is also a spoof Twitter feed , BPGlobalPR , that purports to be the oil company 's online persona . 
The satirical feed has more than 114,000 followers , compared with the official BP -- America feed , which had less than 10,000 on Thursday . 
The fake feed has donated $ 10,000 to the Gulf Restoration Network from the sale of T-shirts emblazoned with an oil-smudged BP logo and the words `` bp cares . '' 
Kloza said : `` If people are serious about demonstrating or showing they 're indignant , they can divest themselves of investments , and maybe think about using a little bit less fuel . 
There 's really no downside in that . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
