NEW YORK | Mon Apr 27 , 2009 11:34 pm BST NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Fears that an outbreak of swine flu could become a pandemic brought a new threat to the global economy on Monday , just as some economic indicators appeared to be bottoming out . 
Mexicans returned to work in large numbers after the weekend , despite worries over a virus that has killed up to 149 people there , and spread to the United States , Canada and Europe , but economists have warned that a global outbreak of deadly flu would seriously curtail economic activity . 
The World Bank estimated in 2008 that a flu pandemic could cost $ 3 trillion -LRB- 2 trillion pounds -RRB- and result in a nearly 5 percent drop in world gross domestic product . 
An outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome , or SARS , which disrupted travel , trade and workplaces in 2003 , cost the Asia Pacific region an estimated $ 40 billion . 
It lasted six months and killed 775 of the 8,000 people it infected in 25 countries . 
The current flu outbreak tempered optimism that the global downturn could be starting to slow after governments committed trillions of dollars to interventions and stimulus . 
`` We almost have to wait to see not so much the contagion aspect but how deadly is this , '' said Alan Ruskin , chief international strategist at RBS Greenwich Capital in Greenwich , Connecticut . 
While a mild strain may have a limited impact , `` if you start getting a number of fatalities , then it ramps the issue up substantially at every level , from a human standpoint and from an economic standpoint , '' he said . 
In Washington , the Obama administration said it was too soon to determine the potential economic impact but U.S. Treasury officials were monitoring the situation . 
Regardless of the effect of the virus on the global economy , International Monetary Fund Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn said he did not see a global economic recovery before 2010 . 
Strauss-Kahn told CNBC television he hoped the worst was over but that `` green shoots '' in the global economy were mostly in the United States . 
A Reuters survey of analysts across European and the United States taken April 21-27 found a slim majority saying the bottom had yet to be hit in the worst global recession since World War Two . 
The vast bulk of them said the crisis would last anywhere from six months to another two years . 
`` Financial and macroeconomic stability are still some way off and we do n't yet have the foundation for a solid recovery , '' said Lena Komileva , chief G7 market economist at interdealer broker Tullett Prebon . 
Mexico 's peso dropped more than 4 percent and U.S. stocks fell in volatile trading as investors fretted about the flu outbreak . 
The Dow Jones industrial average closed down 0.6 percent . 
European shares recovered from early losses , with the FTSEurofirst 300 index closing up 0.4 percent . 
Airline and leisure-related stocks were hit by fears the outbreak would hurt travel but drug makers rose on hopes the virus would result in strong vaccine sales . 
Separately , General Motors Corp said it would close plants , eliminate brands and exchange $ 27 billion of bonds for equity in a last ditch effort to avoid bankruptcy and earn continued government support . 
Despite risks of more financial turbulence , European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet said lowering interest rates is not necessarily the best way to fight a recession . 
`` Our actions have been different from those taken by other central banks , reflecting differences in economic and financial structures , '' he said of the ECB 's reaction to the crisis in a speech to the Foreign Policy Association in New York . 
`` Indeed , given the different economic structures , they need to be different to reach the same objective . '' 
The ECB meets on May 7 and markets expect it to cut the benchmark interest rate from 1.25 percent to 1.0 percent . 
The U.S. Federal Reserve starts a two-day meeting on Tuesday and is expected to leave benchmark rates at or near zero . 
Earlier , other European Central Bank policymakers suggested further reductions in the main refinancing rate but differed as to how far they should go . 
The delicate state of the global economy was underlined by the Japanese government , which cut its economic forecasts on Monday , saying gross domestic product would shrink 3.3 percent over the next year . 
The Bank of Japan is expected to keep interest rates near zero when it meets on Thursday but has maintained a cautious view on the global outlook . 
BOJ Governor Masaaki Sharakawa has signalled the BOJ 's monthly policy review will predict a gradual recovery towards the end of this year or early in 2010 . 
-LRB- Reporting by Reuters correspondents worldwide ; Writing by Dena Aubin ; Editing by Patricia Zengerle -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
