Mon Apr 27 , 2009 9:17 pm BST -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The World Health Organisation -LRB- WHO -RRB- revised Monday its 6-point scale for pandemic alerts , saying that phase 5 would correspond to a strong signal that a pandemic was `` imminent . '' 
The revised scale was published ahead of a decision by an advisory body of experts on whether to raise the alert level from the current level of 3 . 
WHO uses a series of six phases of pandemic alert as a system for informing the world of the seriousness of the threat and the need to launch progressively more intense preparations and measures . 
Margaret Chan , director-general of the United Nations agency in Geneva , is charged with deciding on when to move from one phase to another . 
Her decision is based on advice from international public health experts who held an emergency meeting Monday . 
The WHO emergency committee is assessing the risk from a swine flu outbreak that has killed up to 149 people in Mexico and spread across the world . 
The current phase of alert is 3 , on a scale of 1 to 6 . 
A full-blown pandemic , level 6 , denotes sustained , human-to-human spread over many countries of a new and serious virus . 
Here are details of the six phases : No animal influenza virus circulating among animals is reported to cause infection in animals . 
Animal influenza virus is known to have caused infection in humans and is therefore a potential pandemic threat Animal or human-animal influenza virus causes sporadic cases or clusters of cases in people , but no human-to-human transmission , except in specific circumstances Human to human transmission of an animal or human-animal influenza virus able to sustain community-level outbreaks `` The ability to cause sustained disease outbreaks in a community marks a significant upwards shift in the risk for a pandemic . '' 
\* PHASE 5 : The same virus causes sustained community-level outbreaks in two or more countries in one region `` While most countries will not be affected at this stage , the declaration of Phase 5 is a strong signal that a pandemic is imminent and that the time to finalize the organization , communication , and implementation of the planned mitigation measures is short . '' 
The virus causes sustained community-level outbreaks in more than one region `` Designation of this phase will indicate that a global pandemic is under way . '' 
Pandemic levels dropping below peak levels , but countries need to be prepared for a second wave . 
-LRB- For a summary of the new WHO scale , go to : -LRB- For more Reuters swine flu coverage , please click here : An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
