\* Airline stocks fall 15 percent in U.S. on flu scare \* Hotels and cruise ship operators also lower \* Health fears ` could stall ' airlines recovery By Tim Hepher and Karen Jacobs PARIS\/ATLANTA , April 27 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Panicked sellers fled investments in air , land and sea on Monday as fears of a flu pandemic rekindled memories of the Asian SARS crisis that caused widespread industry turmoil six years ago . 
From Sydney to New York , selling hit the world 's leading airline brands , hotels and cruise operators and the cost of insuring airline debt rose following the outbreak of swine flu . 
The United States declared a public health emergency and Americans and Europeans were urged to avoid non-essential travel to Mexico , where 103 people have died from the outbreak . 
Investors wiped $ 5 billion off the value of leading U.S. airlines in just 10 minutes of trading , with all of the carriers most heavily exposed to Mexico racking up double-digit losses . 
N , which offers more seats than any foreign airline into and out of Mexico , according to data provided exclusively to Reuters by airline schedules consultancy Innovata , saw its stock fall by 15 percent . 
American Airlines parent AMR Corp AMR . 
N and US Airways -LRB- LCC . 
N -RRB- , the second and third foreign airlines in terms of passenger capacity to the same country , suffered similar falls . 
In Europe , major network carriers Air France-KLM -LRB- AIRF . 
PA -RRB- and British Airways BAY . 
L fell almost 10 percent and Spain 's Iberia IBLA . 
MC , which offers the most capacity to Spanish-speaking Mexico from Europe , gave up 7 percent . 
Airlines have lurched from crisis to crisis in the past year as carriers grappled with high oil prices , then the credit crunch , a slump in business travel and plunging cargo trade . 
Some executives have been tentatively predicting relief from months of weak traffic figures and eying benefits from cost cuts including more than 25,000 job cuts in the United States . 
But Helane Becker , a transportation analyst with Jesup & Lamont in New York , said the flu scare could stall any recovery . 
`` In the summer of 2002 , international airline traffic was down 14-15 percent so we would expect something similar , and we would expect any recovery to be pushed from the third quarter of '09 into the fourth quarter of '09 and 2010 , '' Becker said . 
The SARS epidemic broke out in early 2003 , postponing a recovery from recession worsened by the Sept 11 , 2001 , attacks . 
However its economic impact was mostly confined to one quarter . 
In Hong Kong , Cathay Pacific Airways -LRB- 0293 . 
HK -RRB- -- which at one point considered grounding its fleet during the SARS crisis -- lost 8 percent and Air China -LRB- 0753 . 
HK -RRB- fell 13.5 percent . 
SE said it had taken steps to ensure lessons learned from SARS were used to try to contain the scare . 
It said cabin crew would try to spot unwell passengers . 
`` We have standard operating procedures in place based on the experience gained from handling the SARS outbreak . 
Staff have been briefed on the nature of the disease and are on the alert for customers who appear unwell , '' a Singapore spokeswoman said . 
`` As the situation for now is primarily precautionary , there are no plans to disinfect our aircraft or for our cabin crew to wear masks . 
However , we do carry emergency packs . '' 
American Airlines reassured travellers it was prepared to deal with any type of illness on board a flight and that it had full ground-to-air communication with its medical staff . 
It said it would allow passengers to any city in Mexico to change their plans without any fee or penalty , but there were no immediate reports of any airlines canceling flights . 
In Madrid , passengers arriving from Mexico were given information packs on what to do if they fell unwell . 
Shares of U.S. hotels and cruise companies joined the rout . 
Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd -LRB- RCL . 
N -RRB- -LRB- RCL . 
OL -RRB- sank 14 percent in New York , while Carnival Corp -LRB- CCL . 
N -RRB- was off 9 percent . 
U.S. giant Starwood Hotels & Resorts -LRB- HOT . 
N -RRB- lost nearly 8 percent and Marriott International -LRB- MAR. . 
N -RRB- fell about 5 percent . 
Carnival said there were no reports of guests showing symptoms of swine flu on its ships . 
Not all analysts were rattled by the swine flu outbreak . 
Howard Wheeldon , senior strategist at BGC Partners in London , said airlines were used to living through boom and bust . 
`` The one thing about airlines is they recover from events like this amazingly quickly . 
It is damaging and unhelpful , but not the end of the world for them , '' he said . 
FACTBOX-Airline exposure to Mexico -LRB- nLR716823 -RRB- TAKE A LOOK-Swine flu outbreak -LRB- nFLU -RRB- -LRB- Additional reporting by Ben Harding , Claire Milhench , Jane Baird and Kevin Lim ; Editing by David Cowell -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
