-LRB- Repeats to more subscribers without changes in text -RRB- SINGAPORE , April 27 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - As fears grow about whether a new dangerous strain of swine flu will develop into a global pandemic and affect economies , Asia can look to the 2003 SARS epidemic for pointers on what might happen . 
In 2003 , Asia was feeling the effects of the October 2002 Bali bombings , a tentative world recovery was underway from the bursting of the technology bubble and there was conflict in Iraq . 
Likewise today , other factors , such as job and income losses from the credit crisis , could make it difficult to isolate the effects of any swine flu outbreak . 
But SARS provides the last main point of reference in how the world dealt with a pandemic that was spread by human-to-human contact and how it affected economies and markets . 
Here are some questions and answers about the severe acute respiratory syndrome , or SARS , crisis : WHAT WAS THE IMPACT OF SARS ON ASIA ? 
The World Health Organisation declared SARS a pandemic in March 2003 . 
By June of that year , it had lifted an advisory warning against traveling to SARS affected countries . 
There were some 8,000 cases and close to 800 deaths . 
The most visible impact of SARS was on tourism and consumption patterns in the most affected countries : Singapore , Hong Kong , China and Malaysia , although others in the region also suffered . 
Singapore and Hong Kong slipped into recession in 2003 . 
Other countries affected by SARS included Canada , South Africa , Sweden , France and the United States . 
Deaths were reported in Asia , Canada , France and South Africa . 
According to the Asian Development Bank , the cost of SARS in terms of lost GDP in nominal terms for East and Southeast Asia was about $ 18 billion or 0.6 percentage points of 2003 GDP . 
The main channels through which SARS affected economies was through tourist arrivals . 
ADB data shows a 20-70 percent drop on tourist arrivals in April 2003 in the most affected economies , while others in Asia also saw declines of 15-35 percent , leading to estimated tourism revenue losses of nearly $ 15 billion or 0.5 percent of GDP . 
SARS-affected economies experienced drops in retail sales growth in the order of 5-10 percent in early 2003 . 
Hong Kong 's economy shrank 2.6 percent and Singapore 's by 2 percent in the first half of 2003 . 
Overall growth was ironically helped by a simultaneous decline in imports and investment . 
HOW DID MARKETS REACT TO SARS ? 
Market reaction was relatively muted , possibly because the panic over SARS lasted for just about one quarter and governments reacted quickly . 
The Singapore dollar SGD = fell nearly 4 percent against the U.S. dollar between the end of January 2003 and the end of April 2003 , but it then rallied . 
MCSI 's emerging Asia-ex-Japan index . 
MIAPJ0000PUS fell around 14 percent between January and March 2003 . 
From the end of March it rallied by 56 percent during the rest of the year Hong Kong 's benchmark index . 
HSI shed 18 percent of its value between December 2002 and April 2003 , bottoming at a 4-year low . 
For a graphic on economic and market impact , click here : China had price controls for SARS-related drugs , tax waivers for affected industries such as hotels , interest subsidies for tourism sectors . 
Hong Kong 's government announced a package of measures worth around 1 percent of GDP , which included tax reductions and loan guarantees . 
Singapore likewise had a SARS relief package including measures for airlines . 
It also eased monetary policy in July 2003 by a one-off devaluation of the currency . 
Malaysia 's package was close to 2 percent of GDP and included cheaper loans , support for job training and tourism sectors . 
IS THE ECONOMIC SITUATION DIFFERENT NOW ? 
The starting point for most economies is much lower , since the credit crisis has already plunged a lot of the developed world and countries such as Singapore , Japan and Hong Kong into recession . 
Tourism received a big boost between 2004 and 2007 and is now a much bigger contributor to growth , with revenues comprising between 6 and 9 percent of GDP in Hong Kong , Malaysia , Thailand and Singapore . 
LINKS -RRB- After SARS , bird flu , Asia wary of new virus . . 
-LRB- ID : nHKG362728 -RRB- -RRB- Global fears over flu outbreak , over 100 dead . 
-LRB- ID : nN27484099 -RRB- -RRB- Asia stocks , commodities hit by flu fears ... -LRB- ID : nHKG372361 -RRB- -LRB- Editing by Neil Fullick -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
