MEXICO CITY | Mon Apr 27 , 2009 3:10 am BST MEXICO CITY -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Fears of a global flu pandemic grew as new suspected cases of a dangerous new strain of swine flu appeared around the world . 
It has killed up to 81 people in Mexico and spread to the United States and Canada . 
Here are some questions and answers about the outbreak : HOW MANY PEOPLE HAVE DIED ? 
HOW MANY ARE INFECTED ? 
All the fatalities have been in Mexico , where the government is reporting at least 20 and up to 81 deaths from the flu virus . 
Most of the dead are between 25 and 45 -- the age group past pandemics have tended to strike . 
Mexican officials said , however , that most of the 1,300 suspected cases were found not to have swine flu . 
In the United States , the flu has infected 20 people in California , Kansas , Texas , New York and Ohio . 
Canada has confirmed six cases . 
Possible infections have also been detected in Spain , France and New Zealand . 
WHAT KIND OF FLU IS IT AND HOW IS IT SPREADING ? 
The virus is an influenza A virus , carrying the designation H1N1 and is spreading from person to person . 
It contains DNA from avian , swine and human viruses , including elements from European and Asian swine viruses , according to the U.S. Centres for Disease Control and Prevention . 
It is passed on by sneezing , coughing or when people pick up the virus from their hands . 
It likely originated in pigs , but the Mexican government and the World Health Organisation have ruled out any risk of infection from eating pork . 
The Geneva-based WHO has declared the flu a `` public health emergency of international concern . '' 
It poses the biggest risk of a large-scale pandemic since avian flu re-emerged in 2003 , killing 257 out of 421 infected in 15 countries . 
The Mexican government is stressing that it can be treated and it has one million doses of antiviral drugs . 
HOW IS THIS FLU DIFFERENT FROM ORDINARY FLU ? 
The swine flu is characterized by common flu symptoms -- sudden fever , muscle aches , sore throat and dry cough -- but may cause more severe vomiting and diarrhoea . 
Common seasonal flu kills between 250,000 and 500,000 people in an average year , often targeting the elderly . 
Most people die from pneumonia and flu can kill previously healthy people for reasons no one quite understands . 
It can also worsen bacterial infections . 
New flu strains can spread fast because no one has natural immunity and a vaccine can take months to develop . 
This new strain of swine flu is genetically different from the H1N1 virus that the seasonal flu vaccine protects against . 
HOW BAD COULD IT GET ? 
A 1968 a `` Hong Kong '' flu pandemic killed about one million people globally . 
In a 1918 `` Spanish '' flu pandemic between 40 million and 100 million people died . 
However , the WHO says the world is now better prepared to withstand a flu pandemic . 
WHAT MEASURES IS THE MEXICAN GOVERNMENT TAKING ? 
Mexico has closed all schools in the capital and two central states until May 6 and stopped hundreds of public events in Mexico City , including concerts . 
Mexico City has shut 70 percent of its bars and nightclubs , closed churches and cinemas , and the army is handing out surgical face masks on the street . 
The government is recommending people avoid crowded places and refrain from greetings like shaking hands , kissing or hugging . 
People have been told to wash their hands frequently and avoid sharing food or kitchenware . 
It has also issued an emergency decree that gives it the power to isolate sick people , enter homes or workplaces and regulate air , sea and land transportation to try to stop further infection . 
The government has even extended the deadline on filing tax returns by a month to the end of May . 
WHAT IS THE REST OF THE WORLD DOING TO HELP ? 
The U.S. government is monitoring developments and the CDC and the WHO are working on a vaccine . 
The WHO has activated a command and control center for acute public health events nicknamed the `` war room . '' 
It says it is ready to use rapid containment measures if needed , including antivirals . 
The WHO has a stockpile of 5 million treatment courses of the antiviral Tamiflu , by Swiss drugmaker Roche Holding AG and Gilead Sciences Inc , and of Relenza , made by GlaxoSmithKline , which have both proven effective against the virus . 
Countries and regions also have antiviral supplies and the United States has released 25 percent of its 50-million course stockpile of the two drugs . 
SHOULD TOURISTS WITH TRIPS PLANNED TO MEXICO BE WORRIED ? 
The CDC and the WHO say there is no need to alter travel plans and Mexico has said it saw no need to close its borders . 
