By the CNN Wire Staff Anti-Gadhafi rebels have taken control of several Libyan cities , including Misrata , Benghazi and Ajdabiya . 
NEW : South Africa 's president makes his second trip to Tripoli in recent weeks NEW : The aim is to stop hostilities and spur peace talks , an African Union official says The rebel leader says , `` We are in desperate need of money '' More than 25 rebels in Libya are wounded in an attack near rebel-held Misrata Dafniya , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- South African President Jacob Zuma is set to meet embattled Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi on Monday , his second visit to Tripoli since unrest started roiling the North African country . 
Unlike many other world leaders and alliances , Zuma , his African National Congress party and the African Union -- which he will represent on his trip , and which Gadhafi himself once led -- have not called for the longtime Libyan leader to step down . 
In fact , it has criticized the NATO airstrikes targeting government forces . 
Noureddine Mezni , an African Union spokesman , said the mission is to call for the cessation of all hostilities , followed by peace talks between the warring parties . 
The continental organization has helped mediate such talks before , including ones in Kenya and Zimbabwe that left the ruling powers still in control . 
Zuma 's first visit to Tripoli in April was launched with similar intentions , but did not achieve its desired results . 
On Saturday , rebel leaders marked the 100th day of an uprising they say was launched over concerns about lack of freedom , democracy and other concerns related to Gadhafi 's 42-year rule . 
Its leader , Mustafa Abdul Jalil , told CNN on Saturday that his opposition movement is running out of money -- at the same time it has achieved key victories militarily and diplomatically , including Russia joining others in calling for Gadhafi 's exit . 
The chairman of the Benghazi-based National Transitional Council did not suggest in an exclusive interview that the rebels would pull back in their fight against Gadhafi 's government . 
But he pleaded for more resources so that the effort -- which is being backed by many Western nations -- could be successful . 
`` We are in desperate need of money , '' said Jalil , a former justice minister under Gadhafi . 
`` We really need money . 
We are going through a financial crisis . '' 
The opposition movement 's stature has been bolstered by the sale of a shipment of oil to China for $ 160 million , Jalil said . 
Still , he said the financial situation remains precarious for now -- especially with rebels ' limited access to more oil . 
`` People are patient and have been able to manage their lives at minimal living standards , '' he said . 
`` The problem is the prices have gone up . '' 
Jalil 's forces , meanwhile , continued to fend off attacks Sunday near the rebel-held city of Misrata . 
Gadhafi 's forces fired mortars and guns in an apparent effort to break through a stalemated line west of the city , CNN 's Ben Wedeman reported from the scene . 
Rebels returned fire , and while some pulled back to seek cover from the incoming artillery shells , others moved toward the front line near the town of Dafniya , about 35 kilometers -LRB- 22 miles -RRB- west of Misrata . 
More than 25 opposition fighters have been wounded in the battle so far , medics at a field hospital told CNN . 
They did not report any deaths , but fighters returning from the battle said two men had been killed . 
Ambulances continued bringing wounded in for treatment . 
Libya has been in the throes of a civil war for months , since Gadhafi dug in his heels against popular efforts to force him out of power as anti-government protests sweep the Arab world this year . 
NATO is operating under a U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing the use of any means -- with the exception of foreign occupation -- to protect civilians from attack or the threat of attack . 
It has been conducting airstrikes targeting Gadhafi 's military resources . 
Russia has not come on board fully supporting those strikes . 
But on Friday , President Dmitry Medvedev changed Moscow 's position and called for Gadhafi to step down . 
Ragtag rebels holding down Zintan Medvedev 's statement , echoing the stance of American and European leaders , appeared to indicate a closing diplomatic window for the Libyan strongman . 
In his interview with CNN , Jalil applauded Russia 's move . 
He said rebels would n't seek arms or economic aid from Russia , adding the council only wanted political support and help in expediting International Monetary Fund loans . 
Most valuable , he said , would be moving Gadhafi 's government closer to a political solition `` so no more blood will be spilled . '' 
`` We know very well that the Russians have relations with Moammar Gadhafi 's regime , and perhaps these relations will be used in the benefit of the revolutionaries in terms of finding an exit strategy for Gadhafi , '' Jalil said . 
He reiterated that the transitional council will `` agree to any cease-fire that leads to removing Moammar Gadhafi . 
Anything short of that is unacceptable . '' 
Jalil said Saturday he has offered amnesty to Gadhafi loyalists who defect before the demise of the regime , but reiterated that there will be `` no negotiation for any solution until Gadhafi 's departure . '' 
Once that happens , elections and a constitutional referendum will be held within a year . 
Marking what he called the 100th day of the nation 's civil war on Saturday , the rebel leader voiced optimism even given the movement 's financial straits . 
`` We see victories emerging at both national and international levels , '' he said . 
`` We should celebrate what our heroic sons have accomplished in Misrata and the Nafusa mountains , as well as applaud the wide international support for our revolution . '' 
CNN 's Sara Sidner , Nkepile Mabuse , Amir Ahmed , Raja Razek and Nima Elbagir contributed to this report . 
