How the right played the fascism card against Islam Friday 4 February 2005 00.03 GMT Fascism is coming back into fashion , at least in the propaganda wars . 
For the right , it comes in the shape of a new word : `` islamofascism '' . 
That conflates all the elements into one image : suicide bombs , kidnappings and the Qur ` an ; the fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan ; Iranian clerics and Hitler . 
The term seems to have appeared first in the Washington Times in a reference to Islamist fundamentalists . 
Coined by Khalid Duran , a Muslim scholar seeking to explain Islam to Jews , the word was meant as a criticism of hyper-traditionalist clerics - who in turn denounced Duran as a traitor to the faith . 
Usage has gathered momentum among commentators and academics who seek a verbal missile to debilitate those who disagree with them . 
They have adopted it as a sort of Judeo-Christian war cry - look for it soon in the title of a neo-conservative think tank conference . 
For the left , the term `` fascist '' lost its power in the 1970s , when it was sprayed on every authority figure in sight , from the Nixon-Kissinger White House to university provosts to the neighborhood cop . 
To make Bush-Hitler comparisons work requires more nuanced historical references - to the night of the long knives , for example , as Sidney Blumenthal did about the dismissal of Colin Powell . 
Unfortunately for liberals , those references do n't work as efficiently as islamofascism does for the right , because to imagine the appropriately creepy picture requires a familiarity with German history of the 1920s and 30s . 
Nazism is better known for its death camps than for Leni Riefenstahl or the Reichstag fire , so analogies between the Nazis ' early years and current Republican party behavior seem hollow , no matter how strong some parallels might be . 
Christopher Hitchens , a former socialist who now sits on the other end of the political see-saw , sprinkles islamofascism about like paprika . 
He and Andrew Sullivan , a voice of the right , both wrongly receive credit in some quarters for coining the term . 
Long before September 11 2001 , Duran was commissioned by the American Jewish Committee to produce one side of an interfaith project . 
Duran responded to attacks on his book , Children of Abraham , by deriding those who sought `` to impose religious orthodoxy on the state and the citizenry '' . 
In that sense , he said , extreme islamism is `` islamofascism . '' 
It took a couple of years for the word to seep into frequent usage . 
By then its meaning had expanded . 
Last year , Sullivan cited `` five elements that make it particularly dangerous '' , including the `` broken , medieval societies '' that foster it , the `` unquenchable extremism '' of its motivation , and `` the destructive technology '' its adherents seek . 
Use of the term to describe Muslim clerics and stateless terrorists has neatly pre-empted any chance of labeling Bush a fascist - no matter how many suspects are kidnapped by the US authorities and tortured ; no matter how impervious the border ; no matter how effective the use of propaganda to destroy the opposition ; no matter how many countries are invaded on false pretenses ; no matter how strongly a minority religion may become a mark of guilt . 
Like a MacBook Pro '' says @Mister_Solomon : Westminster Dog Show - live ! 
