Haunted by his experiences as an army medic in Iraq , David McGough could n't cope with life after his tour of duty . 
Yet it took two failed suicide attempts before he was diagnosed as suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder . 
Alison Roberts on the forgotten casualties of the war The first symptom was sleeplessness . 
It was July 2003 and Lance Corporal David McGough of the Royal Army Medical Corps was just back from a five-month tour of duty in Basra , Iraq . 
Lots of the lads from his unit had trouble settling back to a normal routine at first , but most were OK within a fortnight or so . 
David , however , did not sleep for an entire month . 
`` My body just would n't switch off , '' he tells me , fidgeting with his hands . 
`` All the time this tension was building , this incredibly tense restlessness . 
I was going for weeks without any sleep at all and then collapsing , sleeping for maybe six hours , and then starting all over again . '' 
At night , on leave , he walked around his small maisonette in a suburb of Preston , Lancashire , folding and re-folding his clothes , checking and double-checking the locks , looking over his shoulder repeatedly for imagined intruders . 
McGough was vomiting every day , often bloodily . 
The odour of cooking or burned meat made him sick , though `` the worst thing is the smell of public toilets '' . 
`` That brings the PoW camps back . 
The stench of those places was horrendous . '' 
Mostly it was the insomnia that started to drive him mad , that made him crash his car and almost beat his then-fiancee , that both masked and exacerbated his chronic underlying depression . 
The army doctor at the camp in Preston prescribed him Prozac and more or less told him to pull himself together . 
When Prozac failed to work , McGough was given a stronger antidepressant , citalopram , `` but no sleeping tablets , and by then - Christmas - I was n't really sleeping at all '' . 
McGough 's two attempts at suicide , both at Christmas in 2003 , were more cries for help than committed bids to kill himself . 
On the first occasion he held a knife across his throat until his sister begged him to put it down , and on the second he put a 9mm pistol to his head but did not pull the trigger fully . 
Horrified by what was happening , McGough 's father , a civil servant based in Northern Ireland , called Dr Alun Jones , a civilian psychiatrist who specialises in diagnosing and treating psychological problems in servicemen and women . 
`` It was immediately clear , '' says Jones , `` that McGough was suffering a severe case of post-traumatic stress disorder . '' 
So far , PTSD experts have seen a mere handful of British sufferers from this latest war in Iraq - but as the violence goes on , the trickle is expected to become a flood . 
Late last year , the independent inquiry into Gulf war illnesses chaired by Lord Lloyd of Berwick came to the conclusion that there was `` every reason '' to accept the existence of a Gulf war syndrome , and that post-traumatic stress was one of several contributing factors . 
Though the Ministry of Defense does not publish statistical predictions , military psychiatrists in America have been warned to expect psychiatric disorder to occur in a remarkable 20 % of servicemen and women returning from Iraq . 
`` What we 've got now is a situation starting to approximate to Northern Ireland or Bosnia , to civil insurrection rather than a straight shooting war , '' says Jones , who runs PTSD clinics around the country and at a residential center in north Wales . 
`` In those kinds of circumstances , where you 're experiencing hatred and violence from an unpredictable civilian population , we tend to get a lot of very disturbed and damaged soldiers . '' 
In the field of trauma studies , this atmosphere of constant and random danger is known by the shorthand `` no safe place '' . 
Other surveys suggest that roughly half the servicemen who suffer psychiatric illness as a result of traumatic events do not seek medical help , or do so years later , when the psychological afterburn has irreparably damaged marriages , careers and mental wellbeing . 
`` And there 's still a stigma attached , '' says Leigh Skelton , director of clinical services at Combat Stress , the ex-services mental welfare charity . 
`` PTSD is seen as a career-stopper within the army . 
Generally , the first line of action servicemen and women take is to bottle it up . 
Then they 'll self-medicate , usually with alcohol , sometimes with other substances . 
Cries for help often come from relatives rather than from the affected person . '' 
Symptoms range from insomnia , nausea and extreme fatigue to the classic `` flashback '' ; aggression , feelings of alienation and irrational anger . 
Sometimes the disorder centres on one particular memory . 
A 30-year-old female ambulance driver in the Territorial Army , for example , constantly replays the moment her vehicle was blown up last year by a hand-made bomb tied to a lamp-post in Basra . 
One marine in his early 20s now suffering chronic PTSD remembers `` the fear in the eyes of an Iraqi soldier in the window '' of a building mortared by the British ; and seeing that fear again when British soldiers mistakenly opened fire on a civilian vehicle . 
McGough , however , identified no single trigger . 
Skinny and pale , when I met him in late November he was a shadow of the strong young man he was pre-Iraq - the high-flyer who studied psychology at Queen 's College , Belfast , who loved to sky-dive and socialise , who was promoted within a year of joining the RAMC . 
For him , the pressure began the moment he and his medical unit moved into Iraq , at 2.30 am on the first night of the war , four hours after the Americans began their aerial bombardment of Baghdad . 
McGough was 21 years old and effectively in charge of 80 rookie soldiers fresh out of training , most of them still teenagers . 
As medics , they traveled in canvas-roofed trucks and were not equipped with body armor . 
`` There was gunfire everywhere . 
Some of them were literally crapping themselves in the back of those trucks . '' 
That first night , there was n't even time to pitch camp . 
`` The worst casualty I saw was an Iraqi guy hit about 13 times , big chunks of his stomach , face and legs just gone . 
We intubated him and opened him up by the side of a truck . 
You do it on autopilot at the time because your training kicks in . 
It 's only afterwards you start to think about what you 've seen and done . '' 
The mobile field unit , the first line of medical services , was initially established just south of Basra , but was twice relocated to escape attack . 
Its job was to mop up trauma cases , stabilise them and send them to field hospitals nearer the southern border . 
According to McGough , the medical unit received up to 1,000 wounded Iraqis during his five-and-a-half-month tour of duty , of whom perhaps 60 % died and were buried in mass graves . 
A large proportion of the medics ' work , however , took place in the PoW camps set up on each site . 
`` Usually we had about 150 prisoners coming in a day , '' says McGough , `` both soldiers and civilians who 'd been picked up with guns . 
Some had clearly been tortured by the Iraqi regime . 
There was one man who had thick black stuff , like goo , coming out of his penis , and said he 'd been injected with something when he was a prisoner before . 
Others had quite infected lash wounds on their backs , or broken jaw bones . '' 
The unit also saw a number of raped women , who were treated and counselled by a female army gynaecologist . 
Seemingly futile or absurd situations are known to compound wartime trauma . 
The unit 's first location at Basra was regularly attacked by Iraqis defending a nearby ammunition dump from a maze-like system of trenches . 
`` There was no adherence to any kind of convention on their part . 
Sometimes it was ridiculous . 
Every time we hit and wounded someone , a white flag would go up on their side and the others would bring the man we 'd wounded over to the base for treatment . 
Then they 'd go back up and start shooting at us again . '' 
Most harrowing of all was the discovery of the corpse of a 12-year-old girl who 'd been hanged in a backstreet alley in Basra . 
McGough was sent to confirm the death and recognized her as the child to whom he and his comrades had chatted the week before . 
`` We heard later that she was probably hanged by the crowd because she 'd been talking to our crew ... That was one of the worst things . 
You expect to see some nasty stuff , but seeing a little girl hanging in the street because she once spoke to you ... '' PTSD has been a recognized injury of war for more than 30 years , yet treatment in Britain is still very patchy . 
It took complete break-down -LRB- `` my girlfriend found me one night huddled on the floor , shaking and crying '' -RRB- and several emergency trips to hospital in Preston before McGough was finally prescribed sleeping tablets . 
While a member of the British army , he was unable to access the civilian care system - and had been informed of a decision to discharge him without a pension . 
`` The army is not a branch of the social services , '' says Jones , `` but I do think there is a certain duty of care , knowing what we now know about the effects of trauma . 
It would be reasonable to expect the army to check these lads over for psychological injury when they come back from combat , but in fact there is no obligation whatsoever to do this . '' 
`` No one rings or visits in the mornings because I 'm just a horrible , nasty person before the drugs have kicked in , '' says McGough . 
He was increasingly convinced that his physical symptoms - the vomiting and chronic weight loss - are related to anthrax injections and to the Naps tablets taken to counter the potential use of enemy nerve agents . 
On bad days he does not get out of bed at all . 
`` I loved being in the army , '' he says . 
`` It was supposed to be my long-term career , and I was prepared to give everything to it ... I just wish I could shake this and get on with my life again . '' 
