Friday 4 February 2005 15.55 GMT An Italian woman journalist has been kidnapped in Baghdad as she interviewed local people on the street . 
Iraqi police sources said Giuliana Sgrena , a journalist on the Rome based Il Manifesto paper , was abducted outside Baghdad University . 
She was conducting interviews near the university when four gunmen snatched her from her car at about 2pm , the Italian news agency ANSA said in a report after speaking to Sgrena 's interpreter . 
Two Iraqi journalists traveling with Sgrena were released after the gunmen stopped the car they were traveling in . 
Italian Foreign Ministry officials said they were investigating the report , while Il Manifesto said Sgrena had been working for the paper in Iraq since January 23 and had called in just two hours earlier . 
She is the second Italian journalist to be kidnapped in Iraq since the start of the war . 
Last August Enzo Baldoni , an Italian freelance journalist working for Milan weekly Diario , was killed eight days after he went missing en route to Najaf , then the scene of heavy fighting between US troops and supporters of Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr . 
Sgrena 's kidnapping comes a month after French reporter Florence Aubenas and her Iraqi assistant Hanoun Al-Saadi went missing in Baghdad . 
Today international press freedom lobby group Reporters Sans Frontieres said that , though they could not rule out any other explanation for Aubenas 's disappearance , `` kidnapping with no political motive seems the most likely scenario at the moment '' . 
Since US forces invaded the country , Iraq has become the most dangerous country in the world for journalists and media workers , journalist groups have said . 
In a report earlier this year the International Federation of Journalists called on governments to do more to protect journalists after 129 media workers were killed last year , 69 of them in Iraq . 
To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or phone 02072399857 If you are writing a comment for publication , please mark clearly `` for publication '' . 
