By Ivan Watson and Jomana Karadsheh , CNN Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- - Last-minute shopping before the start of the Muslim month of Ramadan brought back bustle and commercial activity to the center of a city that is increasingly showing strain from Libya 's grinding civil war . 
In downtown Tripoli , cars were backed up in traffic jams . 
Shoppers lined up outside a bakery waiting for bread . 
Not far away , another line of residents stood next to an ATM machine , waiting for their turn to withdraw cash . 
The busy scene on Sunday was a sharp contrast to previous government-sponsored tours of the city , which revealed rows of shuttered shops and streets largely devoid of traffic . 
Asked about how the civil war is likely to impact the imminent month of fasting and feasting , many Tripoli residents insisted they were not facing any hardships whatsoever . 
The secular West is stupid . 
Whoever controls whom within Muslims , they 'll start oppressing each other forever . 
It 's Christianity that gave Westerners humaness that the world can imitate and follow , nothing else . 
Why does n't CNN cover the violence in Mexico as much as they do Syria and Libya ? 
tens of thousands have been killed there and they are on the USA border . 
I am sure that they get violent video from there as well . 
The constant overseas coverage is astonishing to me vs what is going on so close to our homes and seems to affect us via drugs and spillover into the USA . 
August 2 , 2011 at 11:09 pm | Report abuse | Good , now that they are all in one spot , nuke them . 
ANd I am sure you Mr. Dub A \*\* call yourself peaceful , peace loving christian , and it is all about unconditional love . 
August 1 , 2011 at 11:00 pm | Report abuse | Make no mistake , gay Jesus will return . 
In it , he explains the essential virtues that reflect true `` faith '' -LRB- iman -RRB- through related Qur anic verses and Prophetic sayings . '' 
i.e. a nice summary of the Koran and Islamic beliefs . 
The First Five of the 77 Branches : aka as God , Yahweh , Zeus , Jehovah , Mother Nature , etc. should be added to your cleansing neurons . 
To believe that everything other than Allah was non-existent . 
Thereafter , Allah Most High created these things and subsequently they came into existence . '' 
Evolution and the Big Bang or the `` Gi-b G-nab '' -LRB- when the universe starts to recycle -RRB- are more plausible and the `` akas '' for Allah should be included if you continue to be a `` crea-tionist '' . 
To believe in the existence of angels . '' 
A major item for neuron cleansing . 
Angels\/de-vils are the mythical creations of ancient civilizations , e.g. Hitt-ites , to explain\/define natural events , contacts with their gods , big birds , sudden winds , protectors during the dark nights , etc. . 
No `` pretty\/ug-ly wingy thingies '' ever visited or talked to Mohammed , Jesus , Mary or Joseph or Joe Smith . 
Today we would classify angels as f airies and `` tin ker be-lls '' . 
Modern de-vils are classified as the de-mons of the de-mented . 
To believe that all the heavenly books that were sent to the different prophets are true . 
However , apart from the Quran , all other books are not valid anymore . '' 
Another major item to delete . 
There are no books written in the spirit state of Heaven -LRB- if there is one -RRB- just as there are no angels to write\/publish\/distribute them . 
The Koran , OT , NT etc. are simply books written by humans for humans . 
Prophets were invented by ancient scribes typically to keep the un-educated masses in line . 
Today we call them for-tune tellers . 
Prophecies are also invali-dated by the natural\/God\/Allah gifts of Free Will and Future . 
To believe that all the prophets are true . 
However , we are commanded to follow the Prophet Muhammad -LRB- peace and blessings be upon him -RRB- alone . '' 
Mohammed spent thirty days `` fasting '' -LRB- the Ramadan legend -RRB- in a hot cave before his first contact with Allah aka God etc. via a `` pretty wingy thingy '' . 
Common sense demands a neuron deletion of # 5 . 
# 5 is also the major source of Islamic vi-olence i.e. turning Mohammed 's `` fast , hunger-driven '' hallu-cinations into horrible reality for unbelievers . 
Walk these Five Steps and we guarantee a complete recovery from your Islamic ways !!!! Unfortunately , there are not many Muslim commentators\/readers on this blog so the `` two-minute '' cure is not getting to those who need it . 
If you have a Muslim friend , send him a copy and help save the world . 
Analogous steps are available at your request for deprogramming the myths of Christianity , Judaism , Buddhism , Hinduism and Paganism . . 
The Bible is true in all things and is the discerner of every thought and the intent of the heart -LRB- Hebrews 5:12 -RRB- . 
TROLL ALERT do n't listen to this trash they are only trying to sell their cult and awful book . 
Click the report abuse link to get rid of this TROLL ! 
August 1 , 2011 at 11:36 am | Report abuse | TROLL ALERT AGAIN this person is trying to sell their cult and book it 's all garbage , click the report abuse link to get rid of this TROLL !!! Rest assured , gay Jesus will return . 
`` These individuals go by the User Name of Observer , LOL , Expert , etc. , etc. and their goal is to control the dialogue of this forum with their distorted and vile messages . '' 
That 's why even conservative Christians have said your peddling a cult but yet their names are n't on your list . 
You are the one trying to spread a distorted and vile message . 
Listen I am trying to sell my cult and if you do n't like I 'll insult you and throw a temper tantrum . ! 
I would call you a pu $ $ y but I think you would like being called that . 
Lighten up that is all . 
TROLL ALERT Do n't bother watching this trash , click the report abuse link to get rid of this troll . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
The CNN Belief Blog covers the faith angles of the day 's biggest stories , from breaking news to politics to entertainment , fostering a global conversation about the role of religion and belief in readers ' lives . 
It 's edited by CNN 's Eric Marrapodi with daily contributions from CNN 's worldwide newsgathering team and frequent posts from religion scholar and author Stephen Prothero . 
