July 20 , 2011 | By Ivan Watson , CNN Libyan rebel fighter wearing his old national flag as a cape flashes the ` victory ' sign as he looks at an airforce fighter jet flying overhead at a checkpoint on the outskirts of the oil town of Ras Lanuf on March 7 . 
The Libyan government in Tripoli estimates the grinding conflict that has been tearing the country apart for the past five months has cost the national economy some $ 50 billion . 
`` The cost is colossal , '' said Abdulhafid Zlitni , planning and finance minister for the Tripoli government . 
In an interview with CNN , Zlitni said the suspension of oil and gas exports had accounted for a huge chunk of the losses . 
`` The income foregone because of the stoppage of the export of oil is something like $ 20 billion , '' he said . 
This has brought an end to what had been a surge in prosperity for the North African country . 
Last year , Libya 's economy was booming , with gross domestic product surging 10.3 % , according to the International Monetary Fund . 
And in a report published February 15 , the IMF 's executive board concluded , `` The outlook for Libya 's economy remains favorable . '' 
But two days later , protests against Col. Moammar Gadhafi 's 41-year rule erupted in the eastern city of Benghazi . 
As protests spread to other cities and towns across the country , the Gadhafi regime embarked on a bloody crackdown . 
Today , the country is split into territories controlled by loyalists and opposition rebels . 
A NATO military alliance is now into the fourth month of a campaign of airstrikes against government targets after the U.N. Security Council passed a resolution authorizing the use of force to protect civilian lives . 
The civil war has all but shattered ambitious plans to upgrade transport , housing and infrastructure in a country that had long been isolated from the international community . 
`` The main objective was to create capacity for the economy to stand on its feet away from oil and gas production , '' recalled Zlitni somewhat wistfully , as he described a five-year , $ 170 billion plan to modernize Libya . 
In March , the legions of foreign workers who had been contracted to build railroads , airports , apartment buildings and telecommunications networks began fleeing the rapidly escalating conflict by the tens of thousands . 
The exodus included large numbers of engineers , construction and oil workers from China , Turkey , Egypt , and the Philippines , who crossed the western border with Tunisia on foot . 
At the time , many of them told CNN stories of being robbed at gunpoint by Libyan security forces who took their cell phones , laptops and money . 
