DUBAI | Mon Aug 8 , 2011 11:55 am EDT DUBAI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Gulf Arab states broke their silence over a bloody crackdown on popular unrest in Syria , recalling their envoys in a pointed rebuke of President Bashar al-Assad 's behavior and significantly deepening his international isolation . 
In less than 24 hours , the island kingdom of Bahrain and oil-rich neighbor Kuwait followed Saudi Arabia 's lead by summoning their ambassadors from Damascus `` for consultations . '' 
Saudi Arabia , an absolute monarchy normally loath to criticize other Arab autocrats but now wary of giving an opening to reform elements at home , pulled its envoy late on Sunday . 
King Abdullah , in an extraordinary statement read on Al Arabiya television , said Syria 's fierce military crackdown on nearly five months of demonstrations for more political freedoms had `` nothing to do with religion , or values , or ethics . '' 
Abdullah , who has approved billions of dollars in handouts to Saudi citizens this year in a move analysts said was aimed at buffering his monarchy from political reform pressure , issued a stern warning that Syria must be open to change . 
`` Syria should think wisely before it 's too late and issue and enact reforms , '' he said . 
`` Either it chooses wisdom on its own or it will be pulled down into the depths of turmoil and loss . '' 
`` The action of Gulf states has served to isolate the Assad regime in the Arab world , thereby signaling a major strategic shift in the region : From tacit support of the Syrian regime 's action to outright condemnation , '' said Michael Stephens , analyst at the Royal United Services Institute -LRB- RUSI -RRB- based in Doha . 
While unlikely to lead to intervention in Syria , the Gulf comments marked the sharpest Arab criticism leveled against any Arab state since a wave of protests began rocking the Middle East in January , toppling veteran rulers in Tunisia and Egypt . 
On Monday , Kuwaiti Foreign Minister Sheikh Mohammed al-Sabah told reporters in parliament that he would meet his counterparts across the Gulf to discuss conditions in Syria . 
`` When the number of innocent people killed exceeds 2,000 , it is something totally unacceptable , '' he said , while ruling out any military action against the fellow Arab country . 
Hours later , Bahrain , which itself suppressed a protest movement in March , joined growing condemnation of Syria when Foreign Minister Sheikh Khaled al-Khalifa announced the recall of his country 's ambassador . 
`` Bahrain has summoned its ambassador for consultation and stresses the importance of prudent action , '' he posted on his Twitter account . 
Apart from Libya 's civil war , Syria 's military crackdown has been the most violent outgrowth of unrest in the Arab world this year . 
On Monday , tanks extended operations to crush protesters in Syria 's Sunni Muslim tribal heartland . 
Assad 's government says it is fighting criminals and armed extremists who have provoked violence by attacking its troops . 
Syrian rights activists and Western countries say Assad 's forces have attacked peaceful protesters . 
But sharp words against Syria by Gulf states are unlikely at this time to be followed by any decisive action . 
Analysts expect Gulf governments to stop short of supporting intervention in Syria as they did against distant Libya , where the United Arab Emirates and Qatar have sent planes to back NATO air strikes . 
In ruling out military action , Kuwait echoed an Arab League statement earlier on Monday saying that the pan-Arab body would use persuasion rather than `` drastic measures '' to press for an end to Syria 's bloodshed . 
Despite a lack of appetite for military moves , Saudi Arabia has played a `` game changer '' role in bringing Gulf states to heap pressure on another discredited Arab leader to quit , Yemen 's Ali Abdullah Saleh , RUSI 's Stephens said . 
Qatar , which has sought to lead Arab diplomacy as the unrest spreads , was the first to recall its envoy to Syria in July . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Positive change for everyone concerned . 
President Bashar al-Assad should come to a negotiating table and work out a peaceful resolution to this very unnecessary This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
