EDITOR 'S NOTE : Credit : Reuters CAN NOT INDEPENDENTLY VERIFY THE CONTENT OF THE VIDEO FROM WHICH THIS STILL IMAGE WAS TAKEN An army tank is seen on a street in Hama city , in this undated still image taken from amateur video , taken August 7 , 2011 and made available to Reuters on August 8 , 2011 . 
REUTERS\/Social media website via Reuters TV AMMAN | Mon Aug 8 , 2011 3:38 pm EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian President Bashar al-Assad pressed on with a tank onslaught against a city Monday , but was plunged deeper into international isolation by Arab neighbors who denounced his violent crackdown and recalled their envoys from Damascus . 
Assad 's five-month campaign against street protests has emerged as one of the bloodiest episodes of the wave of democratic revolutions sweeping the Arab world this year . 
Killings have worsened sharply in the past week after Assad ordered tank assaults on two cities . 
Other Arab leaders had been cautious about criticizing one of their peers , but Saudi Arabia 's King Abdullah broke the silence with a rare intervention overnight , demanding an end to the bloodshed and recalling the Saudi ambassador from Damascus . 
Hours later Kuwait and Bahrain recalled their envoys too . 
Syrian tanks and troops poured into the eastern Sunni city of Deir al-Zor in the latest stage of a campaign to crush centers of protest against 41 years of Assad family rule . 
`` Armored vehicles are shelling the al-Hawiqa district heavily with their guns . 
Private hospitals are closed and people are afraid to send the wounded to state facilities because they are infested with secret police , '' Mohammad , a Deir al-Zor resident who did not want to give his full name . 
He said at least 65 people had been killed since tanks and Armored vehicles barreled into the provincial capital , 400 km -LRB- 250 miles -RRB- northeast of Damascus , Sunday , crumpling makeshift barricades and opening fire . 
Later Monday Assad fired defense minister Ali Habib and replaced him with chief of staff General Daoud Rajha . 
The state news agency said Habib was ill . 
Habib had been added to an EU sanctions list last week for his role in crushing protests . 
Syria 's military is effectively under the command of Assad 's brother Maher . 
Many officers are from the Assad family 's minority Alawite sect . 
The Syrian Observatory of Human Rights said among those killed were a mother and her two children , an elderly woman and a young girl . 
Syria has expelled most independent media since the uprising began , making it hard to confirm accounts . 
The sudden withdrawal of ambassadors of Gulf Arab states leaves Assad with few diplomatic friends . 
Western states have imposed sanctions on top Syrian officials and countries with close ties to Damascus such as Russia and Turkey have warned Assad he is running out of time . 
Nevertheless , countries have not proposed military action like that ranged against Libya 's leader Muammar Gaddafi . 
Assad 's forces shot dead at least three mourners Monday when they opened fire at a funeral for a pro-democracy protester in the southern border city of Deraa , cradle of the five month uprising , witnesses and activists said . 
Rami Abdulrahman of the Syrian Observatory said one of the dead was Maen Yousef Awadat , a leading political campaigner , who had recently been released from prison . 
The funeral was for a youth arrested earlier this week when he took part street protests after nightly Ramadan prayers . 
His body was handed to relatives earlier Monday with signs of torture , according to relatives contacted in Deraa . 
The Saudi criticism was the sharpest the oil giant has directed against any fellow Arab state since uprisings began to sweep the region , toppling autocrats in Tunisia and Egypt , kindling civil war in Libya and rattling elites . 
`` What is happening in Syria is not acceptable for Saudi Arabia , '' the Saudi king said in a written statement read out on Al Arabiya satellite television . 
`` Syria should think wisely before it 's too late and issue and enact reforms that are not merely promises but actual reforms . '' 
`` Either it chooses wisdom on its own or it will be pulled down into the depths of turmoil and loss . '' 
The assault on Deir al-Zor , in an oil-producing province bordering Iraq , took place a week after tanks stormed the city of Hama , where residents say scores have been killed . 
The official SANA news agency said Monday the military was winding down in Hama . 
Residents said there were still tanks in parts of the city and security forces were making arrests . 
The Observatory said 1,500 people had been arrested in Hama 's Jarajima neighborhood and troops killed three civilians . 
Like most of Syria , Hama and Deir al-Zor are mainly-Sunni cities , and the crackdowns there resonate with Sunnis , who form the majority in the region and rule most Arab countries . 
The Arab League called for an end to the bloodshed . 
France and Germany repeated calls for Assad to scrap the military campaign which rights groups say has killed at least 1,600 civilians . 
Saudi Arabia 's decision to join countries putting pressure on Assad was unlikely to deter the 45-year old president , who calls the clampdown a national duty , regional experts said . 
Relations between Sunni Saudi Arabia and a Syrian ruling elite from Assad 's minority Alawite sect have been tense since the assassination in 2005 of Rafik al-Hariri , a Western-backed Lebanese Sunni statesman who also had Saudi nationality . 
In Cairo , the head of the most influential school of Sunni Islam , al-Azhar , described the violence as a human tragedy that had to stop . 
`` Blood only fuels the fires of revolutions , '' said Grand Imam Ahmed el-Tayeb . 
Hama is known throughout the region as the site of a crackdown by Assad 's father nearly 30 years ago against Sunni Islamists in which many thousands died . 
Syrian authorities denied that any Deir al-Zor assault had taken place . 
The official state news agency said `` not a single tank has entered Deir al-Zor '' and reports of tanks in the city were `` the work of provocateur satellite channels . '' 
Syrian authorities say they have faced attacks since the protests erupted in March , blaming armed saboteurs for civilian deaths and accusing them of killing 500 security personnel . 
State television broadcast footage Sunday of mutilated bodies floating in the Orontes river in Hama , saying 17 police had been ambushed and killed in the central Syrian city . 
Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan , who cultivated close ties with Assad but has sharply criticised the crackdown , said Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu would visit Syria Tuesday . 
`` Our message will be decisively delivered , '' he said , drawing a rebuke from an Assad adviser , who described the Turkish statement as unbalanced . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton spoke to Davutoglu Sunday , the State Department said , asking him to `` reinforce '' Washington 's position that Syria must immediately return its military to barracks and release prisoners . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
they do n't have any oil ... ... ... . . 
How about Saudi Kingdom , Howmany years are they ruling ? 
, left to Saudi young generation This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
