BERLIN\/PARIS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Germany joined a growing number of western nations urging Syria Thursday to prevent violence against protesters after Syrian forces killed up to 37 people a day earlier . 
`` The violence must end immediately . 
The Syrian government must make sure that basic human and civil rights , as well as the rule of law , is observed , '' Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said in a statement . 
`` The upheaval in the Arab world shows that stability does not come from violence , but only through dialogue and reforms . '' 
Dozens of civilians have been killed by Syrian forces in six days of demonstrations for political freedom and an end to corruption , in a protest movement spreading across the Arab world since a popular uprising in Tunisia late last year . 
Wednesday , security forces opened fire on hundreds of youths in the southern city of Deraa , witnesses said , killing up to 37 demonstrators according to a hospital official . 
France , Syria 's former colonial ruler which has sought to improve its relations with the country since 2008 , has repeatedly condemned what it calls excessive force being used there , and Thursday called for dialogue and change . 
`` We urge Syria to listen to the voice of dialogue and of democracy , '' French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe told reporters . 
Paris has also called for an investigation into civilian deaths and the release of detained protesters . 
`` A great change is under way . 
For a long time , France 's Arab policy aimed for stability . 
Today , Arab policy is to listen to the aspirations of the people and that applies to Syria , which must take on board this widespread movement . '' 
The United Nations and United States also condemned the violence . 
Britain called on Syria to respect people 's right to peaceful protest and to take action on their grievances . 
President Bashar al-Assad has dismissed demands for reform in Syria , a country of 20 million people run by the Baath Party since a 1963 coup . 
-LRB- Reporting by Brian Rohan , John Irish , Catherine Bremer ; Editing by Elizabeth Fullerton -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
