Explore all of our oil spill graphics to track the spill , see its effects , and learn its possible solutions . 
The tenuous alliance among the Obama administration , the oil firm BP and Gulf Coast officials was visibly fraying on Monday , with exasperation on all sides mounting as oil from a deep-water gusher began lapping at the region 's environmentally fragile shoreline . 
Meanwhile , the administration faced growing questions about whether it should be taking more control of the situation , rather than ceding so much of the decision-making about stopping the oil spill to the company that created it . 
On the coast , local officials complained that Washington has been too slow in helping them hold back the oil . 
Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal -LRB- R -RRB- said that the administration has not provided enough equipment -- including booms , skimmers , vacuums and barges -- and that it has stood in the way of his proposal to erect artificial barrier islands . 
Federal officials say that latter plan needs more study . 
`` BP is the responsible party , but we need the federal government to make sure that they are held accountable and that they are indeed responsible . 
Our way of life depends on it , '' Jindal said at a news conference in Galliano , La. , with Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano and Interior Secretary Ken Salazar . 
With the realization that images of spoiled beaches and oil-covered animals are likely to become much worse in the coming weeks , the administration is torn between a political imperative -- that it take a hard line with the oil giant -- and a practical one -- that it has no choice but to rely on the company to stop the flow . 
Some administration officials have started taking a tougher stance with BP , with Salazar threatening on Sunday to `` push them out '' if the company did not perform . 
But when Coast Guard Adm. Thad W. Allen , who is directing the government 's disaster response , was asked about Salazar 's comment during a briefing Monday at the White House , he dismissed it as `` more of a metaphor . '' 
Allen added : `` To push BP out of the way would raise the question of : Replace them with what ? '' 
And BP Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles told reporters on a conference call : `` I do n't know of anything else we could do , but if the government felt there were other things to do , it is clearly within their power to do that . '' 
Even in one of the few areas where the government has publicly tried to overrule BP -- over its choice of chemical dispersants -- it has not gotten its way . 
Last week , the Environmental Protection Agency told BP that it had 24 hours to find a less toxic alternative to the chemical it had been using to break up the oil . 
The company , however , replied that no alternatives are available in large enough quantities to deal with the spill . 
On Monday , the EPA responded that BP should keep looking . 
In the meantime , the agency said , it would conduct its own tests on other chemical dispersants , which was an acknowledgment that it has no answer either . 
Tensions are likely to grow if BP 's next effort to stop the spill -- a `` top kill , '' which involves pumping in heavy fluids and is scheduled for Wednesday -- does not succeed . 
That could be followed by another inventively named maneuver , a `` junk shot , '' that would clog the opening with materials that include golf balls and pieces of tire and rope . 
Or , more likely , BP would try to attach a new funneling device or lower a new blowout preventer on top of the 450-ton one that failed . 
But if those measures prove ineffective , it may be August before the leak is stopped through the completion of a relief well , Allen said . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
