Explore all of our oil spill graphics to track the spill , see its effects , and learn its possible solutions . 
The federal agency responsible for regulating U.S. offshore oil drilling repeatedly ignored warnings from government scientists about environmental risks in its push to approve energy exploration activities quickly , according to numerous documents and interviews . 
Minerals Management Service officials , who can receive cash bonuses in the thousands of dollars based in large part on meeting federal deadlines for leasing offshore oil and gas exploration , frequently changed documents and bypassed legal requirements aimed at protecting the marine environment , the documents show . 
This has dramatically weakened the scientific checks on offshore drilling that were established under landmark laws such as the Marine Mammal Protection Act and the National Environmental Policy Act , say those who have worked with the MMS , which is part of the Interior Department . 
`` It 's a war between the biologists and the engineers , '' said Thomas A. Campbell , who served as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 's general counsel under President George H.W. Bush . 
`` They just have a very different worldview , and sometimes the engineers simply do n't listen to the biologists . '' 
Interviews and documents show numerous examples in which senior officials discounted scientific data and advice -- even from scientists elsewhere in the federal government -- that would have impeded oil and gas companies drilling offshore . 
Under the Bush and Obama administrations , red flags raised by scientists at NOAA and the Marine Mammal Commission have gone unheeded . 
Obama officials say they are taking steps to ensure that science guides drilling decisions ; former agency officials say such questions are rarely as simple as they seem . 
Several instances involving the leasing process for a section of Alaska 's Beaufort Sea and the Gulf of Mexico illustrate the problems the agency faces . 
In 2006 , then-MMS biologist Jeff Childs wrote a detailed analysis of how the Exxon Valdez spill had harmed generations of fish in Alaska 's Prince William Sound and how a future spill could do the same in the Beaufort Sea . 
But Childs 's conclusion that `` a large oil spill ... is likely to result in significant adverse effects on local -LRB- fish -RRB- populations requiring three or more generations to recover '' would have forced the MMS to conduct a full environmental impact statement before auctioning off a lease in the Beaufort Sea . 
`` I have concerns about Jeff 's analysis and will not insert it into the -LRB- environmental assessment -RRB- being sent to HQ at this time , '' Deborah Cranswick , chief of the environmental assessment section at the MMS , wrote in an e-mail June 23 to her Alaska colleagues . 
`` I believe that Regional management needs to review it first because Jeff has concluded new significant impacts from oil spills . 
This will trigger an -LRB- environmental impact statement -RRB- -- and thus delay the lease for at least a year . '' 
Six days later , Paul Stang , Alaska 's MMS regional supervisor for leasing and environment , sent a hand-written note to Childs saying , `` As you know , a conclusion of significance under -LRB- the National Environmental Policy Act -RRB- means an EIS and delay in sale 202 . 
That would , as you can imagine , not go over well with HQ and others . '' 
When Childs balked at deleting the finding , another manager rewrote it so that the lease process could move ahead without delay . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
