CHICAGO | Fri Jun 26 , 2009 7:39 pm EDT CHICAGO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - More than 1 million people in the United States may have been infected with the new H1N1 swine flu , U.S. health officials said on Friday , and infections continue to rise . 
The new H1N1 influenza virus that has triggered a global pandemic is infecting people in the United States well beyond the normal period for influenza season , Dr. Anne Schuchat of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention told reporters in a telephone briefing . 
`` The key point is this new infectious disease is not going away , '' Schuchat said . 
`` In the U.S. , we 're still experiencing a steady increase in the number of reported cases , with 6,000 new cases reported just this week . '' 
That represents the largest number of cases to be reported in a one-week span since the beginning of the outbreak in April . 
The World Health Organization is now reporting more than 67,000 confirmed cases of H1N1 flu and some 300 deaths worldwide . 
In the United States , there have been 27,717 laboratory-confirmed cases , including more than 3,000 hospitalizations and 127 deaths . 
`` We are estimating about a million people in the U.S. or more have gotten this virus at a time of year when people really are n't continuing to get the seasonal influenza viruses , '' Schuchat said . 
`` A big question that everybody really has is what kind of illness , hospitalization and deaths will we see when our winter flu season begins ? '' 
Schuchat said vaccine makers are developing H1N1 vaccine that will be tested in clinical trials over the summer . 
She said the CDC has not yet decided if it will recommend people get the new shots when flu season in arrives in North America in the fall . 
But Schuchat said the CDC is asking state and local health departments to draw up plans for how to handle distribution of the vaccines . 
`` We want states to be ready to offer and administer this novel vaccine , '' she said , focusing especially on how to reach younger people , pregnant women and people with underlying health conditions like asthma and diabetes that put them at higher risk . 
At a three-day meeting in Atlanta of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices , which advises the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , CDC researchers said one vaccination scenario could include as many as 600 million doses . 
That could place a heavy burden on cash-strapped health departments , which would likely have to distribute two doses of the new vaccine , which might be required for full immunity , in addition to the regular seasonal flu vaccination program . 
Schuchat said the CDC continues to watch for changes in the virus in the Southern Hemisphere , where flu season is now in full swing . 
`` We have not seen any changes in the virus that are important at this point , '' she said . 
In the United States , the new flu continues to spread , with 12 states reporting widespread flu activity , something Schuchat said was `` very unusual for this time of year . '' 
`` That is just one feature that helps us to see that what we are seeing is quite different , '' she said . 
She said flu infections are even affecting children attending camps in the Northern Hemisphere summer , with outbreaks in 34 camps in 16 states . 
`` Some have actually closed for the summer . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
