HOPEDALE , La. -- In a way , they are the invisible victims of the BP oil disaster : deck hands and other day laborers who get paid in cash , do n't receive W2 forms , may not file tax returns and have little or no way of proving they are losing income because of the spill . 
`` We run into them on a daily basis . 
They 're stuck in limbo , '' Tuan Nguyen , deputy director of the Mary Queen of Vietnam Community Development Corp. in eastern New Orleans , said in a recent interview . 
Nguyen said he has encountered hundreds of workers , mostly deckhands , who lack the documentation BP needs from claimants seeking a piece of the $ 20 billion of the oil giant 's aid fund . 
`` It 's a very cash-involved industry , '' said Nguyen , whose organization formed after Hurricane Katrina to help the Vietnamese community recover from Hurricane Katrina in 2005 . 
`` Some of the boat captains or boat owners , they sell fish on the side of the road or directly to families . 
They do n't have records of that . '' 
Stuart Smith , an attorney handling oil-spill lawsuits , said seeking aid can be intimidating , and some cash workers fear that they 'll face penalties or prosecution for not paying taxes if they come forward . 
`` Proving that you worked in that capacity is going to be an issue for a lot of these people because they 're not sophisticated businessmen , '' Smith said . 
That fear may be why it 's hard to find a laborer willing to talk about the problem . 
Along Bayou Hopedale , east of New Orleans , a group of men sorting crabs at a ramshackle waterside building declined to answer questions recently . 
Less than a mile away , Christian Delos Reyes , who until the spill made a living dredging oysters , was helping prepare a boat for cleanup work . 
He had documented his income and started the BP claims process , he said . 
But he lamented the fate of others . 
`` A lot of them do n't pay taxes , '' he said . 
BP requests tax returns for 2007 through 2009 , but will work with individuals who want to provide other documentation , including wage loss statements , deposit slips , boat registrations , copies of current fishing licenses and other financial statements , the company said in a written response to questions about the process . 
`` BP will make every effort to keep claimant information confidential but will meet all of its legal obligations , '' the company statement said , adding it will report claims it pays to the IRS . 
Ken Feinberg , appointed by the White House and BP to administer the aid fund , did n't hold out a lot of hope for people who take cash to avoid taxes . 
Feinberg administered a similar fund for victims of the Sept. 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks . 
`` I must say under the 9\/11 fund , which was all public money , we were not sympathetic to paying claims based on cash-only , no tax returns , '' Feinberg said in an interview . 
`` You go down that road and you 're really opening up this fund to diversion to people who ca n't justify the claims , '' he said . 
Still , he added , President Barack Obama wants money to get to the people who are entitled to it . 
`` Maybe there 's some compromise we can reach , '' he said . 
IRS spokesman Eric Smith in Washington said the agency could not comment on the issues faced by workers who lack documentation . 
Meanwhile , the seafood industry has organized a charitable corporation to raise money for those who might fall through the cracks of the claims process . 
The group does n't need the documentation required by BP or government agencies . 
`` We do n't even have an application process , '' said Kevin Voisin , the group 's head and an executive with Motivatit Seafood in Houma , La. . 
Using a database of seafood-related companies in the Gulf region , volunteers are contacting managers and asking which workers need help , either because they have applied for aid that has n't arrived yet , lacked the documentation for an application or feared reprisal . 
`` We do n't need W2s . 
We do n't need 1040s , '' Voisin said . 
`` We know the places that are shutting down . 
We know the communities . '' 
Associated Press Writer Alan Sayre in New Orleans contributed to this report . 
