Wednesday 7 December 2005 19.25 GMT Pinter : to play domineering father Max in one of his most popular and controversial plays . 
Photo : Max Nash\/AP The Nobel prize-winning playwright Harold Pinter has called for Tony Blair to be tried for war crimes , in his acceptance speech to the Nobel committee . 
The 5,000-word speech excoriates the US government over Guantnamo Bay and its attempts to destabilise Nicaragua in the 1980s . 
But he saves his most savage comments for the UK , described as `` pathetic and supine '' and a `` bleating little lamb '' tagging along behind the US in its support for the Iraq war . 
`` The invasion of Iraq was a bandit act , an act of blatant state terrorism demonstrating absolute contempt for the concept of international law , '' he said . 
`` The invasion was an arbitrary military action inspired by a series of lies upon lies and gross manipulation of the media and therefore of the public ... a formidable assertion of military force responsible for the death and mutilation of thousands and thousands of innocent people . 
`` We have brought torture , cluster bombs , depleted uranium , innumerable acts of random murder , misery , degradation and death to the Iraqi people , and call it ` bringing freedom and democracy to the Middle East ' . '' 
The 75-year-old will not be attending Saturday 's award ceremony at the Swedish Academy in Stockholm because of poor health . 
He will be sending his publisher , Stephen Page , in his place to receive the 10m kroner prize . 
But the author of The Caretaker and The Birthday Party has recorded a video of himself reading the speech , looking frail in a wheelchair with a red blanket over his legs . 
In recent years he has been treated for cancer , and appeared with a bandaged head earlier this year when it was announced that he had been awarded the prize . 
One of the original `` angry young men '' who revolutionised British theater in the 1950s , he has lost none of his fury in the speech . 
`` How many people do you have to kill before you qualify to be described as a mass murderer and a war criminal ? 
More than enough , I would have thought , '' he said . 
`` Therefore it is just that Bush and Blair be arraigned before the international criminal court of justice . 
But Bush has been clever . 
He has not ratified the international criminal court of justice ... `` But Tony Blair has ratified the court and is therefore available for prosecution . 
We can let the court have his address if they 're interested : it is Number 10 , Downing Street , London . '' 
He also discusses his early plays , the creative process , and the ambiguity of language . 
Beginning with a 1958 quote in which he claims that `` a thing is not necessarily either true or false '' , he says that sometimes a writer has to escape questions about the uncertainty of truth and stand up for what they think is right . 
`` I believe that these assertions still make sense and do still apply to the exploration of reality through art `` So as a writer I stand by them , but as a citizen I can not . 
As a citizen I must ask : what is true , what is false ? '' 
