Managing director Bob Dudley is taking over responsibility for BP 's Gulf of Mexico operation This is not the first time Robert -LRB- Bob -RRB- Dudley has sat in the hot seat . 
An oil industry veteran , with 30 years ' experience , he joined the board of BP 18 months ago . 
But his most high-profile role was as the chief executive of BP 's joint venture in Russia , exploiting oil fields in eastern Siberia . 
He was appointed in 2003 when BP went into partnership with a group of Russian billionaires known as AAR . 
The deal was worth $ 6bn -LRB- # 3.6 bn at the time -RRB- . 
Under Mr Dudley , the joint venture increased oil output by a third to 1.6 million barrels per day . 
However , Mr Dudley fell out with AAR , who accused him of favoring BP . 
The dispute escalated and became increasingly politicised . 
BP 's technical staff were barred from working in Russia by a Siberian court . 
The security service , the FSB , twice raided TNK-BP 's offices in Moscow . 
In June 2008 , Mr Dudley himself left Russia in haste when his visa was not renewed . 
At the time , he said he had faced `` sustained harassment '' from the Russian authorities . 
For five months , he attempted to run TNK-BP from an undisclosed secret location outside Russia but resigned in December 2008 . 
In April 2009 , Mr Dudley joined the board of BP with responsibility for the company 's operations in Asia and the Americas . 
Mr Dudley began his career with the oil company Amoco in 1979 , moving to BP when it took over Amoco in 1998 . 
He worked in Russia for Amoco , and later oversaw BP 's operations in Russia , the Caspian Sea and other areas . 
From a PR point of view , it helps BP that Mr Dudley is American , not British . 
Better still for BP , he grew up in Mississippi and speaks with the accent of the American South . 
He knows the Gulf coast well . 
BP has been playing down the significance of the news that Mr Dudley is to assume control immediately of the operation in the Gulf of Mexico . 
His appointment was announced on 4 June but was only supposed to take effect in August . 
However , the fact that he has taken up his post ahead of schedule may indicate that BP is feeling the heat from its failure to cap the well or provide a satisfactory explanation to the US authorities . 
BP 's share value has slid by almost 50 per cent since the oil leak began on 20 April . 
Tony Hayward , BP 's beleaguered chief executive , has described Mr Dudley as `` the management team 's Foreign Secretary - or perhaps Secretary of State in American terms '' . 
Mr Dudley will need all the diplomatic skills he can muster if he is to repair the damage done to BP 's reputation . 
My Hayward has come in for fierce criticism from the US media When Tony Hayward , 53 , became BP 's chief executive in 2007 he told journalists that his number-one task was to focus `` laser-like '' on safety and reliability . 
He showed all the energy and excitement one would expect from a man who had climbed to the top of one of the world 's biggest companies - and could now stamp his mark on it . 
He inherited a company severely tarnished by the deaths of 15 employees at a refinery in Texas and by an oil spillage from a fractured pipeline in Alaska . 
But Mr Hayward promised that BP would do things differently , telling the Texas-based Houston Chronicle newspaper : `` The task is to restore confidence . '' 
How quickly things change . 
Then aged 50 , but looking much younger , Mr Hayward now wears a drained , slightly haunted expression . 
The excitement he showed in the early days of his tenure seems absent today . 
No wonder , after being declared public enemy No 1 in America . 
Mr Hayward has been demonised by the US media as being responsible for the world 's worst environmental disaster - and , let 's not forget , for the deaths of 11 men in the rig explosion that preceded it . 
Critics argue that , as the man in charge , it is Mr Hayward 's job to take the heat . 
Nor has he helped his cause with some misguided remarks about wanting his life back and optimistic comments about the clean-up operation . 
But the hostility must be a crushing weight to bear , especially for a man whose declared intention on becoming chief executive was take a lower profile than his predecessor , Lord -LRB- John -RRB- Browne of Madingley . 
By the time he departed Lord Browne had become as well known for his celebrity friends and political connections as for his business successes . 
Mr Hayward 's appointment was in part a desire by the BP board to get back to basics . 
He was seen as a old-school oil man , happier having a beer with rig workers than , like Lord Browne , drinking fine wine with prime ministers and presidents . 
Words such as `` informal '' , `` quiet '' or `` easy-going '' are often used to describe his manner . 
Born in 1957 , the eldest of seven children , Mr Hayward gained a first class geology degree from Aston University , in Birmingham , and PhD from Edinburgh University at the age 22 . 
Married , with two children , Mr Hayward considered going into academia , but instead went to BP in 1982 and was posted first to Aberdeen , home of the UK 's North Sea oil boom . 
Mr Hayward has spoken frequently of his love of the offshore life and of touring the world in various BP jobs . 
But he was eventually talent-spotted by Lord Browne , and became one of his Turtles -LRB- a name Browne gave to his inner circle of high fliers -RRB- a reference to the fearsome cartoon warriors , the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles . 
Mr Hayward rose to become head of exploration and production , a key role in any oil company , and was long identified as Lord Browne 's likely successor . 
When Lord Browne resigned after having lied to a UK court about his relationship with a male escort , no one was surprised when Mr Hayward took over . 
But he had already begun positioning himself , telling a conference some months earlier that BP needed to change its leadership style because it was `` too directive and does n't listen sufficiently well . '' 
Mr Svanberg is coming under increasing pressure While Tony Hayward has been made the fall guy by US media for the oil disaster , chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg is increasingly under the spotlight from the UK press . 
Several commentators have queried Mr Svanberg 's lack of visibility during the crisis , with Financial Times columnist Jonathan Guthrie saying he is `` proving lower-profile than an agoraphobic prairie dog '' . 
This may be about to change if reports are correct that Mr Hayward is returning to London , while Mr Svanberg now directs BP 's response to the growing political crisis the company is facing in America . 
Mr Svanberg 's supporters point out that he only became chairman in January , and only joined the BP board five months earlier . 
He has no oil industry experience , having most recently spent six years as president and chief executive of Swedish telecoms group Ericsson . 
However , while he may not have been able to answer detailed operational questions , critics say a chairman 's role is to take the lead in times of crisis , especially in dealings with governments and investors . 
When he was appointed chairman Mr Svanberg said last year that he recognized it was a big challenge `` following such a distinguished predecessor '' . 
This predecessor was Peter Sutherland , who cut his teeth in Irish politics and at the European Commission , and is unlikely to have been found on the sidelines if the crisis happened during his watch . 
There was , at the time , some surprise that BP had gone outside the industry to find Mr Sutherland 's replacement . 
But , then , so did Royal Dutch Shell , BP 's bigger rival , when it appointed former Nokia boss Jorma Ollila as its chairman . 
Married , with three children , Mr Svanberg , 57 , has had a distinguished career . 
Born in the Swedish town of Porjus , inside the Arctic Circle , he received a Masters degree in engineering from the Institute of Technology at Linkoping University . 
After graduating in 1977 , he worked for ABB on various foreign assignments , then moving to security company Securitas . 
He led the spin out of Assa Abloy from Securitas in 1994 and , with the help of numerous acquisitions , boosted turnover seven-fold . 
A big ice hockey fan and accomplished player in his youth , Mr Svanberg took the top job at Ericsson in 2003 , steering a then loss-making company through a big and often painful restructuring . 
His reward was to be given the King of Sweden 's medal for his contribution to Swedish industry - and to have garnered enough plaudits to make him a contender to chair one of the world 's great energy groups . 
Ironically , Mr Svanberg 's single biggest skill , according to one analyst who has watched his career , is `` stewarding companies through difficult times '' . 
There are many observers who think that Mr Svanberg could be putting that skill to better use today . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
