Monday 21 February 2005 16.17 GMT George Bush delivers a speech in Brussels in which he calls for a new era of transatlantic unity with the goal of spreading democracy across the Middle East . 
Photograph : AP\/Kevin Lamarque The US president , George Bush , today warned Syria to end its occupation of Lebanon as he put reform in the Middle East at the center of his vision for the transatlantic alliance . 
In a Brussels speech billed as a conciliatory gesture to EU leaders after the divisions of the Iraq war , Mr Bush said it was time for Europe and the US to work together to `` to take up the duties of great democracies '' . 
The Middle East and the Muslim world from Egypt to Afghanistan dominated the address . 
The president said peace between Israel and the Palestinians was `` our immediate goal '' and insisted that Iran `` must not develop nuclear weapons '' . 
He called on the EU to support the `` world 's newest democracy '' in Iraq . 
Mr Bush said democratic regimes in the region were the key to wider peace and stability for Europe and the US , telling his audience that the `` future of our nations and the future of the Middle East are linked '' . 
His call for Syria to withdraw from the territory of its tiny neighbor came as it was reported the Syrian president , Bashar al-Assad , had said Damascus would take steps to pull its troops out of the country in accordance with the Taif agreement that ended Lebanon 's 1975-90 civil war . 
Syria has been under pressure over Lebanon since opposition politicians blamed Damascus for the assassination last week of the former prime minister Rafik Hiriri . 
Mr Bush also called for Lebanese elections taking place in the spring to be without Syrian interference . 
Syria and Iran last week announced a `` common front '' as Washington ratcheted up its rhetoric against them . 
Mr Bush began his speech joking that Condoleezza Rice had told him to be a `` realist '' about the reception he would get in Brussels , but he was greeted with applause when he said the US wanted to see Israeli and Palestinian states living side by side in peace and security . 
He said the `` greatest opportunity and ... immediate goal '' of a US-EU alliance was an end to the Middle East conflict . 
`` The world must not rest until there is a just and lasting resolution to this conflict , '' he told the audience . 
`` We seek peace between Israel and Palestine for its own sake . 
We also know that a free and peaceful Palestine can add to the momentum of reform throughout the broader Middle East . '' 
Mr Bush said the lesson of post-war European history was that rivals could become partners and that Washington supported a strong and united Europe `` because we need a strong partner in the hard work of advancing freedom in the world '' . 
He said the US and western Europe shared a history of fighting tyranny in the second world war and in the democratisation of central and eastern Europe in the years after 1989 and the two needed to begin `` a new era of transatlantic unity '' . 
Mr Bush will meet with the three key opponents of the Iraq war - the French , German , and Russian leaders , Jacques Chirac , Gerhard Schrder and Vladimir Putin - on his five day visit to Belgium , Germany and Slovakia . 
He may have strong words for Mr Putin , whom he today urged to ensure Russia stayed true to democratic principles and the rule of law . 
He said the EU must put democratic reform at the heart of its dialogue with Russia . 
In a move sure to please Mr Bush , EU foreign ministers are today expected to approve the funding of a Baghdad office to coordinate the training of Iraqi judges and prosecutors . 
US aides expressed hope that Mr Bush 's European visit would lead to a cooler transatlantic dialogue . 
He will dine later today with Mr Chirac , one of his most outspoken critics on the Iraq war . 
The EU may be cooperating with the US on Iraq but divisions remain over how to confront Iran about its nuclear programs and an EU proposal to end a 15-year arms embargo on China . 
Mr Bush 's trip will see the tightest and largest security operation ever mounted in the countries he is visiting . 
Several thousand police were on duty in Brussels last night , almost double the quota deployed during EU summits , as hundreds of demonstrators staged the first of several planned protests . 
