Page last updated at 13:13 GMT , Wednesday , 24 August 2011 14:13 UK Interview by Debbie Randle , words by Del Crookes The organiser of the Michael Jackson tribute concert is defending the event saying that they have the `` overwhelming majority '' of his family behind them . 
It 's after opposition from Jermaine and Randy Jackson , who say the concert should n't go ahead because it will clash with Conrad Murray 's trial . 
Michael Jackson 's former doctor is accused of involuntary manslaughter . 
`` There 's nothing in this . 
It 's not something to get excited about , '' said Chris Hunt from Global Live Events . 
`` The notion that an event which reminds people just how fantastic Michael Jackson was , what a loss he was to the world he is , what a great singer , a great performer he was , should be inappropriate - it does n't compute , it does n't make sense . '' 
Jermaine and Randy Jackson also say Global Live has `` mishandled '' the booking as well as `` misjudging '' the event 's timing . 
Rock band Kiss were dropped from the bill after over comments made by Gene Simmons . 
During a magazine interview last year the bassist said Michael Jackson was a child abuser . 
Chris Hunt 's response to fans The singer was cleared of child molestation in 2005 . 
Chris Hunt says all the criticism about the concert is understandable but wrong . 
`` They were saying that it was a pity that there had not been a big scale , proper tribute to Michael . 
`` We began to think , ` Why do n't we try and do one . ' 
LaToya was the lead one but there were other family members around as well . 
`` There are two that are n't so happy . 
I do n't wish to be ungenerous to anyone . 
I have the greatest respect for Jermaine , who I 've met a number of times . 
`` He did a couple of times announce that he was going to organise a concert like this and then was n't unable to do so . 
So I suppose it 's a little understandable . '' 
A coalition of 35 fan communities has since written an open letter to the concert organisers asking for the event to be canceled . 
But Chris Hunt says they have n't heard all the facts . 
Michael Jackson was preparing for a series of UK gigs when he died in 2009 `` We have the greatest respect for the fans , '' he said . 
`` We 've been listening to the fans . 
`` I think what 's happened is that there 's been a campaign , which some of them have listened to and have n't heard our responses to it yet . 
`` This concert will sell out either very quickly or quickly . 
We have no worries about it at all . '' 
The Michael Forever concert takes place at Cardiff 's Millennium Stadium on 8 October . 
Artists confirmed to be taking part include Christina Aguilera , Leona Lewis , Cee Lo Green , JLS , Alexandra Burke and Beyonce , who will perform via satellite . 
Speaking to Newsbeat about the controversy surrounding the concert , Alexandra Burke said : `` I definitely think it should go ahead , but it 's not up to me . 
I think the family should decide amongst themselves . '' 
She added : `` I 've got three weeks of rehearsals booked in -LRB- for the concert -RRB- because I 'm trying to make sure I do these songs justice . '' 
Michael Jackson died in June 2009 aged 50 while rehearsing for his This Is It UK tour . 
Conrad Murray has pleaded not guilty to the involuntary manslaughter charge , arguing he did not cause the singer 's death . 
