BEIRUT | Fri Mar 11 , 2011 8:08 am EST BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Rebels trying to topple Libya 's Muammar Gaddafi have so far fought alone . 
Help is not in sight , even as he strikes back with tanks , artillery and warplanes . 
Gaddafi is widely reviled in the Arab world , even by his fellow autocrats . 
Nor is he loved by the Western powers that had courted him for his oil until the revolt against him . 
Yet with the military momentum appearing to shift in his favor , the Libyan leader of 41 years may succeed where Egypt 's Hosni Mubarak and Tunisia 's Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali failed , in clinging to power . 
His willingness to use extreme force , with no effective riposte from the outside world , could also set a dangerous example to other Arab rulers confronting disaffected populations . 
According to a somber assessment by U.S. President Barack Obama 's national intelligence chief , James Clapper , Gaddafi is `` in this for the long haul '' and is likely to prevail . 
Public calls are growing for some action to save rebels and civilians from the firepower of pro-Gaddafi forces , now regaining ground near Tripoli and along the eastern coast . 
Yet nothing has been done beyond sanctions in the form of an asset freeze and arms embargo , threatening prosecution for war crimes , and French-led moves to recognize a rebel national council . 
The rag-tag Libyan fighters battling Gaddafi 's military can not fathom what the world is waiting for , even as the leader 's son Saif al-Islam declares that they face a full-scale assault to crush their three-week-old uprising . 
`` I am disappointed as we have asked for air and sea blockades , '' Mustafa Abdel-Jalil , head of the opposition national council in Libya , told the BBC on Friday , saying that delaying action further `` might allow Gaddafi to regain control and remain in power against the will of the Libyan people . '' 
Yet there is no international consensus on robust action . 
Judging by Thursday 's meetings of the Gulf Cooperation Council -LRB- GCC -RRB- , the African Union and NATO , none will emerge soon . 
European Union leaders were meeting on Friday to discuss Libya . 
Many fear mission creep if , say , a no-fly zone were imposed . 
`` What happens if it is not the Libyan air force that is gaining ground , but their armor ... and heavy artillery ? '' 
asked Timur Goksel , a former U.N. peacekeeping adviser in Beirut . 
`` Then what do you do , attack those ? 
Because that 's not a no-fly zone , it 's war . 
It 's a very complicated decision . 
The Western countries have to think very hard , '' Goksel said . 
For all their anti-Gaddafi rhetoric , Western powers are wary of plunging into another conflict in a Muslim nation in the absence of any simple way to remove a leader bent on survival . 
The United States is hamstrung by its costly and contentious military campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
Russia and China , along with Arab nations such as Algeria and Syria , are queasy about any precedent for meddling in another country 's affairs . 
So it is hard to get the U.N. Security Council to authorize military action -- no-fly zones or sending military advisers or weapons to rebels are arguably acts of war -- and no nation or alliance is yet ready to step in without such approval . 
The International Crisis Group has argued instead for a ceasefire and negotiations to end a burgeoning Libyan civil war . 
`` Western calls for military intervention of one kind or another are perilous and potentially counter-productive . 
There are no quick or easy fixes , '' the conflict resolution group says . 
`` Insisting that Gaddafi step down will not make it happen . 
Imposing a no-fly zone , bombing airfields or arming the rebels could tilt the balance of power in the rebels ' favor , but is unlikely to swiftly bring down the regime . '' 
The African Union , rejecting any military intervention , plans to send five heads of state to Libya to seek a truce . 
The Arab League has suspended Libya 's membership . 
Saudi Arabia and its five partners in the GCC have voiced support for a no-fly zone and declared Gaddafi 's rule illegitimate . 
The Arab League was due to meet in Cairo on Saturday and officials said it would not let a delegation from Tripoli attend . 
But decisive action from the League would be a surprise . 
`` The Arab League has become an entirely emasculated body that is essentially capable of doing nothing except rhetoric and speeches , '' said Karim Makdisi , who teaches international relations at the American University of Beirut -LRB- AUB -RRB- . 
He said most Arab regimes remained intact despite the overthrow of leaders in Egypt and Tunisia and popular unrest against others . 
None of them wanted the Arab League to lead the way in intervening against the government of a member state . 
NATO is also skittish about proposals to crimp Gaddafi 's military with a no-fly zone . 
This would require evidence of war crimes against civilians , a clear legal basis and firm regional support , said its secretary-general Anders Fogh Rasumussen . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has signaled that her country will not go solo in imposing a no-fly zone on Libya . 
`` Absent international authorization , the United States acting alone would be stepping into a situation whose consequences are unforeseeable , '' she said on Thursday , belittling the effect of past no-fly zones in Iraq and Serbia . 
Gaddafi , like Iraq 's Saddam Hussein , would portray any Western intervention as a selfish , colonial venture -- rhetoric that for many Arabs is grounded in decades of bitter reality . 
`` What we fear most is this European and Western eagerness to take control of Libya 's oil , '' said Omar Nashabe , an editor at Beirut 's al-Akhbar newspaper , which is sympathetic to Hezbollah . 
Many Arabs feel outraged by Gaddafi 's bloody strikes against his foes , but might also mistrust Western action , especially if an air embargo produced unintended civilian casualties . 
`` There is no belief that U.S. intervention will be brief , in the interests of Arabs , or serve the interests of stability , '' said AUB 's Makdisi . 
Many Arabs would see it as oil-motivated or as a U.S. bid to get ahead of the curve after failing to respond adequately to the pro-democracy revolts in Egypt and Tunisia . 
`` The wider context is the abysmal failure of the Obama administration to have any coherent U.S. policy toward the Middle East , '' Makdisi said , citing its past support for Arab strongmen and its ill-starred Israeli-Palestinian peace drive . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
