UPDATE 3-Dutch marines freed by Libya flown out to Greece \* Marines arrive in Athens on Greek military plane \* To return to the Netherlands shortly -LRB- Updates with quote from Dutch prime minister -RRB- ATHENS , March 11 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Three Dutch marines detained in civil war-hit Libya were released and flown to Athens aboard a Greek military plane on Friday . 
They were met at Athens airport by Dutch government officials , including Deputy Foreign Minister Ed Kronenberg who headed the delegation that negotiated their release . 
`` The people have been very well taken care off , they are in good health and in good shape , '' Kronenberg told reporters . 
`` They will be flying back to the Netherlands very soon . '' 
The marines were arrested on Feb. 27 at Sirte on Libya 's central Mediterranean coast when they tried to rescue a Dutch engineer and another European by helicopter . 
The Dutch Defense Ministry confirmed the operation was carried out without authorisation from Libya , whose soldiers prevented the helicopter from taking off . 
The civilians were later handed over to the Dutch embassy in Tripoli and returned to the Netherlands on March 2 . 
`` Obviously we are overjoyed that this has happened . 
We were very worried about the situation . 
Last night it transpired that they would be out of Libya , which happened at the end of the morning , at the end of the night , '' Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte told reporters in Brussels . 
The three marines will return to the Netherlands soon but probably not on Friday to give them time to recover from their detention , Defense Minister Hans Hillen was quoted as saying by public broadcaster NOS. . 
The marines ' release was announced on Thursday by the son of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi , Saif al-Islam . 
`` We told them , do n't come back again without our permission . 
We captured the first NATO soldiers , we are sending them back home . 
But we are still keeping their helicopter , '' he told Reuters . 
Tens of thousands of foreigners living and working in Libya have left the country since a rebellion against Gaddafi 's 41-year rule broke out last month . 
