MARSHALL , MICH. -- In the Summer of the Spill , history is already repeating itself , this time in Michigan . 
But other plot points are eerily similar : A large company with safety violations . 
Regulators who did n't act fast enough . 
Broken equipment that everybody 's waiting to examine . 
And now , questions about how much of the oil is gone and how much is just unaccounted for . 
`` The pattern that we see here is a pattern of inadequate oversight and supervision -LRB- in government -RRB- and an industry that appears to cut corners , '' said the National Wildlife Federation 's Tim Warman , who helped write a report documenting hundreds of accidents in the oil and gas industry in the past decade . 
It went to the printer last month , two days before the Michigan spill began . 
`` The pattern suggests that we 're going to see more of them , '' Warman said . 
The Michigan spill appears to have begun late July 25 when something broke in a 30-inch pipeline that carries oil from Canada to Midwestern refineries . 
The leak was n't noticed until 11:45 the next morning . 
By then , an estimated 19,500 barrels -LRB- 819,000 gallons -RRB- had escaped . 
That is n't much compared with the gulf spill , in which 4.9 million barrels -LRB- 205.8 million gallons -RRB- escaped , according to an analysis this week . 
But it was enough to turn tiny Talmadge Creek into a stream of oil and make a section of the larger Kalamazoo River run black . 
An Environmental Protection Agency official on the scene said it was the most destructive oil spill ever in the Midwest . 
`` I do n't know if we 'll feel safe ever again . 
That 's the mind-set this gives you , '' David Orban , who lives on the creek , said at a public hearing Monday . 
Nearby homes were evacuated , and residents were left worrying about tainted air and drinking water . 
As in the gulf , scrutiny has fallen on an obscure federal agency charged with preventing this kind of calamity . 
There , it was the Minerals Management Service . 
Here , it is the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration , an arm of the Transportation Department . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
