Sergey Lavrov -LRB- pictured -RRB- was speaking after a meeting with Libyan opposition spokesman Abdel Rahman Shalgam . 
Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov meets with a Libyan opposition representative The opposition knows it will be one of several parties in talks , he says Lavrov hopes a strategy will be worked out `` that will help end this bloodshed '' Moscow -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The Libyan opposition is not asking to be recognized as the `` sole legitimate '' authority in the country , Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said Tuesday , a day after meeting with opposition representative Abdel Rahman Shalgam . 
Instead , he said , Shalgam asked only that the National Transitional Council , based in Benghazi , Libya , be considered `` as a legitimate partner in the talks '' aimed at settling the nation 's conflict , Lavrov said . 
Opposition officials are aware , Lavrov said , that the settlement talks should also involve other parties , including representatives of Tripoli and western regions of Libya . 
Lavrov said he hopes a crisis settlement plan for Libya can be formulated at an upcoming session of the African Union . 
`` I hope that some strategy will be worked out based on all of these approaches '' -- referring to ones offered by opposition representatives in Benghazi , the African Union and the United Nations -- `` that will help end this bloodshed as soon as possible , '' he said . 
Speaking to reporters after his meeting with Lavrov , Shalgam said Monday that the Libyan opposition would like to continue dialog with the Russian authorities `` because Russia is a very important state and a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council . '' 
`` We have agreed to remain in contact over the situation in Libya , '' he said . 
Shalgam reiterated that the Libyan opposition is not going to strike any reconciliation deal with the country 's ruling government , and insisted on the immediate resignation of leader Moammar Gadhafi . 
`` We will have peace and no gunfire when Gadhafi relinquishes power or leaves the country , '' he said . 
Shalgam also said the Libyan opposition does not want NATO to conduct a ground operation in Libya . 
Last week , Lavrov also held separate talks in Moscow with an envoy of the Libyan government , the secretary general of the World Islamic Call Society , Muhammad Ahmed al-Sharif , as well as U.N. Special Envoy for Libya Abdul Ilah Khatib . 
