Testing of BP 's newly capped Gulf of Mexico oil well has been extended for a further 24 hours . 
The US official in charge of the spill clean-up , Admiral Thad Allen , said the `` integrity test '' would not stop until Sunday afternoon . 
He added that when the test ceased , containment of the spill using surface ships to collect oil would resume . 
The new cap has managed to stop the flow of oil for the first time since the well exploded three months ago . 
The flow of oil was shut off at 1425 local time -LRB- 1925 GMT -RRB- on Thursday . 
In a statement , Adm Allen said : `` Based on the data and pressure readings compiled to date , the test has provided us with valuable information which will inform the procedure to kill the well and a better understanding of options for temporary shut-in during a hurricane . 
`` As we continue to see success in the temporary halt of oil from the leak , the US government and BP have agreed to allow the well integrity test to continue another 24 hours . '' 
He added that at the end of the test , the surface ships resuming collection of leaking oil would have the capacity to take up to 80,000 barrels per day . 
Andy Gallacher BBC News , Washington If the pressure readings drop or a leak is discovered from the ocean bed , the valves will once again be opened . 
This time , though , BP says it is ready with four container ships on the surface to siphon off most if not all the oil . 
Work on two relief wells which will finally cap the well has restarted . 
They should be finished in the next few weeks when concrete and mud will be pumped into the well , sealing it for good . 
Even if all that goes to plan , the Gulf of Mexico still faces a huge clean-up operation that could take years . 
Correspondents say this switch-over will see crude oil flowing into the Gulf once again , on temporary basis , as pressure is relieved . 
BP is drilling relief wells which aim to intercept the leaking one at the end of July , enabling it to be sealed by mid-August . 
Adm Allen 's statement concluded : `` Progress also continues on the two relief wells the federal government has required BP to drill . 
The relief well remains the ultimate step in stopping the BP oil leak for good . '' 
The spill has been described as the worst environmental disaster the US has ever seen . 
Eleven workers were killed when the Deepwater Horizon rig blew up on 20 April . 
The subsequent spill has affected hundreds of miles of Gulf coastline since April , with serious economic damage to the region as tourists have avoided Gulf Coast beaches and fishing grounds have remained closed . 
BP has put the costs of dealing with the disaster at over $ 3.5 bn -LRB- # 2.3 bn -RRB- . 
It has already paid out more than $ 200m to 32,000 claimants . 
The company is evaluating a further 17,000 for payment and is seeking more information on 61,000 other claims . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL In June , BP placed a cap , known as an LMRP cap , over the top of the Deepwater Horizon well so oil could be collected at the surface . 
However , this continued to leak oil and has now been replaced with a better fitting device . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL When engineers removed the LMRP cap on 10 July , oil began to freely flow from the top of the blowout preventer once more . 
However , the Q4000 containment system continued to take some oil to the surface . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Engineers then bolted on a new capping stack onto the blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- . 
This allowed them to conduct a series of tests to see if the flow of oil could be stopped using the newly installed equipment . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL During the test the three ram capping stack has been closed and all sub-sea containment systems collecting the oil temporarily suspended , effectively blocking the flow of oil from the well . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Once the tests have been successfully completed , BP will resume collecting oil . 
The Helix Producer ship was recently connected to the BOP to provide another collection route in addition to the Q4000 rig . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
