By the CNN Wire Staff Reporter in Misrata : ` We 're under siege ' NEW : Offshore communications cable reportedly cut Ship takes nearly 1,000 migrants and 17 casualties from Misrata to Benghazi `` It 's just hell , '' says a reporter in Misrata NATO 's `` message '' was `` sent to the wrong address , '' a government spokesman says Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Libyan government forces directed their assault Monday on civilian areas of Misrata , resulting in a number of civilian casualties , witnesses said . 
`` It 's just hell , '' said Marie Colvin , a foreign affairs correspondent for the Sunday Times of London , who has been in the city for a week . 
`` Civilian neighborhoods are being decimated as we speak . '' 
She said that at least 10 people had been killed and at least 30 others wounded . 
But figures were difficult to confirm ; CNN was not in the city . 
A resident of Misrata who asked to be identified only as Mohammed said Monday that six people were killed in the morning . 
Building frequented by Gadhafi hit A doctor at a hospital in Misrata put the number of dead Sunday at 16 , with 71 wounded . 
The indiscriminate shelling began after rebel forces routed forces loyal to leader Moammar Gadhafi from the city center early Sunday , Colvin said . 
The rout came after rebels moved from building to building along Tripoli Street , the main boulevard , ousting government forces , she said . 
Twenty-five rebels were killed in one day , and an undetermined number of Gadhafi soldiers were killed , she said . 
Asked about the rebel army , she laughed . 
`` We 're talking about an army of shopkeepers , engineers , car mechanics , '' she said . 
`` Very , very few trained military . '' 
At the fruit and vegetable market , government tanks that had been hidden under loading bays were set afire over the weekend . 
Their position there underscored the difficulty of NATO airstrikes in discriminating between government forces and civilians . 
Since then , stationed on the city 's edge , government forces have been firing shells randomly into residential neighborhoods of the city , she said . 
`` It 's a free-fire zone on civilians , '' she said from the hospital , where she said she had seen casualties that ranged `` from loss of limbs to an 8-year-old boy struck in the ankle by shrapnel . 
He 'll keep the foot , but he was in bad shape . '' 
Outside , a white tent served as a triage area ; a refrigerator truck was packed with bodies . 
When two people were killed in one house , the family got into a car , but it too was hit , killing a man and two children , she said . 
Almost all of the shops in the city were shut , she said . 
Along Tripoli Street , `` every single building has been hit by shells . '' 
Some bakery owners were giving away bread , and a few stores on the other side of town remained open , she said . 
As of Monday night , the seaside city remained surrounded on three sides , she said . 
Last week , Libyan Deputy Foreign Minister Khaled Khaim said that Gadhafi 's military was withdrawing from Misrata and that tribal leaders would deal with the rebels . 
But rebel commanders told Colvin that there were no negotiations going on between them and tribal leaders , the reporter said . 
The government 's assertion that such talks were ongoing `` appears to be a fig leaf or Gadhafi trying to cover the fact that his troops have been defeated , '' Colvin said . 
Misrata has been the scene of some of the deadliest battles of the war as rebels attempt to oust Gadhafi , who has been in power for 42 years . 
At least 36 people were killed there Sunday , rebel spokesman Col. Ahmad Bani said Monday . 
In all , hundreds of people have been killed in the battle for the city , which has been under siege by Gadhafi 's forces for seven weeks . 
Its population of about 450,000 makes it the country 's third-largest city . 
But that number has been dropping as residents have sought to get out . 
On Monday , the International Organization for Migration said it had taken nearly 1,000 stranded migrants -- most of them from Nigeria -- and 17 civilian casualties from Misrata to Benghazi on Sunday , with more such efforts planned . 
The accounts of dire conditions in Misrata came as a government official said Gadhafi was well and in command of the country 's affairs , despite what the official called a NATO attempt to kill him by bombing his compound in the capital city of Tripoli . 
`` The message that was sent by NATO in the early hours of this morning was sent to the wrong address , '' Mussa Ibrahim said in a written statement . 
In a tour of the aftermath , Ibrahim said the flattened structure was a civilian office building . 
In a statement , NATO said the target was a communications center in central Tripoli that had been used to coordinate attacks against civilians . 
NATO is leading an international military operation in Libya that includes airstrikes targeting Gadhafi 's military resources . 
It is operating under a U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force to protect civilians . 
On Monday , Italy 's Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi called U.S. President Barack Obama to tell him of his decision to provide additional military support by authorizing air-to-ground strikes on Libyan regime targets , the White House said in a statement . 
`` The two leaders agreed that additional pressure is necessary to strengthen the civilian protection mission , and the president emphasized that the best way to ensure the safety of the Libyan people is for Gadhafi to leave power , '' the statement said . 
Libyan state TV said military and civilian casualties resulted from the strike on Gadhafi 's Bab el-Azizia compound . 
`` We have no independent means of verifying reports of possible civilian casualties , '' NATO said in a statement on its website . 
NATO has been issuing warnings to Libyan civilians to stay away from military sites and equipment , especially around Misrata . 
Citing a military source , state-run Libyan TV reported late Monday that NATO ships struck an offshore fiber-optic cable , cutting communications to Sirte , Ras Lanuf and al-Brega . 
It also reported that air strikes hit targets Monday night in Zawiya and Ayn Zarah of Tripoli district , resulting in casualties . 
Since NATO took command of Operation Unified Protector on March 31 , its aircraft have flown more than 3,700 sorties and more than 1,500 strike sorties . 
Over the weekend , NATO aircraft destroyed multiple-rocket launchers , armored personnel carriers , bunkers and storage facilities in and around Misrata , Tripoli and Sirte , the alliance said . 
`` We are bringing all our capabilities to bear on all parts of the Gadhafi regime that remain intent on harming the civilian population , '' NATO spokeswoman Oana Lungescu said in a statement . 
`` As decided by the foreign ministers of NATO and operational partners , we will keep up the pressure until all attacks against civilians have stopped , Gadhafi 's forces have withdrawn to bases , and full and unimpeded humanitarian access has been ensured . '' 
The rebels , under the umbrella of the Transitional National Council , received a pledge Sunday from Kuwait for about $ 180 million . 
The announcement came during council chief Mustafa Abdel Jalil 's visit to Kuwait , Kuwaiti state-run television reported . 
CNN 's Kamal Ghattas , Barbara Starr , Kareem Khadder , Frederik Pleitgen , Reza Sayah and Saad Abedine contributed to this report . 
