UNITED NATIONS | Wed Mar 9 , 2011 1:40 pm EST UNITED NATIONS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The U.N. Security Council is split on whether to authorize a no-fly zone over Libya as Britain and France consider tougher options for Tripoli , including setting up an escrow account for oil revenues , envoys said on Wednesday . 
Britain and France have been preparing a draft U.N. resolution that would authorize a no-fly zone over Libya to prevent airstrikes against civilians in the North African country where rebels are seeking to oust long-time leader Muammar Gaddafi . 
The United States , however , has made clear to London and Paris that the administration of President Barack Obama is in the throes of a policy review and is not ready `` to go full steam ahead on a no-fly zone at the moment , '' a Western diplomat said on condition of anonymity . 
The British and French , however , are consulting with Washington and other allies so that they are ready to submit a draft resolution to the 15-nation Security Council immediately in the event of an `` egregious act '' against civilians by forces loyal to Gaddafi . 
`` If they were to bomb a school and kill a dozen children , the French and British are ready to move immediately with a draft on the no-fly zone issue , '' another diplomat said . 
But the idea of a no-fly zone lacks sufficient support at the moment among council members . 
Veto powers China and Russia dislike it , India and South Africa are skeptical , and the Americans are undecided , envoys said . 
`` If we put it on the table today , I do n't think there would be enough support for it , '' a diplomat said . 
But he added that no council members had categorically ruled it out . 
In order to pass , Security Council resolutions need nine votes in favor and no vetoes from the five permanent members , which also include the United States , Britain and France . 
`` Other options are being discussed , '' another diplomat said . 
`` One of those is an escrow account for Libyan oil revenues to prevent Gaddafi from getting all the nation 's oil money . '' 
British Foreign Secretary William Hague told parliament this week that a U.N.-administered escrow account similar to one set up for Iraq in the 1990s was an option being considered by Britain and its allies . 
The United Nations ' `` oil-for-food '' program in Iraq -- which allowed Iraq to sell oil in order to buy humanitarian goods -- was hit with allegations of widespread corruption , and U.N. officials have said privately that there is little appetite to get back in the business of administering oil revenues . 
Libya 's deputy U.N. ambassador Ibrahim Dabbashi , whose denunciation of Gaddafi last month sparked dozens of defections of Libyan envoys worldwide , said he did not support the idea . 
`` There is no need for this , '' Dabbashi , a key member of the Libyan opposition , told Reuters . 
`` We have a government in place ready to take power . 
We do n't support an escrow account . '' 
Dabbashi said the Security Council should speed up talks on a no-fly zone and authorize it `` as soon as possible . '' 
Other options include modifying the Libyan arms embargo to allow the arming of the rebels . 
The arms embargo and other punitive measures were part of a Security Council sanctions resolution on February 26 . 
At the moment , an exemption would only be possible with the unanimous advance approval of all 15 council members . 
But Russia and China , which consider Libya to be in the throes of a full-scale civil war , are loath to have the Security Council taking sides against Gaddafi , diplomats said . 
They added that other council members dislike the idea of the council explicitly authorizing the arming of Libyan rebels . 
The key option , they said , remains the idea of a Security Council-authorized no-fly zone , which would be enforced by NATO but would ideally include participation of Arab and African nations to avoid the appearance of it being an exclusively U.S.-European military operation . 
`` Having Arabs and Africans would be helpful , '' a diplomat said , adding that even symbolic participation would be good . 
The French and British are also waiting to see whether the Arab League , African Union and European Union will formally agree to support a no-fly zone , diplomats said . 
Such a zone could take any number of forms , the envoys said , ranging from a military operation intended to shoot down any Libyan aircraft violating a flight ban to a zone where reconnaissance planes and satellites would monitor violations and pass the information to the International Criminal Court . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
