BP sells Gulf of Mexico fields to pay for oil spill TOKYO\/LONDON | Mon Oct 25 , 2010 4:50 pm IST TOKYO\/LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP agreed to sell four fields in the deepwater of the Gulf of Mexico to Japan 's Marubeni Corp for $ 650 million , as the oil major seeks to raise cash to pay for its oil spill in the region . 
BP has committed to selling up to $ 30 billion in non-core assets to pay for the clean up of the U.S. 's worst ever oil spill , and to compensate victims . 
Last week , the company agreed to sell a package of oil and gas fields in Vietnam and Venezuela to its Russian joint venture TNK-BP for $ 1.8 billion . 
BP and Marubeni Corp said on Monday that Japan 's fifth-largest trading house would buy BP 's interests in the Magnolia , Merganser , Nansen and Zia fields , representing output of 15,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day of oil and gas . 
The interests are part of a package of largely non-producing Gulf of Mexico assets , mainly focused on what is known as the Paleogene play , where the major Kaskida discovery was made , that BP agreed to buy from Devon Energy in March . 
A BP spokesman said the interests in the mature fields being sold to Marubeni would have been sold even if BP had not had its oil spill . 
`` When BP acquired Devon 's Gulf of Mexico assets it was clear that these four fields did not fit well with the rest of our business in the region , '' Andy Hopwood , vice president for Strategy and Integration , said in a statement . 
BP shares traded up 0.8 percent at 432 pence by 0953 GMT , outperforming a 0.02 percent fall in the STOXX Europe 600 Oil and Gas index . 
Some U.S. lawmakers have called for BP to be barred from drilling in the Gulf of Mexico following its spill . 
Last week , BP Chief Executive Bob Dudley stepped up his battle to rebuild the troubled oil giant 's reputation , declaring safety would be the sole measure for staff bonuses in the last quarter of this year . 
With BP the largest producer and leaseholder in the Gulf , investors fear that a drill ban , or even a severe hardening of regulators ' approach to the company , could stunt its growth in the region . 
When Marubeni completes the purchase by early 2011 , its oil and gas upstream assets will total 50,000 bpd of crude oil equivalent , up 43 percent from 35,000 bpd currently , a Marubeni spokesman said . 
`` Marubeni and BP have had a business partnership in the Gulf of Mexico from before the accident , '' the spokesman said , referring to the April 20 well rupture . 
`` These wells have had a track record of operating without problems for about 10 years , '' the spokesman said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Osamu Tsukimori and Risa Maeda ; Editing by Joseph Radford , Sharon Lindores -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
