LONDON | Mon Oct 25 , 2010 1:24 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP 's new chief executive said its rivals and the media had helped cause a climate of fear during the summer when the oil giant 's blown-out Gulf of Mexico well caused the worst ever oil spill in the United States . 
The comments by Bob Dudley represented the latest volley in BP 's battle to rebuild its battered reputation by taking a harder line with those who have blamed the disaster on a safety culture at BP that , they said , put cost-saving before safety . 
However , the remarks also prompted angry reaction from one U.S. lawmaker who said the company continued to be in denial about its responsibilities and called on Dudley to testify before congress . 
In an address to the annual conference of British business lobby group , the CBI , Dudley said there had been : `` A great rush to judgment by a fair number of observers before the full facts could possibly be known , even from some in our industry . 
`` I watched graphic projections of oil swirling around the gulf , around Florida , across and around Bermuda to England -- these appeared authoritative and inevitable . 
The public fear was everywhere , '' he said . 
BP said in late July that Dudley would take over as chief executive on October 1 , succeeding Tony Hayward who had come under fire for his public gaffes , including playing down the extent of the disaster , which inflamed public opinion . 
Dudley 's comments on Monday echoed those he made early in the 87-day crisis during a television interview , when he said scientists who argued the well was gushing up to 70,000 barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- were `` scaremongering . '' 
At the time , Dudley said the `` best estimate '' of the flow rate was 5,000 bpd . 
A government panel later put the flow rate at 62,000 bpd . 
BP 's rivals including Chevron , Exxon Mobil , and Royal Dutch Shell , have said they would not have drilled the blown-out well the way BP did . 
The companies have also rankled at BP 's argument that the disaster highlighted failures in the industry , rather than flaws specific to BP . 
However , BP 's own internal report into the disaster placed the blame largely on the contractors BP hired to drill and cement the well . 
Congressman Ed Markey slammed Dudley 's comments . 
`` BP is continuing to point the finger at everyone but themselves . 
Since this disaster began , BP has stood for `` Blame Passed ' , '' he said in an emailed statement . 
Markey said Dudley had refused a request to address a congressional hearing to discuss the spill and asked him to reconsider . 
Dudley also thanked the British government for its `` stalwart support '' in the face of harsh attacks from U.S. lawmakers during the crisis . 
`` At the height of the crisis it made a big difference knowing we had such good friends at home , '' the U.S.-born Dudley said . 
Separately on Monday , BP said it was to sell fields in the Gulf to Japanese group Marubeni Corp for $ 650 million as it seeks to raise up to $ 30 billion from asset sales to pay for the oil spill . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Bergin ; Editing by Dan Lalor and David Cowell -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
First BP says that on 5K barrels\/day are pouring out , when all along it was 25K . 
Then BP sprays chemicals throughout the Gulf and wo n't release the names of the chemicals . 
The BP blames the whole thing on the drillers , in the meantime ... . . 
BP is spending $ millions on television the they `` will do the right thing '' while funding climate change deniers in the Tea Party and Republican party . 
So go blame the media . 
That 's exactly what Cheney and Bush did for 8 years . 
You are in good company . 
I was unaware that the Tea Party movement was funded by BP . 
I thought they had considerable assistance from the Koch brothers -- so their support is rooted in the oil industry and its climate change deniers . 
However it is possible that BP is funding American candidates -- American politics thrives on all world currencies . 
Ace , let 's see . 
It was a democratically controlled congress and a democratic President that was in charge of the governments oversight of BP and the oil spill . 
All of the misinformation and the failed timely response to and management of the crisis happened under democratic leadership . 
The way the Obama administration managed the crisis made the democrats look like fools . 
It was embarrassing to say the least . 
And your response is to blame it on the Tea party . 
This is the prime reason why democrats are going to be thrown out of office . 
The only thing you guys are good at is pointing the finger , you never take responsibility . 
I am an independent and neither you democrats nor the republicans have me fooled one little bit . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
