Explore all of our oil spill graphics to track the spill , see its effects , and learn its possible solutions . 
In the days after the immensity of the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico became clear , some Nature Conservancy supporters took to the organization 's Web site to vent their anger . 
`` The first thing I did was sell my shares in BP , not wanting anything to do with a company that is so careless , '' wrote one . 
Another added : `` I would like to force all the BP executives , the secretaries and the shareholders out to the shore to mop up oil and wash the birds . '' 
Reagan De Leon of Hawaii called for a boycott of `` everything BP has their hands in . '' 
What De Leon did n't know was that the Nature Conservancy lists BP as one of its business partners . 
The Conservancy also has given BP a seat on its International Leadership Council and has accepted nearly $ 10 million in cash and land contributions from BP and affiliated corporations over the years . 
`` Oh , wow , '' De Leon said when told of the depth of the relationship between the nonprofit group she loves and the company she hates . 
`` That 's kind of disturbing . '' 
The Conservancy , already scrambling to shield oyster beds from the spill , now faces a different problem : a potential backlash as its supporters learn that the giant oil company and the world 's largest environmental organization long ago forged a relationship that has lent BP an Earth-friendly image and helped the Conservancy pursue causes it holds dear . 
The crude emanating from BP 's well threatens to befoul a number of alliances between energy conglomerates and environmental nonprofits . 
At least one group , Conservation International , acknowledges that it is reassessing its ties to the oil company , with an eye toward protecting its reputation . 
`` This is going to be a real test for charities such as the Nature Conservancy , '' said Dean Zerbe , a lawyer who investigated the Conservancy 's relations with its donors when he worked for the Senate Finance Committee . 
`` This not only stains BP , but , if they do n't respond properly , it also stains those who have been benefiting from their money and their support . '' 
Some purists believe environmental groups should keep a healthy distance from certain kinds of corporations , particularly those whose core mission poses risks to the environment . 
They argue that the BP spill shows the downside to what they view as deals with the devil . 
On the other side are self-described pragmatists who , like the Conservancy , see partnering with global corporations as the best way to create large-scale change . 
`` Anyone serious about doing conservation in this region must engage these companies , so they are not just part of the problem but so they can be part of the effort to restore this incredible ecosystem , '' Conservancy chief executive Mark Tercek wrote on his group 's Web site after criticism from a Conservancy supporter . 
The Arlington County-based Conservancy has made no secret of its relationship with BP , just one of many it has forged with multinational corporations . 
The Conservancy 's Web site lists BP as a member of its International Leadership Council . 
BP has been a major contributor to a Conservancy project aimed at protecting Bolivian forests . 
In 2006 , BP gave the organization 655 acres in York County , Va. , where a state wildlife management area is planned . 
In Colorado and Wyoming , the Conservancy has worked with BP to limit environmental damage from natural gas drilling . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
