Women hold flags during an anti-government rally in Sanaa May 30,2011 . 
SANAA | Tue May 31 , 2011 4:45 pm EDT SANAA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Street fighting raged in Yemen 's capital on Tuesday ending a tenuous ceasefire between tribal groups and forces loyal to President Ali Abdullah Saleh and edging the impoverished Arab state closer to civil war . 
Global powers have been pressing Saleh to sign a Gulf-mediated deal to hand over power to stem spreading chaos in Yemen , a haven for al Qaeda militants and neighbor to the world 's biggest oil exporter , Saudi Arabia . 
The turmoil was a factor in keeping up oil prices on Tuesday , traders said . 
`` The ceasefire agreement has ended , '' a government official said , adding that tribesmen had seized a state building . 
On Tuesday , there were three main flashpoints in the troubled country -- fighting in the capital , government troops gunning down protesters in Taiz in the south and a battle with al Qaeda and Islamic militants in the coastal city of Zinjibar . 
U.N. human rights chief Navi Pillay said 50 people may have been killed by government forces since Sunday in Taiz . 
Explosions rocked a northern district of Sanaa on Tuesday that houses the headquarters of an army division headed by Ali Mohsen , an influential general who has joined the opposition . 
`` I think it is the first time missiles are being used in the street battles , '' a resident said , referring to the loud blasts . 
Al Arabiya reported that government forces were bombarding Mohsen 's unit , but the Defense Ministry denied it . 
State television said tribesmen were again attacking government buildings , some of which they had evacuated under the truce . 
The report could not be independently verified . 
A government spokesman earlier suggested breakaway army units had attacked the ruling party 's headquarters in Sanaa . 
`` What was new in today 's clashes is the use of armored vehicles ... which the Ahmar -LRB- tribesmen -RRB- do n't have , '' Abdu al-Janadi , a deputy information minister , told Reuters . 
Sporadic fighting with tribesmen continued in the nearby Hasaba district , where residents took refuge in basements . 
Battles in the capital overnight ended a truce between Saleh 's forces and tribesmen brokered at the weekend after more than 115 people were killed last week . 
Saleh has defied calls from global leaders , elements in his own military and tens of thousands of protesters to end his 33-year-rule , which has brought Yemen close to financial ruin . 
He has also exasperated his rich Gulf Arab neighbors by three times agreeing to step down , only to pull out of a power transition plan at the last minute and cling on to power . 
The opposition coalition issued a statement calling on Gulf states to withdraw their peace plan and `` stand with the Yemeni people and its peaceful revolution . '' 
The breakaway military accused Saleh of starting a civil war and vowed that he and his entourage would be brought to justice . 
Mohammed al-Surmi , a doctor at a Sanaa hospital , said two dead and 17 wounded were brought in . 
The Defense Ministry website said one officer and one civilian were killed , and 13 soldiers were wounded in the fighting with tribesmen . 
Full casualty figures were not immediately available due to the intensity of the fighting . 
`` Three different dynamics are playing out at the same time , '' said Ginny Hill , who runs the Yemen Forum at the influential Chatham House think-tank in London . 
The newest element is the street revolution while the power struggle among the elites and fragmentation of the Arabian Peninsula country have been playing out for some time , she said . 
`` Saleh 's departure could be seen as the beginning of a contested and potentially lengthy process , '' she said . 
Saleh 's forces fired on hundreds of protesters in Taiz , about 200 km -LRB- 120 miles -RRB- south of the capital , who were trying to gather at the focal point of rallies dubbed `` Freedom Square , '' witnesses and a Reuters cameraman in the city said . 
At least three people were killed and scores wounded in the latest fighting there , medical sources said . 
U.N. 's Pillay denounced the killings in Taiz where troops used bulldozers and bullets to crack down on protesters . 
`` Such reprehensible acts of violence and indiscriminate attacks on unarmed civilians by armed security officers must stop immediately , '' Pillay said in an Internet posting . 
French Foreign Ministry spokesman Bernard Valero condemned the attacks in Taiz . 
He also said there was no news on three French aid workers who disappeared in southern Yemen on Saturday . 
Paris believes they were kidnapped . 
Further south , government troops and locals have been trying to oust al Qaeda and Islamist militants from Zinjibar after they seized the town of 20,000 at the weekend . 
Residents said bodies were strewn on the streets , the national bank building was burned and explosions rocked the city . 
Most of the inhabitants have fled . 
`` Explosions lit the sky , '' one resident said . 
The United States and Saudi Arabia , both targets of attacks by Yemen-based al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula , are worried that a spreading state of anarchy is emboldening the group . 
Opposition leaders have accused Saleh of deliberately allowing Zinjibar , located near a sea lane where about 3 million barrels of oil pass daily , to fall to al Qaeda to try to show how chaotic Yemen would be without him . 
At least 320 people have been killed since protests started about four months ago , inspired by popular uprisings that ended the reign of the long-standing rulers of Tunisia and Egypt . 
-LRB- Reporting by Mohammed Mukhashaf in Aden , Khaled al-Mahdi in Taiz , John Irish in Paris , Mahmoud Habboush , Nour Merza , and Sara Anabtawi in Dubai ; writing by Jon Herskovitz and Firouz Sedarat in Dubai ; editing by Mark Heinrich and Lin Noueihed -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
