BP set to announce record loss after Gulf oil spill Mr Hayward has been the public face of BP 's response to the spill BP is set to announce a record loss , having set aside an estimated # 16bn - # 19bn -LRB- $ 25bn - $ 30bn -RRB- to cover the costs of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
The loss is expected to be one of the biggest in British corporate history . 
The BBC has learned BP chief executive Tony Hayward will get an immediate annual pension worth about # 600,000 -LRB- $ 930,000 -RRB- when he leaves in October . 
Mr Hayward is to stand down after sustained criticism of his handling of the oil leak . 
BP has lost 40 % of its market capitalization since the explosion on the drilling rig off Louisiana on 20 April , which killed 11 workers and triggered the worst oil spill in the US . 
The company 's second-quarter results are expected to reveal a provision for the costs of the clean-up , compensation claims and fines to be paid . 
Mr Hayward has been heavily criticised by residents of the Gulf coast and US politicians for his handling of the clean-up and for a series of gaffes , including saying that he `` just wanted his life back '' and that the Gulf of Mexico was a `` big ocean '' following the leak . 
He was also taken to task for attending a sailing event off the Isle of Wight in June . 
And he was publicly rebuked by members of the House Energy and Commerce Committee last month for `` stonewalling '' questions at a congressional hearing . 
BBC business editor Robert Peston said that Mr Hayward 's pension entitlement was `` bound to be hugely controversial '' . 
Our business editor said that because he was leaving by mutual agreement rather than being sacked , the BP board felt it had `` to honor the terms of its contract with him '' . 
Mr Hayward will receive a year 's salary plus benefits worth more than # 1m . 
His pension pot is valued at about # 11m and he will keep his rights to shares under a long-term performance scheme which could - depending on BP 's stock market recovery - eventually be worth several million pounds . 
The man expected to replace Mr Hayward , American colleague and BP managing director Bob Dudley , took over the day-to-day operations in the Gulf last month . 
Many say that , from a public relations point of view , Mr Dudley has the advantage of being American . 
He grew up in Mississippi and , according to BP , has a `` deep appreciation and affinity for the Gulf Coast '' . 
He was the former chief of the BP-TNK joint venture , but was forced to leave Russia in 2008 amid a dispute with shareholders . 
Mr Hayward began his career with BP 28 years ago as a rig geologist in the North Sea before working his way up to board level . 
He was a popular choice for the top job when Lord Browne stepped aside in 2007 . 
You can comment about this story on Have Your Say The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
