Vladimir Putin -LRB- L -RRB- spoke after a meeting with France 's President Francois Hollande Russia 's President Vladimir Putin has resisted diplomatic pressure from Western nations to support tougher action against Syria 's government . 
Mr Putin , an ally of Syria , called for more time to be given to the peace plan of envoy Kofi Annan . 
The US and UK have called on Moscow to strengthen its condemnation of the Syrian regime since last week 's massacre in Houla , where 108 died . 
Earlier , Moscow opposed a UN Human Rights Council resolution on Syria . 
In an emergency session on Friday , the council condemned Syria over the Houla massacre and called for an investigation . 
But Russia voted against the US-backed resolution , arguing that it was `` unbalanced '' . 
Meanwhile , a US government website published satellite images apparently showing a mass grave in the Houla area . 
Correspondents say Mr Putin 's latest remarks , made after a meeting with French President Francois Hollande , highlight the divisions between Moscow and Paris towards the conflict in Syria . 
Speaking at a news conference , Mr Hollande called for further pressure and sanctions , and said the only solution was for President Bashar al-Assad to resign . 
Residents of Taldou village in the Houla region say that after an anti-government protest on 25 May , the army began an 18-hour bombardment Some accounts say rebel fighters attacked the military position from where shellfire was coming Unconfirmed reports say pro-government shabiha militia entered Taldou , killing people at home , shooting them in the head or cutting their throats UN observers say at least 108 people died , including 49 children and 34 women . 
No more than 20 appeared to have been killed by shellfire A government investigation blames armed groups seeking to trigger foreign military intervention He said Mr Assad 's regime had conducted itself in an `` unacceptable , intolerable way '' and had committed acts that disqualified it from power . 
`` There is no possible exit from this situation except with the departure of Bashar Assad , '' he said . 
Mr Putin , however , questioned calls for the Syrian president to quit . 
`` Why are we thinking that if we push the current leadership from power , then tomorrow general wellbeing will begin there , '' Mr Putin said . 
`` What is happening in Libya ? 
What is happening in Iraq ? 
Has it become safer there ? 
We propose to act in an accurate , balanced manner at least in Syria . '' 
He said the most important thing was to prevent the worst-case scenario of civil war . 
There have been calls for more action to be taken in Syria to stop the violence , which has continued despite Mr Annan 's six-point peace plan . 
Speaking in Oslo on Friday , US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton hit out at Russia saying she did not believe it was acting impartially . 
`` We know there has been a very consistent arms trade , even during the past year , coming from Russia to Syria . 
We also believe the continuous supply of arms from Russia has strengthened the Assad regime , '' she told a news conference . 
On Thursday , Western officials confirmed a report that a Russian cargo ship had delivered heavy weapons to the Syrian port of Tartus last weekend . 
Mr Putin has insisted that Russia was not supplying Syria with arms `` that could be used in a civilian conflict '' . 
Earlier , the UN Human Rights Council said it wanted investigators to identify the perpetrators of the killings in Houla . 
Navi Pillay 's representative : `` Those who order , help or fail to stop attacks on civilians are individually criminally liable for their actions '' In the vote , 41 members voted in favor of the US-backed resolution condemning Syria , while Russia , China and Cuba voted against it . 
Two other countries abstained and one was absent . 
Residents of the village of Taldou , in Houla , said militiamen had been sent in early last Saturday after the Syrian army unleashed a barrage of heavy weapons late on Friday in response to a local anti-government protest . 
The UN high commissioner for human rights , Navi Pillay , said the killings in Houla may amount to crimes against humanity . 
She said those who ordered attacks were `` individually criminally liable '' , and urged the UN Security Council to refer Syria to the International Criminal Court -LRB- ICC -RRB- , a move opposed by Russia and China . 
As Syria is not a state party to the ICC the court has no jurisdiction to indict its citizens without a Security Council referral . 
Meanwhile , opposition activists said there had been another mass killing of civilians by pro-government militiamen . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites 2nd June 2012 - 15:21 It 's hard to know who to believe regarding Syria . 
It would n't be the first time our -LRB- Western -RRB- governments and media have misrepresented the facts . 
For all its alleged faults , the Assad regime is tolerant towards religious minorities , including Christians . 
It has also managed to keep the peace with Israel , despite the occasional tiff . 
Perhaps we should heed the idiom , `` better the devil you know ... '' 2nd June 2012 - 14:59 I 'm sure that since Assad claims innocence then he would welcome an investigative team of 10 police from each of the UN members . 
1930 people who could freely investigate who has committed these vile crimes . 
Unless , of course , he and his allies are guilty ? 
2nd June 2012 - 14:23 Arguably the UN would be dysfunctional without the permanent member vetoes . 
It is certainly not fit for purpose with this system . 
It was impotent to prevent war crimes in Iraq , Libya , Lebanon , Palestine , etc. . 
It is a waste of space and should be abandoned . 
2nd June 2012 - 11:02 In my opinion the Syrians should sort this out themselves . 
It is their affair and no one else 's . 
Intervening in it will just cause more problems . 
All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
