Page last updated at 07:50 GMT , Friday , 1 June 2012 08:50 UK At least 109 people killed in a massacre in Houla A UN official now says Syria is officially in full-scale civil war . 
The violence started in the country in January 2011 . 
It 's now believed the government there has lost control of major cities to rebel fighters . 
UN observers have now started filming some of the violence for themselves . 
There are claims from the US that Russia is sending helicopter gunships to the aid of the Syrian regime . 
Below we explain the background to this conflict and why foreign military intervention is being avoided . 
A ceasefire to end the violence in Syria started on 12 April . 
Syria says it will keep to the ceasefire but reserved the right to respond to attacks . 
The main armed rebel group also said it would respond to any government attacks . 
There 's been no fighting so far but America says it doubts the Syrian government will stick to its promise . 
The ceasefire was arranged by former UN chief Kofi Annan . 
Anti-government activists in Syria claim at least 30 people were killed the day before the ceasefire started . 
The UN says more than 9,000 people have been killed in the uprising against President Assad 's rule , which began more than a year ago . 
The Syrian government says 2,000 security personnel have been killed and blames the violence on `` armed gangs '' and `` terrorists '' . 
What do the protesters want ? 
The ceasefire is accepted by the Syrian government and armed opposition . 
The ceasefire came into force on the morning of Thursday 12 April . 
There are worries the ceasefire wo n't last . 
Both sides said ` they will respond if attacked ' . 
Russia and China , who are Syria 's closest allies , welcomed the ceasefire . 
British Foreign Secretary William Hague said UN must send monitors to make sure ceasefire holds . 
The demonstrations began shortly after anti-government uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt in mid-March last year . 
A group of teenagers spray-painted a revolutionary slogan on a wall in the southern city of Deraa . 
They were arrested and soon the unrest spread to other areas . 
Protesters started by calling for democracy and freedom in what is one of the most repressive countries in the Arab world . 
For example , there are emergency laws which allow people to be arrested without warrants and imprisoned without trials . 
Syria 's president has promised some changes but protesters say the killing is continuing so they want him to step down . 
Mr Assad has described protesters as terrorists who need to be removed . 
Why is there no foreign military action as in Libya ? 
For decades Syria has been among the most stable countries in the Middle East . 
It is a major player in the region because of where it 's positioned , unlike Libya which is more isolated . 
A military attack on Syria would cause knock-on effects in neighbouring countries . 
President Assad has promised changes but protesters do n't believe him It may mobilise militant groups like Hezbollah in Lebanon , Hamas in the Gaza Strip and other more radical Palestinian groups opposed to peace with Israel . 
Syria is also strongly supported by Iran - a country considered hostile by the US , Israel and Saudi Arabia - which could potentially draw those powers into a dangerous Middle Eastern conflict . 
President Bashar al-Assad has warned any foreign military action will turn Syria `` into another Afghanistan '' . 
Is there any support for the president inside Syria ? 
Religion : Sunni Muslim 74 % , 16 % other Muslim -LRB- includes Alawite , Druze -RRB- , Christian , 10 % Syria is a mixed country of 21 million people with a large Sunni Muslim majority and minorities of Christians , Alawites and Jewish people . 
Mr Assad belongs to the Alawaite sect . 
He 's supported by many people from the upper classes and minority groups . 
The protests against him have mainly been in Sunni populated areas . 
