Istanbul summit tries to increase pressure on Syria The UK Foreign Secretary spoke of plans for `` a managed transition , a political transition '' in Syria However key players remained absent , including Russia , China and Iran . 
Damascus dubbed the summit the `` enemies of Syria '' and has declared its victory over rebel fighters . 
Syria has in principle agreed to the six-point peace plan proposed by UN-Arab League envoy Kofi Annan . 
However , many of those at the summit appeared sceptical it would implement it . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said : `` Nearly a week has gone by , and we have to conclude that the regime is adding to its long list of broken promises . '' 
Opening the summit , Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said : `` The Syrian regime should not be allowed at any cost to manipulate this plan to gain time . '' 
Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut The Istanbul meeting faces a mass of dilemmas , contradictions and complexities , with no clear way forward . 
Western leaders talk of the need to step up pressure on the regime and support the opposition . 
But they have no intention of intervening militarily in any way , or even backing the rebels with weaponry . 
The opposition is divided , and many of its fighters on the ground have been crushed by a ruthless crackdown . 
It is under pressure to accept the peace plan of Kofi Annan . 
The rebels know that in any talks , the balance of power will be heavily against them . 
So there 's little reason to hope for a swift end to the violence other than on the regime 's terms . 
It clearly believes it has little to fear from the Istanbul gathering . 
But the BBC 's Jim Muir , in Beirut , says the Syrian government feels confident that it has little to fear from the Istanbul gathering - state television carried parts of the opening speeches from the conference live , dubbing it the `` enemies of Syria '' meeting . 
Mrs Clinton called for a unified response on renewed action against Damascus should it fail to implement the Annan plan , saying `` we can not sit back and wait any longer '' . 
However , there remain a number of issues on which there appears little unity . 
A call by Burhan Ghalioun , leader of the main opposition Syrian National Council -LRB- SNC -RRB- , for `` security corridors '' inside Syria to allow the delivery of aid to civilians has so far not been heeded . 
There is also serious division over arming the rebels . 
Qatar and Saudi Arabia have argued strongly for such support , but most of those at the summit remain opposed . 
They fear a flood of weapons could fuel a sectarian civil war . 
Mr Ghalioun has also pressed for the SNC to be recognized as `` the sole legitimate representative of the Syrian people '' . 
But French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said the conference had agreed to recognize it as the `` main point of contact '' . 
Mr Juppe added that a deadline must be set for Syria to implement the Annan plan . 
The head of the Arab League , Nabil al-Arabi , told the summit it should `` simultaneously call on the Security Council to take a binding decision ... to stop the violence in Syria '' . 
Mrs Clinton and Mr Erdogan are both sceptical about Syria 's intentions on the Annan plan However , Russia and China have balked at Security Council resolutions and were pointedly absent in Istanbul . 
Iraq is attending , although it had earlier suggested it might not . 
However , on Sunday Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki said he opposed arming the opposition and believed the Syrian government would survive . 
He said : `` It has been one year and the regime did not fall , and it will not fall , and why should it fall ? '' 
The Syrian government says it is close to ending the uprising . 
Syrian foreign ministry spokesman Jihad al-Makdissi told Syrian TV `` the battle to topple the state is over '' . 
Violence continued on Sunday , with more than 10 people reported killed , a day after more than 60 people died across the country . 
Our correspondent says that in the latest violence , activists reported attacks by security forces in areas near the Iraqi border to the east , and the Jordanian frontier to the south . 
The UN believes at least 9,000 people have died in the year-long revolt against Mr Assad 's rule . 
The Syrian government has been trying to suppress an uprising inspired by events in Tunisia , Egypt and Libya . 
The UN says thousands have been killed in the crackdown , and that many more have been detained and displaced . 
The Syrian government says hundreds of security forces personnel have also died combating `` armed terrorist gangs '' . 
The family of President Bashar al-Assad has been in power since his father , Hafez , took over in a coup in 1970 . 
The country underwent some liberalisation after Bashar became president in 2000 , but the pace of change soon slowed , if not reversed . 
Critics are imprisoned , domestic media are tightly controlled , and economic policies often benefit the elite . 
The country 's human rights record is among the worst in the world . 
Syria is a country of 21 million people with a Sunni Muslim majority -LRB- 74 % -RRB- and significant minorities of Alawites - the Shia heterodox sect to which Mr Assad belongs - and Christians . 
Mr Assad promotes a secular identity for the country , but he has concentrated power in the hands of family and other Alawites . 
Protests have generally been biggest in Sunni-dominated areas . 
Under the sanctions imposed by the Arab League , US and EU , Syria 's two most vital sectors , tourism and oil , have ground to a halt in recent months . 
The IMF says Syria 's economy contracted by 2 % in 2011 , while the value of the Syrian pound has crashed . 
Unemployment is high , electricity cuts trouble Damascus , and critical products like heating oil and staples like milk powder are becoming scarce . 
Pro-democracy protests erupted in March 2011 after the arrest and torture of a group of teenagers who had painted revolutionary slogans on walls at their school in the southern city of Deraa . 
Security forces opened fire during a march against the arrests , killing four . 
The next day , the authorities shot at mourners at the victims ' funerals , killing another person . 
People began demanding the overthrow of Mr Assad . 
The government has tried to deal with the situation with a combination of minor concessions and force . 
President Assad ended the 48-year-long state of emergency and introduced a new constitution offering multi-party elections . 
But at the same time , the authorities have continued to use violence against unarmed protesters , and some cities , like Homs , have suffered weeks of intense bombardment . 
The opposition is deeply divided . 
Several groups formed a coalition , the Syrian National Council -LRB- SNC -RRB- , but it is dominated by the Sunni community and exiled dissidents . 
The SNC disagrees with the National Co-ordination Committee -LRB- NCC -RRB- on the questions of talks with the government and foreign intervention , and has found it difficult to work with the Free Syrian Army - army defectors seeking to topple Mr Assad by force . 
International pressure on the Syrian government has been intensifying . 
It has been suspended from the Arab League , while the EU and the US have imposed sanctions . 
However , there has been no agreement on a UN Security Council resolution calling for an end to violence . 
Although military intervention has been ruled out by Western nations , there are increasing calls to arm the opposition . 
Correspondents say a peaceful solution seems unlikely . 
Syria 's leadership seems intent on crushing resistance and most of the opposition will only accept an end to the regime . 
Some believe the expected collapse of Syria 's currency and an inability to pay salaries may be the leadership 's downfall . 
There are fears , though , that the resulting chaos would be long-lasting and create a wider conflict . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
