Singer Jimmy Buffett makes a surprise appearance at the annual Parrot Heads in Paradise convention in Key West , Fla. , Friday Nov. 1 , 2002 . 
More than 3,000 of the singer 's fans have gathered in Key West through Sunday , Nov. 3 . 
There are now almost 160 Parrot Head chapters in the U.S. , Australia and Canada with more than 18,000 total members . 
-LRB- AP Photo\/Florida Keys News Bureau , Roberto Rodriguez -RRB- AP2002 Singer Jimmy Buffett is just another mad Gulf Coast native when it comes to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill , but with an exception : He 's got millions of fans and a way to help lift spirits over the seemingly endless crisis . 
Buffett and his Coral Reefer Band will play Sunday on the beach in Gulf Shores , Ala. , which has been sporadically hit by oil for weeks . 
The show already has been postponed once because of Hurricane Alex , and Buffet is hoping bad weather lurking in the Gulf does n't create problems this weekend . 
Known for laid-back tunes like `` Margaritaville '' and `` Cheeseburger in Paradise , '' Buffett told The Associated Press in an interview Tuesday that it 's perfectly normal for people to be mad when they see oil washing up on beaches and marshes . 
`` If you 're born and raised on the Gulf Coast and it 's kind of in you , and you do n't feel anger and rage initially over what 's going on down there , I think you 're a hypocrite , '' he said in a telephone interview from New York . 
`` That 's the way I felt . 
Now , what you do with that is a big question . '' 
Buffett said a beachfront concert seemed like the right thing to do after talking to people on the coast . 
`` People were going , ` What are you going to do about things ? ' 
I mean , hell , I ca n't stick my finger in that hole . 
Everybody wishes they could , '' said Buffett . 
`` But there 's a huge amount of frustration and probably it will boil over in summertime anger , and I know what I 've done for years is entertain . 
What I 'm best at is two hours of escapism for people that have to go back and either live jobs that they do n't like or whatever , '' he said . 
`` It 's that Mardi Gras mentality . '' 
Born in Mississippi and raised in Alabama , Buffett has lived all over the Gulf Coast . 
He said memories of the region are laced through his music . 
`` I have pretty much surrounded myself with Gulf Coast influences for a long time , and ... if you listen to those songs , I think it 's pretty much in there , '' said Buffett , 63 . 
Buffett , a supporter of President Barack Obama , said the roots of the spill lie with the administration of former President George Bush , which was often criticized for being too cozy with the petroleum industry . 
`` To me it was more about eight years of bad policy before -LRB- Obama -RRB- got there that let this happen . 
It was Dracula running the blood bank in terms of oil and leases , '' he said . 
`` I think that has more to do with it than how the president reacted to it . '' 
The beach concert on Sunday will also feature Jesse Winchester and Allen Toussaint , who also were in the original lineup . 
Country singers Kenny Chesney and Zac Brown had to drop out because of prior commitments . 
Buffett said he is still making phone calls trying to add additional acts for Sunday , but he 's not sure of the final roster . 
