July 5 : A sample jar of tar balls found on Crystal Beach and Galveston 's East Beach during the holiday weekend are displayed during a news conference . 
Michael Paulsen , Houston Chronicle via AP The latest hopes to clean oil near the spewing well in the Gulf of Mexico rests on this massive new skimmer dubbed ' A Whale . ' 
Residents along the Texas coast are holding out hope that the tar balls washing up on their shores are not a sign of what 's to come . 
A bucket 's worth of tar balls was discovered over the weekend along the shores of Gavelston , Texas -- more than two months after oil gushing from a blown-out well on the ocean floor first reached Louisiana . 
Authorities , however , said Tuesday that they do not know whether the tar balls found in Texas were dropped from a contaminated ship passing through the waters . 
Galveston Mayor Joe Jaworski said he believed the tar balls were a fluke , rather than a sign of what 's to come . 
`` This is good news , '' he said . 
`` The water looks good . 
We 're cautiously optimistic this is an anomaly . '' 
The crude from the Deepwater Horizon oil spill is still moving , but the fleet of skimmers tapped to clean the worst-hit areas of the Gulf of Mexico is not . 
A string of small storms has made the water too choppy for the boats to operate for more than a week off Florida , Alabama and Mississippi . 
The number of tar balls discovered in Texas is tiny compared with what has coated beaches so far in other Gulf states . 
Still , it still provoked the quick dispatch of cleaning crews and a vow that BP will pay for the trouble . 
`` Any Texas shores impacted by the Deepwater spill will be cleaned up quickly and BP will be picking up the tab , '' Texas Land Commissioner Jerry Patterson said in a news release . 
The oil 's arrival in Texas was predicted Friday by an analysis from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , which gave a 40 percent chance of crude reaching the area . 
`` It was just a matter of time that some of the oil would find its way to Texas , '' said Hans Graber , a marine physicist at the University of Miami and co-director of the Center for Southeastern Tropical Advanced Remote Sensing . 
About 5 gallons of tar balls were found Saturday on the Bolivar Peninsula , northeast of Galveston , said Capt. Marcus Woodring , the Coast Guard commander for the Houston\/Galveston sector . 
Two gallons were found Sunday on the peninsula and Galveston Island , though tests have not yet confirmed the oil 's origin . 
Woodring said the consistency of the tar balls indicates they could have been spread to Texas water by ships that have worked out in the spill . 
But there 's no way to confirm how they got there . 
Hurricane Alex , which blew through the Gulf last week and made landfall along the border between Texas and Mexico , may have played a small role in bringing the oil ashore in Texas by increasing the westerly current near land , Graber said . 
But it was more likely due to normal coastal currents and local weather patterns . 
NOAA scientists are looking at local weather , Hurricane Alex and Gulf vessels as possible sources for the tar balls , agency spokeswoman Monica Allen said Monday . 
The distance between the western reach of the tar balls in Texas and the most eastern reports of oil in Florida is about 550 miles . 
Oil was first spotted on land near the mouth of the Mississippi River on April 29 . 
The spill is reaching deeper into Louisiana . 
Strings of oil were seen Monday in the Rigolets , one of two waterways that connect the Gulf with Lake Pontchartrain , the large lake north of New Orleans . 
`` So far it 's scattered stuff showing up , mostly tar balls , '' said Louisiana Office of Fisheries Assistant Secretary Randy Pausina . 
`` It will pull out with the tide , and then show back up . '' 
New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu said assets would be deployed to protect the Lake Pontchartrain basin . 
Pausina said he expected the oil to clear the passes and move directly into the lake , taking a backdoor route to New Orleans . 
The news of the spill 's reach comes at a time that most of the offshore skimming operations in the Gulf have been halted by choppy seas and high winds . 
A tropical system that had been lingering off Louisiana flared up Monday afternoon , bringing heavy rain and winds . 
Last week , the faraway Hurricane Alex idled the skimming fleet off Alabama , Florida and Mississippi with choppy seas and stiff winds . 
Now they 're idled by the smaller storms that could last well into this week . 
Officials have plans for the worst-case scenario : a hurricane barreling up the Gulf toward the spill site . 
But the less-dramatic weather conditions have been met with a more makeshift response . 
Skimming across the Gulf has scooped up about 23.5 million gallons of oil-fouled water so far , but officials say it 's impossible to know how much crude could have been sucked up in good weather because of the fluctuating number of boats and other variables . 
Jerry Biggs , a commercial fisherman in Pass Christian , Miss. , who has had to shut down because of the spill , is now hiring out his 13 boats and 40-man crew to BP for cleanup . 
He said skimming is severely hampered by the weather . 
`` This is n't going away . 
This is n't a sneeze or a hiccup . 
This is diarrhea for a long time , '' he said . 
`` My lifestyle is screwed . 
The thing that I love the most I 'm not going to be able to do anymore . '' 
The British company has now seen its costs from the spill reach $ 3.12 billion , a figure that does n't include a $ 20 billion fund for damages the company created last month . 
The storms have not affected drilling work on a relief well that BP says is the best chance for finally plugging the leak . 
The company expects drilling to be finished by mid-August . 
Fox News ' Phil Keating and the Associated Press contributed to this report Sign up for free e-mail news alerts from FoxNews.com and FoxBusiness.com . 
