Ministers face choice between stockpiling drugs to fight seasonal sickness and tackling new strain Barry Greatorex , of Chipping Sodbury , with wife Fran and son Jamie , has swine u . 
Photograph : Ben Birchall\/PA Ministers are facing a dilemma over their battle to combat swine flu . 
They will have to decide if Britain should cut back production of seasonal flu vaccines in order to allow pharmaceutical companies to concentrate on making a vaccine against the new virus . 
Such a move could have severe consequences . 
For the past eight years , seasonal vaccines have helped limit flu deaths , mostly among the elderly , to around 10,000 a year . 
But a switch to a new vaccine would force companies to stop making the seasonal vaccine . 
This could leave the country underprepared for outbreaks of standard flu later in the year and deaths could rise significantly . 
However , the alternative - a decision not to make a vaccine against swine flu - would put Britain at risk of a second wave of the new virus returning in a lethal form this winter . 
In the past , second waves of flu infections have caused widespread deaths after a first , relatively harmless wave has passed through the country . 
To date , only 15 non-lethal infections have been reported in Britain . 
`` Deciding to give priority for a new vaccine will be a judgment call , based on evidence we are now gathering about the swine flu virus 's behavior , '' said Professor David Salisbury , head of immunisation at the Department of Health . 
`` Pharmaceutical companies have only got a limited manufacturing capacity . 
So we will have to decide soon which way to go . 
At the moment , it looks likely that we will go ahead with a new vaccine . 
That means that this winter we will have some seasonal flu vaccine supplies and would also be ready should a second wave of swine flu appear . '' 
British scientists are studying virus samples sent to them by the US Centres for Disease Control on Thursday in the hope of understanding how it might behave in future . 
Early tests have suggested that the H1N1 virus passes fairly easily from person to person but has a low fatality rate . 
In particular , it lacks proteins - possessed by some strains - that would allow it to infect cells outside the body 's respiratory system , making it more dangerous . 
At the National Institute for Biological Standards Control -LRB- NIBSC -RRB- , in north London , researchers are also developing a candidate virus to form a vaccine against swine flu . 
`` We have injected viruses into hen 's eggs , where they will grow for two or three days before being extracted , '' said Dr James Robertson , a virologist . 
Then the virus will be broken open and its eight genes extracted and mixed with harmless laboratory flu strains to create a range of hybrid viruses . 
Researchers will then select one that possesses the right features for a future vaccine : a harmless virus that stimulates immune responses when injected into humans . 
Constructing this candidate virus vaccine will take around four weeks . 
Then scientists will pass it to pharmaceutical companies such as GlaxoSmithKline , which will manufacture the vaccine from it . 
The virus will be grown in hen 's eggs and then extracted . 
Proteins on their surfaces will be removed , mixed with chemical preservatives and a swine flu vaccine created . 
`` Coat proteins raise antibodies in the blood so that a person , coming across the real live virus , will be prepared to launch an immune attack against it , '' added Robertson . 
Creating supplies of the new vaccine will take an estimated four to six months . 
This would give time for UK ministers , acting under advice from Salisbury and colleagues , to give the go-ahead for vaccine production in three or four weeks ' time , allowing sufficient supplies to be ready by winter . 
In addition , the government faces the issue of deciding who would be treated as vaccine priorities . 
`` At the moment , we really do n't know who should get it first , '' said Dr Alan Hay , director of the World Influenza Centre , in north London . 
`` Normally we would propose giving it to the elderly . 
But in the case of the Mexican outbreak of this virus , those who succumbed were typically aged between 10 and 50 . '' 
Professor Salisbury told the Observer that the current advice of the Joint Committee for Vaccination and Immunisation was that health workers would still target the elderly , their carers , health service staff and those suffering from clinical conditions such as diabetes or heart disease . 
`` However , we will be ready to change those priorities rapidly if we have to , '' he added . 
He warned that health service staff would have to improve their attitude to flu vaccines in the event of a second outbreak of swine flu later this year . 
`` Only about 20 % take up offers of immunisation , compared with the elderly , who have a 70 to 75 % uptake . 
We can not allow that to continue . 
We are going to need to have all our doctors , nurses , ambulance drivers and other carers at work if there is a second serious outbreak later in the year and not at home in bed , sick . 
That means they will have to change their attitude to the vaccine . '' 
In fact , the best protection against the virus is available now , added Professor Peter Openshaw , director of the center for respiratory infection at Imperial College London . 
`` The virus is relatively harmless at present and the best possible protection against future , possibly more dangerous , infections would be an infection now . 
Just how you get that is a different matter . '' 
cents There are currently 15 confirmed cases of swine flu in Britain , 12 in England and three in Scotland , out of 631 suspected cases under investigation . 
cents Mexico yesterday revised downwards its suspected death toll from the disease from 176 to 101 . 
The health minister , Jos Angel Crdova , told the BBC that , based on samples tested , the mortality rate was comparable with that of seasonal flu . 
cents A total of 17 countries have now confirmed cases of swine flu within their borders , Denmark being the latest . 
cents Hong Kong has sealed a hotel with hundreds of tourists and employees inside as authorities try to prevent an outbreak of swine flu there . 
They are searching for all those who had contact with a Mexican tourist who brought the virus into the territory . 
