Why have the numbers of deaths in Mexico changed ? 
Initial reports that 176 people had died from swine flu in Mexico were only suspected cases . 
The bodies would have been tested for the virus , which was not confirmed in all cases . 
Of the 101 suspected deaths from the virus in Mexico , 19 have been confirmed . 
Hospitals in the country have also noted a drop in patients appearing with fevers as officials think public health messages such as washing hands regularly must be getting through . 
There are 18 confirmed cases in the UK but health officials are certain this figure will rise in the coming days as further tests are completed on suspected cases . 
In the US , the second hardest-hit nation , 226 cases have been confirmed across 30 states . 
The World Health Organisation yesterday confirmed 787 H1N1 infections in 17 countries . 
The number of cases has been small but no one yet knows how far the H1N1 virus will spread , how it will mutate and how many people will be caught up in this first wave of infection . 
By raising its global alert status to level 5 , the WHO thinks that a pandemic is imminent . 
In that eventuality , the alert will be raised to level 6 , meaning the disease is spreading between people in a sustained way in more than two regions of the world . 
A pandemic is used by health officials to describe the geographical spread of a disease rather than its severity so , even if H1N1 became a pandemic , the number of cases could still be low . 
Should we worry about Tamiflu resistance ? 
All flu viruses mutate so , theoretically , a new version of H1N1 could become resistant to the UK 's frontline defense of Tamiflu . 
Doctors have been encouraged to prescribe Tamiflu only if absolutely necessary and patients will have to ensure they finish their courses . 
Will there be a winter wave of infections ? 
Though the number of cases outside Mexico has been relatively low , it could be because the flu season in the northern hemisphere is coming to an end as the weather warms up . 
The flu season in the southern hemisphere , however , is due to begin in a few months so if the H1N1 virus reaches countries there , it might circulate for several months , build up a number of infections , and then reappear in the northern hemisphere later in the year . 
Previous pandemics have behaved in this way , such as the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic , with a second or third wave returning months later to infect many more people than the milder first wave . 
