cents Jesus statue paraded around square to bring health A near-empty church in Mexico City . 
Photograph : Eitan Abramovich\/AFP\/Getty For Mexico 's Catholic church it is a tricky dilemma : how do you reach out to the faithful in a time of crisis if you are not supposed to touch them ? 
The flu epidemic has tapped the country 's deep religious sentiment , but to avoid spreading infection the church has had to suspend masses and discourage large gatherings of worshippers . 
`` It pains us a lot not to have mass on Sunday , but we have taken this decision in solidarity with the health authorities . 
They asked us to avoid having multitudes of people , '' said Diego Monroy Ponce , rector of Mexico City 's Basilica of Guadaloupe . 
In previous centuries , before science explained the transmission of germs , plagues had the one virtue from a clerical viewpoint of filling pews and coffers . 
Now , instead of harnessing anxiety for religious devotion and boosting its influence the church risks being sidelined . 
`` On weekends we would normally get 200,000 people here , '' lamented Monroy Ponce , gesturing to a basilica deserted save for a dozen priests on the altar singing hymns through surgical masks . 
On Friday , Mexicans were heartened by figures that showed the number of deaths and new infections stabilising . 
Fewer people wore masks , and children virtually invisible during the past week 's lockdown reappeared in some neighborhoods . 
But late yesterday the health minister , Jose Angel Cordova , dented optimism by saying 11 people were suspected to have died within 24 hours . 
The Catholic hierarchy , frustrated that it can not convoke large gatherings , has come up with several tactics to remain relevant . 
Cardinal Norbeto Rivera has written a prayer , which people can recite at home , asking for divine deliverance from swine flu . 
He urged people to follow religious services on radio and television . 
Pope Benedict XVI , speaking in Spanish to pilgrims at St Peter 's Square in Rome , urged Mexicans and others to keep praying for God to help them overcome their difficulties . 
The church 's ace , however , is a 17th-century statue , Jesus of Health . 
The six-foot replica of a bloodied messiah nailed to a cross is credited with banishing medieval plagues . 
Last week , for the first time in three centuries , it was removed from its chapel in Mexico City 's metropolitan cathedral and carried in procession around Zocalo Square . 
`` We took it out to ask for intercession in the epidemic , '' said Felipe Sanchez , a priest and cathedral spokesman . 
`` If things do not get better and it 's necessary to take it out for another procession , we will do it . '' 
Each day a few dozen people have defied warnings to stay indoors to see the statue . 
It has been placed just inside the cathedral entrance where there is plenty of ventilation . 
`` All Mexicans have to commend themselves to the Christ of Health because he helped us during plagues and epidemics in earlier eras , '' said Maria Granados Martinez , 59 , a widow . 
`` Those of us that have faith believe he could deliver us from that evil again . '' 
In New Zealand , which reported its first cases of the H1N1 virus last week , church authorities at the Sacred Heart Cathedral in Wellington banned receiving the eucharist wafer on the tongue as well as drinking communion from a shared chalice and shaking hands at the sign of peace . 
