Aug 3 : An employee sits in the bridge of the Helix Q4000 as it performs the ` static kill ' operation at the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill . 
AP Aug 3 : The Helix Q4000 , the vessel being used to conduct the ` static kill ' procedure , at the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill . 
AP ON THE GULF OF MEXICO -- In a significant step toward stopping the worst offshore oil spill in U.S. history , BP said Wednesday mud that was forced down its blown-out well was holding back the flow of crude in the Gulf of Mexico and it was in a `` static condition . '' 
Workers stopped pumping mud in after about eight hours of their `` static kill '' procedure and were monitoring the well to ensure it remained stable , BP said . 
`` The well pressure is now being controlled by the hydrostatic pressure of the drilling mud , the desired outcome of the static kill procedure , '' the company said in a statement . 
BP spokeswoman Sheila Williams said , `` It 's a milestone . 
It 's a step toward the killing of the well . '' 
The next step would be deciding whether to cement the well , Williams said . 
The pressure in the well dropped quickly in the first 90 minutes of the static kill procedure Tuesday , a sign that everything was going as planned , wellsite leader Bobby Bolton told AP . 
Bolton said Tuesday night that the procedure was going well . 
`` Pressure is down and appears to be stabilizing , '' he told the AP then . 
But the mud that was forced down the broken wellhead to permanently plug the gusher is only half the story . 
To call the mission a success , crews working on a flotilla of vessels on a desolate patch of water need to seal off the well from two directions . 
The static kill -- also known as bullheading -- involved slowly pumping the mud from a ship down lines running to the top of the ruptured well a mile below . 
BP has said that may be enough by itself to seal the well . 
Still , an 18,000-foot relief well that BP has been drilling for the past three months will be used later this month to execute a `` bottom kill , '' in which mud and cement will be injected into the bedrock 21\/2 miles below the sea floor to finish the job , retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen said . 
`` There should be no ambiguity about that , '' Allen said . 
`` I 'm the national incident commander , and this is how this will be handled . '' 
A 75-ton cap placed on the well in July has been keeping the oil bottled up inside over the past three weeks , but that is considered only a temporary measure . 
BP and the Coast Guard want to plug up the hole with a column of heavy drilling mud and cement to seal it off more securely . 
Before the cap was lowered onto the well , 172 million gallons of crude flowed into the sea , unleashed by the April 20 explosion aboard the drilling rig Deepwater Horizon that killed 11 workers . 
A previous , similar effort failed in May when the mud could n't overcome the unstemmed flow of oil . 
BP wo n't know for certain whether the static kill has succeeded until engineers can use the soon-to-be-completed relief well to check their work . 
The task is becoming more urgent because peak hurricane season is just around the corner , Allen said . 
Tropical Storm Colin formed then dissipated far out in the Atlantic on Tuesday , but early forecasts say it will travel toward the East Coast rather than the Gulf . 
