By Rami Ruhayem BBC News , Baghdad Iraqis have been fleeing the Syrian capital , Damascus . 
Some say they were threatened , others advised to get out In the late evening , a busload of Iraqis arrived in Baghdad after a 12-hour journey across the desert . 
With a mixture of anger and resignation , they said that they had been forced to leave their homes near Damascus by armed opposition groups . 
`` The Free Syrian Army ruined our lives , '' said one Iraqi man who had just arrived with his Syrian wife and daughter . 
His wife stepped in to explain : `` We live in Sayyida Zainab , '' she said , referring to a neighborhood in southern Damascus . 
The neighborhood is named after the grand-daughter of the Prophet Muhammad , who is believed to be buried in the Sayyida Zainab mosque . 
It is popular with Shia pilgrims from all over the world , and home to many Iraqi refugees , mostly Shia . 
`` They evicted us , '' she said , staring defiantly at the camera . 
She was on the verge of tears , but refused to break down . 
`` They are not an army , they 're just gangs . 
There 's only one army , the Syrian Arab Army , and they have a right to protect the people and the country . 
They are in control in Damascus . '' 
I asked her why she left if she thought the army is still in control . 
Many have faced a long journey and sleepless nights to arrive where they once fled `` Because we fear for our children . 
They 're playing the sectarian card , especially in Sayyida Zainab . '' 
Another woman described a gruelling escape from Damascus . 
`` Last night , we did not sleep . 
We waited on the street till dawn so we could leave . 
People just grabbed their children - Afghans , Iraqis , Syrians , all of them got in cars and drove off , without knowing where , '' she said . 
`` Those who managed to get on a bus came to Iraq . 
Those who did n't - may God protect them - I do n't know what happened to them . '' 
One of the refugees told me he had seen leaflets in Sayyida Zainab warning Iraqis there to leave within three days . 
Another said an entire Afghan family had been shot to death in their homes . 
Many of these Iraqis had been in Syria for well over a decade , and others left in 2006 and 2007 , as Iraq descended into its own civil war . 
Their story , and the way they told it , captures a snapshot of a reality slowly unravelling in Syria and Iraq , almost in parallel ; the passing of the era of Baathist dictatorship , and what many fear is the rise , in its place , of virulent sectarianism . 
The commanders of the Free Syrian Army are all Iraqi '' End Quote Iraqi man returning from Syria One of the Iraqis coming out of the bus told me a man he knew , a follower of Shia cleric Moqtada al-Sadr , was shot to death by the predominantly Sunni Free Syrian Army . 
What , I asked , about rumors which have been circulating for months that al-Sadr 's men had been fighting alongside the regime in Syria ? 
The crowd around me offered a prompt and collective denial , and one young man even volunteered a counter-rumour . 
There are Iraqis fighting in Syria , '' he said , observing with satisfaction the look of surprise on my face . 
`` The commanders of the Free Syrian Army are all Iraqi , '' he told me with a penetrating gaze and a slight nod of his head , to make sure I got the nuance - Iraqi Sunnis was the unspoken explanation . 
It was a striking feature of the descent into sectarian division ; an eagerness to believe the worst about the others , with or without proof , and to reject anything bad about one 's own . 
As everyone prepared to leave the station , the Syrian woman asked me not to use the interview we had on camera , because she would still like to return to Syria and feared retaliation for what she said . 
But could she return anytime soon , I asked ? 
`` I could n't stay away , '' she shot back , with fire in her eyes . 
`` It 's my home . '' 
Resting on her arms was a sleepy three-year-old who just wanted to get to bed - the daughter of a Sunni Syrian mother and a Shia Iraqi father , going back and forth between two countries which seem to be racing each other to the abyss . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
