Libyan students in America hurt by freeze on Gadhafi 's assets May 26 , 2011 | By Reema Khrais , CNN Naji Abdelwanis and his family are in limbo now that LIbyan assets used to cover U.S. scholarships have been frozen . 
Naji Abdelwanis had a plan : study hard , earn a degree in the United States and return to his country to build a better Libya . 
The 45-year-old from Benghazi never doubted that he would complete his degree . 
He has already finished two years at Clemson University with high marks . 
But now , with Libya in turmoil and its government 's assets frozen overseas , his dream is in disarray . 
Abdelwanis , who is earning a doctorate in industrial engineering , is one of about 2,000 Libyans studying in the United States . 
They are dependent on scholarships provided by the regime of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi . 
But with about $ 30 billion of the government 's assets frozen by the U.S. government , Libya is now unable to cover all of the tuition , living expenses and health insurance costs of the students and their families . 
The money , which is administered by a Canadian non-profit group , will run out on May 31 . 
This leaves students like Abdelwanis -- especially those with families -- nervous about how they will keep a roof over their heads . 
Abdelwanis has five other family members to feed . 
And his options do n't look promising . 
`` They are n't giving us any visible solution , '' he said . 
`` I ca n't work with a student visa . 
I ca n't return because it is too unsafe . 
I do n't even have enough money to buy a ticket . '' 
The Canadian Bureau for International Education , which distributes the funds in the United States and Canada , is worried that the students will lose their status and possibly their right to live in North America . 
It is urgently looking for different avenues to secure money . 
`` I think that everybody realizes that the students are innocent victims of circumstances way beyond their control , '' said CBIE Vice President Jennifer Humphries . 
`` It is not appropriate in any way to have them distressed or potentially in any danger because we can not find mechanisms to provide support to them . '' 
CBIE manages the Libyan-North American Scholarship Program with the Libyan Ministry of Education and Scientific Research . 
While some 2,500 Libyan students pursue graduate and post-graduate medical studies through the program , Humphries said , close to 4,000 Libyans , including family members , are dependent on it . 
In February , as Libya sank into civil war , the U.S. Treasury Department froze many of the Libyan government 's assets held in America . 
CBIE later received permission from the Treasury to distribute funds it already had for the current academic year , but had trouble accessing any new money . 
