Monday 2 May 2005 15.23 BST The death of a soldier from 12 Mechanised Brigade , announced today , takes the number of British service personnel who have died in Iraq since the start of hostilities in March 2003 to 87 . 
There have been 50 killed in action , a spokesman for the MoD said . 
The rest died in accidents or of natural causes\/illness\/unexplained . 
An 88th casualty , Acting Chief Petty Officer Simon Roger Owen , 38 , died of natural causes aboard HMS Chatham on December 17 last year while on patrol in the Gulf . 
HMS Chatham was not assigned to Operation Telic - the name given to the British operation in Iraq . 
Here is the full list : March 21 : Eight British servicemen died when the US Sea Knight helicopter they were aboard crashed south of the Kuwait border , just after midnight . 
They included five Royal Marines , plus two soldiers and a naval rating serving with the 29 Commando Regiment , Royal Artillery battery in Poole , Dorset . 
Captain Philip Guy , 29 , from Bishopdale , North Yorkshire . 
Married with two children . 
Naval Rating Ian Seymour , an operator mechanic -LRB- communications -RRB- second class , of Hamworthy , Poole , Dorset . 
Married with one son . 
Warrant Officer Second Class Mark Stratford , Royal Marines . 
Marine Sholto `` Sonic '' Hedenskog , 25 , from South Africa . 
Lance Bombardier Llywelyn `` Welly '' Evans , 24 , of Llandudno , north Wales . 
Engaged to be married . 
Colour Sgt John Cecil , 36 , of Plymouth , Devon . 
Originally from Newcastle upon Tyne . 
Married with one daughter and two stepchildren . 
Major Jason Ward , 34 , from the Plymouth area . 
Sergeant Les Hehir , 34 , of Poole , Dorset . 
Married with two sons . 
March 22 : Six British servicemen died when two Royal Navy Sea King helicopters collided over the northern Arabian Gulf at around 1.30 am . 
Lt Philip Green , 31 . 
Lt Tony King , 35 , of Helston , Cornwall . 
Married with two children . 
Lt James Williams , 28 , from Falmouth , Cornwall - originally from Winchester . 
He was engaged to be married . 
Lt Philip West , 32 , of Budock Water , near Falmouth , Cornwall . 
He was due to be married . 
Lt Marc Lawrence , in his mid-20s , from Westgate , Kent . 
Engaged to be married . 
Lt Andrew Wilson , 36 . 
All were based at the Royal Naval Air Station Culdrose , near Helston , Cornwall . 
March 23 : An RAF GR4 Tornado aircraft from RAF Marham , Norfolk , which was returning from an operational mission , was engaged near the Kuwaiti border by a Patriot missile battery . 
Flight Lt Kevin Main , a pilot . 
Flight Lt Dave Williams , a navigator . 
Both were of 9 Squadron . 
Also on the same day two British soldiers were killed in an attack on British military vehicles in southern Iraq . 
Sapper Luke Allsopp , 24 , of north London . 
Staff Sergeant Simon Cullingworth , 36 , from Essex . 
Married with two sons . 
Both were members of 33 -LRB- EOD -RRB- Engineer Regiment , a specialist bomb disposal unit of the Royal Engineers , based at Carver Barracks , Wimbish , Essex . 
March 24 : Sergeant Steven Roberts , 33 , was killed in action near Al Zubayr near Basra . 
The soldier of the 2nd Royal Tank Regiment was shot trying to calm a civil disturbance . 
He was from Bradford , West Yorkshire , married , and had a child from a previous marriage . 
He was raised in Cornwall . 
Lance Corporal Barry `` Baz '' Stephen , of the 1st Battalion The Black Watch was killed in action near Al Zubayr . 
Married , 31 , from Perth . 
March 25 : Two British soldiers were killed in a `` friendly fire '' incident west of Basra . 
They were part of a four-man crew of a Challenger 2 Main Battle tank and mistakenly fired upon by comrades in another tank . 
Corporal Stephen John Allbutt , 35 , from Stoke-on-Trent . 
Married with two children . 
Trooper David Jeffrey Clarke , 19 , from Littleworth , Staffordshire . 
Was planning to get engaged to girlfriend Rachel . 
March 28 : A US A-10 tankbuster aircraft is reported to have fired on two armored vehicles containing soldiers from the Household Cavalry Regiment , part of 16 Air Assault Brigade . 
Lance Corporal of Horse Matty Hull , 25 , of The Blues & Royals , Household Cavalry Regiment , from Windsor , was killed in the apparent `` friendly fire '' incident . 
He was married to Susan . 
March 30 : Royal Marine Christopher Maddison , 24 , was killed when a river launch was ambushed on the Al Faw peninsula south of Basra . 
Marine Maddison was a member of Plymouth-based 9 Assault Squadron . 
Lance Corporal Shaun Brierley , 28 , with the 212 Signals Squadron , was killed in a crash in Kuwait . 
His family live in West Yorkshire and he had one son . 
Major Stephen Alexis Ballard , of 3 Commando Brigade , Royal Marines , died of natural causes . 
Married to Lucy and expecting first child . 
March 31 : Staff Sergeant Chris Muir , 32 , with the Army School of Ammunition , Royal Logistic Corps , based at Kineton , Warwickshire , died during an operation to dismantle munitions in southern Iraq . 
The married father-of-one was from Romsey , Hampshire . 
April 1 : Several members of the Household Cavalry Regiment were hurt when their light armored vehicle slid down a crumbling bank and overturned . 
Lance Corporal Karl Shearer was killed in the accident . 
He was traveling in a Scimitar armed reconnaissance vehicle which was on its way to relieve another troop when the accident happened . 
He was married with one daughter . 
April 6 : Three soldiers were killed as allied troops swept into Basra . 
Kelan John Turrington , 18 , from the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers . 
Lance Corporal Ian Malone , of Dublin , 28 , a member of the 1st Battalion the Irish Guards . 
Piper Christopher Muzvuru , 21 , of the 1st Battalion the Irish Guards . 
He was born in Zimbabwe . 
April 22 : Lt Alexander Tweedie , 25 , was hurt in the accident which killed Lance Corporal Karl Shearer when their vehicle overturned on April 1 in southern Iraq . 
Lt Tweedie was taken to Edinburgh Royal Infirmary for treatment on April 3 but died from his injuries on April 22 . 
He was serving with the D Squadron of The Blues and Royals Household Cavalry Regiment . 
He was single and originally from Hawick in the Scottish Borders . 
April 30 : Lance Corporal James McCue , 27 , was killed in an explosion in southern Iraq . 
He was serving with the 7 Air Assault Battalion Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers -LRB- REME -RRB- . 
He was single and from Paisley in Renfrewshire . 
May 6 : Private Andrew Kelly , 18 , was killed in an accident in Iraq . 
He was serving with the 3rd Battalion , The Parachute Regiment . 
He was single and from Tavistock , Devon . 
May 8 : Gunner Duncan Pritchard , 22 , died in hospital in the UK after being injured in a traffic accident in Iraq . 
He was an RAF Regiment Gunner serving with 16 Squadron , based at RAF Honington , Suffolk . 
May 19 : Corporal David Shepherd , 34 , died from natural causes . 
He was serving with the Royal Air Force Police in Kuwait . 
May 22 : Leonard Harvey , 55 , a civilian member of the Defense Fire Service , died in hospital in the UK . 
He was taken ill while deployed in the Gulf . 
Divorced with three daughters , he had served with the Defense Fire Service for 33 years , normally based at Wattisham , Suffolk . 
June 24 : Six Royal Military Policemen were killed by an Iraqi mob at a police station at Al Majar Al Kabir . 
Sergeant Simon Alexander Hamilton-Jewell , 41 , serving with 156 Provost Company . 
The Platoon Sergeant of the Parachute Provost Platoon , known as `` HJ '' he came from Chessington , Surrey , and was single . 
Corporal Russell Aston , 30 , from Swadlincote , Derbyshire , was married with one daughter . 
He was the company physical training instructor . 
Corporal Paul Graham Long , 24 , from Colchester . 
Cpl Long was serving on his first operational deployment . 
Married to Gemma and had a 11-month-old son , Benjamin . 
Corporal Simon Miller , 21 , from Washington , Tyne & Wear . 
Cpl Miller was engaged to be married . 
He had previously served in the Parachute Regiment . 
Lance-Corporal Benjamin John McGowan Hyde , 23 , from Northallerton , North Yorkshire . 
L\/Cpl McGowan Hyde was single and was on his first operational tour . 
Lance-Corporal Thomas Richard Keys , 20 , from Llanuwchllyn , near Bala in Wales . 
L\/Cpl Keys was single and had previously served with The Parachute Regiment . 
July 18 : Captain James Linton , 43 , died while serving in southern Iraq with the 40 Field Regiment , Royal Artillery . 
He collapsed and died following a training run at a British base in Al Zubayr . 
He was married with three children . 
August 13 : Private Jason Smith , 32 , a Territorial Army soldier , died while serving in southern Iraq . 
Death was not the result of enemy action . 
He was serving with 52nd Lowland Regiment attached to the 1st Battalion , The King 's Own Scottish Borderers . 
From Hawick in the Scottish borders , he was unmarried but had a long-term partner . 
August 14 : Captain David Jones , 29 , was killed in a bomb attack on a military ambulance in Basra , southern Iraq . 
He came from Louth , Lincolnshire , and had been married just over a year . 
A Sandhurst graduate , he had been working on civil-military co-operation projects in Basra to reconstruct the city . 
August 23 : Three soldiers from the Royal Military Police were killed after an ambush on a military vehicle by gunmen in Basra . 
Major Matthew Titchener , 32 , of 150 Provost Company . 
He was married with one child . 
Warrant Officer Colin Wall , 34 , of 150 Provost Company . 
He was married with one child , plus two from a previous marriage . 
Corporal Dewi Pritchard , 35 , a Territorial Army soldier serving with 116 Provost Company . 
He was married and came from Bridgend . 
August 27 : Fusilier Russell Beeston , 26 , was killed after an army convoy was confronted by two mobs of Iraqi civilians and a firefight began at Ali As Sharqi . 
Fusilier Beeston , 26 , was a Territorial Army soldier in 52nd Lowland Regiment -LRB- Volunteers -RRB- , serving attached to the 1st Battalion King 's Own Scottish Borderers in Iraq . 
He was married and came from Govan in Glasgow . 
September 23 : A Territorial Army soldier died in an incident involving a firearm while serving at Shaibah near Basra . 
Sergeant John Nightingale , of 217 Transport Squadron , part of 150 Regiment -LRB- Volunteers -RRB- of the Royal Logistic Corps . 
Engaged to Lucy and aged 32 , he came from Leeds and worked in the electronics industry . 
October 31 A Royal Marines NCO was killed by hostile fire during an operation in Iraq . 
Corporal Ian Plank , Royal Marines . 
Aged 31 and came from Poole . 
November 6 : A British serviceman was killed in a road traffic accident in Basra . 
Private Ryan Thomas , 1st Battalion , Royal Regiment of Wales . 
Aged 18 , from Resolven , near Neath . 
January 1 : Two British soldiers were killed in a road traffic accident in Baghdad in the early hours . 
Major James Stenner , Welsh Guards . 
Married , 30 , from Monmouthshire . 
Sergeant Norman Patterson , Cheshire Regiment . 
Single , 28 , from Staffordshire . 
January 7 : A British serviceman died following an incident on a training range near Basra . 
Lance Corporal Andrew James Craw , Argyll & Sutherland Highlanders . 
Single , 21 , from Clackmannanshire . 
January 21 : A soldier was killed in a road accident at Al Amarah . 
Rifleman Vincent Calvin Windsor , 2nd Battalion , Royal Green Jackets . 
Aged 23 , he came from Oxfordshire and had a German fiancee . 
January 31 : A soldier died in an accident in Basra . 
Sapper Robert Thomson , Royal Engineers . 
Unmarried , 22 , from West Lothian . 
February 12 : A soldier died in a vehicle accident at Shaibah Logistics Base in southern Iraq . 
Corporal Richard Thomas David Ivell , Royal Electrical & Mechanical Engineers . 
Married with three children , 29 , from Doncaster , South Yorkshire . 
June 28 : A soldier was killed , and two injured , in an improvised explosive device attack on British vehicles in Basra . 
Fusilier Gordon Gentle , from Glasgow , of Royal Highland Fusiliers . 
June 19 : An airman was killed when an RAF Puma helicopter was involved in an accident at Basra airport . 
Flight Lieutenant Kristian Gover , 33 Squadron RAF . 
August 4 : A soldier died in an accident at Al Amarah . 
Private Christopher Gordon Rayment , 1st Battalion The Princess of Wales ' Royal Regiment , aged 22 . 
August 9 : A soldier was killed and several others injured in an attack on British vehicles in Basra . 
Private Lee O'Callaghan , Princess of Wales ' Royal Regiment . 
He was 20 and from south London . 
August 12 : A soldier was killed and another seriously injured by an improvised explosive device attack at Basra . 
Private Marc Ferns , The Black Watch . 
He was 21 and from Glenrothes in Fife . 
August 17 : A soldier was killed in an exchange of fire with insurgents in Basra . 
Lance Corporal Paul Thomas , The Light Infantry . 
Aged 29 , he was single and from Welshpool . 
September 10 : A soldier died in an traffic accident near Al Amarah . 
Fusilier Stephen Jones , The Royal Welch Fusiliers . 
He was 22 , married and from Denbigh . 
September 28 : Two soldiers died after the ambush of a military convoy south west of Basra . 
Corporal Marc Taylor , served with the Corps of Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers , attached to 1st Regiment Royal Horse Artillery . 
He was 27 , married with a daughter and from Ellesmere Port , Cheshire . 
Gunner David Lawrence , 1st Regiment Royal Horse Artillery , he was aged 25 and came from Walsall , West Midlands . 
October 29 : A Black Watch soldier was killed following a vehicle accident in the North Babil Province in Iraq . 
The incident did not involve hostile action . 
Private Kevin Thomas McHale , 1st Battalion The Black Watch , aged 27 , was single and came from Lochgelly , Fife . 
October 31 : Staff Sergeant Denise Rose , of the Royal Military Police 's Special Investigation Branch , was found dead at a military camp in Basra - the first British female soldier to die in Iraq since the campaign to remove Saddam Hussein began . 
The 34-year-old from Liverpool was discovered dead from a gunshot wound at the Army base in the Shatt-al-Arab Hotel . 
The MoD said the incident is not thought to have been the result of hostile action . 
November 4 : Three soldiers of the Black Watch killed in a suicide attack in Iraq . 
Private Paul Lowe , 19 , Sergeant Stuart Gray , 31 , and Private Scott McArdle , 22 , all from Fife , are killed in a blast at a vehicle checkpoint . 
November 8 : A Black Watch soldier is killed in a roadside bombing in Iraq , north of the regiment 's base at Camp Dogwood . 
Private Pita Tukatukawaqa of the 1st Battalion The Black Watch died when his Warrior armored vehicle was hit by a roadside bomb . 
The 27-year-old was married and came from Fiji . 
December 17 : Acting Chief Petty Officer Simon Owen aboard HMS Chatham died while on patrol in the Gulf . 
The married 38-year-old from Plymouth was thought to have died from natural causes . 
December 26 : A soldier was found dead from a gunshot wound at Shaibah Logistic Base . 
Sergeant Paul Connolly , 33 - no suspicious circumstances . 
January 30 : Ten personnel - nine from the Royal Air Force and one from the Army - killed when a RAF Hercules crashed 30 kilometres north west of Baghdad Squadron Leader Patrick Marshall , Headquarters Strike Command Flight Lieutenants David Stead , Andrew Smith and Paul Pardoel of 47 Squadron , RAF Lyneham Master Engineer Gary Nicholson , Chief Technician Richard Brown and Flight Sergeant Mark Gibson of 47 Squadron , RAF Lyneham Sergeant Robert O'Connor and Corporal David Williams , of RAF Lyneham Acting Lance Corporal Steven Jones , Royal Signals March 28 : A British soldier of the Tyne-Tees Regiment was found dead in his accommodation at Basra . 
An investigation into the death of Private Mark Dobson , 41 , is still under way . 
May 2 : The death of a soldier from 12 Mechanised Brigade announced . 
