Monday 2 May 2005 14.00 BST An Italian report into the shooting dead of one of its secret agents by US troops in Iraq is expected to differ sharply with a Pentagon investigation when it is published later today . 
The US military said its soldiers had followed their rules of engagement but the Italian report will pick apart US conclusions on the incident , the Italian press reported . 
Secret agent Nicola Calipari was shot dead at a US checkpoint on the approach to Baghdad airport as he shielded Giuliana Sgrena , a hostage whose freedom he had just negotiated , from the gunfire . 
Ms Sgrena , who survived the shooting , insists no warning shots were fired but the US soldiers told investigators they fired into the air and flashed lights to order the car to slow down . 
The Italian foreign ministry said yesterday that the report would illustrate flaws in the rules of engagement for checkpoints and problems with coordination between authorities in Iraq . 
Disputing the finding of the US report that the Italian agents did not inform the US military of their rescue mission , the Italian report contends that it informed the US command of the operation several hours before the shooting and of Ms Sgrena 's release 25 minutes before Calipari was killed . 
Corriere della Sera and La Repubblica said the report argues that a rapid removal of evidence from the site of the shooting made a proper inspection impossible . 
The two Italian experts who participated in the joint US-Italian investigation - a diplomat and a military intelligence general - refused to endorse the Americans ' conclusions . 
When several days of negotiations failed to yield a common report , both sides went their own way on the findings . 
Silvio Berlusconi is a staunch US ally in Iraq and deployed 3,000 troops after the fall of Saddam Hussein but Italian involvement in Iraq is not supported by public opinion . 
Some Italian politicians have urged withdrawal from Iraq in protest at the incident but Rome and Washington sought to play down the row . 
Roberto Calderoli , reforms minister in the rightwing government , said differences over the investigation into Calipari 's death should trigger `` an attentive and deep reflection on when our troops should come back , '' according to comments reported in La Stampa . 
The Italian defense minister , Antonio Martino , told Reuters the dispute would not harm relations between the two countries as he attended a service with the US ambassador near Rome to commemorate the end of the second world war . 
Mel Sembler , the US ambassador to Italy , said the ties between the two would hold . 
`` As you can see today , the relations between the United States and Italy are strong and will remain strong , '' he told Reuters . 
`` This is a 60-year relationship . 
There are bumps along the road . '' 
