A House energy panel investigation has found that the blowout preventer that failed to stop a huge oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico had a dead battery in its control pod , leaks in its hydraulic system , a `` useless '' test version of a key component and a cutting tool that was n't strong enough to shear through steel joints in the well pipe and stop the flow of oil . 
In a devastating review of the blowout preventer , which BP said was supposed to be `` fail-safe , '' Rep. Bart Stupak -LRB- D-Mich . -RRB- 
, chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee 's subcommittee on oversight , said Wednesday that documents and interviews show that the device was anything but . 
The comments came in a hearing in which lawmakers grilled senior executives from BP and oilfield service firms Transocean , Halliburton and Cameron , maker of the blowout preventer . 
In one exchange , Rep. Edward J. Markey -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
pressed BP on why it seemed to be `` flailing '' to deal with a spill only 2 percent as large as what it had said it could handle in its license application . 
`` The American people expect you to have a response comparable to the Apollo project , not ` Project Runway , ' '' Markey said . 
Steven Newman , chief executive of Transocean , said the blowout preventer underwent regular tests . 
He said links to the drilling rig would have indicated if the device 's batteries were dead , though he said data records were lost when the rig sank . 
It was the second day of congressional hearings in response to the April 20 blowout that set fire to Transocean 's Deepwater Horizon drilling rig , which later sank , killing 11 people and triggering the oil spill that now threatens wildlife and livelihoods along the Gulf Coast . 
So far , 25 birds have been found `` oiled '' in Louisiana , including seven that survived , said Sharon Taylor of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service . 
In addition , she said 87 sea turtles and six dolphins have been found dead , though lab tests will be needed to determine whether they died from oil or other causes . 
Oil is still pouring into the gulf as federal agencies and others investigate the cause of the accident . 
On Wednesday , BP released the first video of the primary leak on the muddy sea floor , 5,000 feet deep . 
The photos show a dark , frothy plume of oil mixed with a lighter-colored substance that officials did not describe but experts said is natural gas . 
The video has been sought by experts who say it might help them measure the size of the leak . 
BP 's initial estimate was 1,000 barrels a day , and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration later put it at roughly 5,000 barrels a day . 
`` That flow rate looks pretty much the same as its always looked , '' BP Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles said after showing reporters the clip . 
Ian R. MacDonald , a professor of oceanography at Florida State University who has been arguing that the NOAA estimate is too low , said after viewing the video , `` I do n't know how they get only 5,000 barrels a day out of that . 
That 's really quite a gusher . '' 
But Greg McCormack , director of Petroleum Extension Service at the University of Texas , said , `` There are so many unknowns there , you ca n't calculate it . '' 
In an effort to contain the leak , BP said Wednesday that it had lowered a new steel structure into the water near the damaged well to prepare for a second attempt at funneling some of the oil into a pipeline and onto a ship . 
An earlier attempt was foiled by slush-like gas hydrates -- combinations of seawater and natural gas from the well -- that quickly clogged an opening in a larger steel box . 
In Washington , Stupak said the committee investigators had uncovered a document prepared in 2001 by Transocean , the drilling rig operator , that said there were 260 `` failure modes '' that could require removal of the blowout preventer . 
`` How can a device that has 260 failure modes be considered fail-safe ? '' 
