The -LRB- relatively -RRB- moderate conservative cleric Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani , an ally of the unelected supreme leader , Ayatollah Ali Khamenei , is widely tipped to prevail in the election . 
But Iranian bloggers are today writing that this may not be the certainty everyone had thought and that there is a late surge from the main reform candidate , former education minister Mostafa Moin , 54 . 
Hossein Derakhshan , a Toronto-based Iranian who is visiting Tehran , writes on his Editor : Myself blog that he can not believe `` that mainstream media in Iran are ignoring all signs of a reformist candidate 's rise and still pushing for Rafsanjani as the savior '' . 
Continue reading ... What would Ho Chi Minh , that symbol of heroic resistance to the French and the US , make of it all ? 
Ken Livingstone is 60 today . 
The mayor has no official engagements today , but the London Assembly Lib Dems lost no time in wishing him a happy birthday . 
`` Mr Livingstone is now entitled to his Freedom Pass that will allow him to travel across the capital free of charge , '' a spokesman said today . 
`` The Liberal Democrats are hoping that with his new bus pass , the mayor will take the opportunity to visit many of the outer London areas that he has neglected over the last five years . '' 
Actually , he wo n't be collecting the bus pass he 's entitled to - and anyway , a free travelcard is one of the perks of working at City Hall . 
The mayor has enjoyed remarkable popularity ratings among Londoners since he was elected in 2000 , and few would bet against his running for a third term in 2008 . 
But his detractors sense impending trouble . 
They say Livingstone has neglected the binge drinking and traffic problems of suburban areas like Sutton and Croydon in favor of big inner city projects , and has failed to do enough to improve the Underground or combat congestion . 
No doubt his critics will be out in force at the 2005 State of London debate next week . 
Register now if you want to attend . 
Downing Street has announced the appointment of the 98th Archbishop of York , who will be John Sentamu , the first black man to hold the post in its 1,500 year history . 
It will be the most senior appointment ever held by a member of an ethnic minority within the Church of England . 
Sentamu , currently Bishop of Birmingham , immediately traveled to York today - taking the last second class place on a train full of York racegoers - to pray before the high altar of the great medieval cathedral , perhaps conscious that his journey has been rather longer and more extraordinary , probably , than that of any of his predecessors since the appointment of the city 's first archbishop , Paulinus , in 625 AD . 
Continue reading ... Andy Kershaw , the Radio 3 presenter and world music enthusiast , began the backlash against the largely white Live 8 line-ups when he said it would do nothing for `` Africa 's self-esteem '' . 
He returns to the topic in the Independent , accusing Bob Geldof of `` breathtaking arrogance '' for inviting African artists to play at an `` Africa Calling '' concert at the Eden Project in Cornwall . 
First , he dismisses the idea of having Africans on his bill since , supposedly , they are not big enough draws . 
Now , outrageously , he is planning to corral the Africans into Cornwall rather than allow them to appear on the same stage , on equal terms , with their European and American counterparts . 
And I thought apartheid was dead ... Kershaw 's language is strong and , as this blog has argued before , the extension others have made of his argument - that Live 8 is somehow a conspiracy to keep Africans down - is missing the point . 
The idea is to create a populist upsurge to pressure the G8 leaders , not to change the public 's attitude to Africa . 
That would be a happy consequence , however , and if - as Kershaw puts it - a `` few African bands -LRB- may even be -RRB- refreshing after watching hours of clapped-out , over-familiar rock stars '' , that is no bad thing either . 
I 've just spoken to religious affairs correspondent Stephen Bates , who 's on a train with the Church of England 's first black Archbishop . 
Stephen will be posting to the Newsblog today . 
European leaders are meeting today in Brussels to discuss the thorny question of budget reforms . 
On our business site , Victor Keegan argues for a sharp cut in eurozone interest rates in order to revive Europe 's flagging economies . 
And as the summer 's other major summit approaches , at a school in Fife this morning Gordon Brown kept the focus on Africa , telling his audience of the human suffering he had encountered on visits to Africa . 
Here on the Newsblog we report on the latest attack on Bob Geldof 's Live 8 line-up . 
Iranians are voting in their election today ; we 'll have an audio report from Robert Tait in Tehran and a round-up of the best pictures . 
And Jane Perrone blogs here about the great asparagus shortage of 2005 . 
Where 's the best place to hit capitalism where it hurts ? 
On the course , of course . 
The links between golf and filthy lucre have always looked pretty strong , as this report in Capitalism magazine perfectly illustrates , hailing the climax of the 2003 US Masters as `` a good day for golf , capitalism , and , of course , Mike Weir '' . 
After all , what other sport attaches such importance -LRB- in public , at any rate -RRB- to its ` money list ' ? 
Indeed , one of the moments of maximum emotional impact in Michael Moore 's Fahrenheit 9\/11 , the evidence that appeared to clinch the case for George Bush 's status as corporate ratbag no 1 , came when the president turned to the cameras after outlining his stance on global terrorism and urged : `` Now watch this drive . '' 
So it seemed appropriate when this year 's summit of the G8 group of the world 's wealthiest nations was sited in Gleneagles , one of the world 's most famous golfing spots . 
But , those less favourably disposed to the idea of global capitalist hegemony have also dabbled in the sport , and Gleneagles 2005 provided a perfect opportunity for anti-capitalism protesters to make their point . 
An anarchist organization calling itself the People 's Golfing Association looks able to achieve this aim with some lan , even if their style is slightly more SAS commando than Payne Stewart . 
Theresa May wants more women . 
Specifically , she wants 50 of them to fight the Tories ' most winnable seats at the next election . 
This may not sound particularly radical - and by the standards of the Labor party , which has already embraced all-female shortlists and the Emily 's List initiative , it is n't . 
None the less , the shadow secretary 's call for half of the Tories ' top targets to be contested by women will dismay many in the party - and not just male would-be candidates , but also those who oppose positive action on principle . 
As many of them admitted at a Fawcett Society fringe event last year , Tory ladies of a certain age tend to pick men to represent them in the Commons . 
Often this is because they fear women with families will not be able to devote all their resources to winning the seat . 
Sometimes female candidates lack the time for the schmoozing that wins over local party members . 
And there is strong grassroots resistance to all-female shortlists - not just because members feel Conservative Central Office is telling them what to do , but because Tories tend to believe that the talented should be able to rise to the top without special favors . 
Continue reading ... News that Microsoft had joined forces with the Chinese government to ban words such as `` democracy '' , `` human rights '' and `` freedom '' from its weblog service , MSN Spaces , had set `` the blogosphere a-buzzin ' , '' remarked Tim Bray at his Ongoing blog . 
Bray was not alone , writes Toby Manhire , in condemning the US company for agreeing to `` be Beijing 's bitch to buy some bloggers '' . 
Continue reading ... Morning all . 
I 've just been listening to Bono impersonate Warren Buffett . 
The rock star has spent a day talking to the Guardian 's Madeleine Bunting about how he 's trying to win over American hearts to his Africa crusade : you can hear an audio clip of him talking about how the legendary stock market investor told him : `` Do n't appeal to the conscience of America , appeal to its greatness , and I think you 'll get the job done . '' 
News has been trickling out this morning about a hostage drama at an international school in Cambodia : the latest is that a girl has been killed as police freed the hostages . 
We 'll be keeping an eye on Tony Blair as he tries to save Britain 's EU rebate at the European summit in Brussels ; we 've also followed up the latest royal security breach involving a fake bomb and a tabloid reporter , this time targeting Prince Harry at Sandhurst , and we 'll be reporting on a video smuggled out of China showing violence over land rights that left six people dead . 
The proposed Bridge of Reeds , intended to be built near Cambridge This is the Bridge of Reeds - and it 's rather more exciting than the average footbridge . 
The design for the 175ft high bridge was today officially announced as the winner of a competition to find a new landmark for the east of England , beating more than 230 other entries by architects from around the world . 
Continue reading ... It is possible that some of you , at one time or another , may have disagreed with the Guardian 's carefully-considered leader columns . 
These articles - called editorials in the US - appear without a byline , and are set out as the opinion of the paper as a whole . 
Clearly , not every individual in an organization will agree with a given article - but it is leaders that give a paper its voice . 
To create a conversation , we encourage readers to send in comments for our letters page and to contact our readers ' editor , Ian Mayes , with corrections or complaints . 
You can also post to our talkboards , contact writers directly , and post comments to the newsblog . 
But we have never asked you , our valued readers , to actually write the leaders yourselves . 
That 's exactly what Andres Martinez , the editorial page editor at the LA Times , has proposed for his paper 's website . 
He 's called it the wikitorial , a feature that will allow readers to rewrite LA Times editorials . 
Continue reading ... When Oliver Letwin stepped down from the Tory front bench , Gordon Brown congratulated him on his candor for admitting it was to `` spend more time with his merchant bank '' . 
For the last US ambassador to Britain , the low-profile William Farish -LRB- where `` low profile '' is just a diplomatic way of saying largely inactive -RRB- , there was no need for such candor : if you plotted his few appearances on British television or radio against his known enthusiasm for horse racing , it was clear this was a man whose passions lay more with the equine than the ambassadorial . 
The post has been vacant since June 2004 . 
The new nominee for ambassador , Robert Tuttle , comes to the job with much the same qualifications as Mr Farish : a long record of donations to George Bush 's election campaigns . 
Continue reading ... Live 8 organiser Bob Geldof . 
Photograph : Dave Hogan\/Getty Call me a fawning capitalist lackey . 
Brand me a World Bank-loving , anti-poor , rich world boosting , multinational adoring sellout . 
Go as far as accusing me of being a slightly uneasy bedfellow with the Adam Smith Institute . 
But whatever you do , please do explain why Bob Geldof is right to call eBay , the online auction marketplace , `` an electronic pimp -LRB- that -RRB- arrogantly thought they were powerful enough to ignore public anger '' when the company allowed its users to sell Live 8 tickets on its site . 
And , while you 're at it , can someone justify why he 's fair in calling those who tried to sell their tickets `` miserable wretches who are capitalising on people 's misery '' ? 
Continue reading ... Tonight will see the announcement of the winner of this year 's Samuel Johnson Prize for Non-Fiction at an awards ceremony in the swanksome surroundings of the Savoy hotel . 
Despite the prize 's relative youth tonight takes it into its seventh year it is hotly contested and most definitely one to watch : previous winners of the # 30,000 jackpot have included Antony Beevor for Stalingrad and last year Anna Funder for Stasiland , her captivating account of life behind the Berlin Wall . 
This year the judges have upped the stakes with one of the strongest shortlists the prize has ever fielded . 
Of the six books to have made it to the final round , the ones to watch are Alexander Masters ' life-in-reverse of homeless man Stuart Shorter , Stuart : A Life Backwards , which received buckets of press coverage on its publication , Orhan Pamuk 's musical biography of his home city , Istanbul , and Jonathan Coe 's life of BS Johnson , Like a Fiery Elephant , which is generally held by everyone who has read it to be wonderful . 
We 'll bring you the result as soon as we have it Kirsty Wigglesworth\/PAIt 's day one of Royal Ascot and I 'm in a field in the middle of nowhere and it 's raining . 
That 's what they said would happen if they were daft enough to bring the premier event of London 's social season all the way up to York , writes Martin Wainwright . 
That was an hour ago . 
Now I 'm in a sort of Arabian tent eating strawberries and cream . 
The sun 's shining and the Queen 's just trotted past in her landau -LRB- Charles and Camilla just behind -RRB- . 
We waved at one another , me with the Guardian , she with her glove . 
Continue reading ... outside the Santa Maria courtroom where Michael Jackson was found not guilty Courtesy of Dave Pell 's Davenetics come the words that illustrate more than any other the - let 's be polite here - rather skewed worldview of the Michael Jackson fan . 
Remember this date for it is part of HIStory . 
For Jackson fans , of course , this is a bright new dawn and a vindication of the love they have for their hero just like the rush of the climatic gospel ending to Earth Song -LRB- albeit a finale tinged with sadness and self-destruction -RRB- . 
For the rest of us , we are left trying to work out exactly how odd this all has been . 
It is a tricky call . 
Continue reading ... Michael Jackson 's rehabilitation might be sooner than anyone could have predicted . 
Sunday 's papers reported that Jackson is ` frantic ' to appear at the Philadelphia concert . 
Interviewed today on London 's radio station Capital FM , promoter Harvey Goldsmith confirmed that they would certainly ` consider ' adding Jackson to the bill , if approached by the singer . 
Goldsmith added : `` Whether it 's appropriate or not is another issue , whether he 's in a fit state to work is another issue , whether he can work is another issue and whether he can work live is another issue . '' 
Sean Penn visits Tehran 's cinema museum . 
Photograph : Hasan Sarbakhshian\/AP Actor\/activist Sean Penn is in Tehran to report on the Iranian election campaign for the San Francisco Chronicle , the blog Iran Scan reports . 
According to Reuters , Penn visited Friday prayers , scribbling away in his notebook . 
Iran Scan 's Afshin Molavi writes : I wonder how Sean Penn will see things . 
Will he honestly portray what he sees ? 
Or will he be blinded by his hatred of President George W Bush to fall into the trap many a good leftist falls into : defending the Islamic Republic to take a jab at Bush . 
Progressives in America consistently fail to side with the forces for democracy in Iran because it might just seem too , well , Wolfowitzian or , worse , Rumsfeldian . 
The Chronicle has yet to publish any of Penn 's reports , as far as I can see . 
But as Molavi points out , on the one hand , Penn 's presence ensures that more Americans will learn about Iran : on the other , it 's worth recalling the last Middle East country he visited was Iraq in December 2002 . 
And we all know how that ended up . 
Also in Tehran is Iranian blogfather Hossein Derakhshan , who is visiting his home country for the first time in several years . 
It 's a brave act for a blogger who knows all too well the risks of speaking out . 
It 's possible that Penn and Hoder , as Derakhshan is known , could meet via the networking powers of blogging powerhouse Joi Ito , if the comments on this post are anything to go by . 
Meanwhile events in Iran have taken a worrying turn . 
Sunday 's bombings have hardly improved the mood of the campaign - now being described as the closest in the country 's history - as it enters its final stages ahead of Friday 's vote . 
Blogger Mr Behi says : `` Street bombing is rare here in Iran and I can not personally recall one in many years '' , while S'can - Iranic calls the attacks `` ominous '' . 
Michael Jackson is innocent . 
We 've got audio from Dan Glaister , our reporter who covered the trial in Santa Maria , California ; we 'll be rounding up bloggers ' reactions , we 've a digest of what the UK 's papers say ; and we 're gathering photographs of fans celebrating outside the courthouse . 
As I write , Tony Blair is speaking in Paris ahead of talks with Jacques Chirac . 
Earlier in Luxembourg he rejected a proposal by the EU presidency to freeze Britain 's contentious budget rebate - Matthew Tempest reports here . 
In Iraq , there have been bombings in Kirkuk and Baghdad ; suspected Islamist terrorists have been arrested in Germany ; and there are warnings of a cholera outbreak in the Afghan capital , Kabul . 
Declan Walsh 's friends in Pakistan often berate him for failing to find positive news stories to write about . 
`` The problem in Pakistan is that there is just so much bad news , '' he writes . 
For example , in his world dispatch today he details the case of Mukhtaran Bibi , who became a national hero after confronting in court the gang that raped her but who has now been banned from leaving the country . 
Waiting for tonight 's Michael Jackson verdict gave us the chance to indulge in some serious TV news geekery . 
So let 's get the obvious , cliched response out of the way . 
This was the OJ chase all over again tonight , not quite 11 years since the last one , but looking much the same as before . 
All the channels cut to helicopter footage of Jackson 's four vehicle SUV convoy slowly being waved out of his Neverland ranch by a long line of staff , and then watched as it made its way along the freeways to the courthouse in Santa Maria . 
As those images filled our screens , each of the British news channels was living up to stereotypes in the background . 
So ITV News Channel did something cheap-looking , with lots of people on the phone and - it seems - none of their own people actually in California , relying instead on the US MSNBC network . 
The BBC managed to be rather more sober and , of course , big budget , with their correspondent going on matters like security and What Happens Next from Live Outside The Courthouse . 
Continue reading ... A computer-generated image released by Boeing of its 787 Dreamliner . 
Photograph : AP In the boxing ring , the world had Ali and Frazier . 
In the passenger aircraft business , we have Boeing and Airbus - two companies slugging it out for dominance of the skies . 
After being overtaken two years ago , Boeing is determined to regain the top spot . 
At this year 's Paris air show , the company , which is expected to deliver 375 to 385 planes next year , said it was on course to overtake Airbus by 2008 at the latest . 
This is no idle boast . 
Boeing has won 266 orders for its new 787 Dreamliner , while Airbus has secured far fewer orders for its new A350 , a twin-engined jet . 
Continue reading ... Africa 's largest slum , Kibera , where 600,000 Kenyans live with neither sewage nor public healthcare . 
Photograph : Khalil Senosi\/AP What effect will debt relief have on the economies of countries left behind by the sudden outbreak of generosity at the IMF , World Bank and African Development Bank ? 
Kenya , for one , did not qualify for debt relief , while three of its neighbors and major trading partners did . 
That left the East Africa Standard wondering if the country would `` lose its competitive edge against Uganda and Tanzania , given their treatments under arrangements such as the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries -LRB- HIPC -RRB- initiative . 
Rwanda has been included in the HIPC initiative . '' 
Kenya 's frustrated assistant minister for trade , Petkay Miriti , told the paper that Kenya had met all conditions imposed by western capital over time and yet the goalposts kept changing . 
`` It will be difficult for us because our neighbors will be investing that money in services and mobilising trade when we are servicing debts . '' 
Nigeria - aka Africa 's richest debtor - would understandably like its $ 35bn debt written off as well . 
New World Bank president Paul Wolfowitz made Abuja his first stop on an inaugaral four-city tour of Africa , and Nigeria lost no time in making its case . 
The response sounded cautiously optimistic , with Nigeria 's daily Guardian quoting Wolfowitz as saying creditor nations would `` hopefully come up with a deal to forgive Nigeria 's debt '' . 
Continue reading ... `` Press the pause button , '' said Peter Mandelson after the Dutch and French rejected the EU constitution . 
OK , Peter , we 've pressed it . 
The EU 's trade commissioner is delivering a rare speech at the Fabian Society tonight and will argue that New Labor 's mix of social justice and economic reform is the only way forward for the EU . 
But he will warn his old boss that the essence of Blairism is not getting across in Brussels . 
`` In Brussels , Britain has sounded neo-Thatcherite as though nothing has changed from the 1980s , '' Mandelson will tell the Fabians . 
`` Both tone and substance need now to change if the British government is to command attention and win the backing it seeks on the continent . 
A greater effort must be made to get this right during the UK presidency . '' 
What does that mean for Britain 's EU rebate ? 
It means , he says , that Britain will eventually have to compromise . 
`` It is surely wrong to ask the poorer new accession states to pay for any part of the rebate . '' 
The UK risks `` playing into the hands '' of Jacques Chirac if it rules out reform altogether : `` Disengagement from Europe at this time would be a total betrayal of Britain 's national interest . 
... Britain would walk naked into the world of globalisation . '' 
Blairisme has its admirers in France . 
But the suggestion that New Labor has the answer to the EU 's problems - if Tony could only make the Europeans grasp it - is cheekily Mandelsonian . 
And it sets the bar very high for Britain 's presidency in July . 
Expect a fierce fight for the remote control . 
News that Pink Floyd have managed to bury their 24-year-old feud and reunite for London 's Live 8 concert on July 2 will amaze fans of the Jurassic prog-rockers , though it merely fuels Damon Albarn 's argument that the show is crammed with white Anglo-Saxons , writes Adam Sweeting . 
The Floyd split was basically the band versus Roger Waters , the Wagner of pomp rock and the man who masterminded the conceptual nightmare that was The Wall . 
The solo Waters performed The Wall in Berlin in 1990 , but he has n't played with the Floyd since they toured the piece in 1981 . 
During the split , Waters allegedly printed up a roll of toilet paper with guitarist Dave Gilmour 's face on every sheet . 
`` It 's great to be asked to help Bob -LRB- Geldof -RRB- raise awareness of debt and poverty , '' said Waters , 61 . 
`` The cynics will scoff . 
More billionaires lining up to get on TV ? 
What 's to be cynical about ? 
Continue reading ... Tony Blair meets Vladimir Putin today in Moscow as he tries to shore up support for his debt relief proposals ahead of next month 's G8 summit at Gleneagles . 
Meanwhile Midge Ure has been defending the Live 8 concerts over charges that the line-up is n't African enough , saying it has an African `` feel '' . 
Here on the Newsblog we consider the return -LRB- at Live 8 -RRB- of Pink Floyd after an absence of 24 years - almost as long as one of their tracks from the early 70s . 
Our education site gathers teachers ' reaction to the government 's plans to extend the school day . 
With Lebanon 's election campaign in full swing , Brian Whitaker reports from Beirut on nationalism , sectarianism , and relations with Syria . 
And Mark Stuart , author of a new biography of John Smith , writes on the site about the legacy of the late Labor leader . 
What 's the opposite of Morrissey ? 
The Scottish rockers certainly were far from an obvious replacement for his Moz-ness , who pulled out of a headline spot at this weekend 's Isle of Wight festival . 
-LRB- Reportedly because his record company agreed to his appearing without his permission , although there 's a slightly different version of events on Morrissey 's website . -RRB- 
