China Can Do the Most Good for the World by Putting Its Own House in Order This should be China 's time to shine . 
The country is sitting on almost $ 2 trillion in foreign exchange reserves and may post a 9 percent growth rate this year , probably the highest of any nation . 
In the midst of a global financial crisis , the world has come to China 's doorstep seeking leadership . 
Yet China 's leaders have largely kept the door shut , arguing that Beijing can do the most good for the world by putting its own house in order . 
China wants to be a responsible partner , not a global leader . 
Many in the United States have assumed that China wants to ascend to superpower status ; and what better time for Beijing to step up ? 
China matters more to the world every day -- not just on trade and finance but on climate change , food safety , nonproliferation and other global challenges . 
Yet China 's leaders are right : They need to focus on the home front before they extend themselves globally , for their own sake and for ours . 
Above all , China 's leaders need to sort out where they are going politically . 
It is hard to lead globally when your domestic political system is in massive transition -- or , worse , turmoil . 
Beijing faces more than 90,000 protests annually as a result of endemic corruption and ongoing crises in public health and the environment . 
Exports , the lifeblood of the Chinese economy , are falling ; layoffs are already in the tens of thousands , and China 's stock market has lost two-thirds of its value over the past year . 
Chinese media report daily on a stream of new regulations -- to limit the ability of factories to fire workers , to manage state-run reporting or to restructure the public health bureaucracy . 
Yet all this tinkering at the margins has failed to reassure the Chinese people , or many outside the country , that the government has a clear plan for its political and economic future . 
And until China 's leaders address their domestic issues , we do n't want them playing a larger role abroad . 
Their political system is in desperate need of transparency , official accountability and the rule of law . 
Before China 's political institutions are in good shape , Chinese leadership abroad would probably introduce as many problems as it solves . 
The global financial crisis , for example , has sparked calls for Beijing to take a greater stake in the International Monetary Fund . 
On its face , given China 's impressive balance sheet , this makes sense . 
Yet Premier Wen Jiabao 's calls for IMF reform may signal a challenge to the fund 's efforts to promote transparency and accountability in the countries to which it lends ; China has routinely resisted calls for its foreign assistance to be managed in a transparent manner . 
In addition to developing the political capacity for leadership , the time Beijing spends getting its house in order would allow China to develop the economic wherewithal to lead . 
Leadership means setting an example and often entails political or economic sacrifice at home for the greater good abroad . 
China has demonstrated little inclination toward such sacrifice , partly because it does not believe it has the economic capacity to do so . 
Put another way , it needs time to expand its economy . 
On the issue of global climate change , for example , China is a strong supporter of -- and major beneficiary of -- the current international climate framework , and it is committed to the next round of negotiations . 
It has launched a domestic initiative to reduce the amount of energy it uses per unit of GDP and increase the role of renewables in its energy mix . 
Yet China avoids the tough economic choices embodied in adopting hard targets and timetables to reduce emissions , and it has sought free access to clean technology through a global fund supported by the developed world . 
Responsible player , yes ; global leader , no. . 
Acknowledging China 's reluctance to lead does n't mean the world should do nothing but wait . 
China 's path to good governance at home and leadership abroad will be fundamentally of its own making , yet our nation and others can help the process through cooperation where possible and pressure where necessary . 
Institutions such as the U.S.-China Strategic Economic Dialogue provide a framework for bilateral cooperation on economic , environmental and energy issues . 
The dialogue is young but has the potential to make significant advances on these critical issues . 
Meanwhile , on time-sensitive topics such as food safety , climate change or Darfur , the United States has to be prepared to work with the rest of the world to press China more rather than less aggressively to rethink or reform its policies . 
Above all , the United States can do the most good by getting its own house in order . 
We have been free-riding alongside China on global efforts to combat climate change . 
Our lack of good governance domestically has increased our vulnerability to food and product safety crises and precipitated a global financial crisis . 
Our political institutions and financial bearings are not broken , but they have been seriously weakened . 
We and the world will pay a steep price until this country resumes a position from which it too can lead . 
The writer is a senior fellow and director of Asia studies at the Council on Foreign Relations . 
