Friday 3 June 2005 00.06 BST Faced with daily reports of car bombs and kidnappings , it 's difficult to feel optimistic about Iraq . 
But last week in the south of the country I heard a very different story . 
A story of the movement that has formed to rebuild the country 's economy and national pride , to create an Iraq with neither the tyranny of Saddam nor the pillage of military occupation . 
Last week Basra saw its first conference on the threat of privatisation , bringing together oil workers , academics and international civil-society groups . 
The event debated an issue about which Iraqis are passionate : the ownership and control of Iraq 's oil reserves . 
The conference was organised by the General Union of Oil Employees -LRB- GUOE -RRB- , which was established in June 2004 and now has 23,000 members . 
Focused as much on the broader Iraqi public interest as on members ' concerns , its first aim was to organise workers to repair oil facilities and bring them back into production during the chaos of the early months of occupation . 
This effort by the workers required both courage - often in conflict either with coalition troops or remnants of the Ba'athist regime - and considerable ingenuity , putting back together a working oil industry with minimal resources . 
In maintenance too , the Iraqi workers have outmatched their private-company counterparts . 
Walking round the Basra refinery , I pointed to the creaking and rusty equipment and asked the manager whether there were a lot of accidents , arising from failures of equipment under high pressure . 
The refinery manager said that accidents were rare , because however old the equipment it is constantly checked . 
`` For an Iraqi refinery operator , the refinery is part of him , '' he said . 
Contrast this with the disastrous safety record of British and American refineries . 
There , the frequent accidents are caused largely by lack of maintenance and inspection - which are in turn caused by the drastic downsizing of the workforce . 
The occupation forces and their allies in the Iraqi government see things differently . 
Plans are now afoot for sweeping changes to Iraq 's oil sector , to give western oil majors access to its reserves for the first time since 1972 . 
But they will face a challenge . 
While the workforce has shown itself to be quite capable of running the industry , it has been equally effective at shutting down that industry when threatened by the authorities . 
In August 2003 oil workers ' unions organised a strike that stopped all production in southern Iraq for two days . 
The resulting bargaining power has been impressive , with the unions - which later merged to become the GUOE - successfully pushing for foreign workers to be replaced by Iraqis ; the role of US companies in the reconstruction to be reduced ; and wages to be raised to liveable levels . 
And the GUOE is uncompromising in its views on oil privatisation . 
As one oil worker told me , he and his colleagues have rebuilt their industry after its destruction in three wars , and in the face of extreme adversity . 
As a result they have a deep sense of ownership , which they will not willingly relinquish . 
Greg Muttitt is a researcher at Platform , an organization that campaigns for social and environmental justice . 
