By Bridget Kendall Diplomatic correspondent , BBC News Russia has an old ally in Syria , but the political pressure is building to distance itself Syria has provided Russia with a close military ally in the heart of the Arab world since Soviet times . 
And up until recently , it has suited Moscow 's world view to stay friends with President Bashar al-Assad . 
It fits Russia 's profile of itself as an independent Eurasian world power with its own priorities . 
The spat between Russia and Nato over Georgia in 2008 accentuated the trend , prompting Vladimir Putin to announce he was reactivating closer links with old Soviet friends -LRB- Nicaragua and Venezuela in Central and Latin America , and Syria and Algeria in the Arab world -RRB- . 
At the United Nations Security Council , Russia has repeatedly argued that its opposition to UN sanctions against Syria is consistent with a broader refusal to back outside interference in sovereign states , and an insistence that diplomacy is always preferable to coercion . 
That position has hardened in the last decade or so , following the West 's interventions in Kosovo , Iraq and Libya . 
Indeed , Nato 's action in Libya is regularly cited by Russia as the main reason it blocked the UN resolution on Syria in October - precisely because , Moscow said , it feared the start of a slippery slope towards military action . 
Russia may want to proclaim its independence from the West , but it does not want to look isolated either '' Staying loyal to President Assad also reflects another Russian instinct : that stability is usually preferable to turbulence . 
All the various-coloured revolutions in former Soviet republics which preceded the Arab Spring prompted wariness or downright hostility from Mr Putin 's government . 
And Russia is highly sensitive to the geography of the crisis and Syria 's relative proximity to its own unstable Muslim areas : if a full-blown civil war in Syria were to destabilise the entire region , Moscow 's nightmare would be to see trouble spilling over into the North Caucasus on Russia 's side of the border . 
But as often with Russian foreign policy , one has to distinguish between posture and practicalities . 
Russia may want to proclaim its independence from the West , but it does not want to look isolated either . 
Remember what happened with Libya . 
Once it became clear that Col Muammar Gaddafi 's days in power were numbered and other non-Western actors like Turkey and major Arab countries were losing patience , Russia too echoed the call that he should go . 
So far Moscow has not done that with President Assad , though it has warned that the Syrian regime will not survive if it can not reform itself . 
But in recent days the political pressure to do something at the United Nations has been mounting . 
A new UN report on human rights abuses in Syria asserted that the civilian death toll had risen to more than 5,000 . 
The UN Human Rights Commissioner called for the Assad regime to be referred to the International Criminal Court . 
And Russia , seemingly , was stung by accusations that its intransigence was blocking UN action . 
For Russia , a UN resolution could be the top of a slippery slope to military action - like in Libya It too wants to be seen to `` uphold human rights '' in Syria and criticise a `` disproportionate use of force by the Syrian authorities '' , as the new Russian UN text puts it - even if the same draft is also careful to insist on equivalence , and claim that `` extremists '' among the Syrian opposition are also responsible for the bloodshed . 
Besides this , the lessons of `` regime fall '' in Iraq and Libya must also be concentrating minds in Moscow about how best to protect its military and financial interests in Syria . 
Russia is a major arms supplier . 
It has energy projects to protect in Syria and naval interests too : it would like to see the Syrian port of Tartus once again serve as a base for Russian ships as it did in Soviet times . 
All good reasons to support the status quo , but only of course while President Assad remains a viable option . 
Yet at a certain point , Moscow must know that it might have to abandon its long-time ally . 
Once it makes the assessment that Mr Assad and his Alawite officers , some of them trained in Russian military academies , are likely to lose power , then Moscow needs to find a way to shift allegiances . 
Hence the updated draft at the UN . 
Hence - having ruled out sanctions altogether - the hint of a shift in the Russian foreign minister 's recent comments that `` if sanctions could help stop violence and maintain stability ... we would be the most decisive supporters '' . 
And hence , having criticised the Arab League a few weeks ago for suspending Syria 's membership , Russia 's current invocation of the Arab League as part of a possible solution , saying its efforts to encourage dialogue and deploy a monitoring mission in Syria should be supported . 
Where this will lead Russian policy on Syria ? 
Who knows - especially if the Arab League backs not intervention but the establishment of safe havens for fleeing opposition activists . 
One thing is clear : principle is all very well , but Russia 's priority may well be its interests , and how to secure whatever it can salvage for the longer term . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
