Syria unrest : ` Humanitarian ' vote pressed at UN Dozens have died in the past few days in Homs , opposition activists say A new resolution is being drawn up at the United Nations to focus on humanitarian aid for Syria , in the hope both China and Russia , which have opposed previous votes , will back it . 
Although diplomats said the move was in the early stage , China said it did back `` creating conditions '' for humanitarian aid to be sent . 
A UN meeting on Tuesday was told more than 7,500 had died in Syrian unrest . 
Syrian forces continued to pound the city of Homs on Wednesday . 
Three journalists , Edith Bouvier , William Daniels and Javier Espinosa , are still believed to be trapped in Homs . 
Sunday Times photographer Paul Conroy was smuggled out to Lebanon on Tuesday in an operation that left 13 Syrian opposition activists dead . 
The US and France are working on a new draft UN Security Council resolution seeking access for humanitarian aid workers and an end to violence . 
On 4 February China and Russia blocked a UN resolution backing an Arab plan condemning the crackdown and calling on President Bashar al-Assad to step down . 
Video has been released reportedly showing the aftermath of clashes in Sarmin , near Idlib city One diplomat told Reuters there was a new text but it was not yet a formal draft . 
`` It 's been drafted by the Americans . 
It has n't gone to the full council , just to a small circle of like-minded countries . '' 
Another diplomat told AFP : `` This resolution will concentrate on humanitarian access to the cities , but it will indicate that the government is the cause of the crisis . '' 
The aim is to make it hard for Russia and China , who are opposed to what they say is forced regime change , to use their veto . 
China 's Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi indicated his country was in favor of creating the conditions for aid to be sent . 
Speaking to the head of the Arab League , Nabil Elaraby , over the phone , Mr Yang said China was willing to work with the Arab nations for '' a peaceful and proper settlement of the Syria issue '' , the official Xinhua news agency reported . 
Mr Yang said that it was '' an urgent task '' for opposing sides in Syria to halt violence in order to begin '' an inclusive political dialogue '' . 
Thirty-one-year-old reporter for French daily Le Figaro and Radio France Internationale . 
Sustained a broken femur in the attack which killed US war correspondent Marie Colvin and French photographer Remi Ochlik . 
The 34-year-old Paris-based photographer specialises in documenting humanitarian crises . 
He is represented by the London-based Panos agency and is working with Ms Bouvier on an assignment for Le Figaro . 
Spanish daily El Mundo 's Middle East correspondent . 
He began working for the paper in 1994 , covering the Rwandan genocide . 
Has also reported from Mexico and Morocco for the paper . 
In 1999 , he was kidnapped and held for 48 hours by rebels in Sierra Leone . 
`` The international community should create favourable conditions in this regard and provide humanitarian aid to Syria , '' Xinhua quoted him as saying . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton last week called Russia and China 's veto `` despicable '' - comments the Chinese foreign ministry said were not acceptable . 
Critics have said the effect of the Chinese and Russian vetoes was to provide diplomatic support for the Assad regime , which then escalated its offensives against Homs and other cities . 
The BBC 's Damian Grammaticas in Beijing says China has been stung by the international criticism . 
It now appears to be trying to repair the damage to its diplomatic relations with Arab nations who had urged it to support UN action . 
In recent days China 's state-controlled media has been attacking Western governments , saying that they were pursuing `` hegemonistic ambitions '' under the guise of `` humanitarian concern '' . 
But our correspondent says it is far from clear whether China will or will not veto any new Security Council resolution . 
French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said he `` solemnly '' appealed to Beijing and Moscow not to block it . 
Residents of Homs fear the army is planning an imminent ground assault there . 
Faysal Khabbaz Hamoui said the debate was `` fuelling the flames of terrorism '' One activist in the city , Mohammad al-Homsi , told Reuters news agency that the army was moving infantry towards the al-Bassel football stadium just north of the besieged district of Baba Amr , and that `` fierce confrontations with automatic rifles and heavy machineguns are taking place there '' . 
Another activist , Hadi Abdullah , told AFP news agency , power had been cut to most of the city . 
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights says some 100 people were killed in the past two days in the continuing Syrian bombardment of Homs . 
The fate of the remaining journalists remains unclear . 
They left with Mr Conroy but became separated . 
Ms Bouvier and Mr Conroy were both hurt in an earlier attack that killed fellow journalists Marie Colvin and Remi Ochlik . 
The UN 's new estimate of the number of deaths in Syria came at a meeting of the UN Security Council . 
`` There are credible reports that the death toll now often exceeds 100 civilians a day , including many women and children , '' said Lynn Pascoe . 
`` The total killed so far is certainly well over 7,500 people . '' 
The Syrian government says at least 1,345 members of the security forces have been killed combating what it calls `` armed gangs and terrorists '' , and puts the number of civilians killed at 2,493 . 
An emergency meeting of the UN Human Rights Council was also held on Tuesday in Geneva , where commissioner Navi Pillay said atrocities against civilians were being committed . 
Syria 's representative to the UN , Faysal Khabbaz Hamoui , stormed out of the session , accusing countries of `` inciting sectarianism and providing arms '' . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
