HOUSTON\/NEW YORK | Tue Jul 6 , 2010 7:58 pm EDT HOUSTON\/NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Drilling of a relief well to halt the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico is a week ahead of schedule , the U.S. official overseeing the response to the disaster said on Tuesday . 
The prospect of an earlier completion of the well , seen as the most promising way to plug the oil leaking from BP 's blown-out undersea well , could help bolster the energy giant 's battered shares , which rose about 9 percent in New York trade . 
But Retired Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen told reporters in Houston that crews were still aiming to finish drilling two relief wells in mid-August , and he shot down speculation that the first of the two wells could plug the leak in July . 
BP shares continued a recent rally after the British energy giant said it could cover the costs of the spill without selling new shares , despite reports it was talking to government-owned funds in the Middle East about buying a stake to ward off takeover attempts . 
`` Any positive news as far as expediting what they 've been trying for a long time now will be a further catalyst for buyers to get in , '' said Alan Lancz , president at Alan B. Lancz & Associates Inc in Toledo , Ohio . '' 
... anything that would speed up the process or any kind of success at all as far as capping it would be a welcome relief . 
Then you can get down to a definitive range of liability . 
While it 's spilling , it 's very difficult to ascertain what the total costs will be , '' he said . 
Allen , who spoke minutes after markets had closed in New York , also said a third vessel at the leak site that will nearly double BP 's oil-capture capacity to 53,000 barrels a day from around 25,000 now was partially hooked up on Tuesday , but rough seas hampered efforts to finish the job . 
Estimates of the leak 's severity vary widely and run as high as a 100,000 barrels per day . 
BP is already committed to but not ultimately restricted to a $ 20 billion fund for clean-up and other costs stemming from the largest offshore oil spill in U.S. history . 
Its costs to date have topped $ 3 billion and are rising steeply . 
But the ultimate costs may well depend on how much crude is determined to have leaked from the well that blew when a rig exploded on April 20 , killing 11 workers . 
Investors are keenly eyeing containment efforts . 
Analysts said that barring other negative news , the stock may have found a floor with its New York closing price of $ 26.97 on June 25 . 
Shares are up 16 percent since the close on that day . 
`` All the negative news on the stock has had its impact , '' said Kurt Wulff , president at McDep LLC , an oil and gas research firm in Needham , Massachusetts . 
`` We 're optimistic that the news can get better from there . 
The talk about sovereign buyers may not lead to anything , but it certainly means that value-orientated investors are seeing opportunity . '' 
At one stage during the spill , BP had lost $ 100 billion in market value . 
The spill is wreaking havoc on coastal ecosystems , fishing communities and a tourist industry seen as especially important during a time of high unemployment . 
It has also thrust itself to the top of President Barack Obama 's crowded domestic agenda and presented a tough test for his leadership . 
A source in the United Arab Emirates said on Tuesday that BP executives held talks with sovereign wealth funds in Abu Dhabi , Kuwait and Qatar , as well as one in Singapore , to find a partner who might help it avoid being taken over . 
`` BP is seeking a strategic partner so it does n't get taken over by other major oil companies such as Exxon and Total , '' the source said . 
BP declined to comment on talk of a stake sale . 
It did say there were no plans to issue new equity to anyone , allaying some investors ' fears of a share issue to help pay for a spill expected to cost tens of billions of dollars . 
`` We 're always happy to welcome new shareholders or existing shareholders who wish to increase their holdings , but there 's no plans to issue new equity to anyone , '' a BP spokesman said . 
A top 10 shareholder said any move to issue shares would be viewed extremely negatively . 
`` It will be a kind of suicide note -- people will turn up with flamethrowers at management , '' the shareholder said . 
Several sovereign funds already hold BP stakes . 
Norway and Kuwait control about 1.8 percent each , China has 1.1 percent and Singapore 0.7 percent , according to Thomson Reuters data . 
Royal Bank of Scotland upgraded BP to `` buy '' from `` hold . '' 
`` Our base case scenario is significantly less pessimistic and in our view , the risk\/reward profile of the shares is currently favorable , '' it said in a note . 
Just two out of 37 brokers have an `` underperform '' or `` sell '' rating on BP 's stock , and over two-thirds rate it `` buy '' or `` strong buy , '' according to Thomson Reuters data . 
The stock 's 12-month forward price-to-earnings ratio makes it easily the cheapest among the major oil companies . 
Britain 's The Times newspaper reported the British government was drafting contingency plans for a possible BP collapse . 
The British government declined to comment . 
Tests showed tar balls washed up on the Texas coast were from the spill , meaning every U.S. Gulf state -- Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama , Florida and now Texas -- has been soiled by the largest offshore oil spill in the country 's history . 
Texas asked BP for a $ 25 million block grant to help fund its cleanup . 
BP has provided similar funds to other states that have had crude wash ashore , and the credit rating agency Standard & Poor 's said that money was keeping the spill damage from affecting the credit ratings of affected states . 
There was a chance disturbed weather over the southern Gulf of Mexico could strengthen into a tropical storm this week , the U.S. National Hurricane Center said . 
Although it was not expected to travel over the site of the blown-out BP well , it could come closer than Hurricane Alex , which interrupted the cleanup operations last week . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The company has been , for two weeks , trying to get a corporate bond deal done , but investors are too scared of the legal risk surrounding the company ... antecdotal reports also of some interesting plant-damaging rainfall a ways away also . . 
lots of stuff going on regarding this leak . . 
good luck , America . . 
Come on Americans , this is your backyard ! 
This is an upward flow against gravity that pulls down . 
It can be stopped by some easy tricks on fluid dynamics using concepts of surface transport of particles . 
Bubbling flow upward can be clogged by high density objects coming down by gravity pull . 
Instead of doing a junk shot with gulf balls and shredded tires they were supposed to put high density and sinking geometry to clog the well . 
We do it a lot in Soil Science and the Dust Bowl provides insights on surface transport of particles by erosion regarding detachment , transport , and deposition . 
Hydrology is being curbed in the patenting affairs and technological development deeply missing now to solve simple problems like clogging a spilling well . 
The use of golf balls in the junk shot is a clear evidence that the experts have no handle on deep Hydrology . 
I am not surprised since a sort of scientific discovery in Hydrodynamics is being constantly violated by lay people as Patent Examiners , Patent Attorneys , and Scientists . 
Try to find any address of wick\/wicking on Hydrology textbooks and you will see that this oil spill is something that could have been stopped on the day ONE if science were respected and honored . 
This OIL SPILL is a consequence of a bunch of people pretending to be smart overstepping the boundaries of a classic science called HYDROLOGY . 
Mr. Obamas assigned Dr. Regina Benjamin 42 lbs overweight to take care of your health system . 
A person near obese in the health system that can not help herself is going to provide Americans insights to shed weight and be healthy . 
This way Americans are becoming 85 % obese by 2040 . 
I suggested Mr. Obama to resign because my advanced breakthrough scientific discovery in Hydrodynamics is being violated by flawed patents that even do not work . 
Why to ignore science ? 
Just imagine if the well could be clogged in few hours by appropriate approach making gravity pull heavy objects downward on a bubbling upward flow with variable flow velocity due to the dragging effect of well casing . 
The relief wells may not work as clay in the mud can only clog tiny pores but fail on cracks and fissures . 
I believe this entire nightmare is preventable and consequence of a failing leadership you have . 
How would I stop the spill ? 
Easily running some trials with a visible display employing translucent 22 in pipes with similar upward flow and check the dragging effect on many particle sizes and formats . 
The bubbling effect should increase fall by reducing the fluid density , as well as variable radial flow velocity which is higher in the center and lower around the containment case as a stationary surface . 
When we start injecting the junk shot we know what to expect and change the particles sizes and formats as the velocity of spill reduces by the this downward effect from the falling particles . 
Lower and lower velocity suggests smaller and smaller particles until clay can be used to seal tiny pores inside the well lumen . 
What am I charging for it ? 
I just want USPTO to stop violating my scientific discovery US pat . 
6,766,817 with flawed patents that even do not work shamefully harming and dishonoring HYDROLOGY . 
I got PhD at Penn State University and Bill Clinton was the speecher of my commencement on May 10 , 1996 . 
CNN is controlling info by removing comments on its website . 
I am curious who takes advantages by this ongoing catastrophe . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
