Poggy fish lie dead stuck in oil in Bay Jimmy near Port Sulpher , Louisiana June 20 , 2010 . 
NEW ORLEANS\/LAFITTE , Louisiana | Mon Jun 21 , 2010 7:51 pm EDT NEW ORLEANS\/LAFITTE , Louisiana -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Oil services companies went to court on Monday seeking to overturn President Barack Obama 's six-month ban on deepwater drilling in the Gulf of Mexico after the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
U.S. District Court Judge Martin Feldman said he would decide by Wednesday whether to temporarily lift the ban while the case is heard . 
More than a dozen companies involved in offshore drilling operations filed the lawsuit , calling the ban `` arbitrary and capricious . '' 
`` The government 's unchecked authority has shut down this entire industry , '' argued lawyer Carl Rosenblum , representing the oil industry . 
The lawsuit is the first seeking to reverse Obama 's May 28 moratorium , which the companies say will force job cuts in the labor force needed to service offshore oil platforms . 
The ban has caused the shutdown of 33 deepwater drilling rigs . 
Obama imposed the ban after an explosion aboard an oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico on April 20 killed 11 workers and ruptured a well owned by BP Plc , unleashing millions of gallons of crude into the ocean . 
The Obama administration argues that the moratorium is necessary to prevent further accidents while a presidential commission investigates the cause of the BP spill . 
Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal , a Republican critic of the Obama administration 's handling of the spill , has sided with the companies in the case . 
The lawsuit is another example of the administration 's strained relations with big business , which was on display last week when BP bowed to pressure from Obama and agreed to set up a $ 20 billion oil spill damages fund . 
The spill , now in its 63rd day , has soiled the coastline of four U.S. states , threatening tourism and fishing industries ; seeped into ecologically sensitive wetlands and marshes ; battered BP 's image ; and tested Obama , who has come under fire over his handling of the crisis . 
If spill spreads , BP could face challenges beyond the Gulf Coast . 
Attorneys general from 11 states on the U.S. East Coast warned they would hold the company responsible for injury to wildlife that could affect their coastline . 
An independent federal agency that investigates chemical accidents -- the U.S. Chemical Safety Board -- is launching a probe into the root causes of the spill . 
The case will be handled by the investigators who examined BP 's safety practices after a deadly 2005 refinery explosion in Texas . 
BP said it has spent $ 2 billion so far on clean-up . 
Fueling investor concern about BP 's final bill for the spill , a Democratic U.S. lawmaker on Sunday released an internal company document that said , in a worst-case scenario , up to 100,000 barrels -LRB- 4.2 million gallons\/15 .9 million liters -RRB- of oil a day could gush from its ruptured deep-sea well . 
The British energy company dismissed it , saying the figure was being taken out of context . 
But investors , apparently worried it could mean higher fines and clean-up costs for BP , drove its shares down 4.5 percent in New York trading . 
BP plans to raise cash from banks to ensure it has enough money on hand to pay for the clean-up but does not plan a bond offering , sources familiar with the company 's thinking told Reuters on Monday . 
Banking sources said last week that BP was seeking some $ 7 billion from banks . 
BP has considered several ways to raise more money , such as selling assets . 
But for now , it is confident its cash resources can cover the bulk of the clean-up costs , one source said . 
Seeking to keep the focus on the ecological disaster , New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu hosted mayors from 17 U.S. cities on a visit to the Mississippi Delta , where oil has coated fragile marshlands , tarred wildlife and decimated fisheries . 
During the mayors ' visit to marshes in Louisiana 's Barataria Bay , the stench of coagulating oil hung in the air as miles of boom encircled oil-stained marshes and scores of boats skimmed oil from the bay 's waters . 
BP continued to siphon more oil from the blown-out deep-sea well . 
It said it collected or burned off 23,290 barrels -LRB- 978,180 gallons\/3 .7 million liters -RRB- of crude on Sunday , still well below the 35,000-60 ,000 barrels a day that government scientists estimate are gushing from the well . 
Both BP and the U.S. government are placing their hopes on two relief wells that are being drilled to permanently cap the leak . 
Those wells are expected to be finished in August . 
BP Managing Director Bob Dudley is in day-to-day charge of the company 's response to the spill after Chief Executive Tony Hayward returned to Britain last week , the company said . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Executives only understand costs , not human suffering . 
Hit them with severe penalties , and if someone in Congress objects , publicize it loudly . 
should consider a fact that is being ignored : Louisianans - because of its royalty payments from oil and gas has the lowest property taxes in the U.S. for fourty plus years . 
Since they did not share that income with other states and the citizens of Texas and Louisiana certainly supported their oil industry benefactors as evidenced by the Joe Barton 's ; I '' shed my tears for the fish !! Just wait until the oil is caught by the Loop current and transported around FL and up the East Coast at 1 m\/sec . 
The cost of damages will triple . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
