\* BP 's purchase of Devon 's Brazil assets under review \* ANP 's Lima tells Valor `` in no rush '' to review deal SAO PAULO , Brazil , June 21 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Brazilian government is `` in no rush '' to approve BP 's -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- $ 7 billion purchase of Devon Energy 's -LRB- DVN . 
N -RRB- assets in the country as it assesses the impact of BP 's oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , Valor Economico newspaper said on Monday . 
The review of the deal , which is part of a normal evaluation of takeovers in the nation 's energy industry , will also gauge BP 's ability to honor contracts as the company may have to create a $ 20 billion fund to pay for the spill cleanup , Valor said , citing Haroldo Lima , the head of the ANP energy regulator . 
There are no current impediments to the transfer of assets to BP , Lima said , according to Valor . 
BP said in March it would buy interests in 10 exploration blocks in Brazil and others in the Gulf of Mexico and Azerbaijan from Devon to help it replace depleting reserves . 
-LRB- ID : nLDE62A09Y -RRB- `` We are analyzing the deal but we wo n't decide now , in the middle of this very tense moment and before the studies about the Gulf of Mexico spill tell whether things will get worse , '' Lima told Valor . 
Most of the blocs that are included in the transfer plan are in exploratory phase , with the exception of the Polvo field in the Santos Basin that is currently producing heavy oil , Valor said . 
BP 's head of institutional relations in Brazil , Ivan Simoes Filho , told Valor the company 's finances are `` very solid and -LRB- the company -RRB- has all the necessary capabilities to face any of its current commitments . '' 
Neither the ANP nor BP immediately responded to requests for a comment . 
An ANP spokesman told Reuters on June 16 the review of the asset transfer was not related to BP 's Gulf oil spill , which specialists call the worst oil industry disaster in U.S. history . 
-LRB- Reporting by Guillermo Parra-Bernal ; additional reporting by Brian Ellsworth in Rio de Janeiro ; Editing by Maureen Bavdek -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
