When secrecy does more harm than good The government is wrong to wield the Official Secrets Act over the leaked al-Jazeera memo In 1997 , the new Labor government published a white paper setting out its proposals for a Freedom of Information Act . 
The opening paragraph stated : `` Unnecessary secrecy in government leads to arrogance in governance and defective decision-making . 
The perception of excessive secrecy has become a corrosive influence in the decline of public confidence in government . 
Moreover , the climate of public opinion has changed : people expect much greater openness and accountability from government than they used to . '' 
So , when the Daily Mirror last week published a report , `` Bush plot to bomb his Arab ally '' , which told of a leaked government memo alleging that George Bush planned to bomb al-Jazeera 's headquarters in Qatar , did the government welcome the openness that such scrutiny could bring ? 
Instead the attorney general , Lord Goldsmith , tried to coerce editors into keeping quiet . 
The memo is said to describe an alleged conversation between Bush and Tony Blair last April , when Bush apparently threatened to use `` military action '' against al-Jazeera . 
The government could have tried to sue the Daily Mirror for breach of confidence . 
However , the newspaper would surely have had a cast-iron public interest defense , so the government chose instead to rely upon the Official Secrets Act . 
Under section 3 of the OSA , a crown servant is guilty of a criminal offence if he or she makes a damaging disclosure relating to international relations without lawful authority , where they came by that information because of their position in government . 
Also , under section 5 , a person who receives such information from such a person is guilty of a criminal offence if he or she then discloses it knowing it is protected under the OSA . 
A disclosure is held to be `` damaging '' if it is likely to endanger the interests of the UK abroad , seriously endanger the protection by the UK of those interests or the safety of British citizens abroad . 
According to the Daily Mirror report , the memo turned up in the office of the former Labor MP for Northampton South , Tony Clarke . 
A civil servant has been charged under section 3 , and a researcher for Clarke under section 5 , in relation to the leaked memo . 
But also , Lord Goldsmith is threatening newspaper editors under section 5 if they publish its contents . 
Clearly , there is a need for secrecy in relation to genuinely sensitive information which could endanger the UK 's national security or British citizens ' lives . 
However , the information apparently contained in this memo clearly raises questions of public interest . 
For example , whether George Bush was seriously recommending that a news organization located in a US ally 's territory be bombed in order to stop unfavourable coverage of the Iraq war . 
One wonders whether the prosecutions have more to do with political expediency than a genuine attempt to safeguard the national interest . 
Indeed , it could be suggested that the lack of openness of the government in this case does more harm to national security than good . 
This potential conflict has been recognized by the courts as long ago as the Spycatcher case in the late 1980s . 
More recently , Lord Bingham in the David Shayler case stated : `` There can be no government by the people if they are ignorant of the issues to be resolved , the arguments for and against different solutions and the facts underlying those arguments . '' 
The House of Lords in that case held that there was no public interest defense available under the OSA for members and former members of the security services , but one would expect the strictest restrictions to be imposed on security services personnel . 
The media are in a different position and thus a public interest defense may apply when journalists are alleged to breach the OSA . 
For , as the government itself noted , without openness and accountability , the public confidence will disappear . 
