Wall Street roared back yesterday , rebounding from last week 's dismal performance with its largest rally in 70 years and revealing renewed confidence in U.S. and global efforts to combat the financial crisis . 
After finishing the worst week in its more than 100-year history , the Dow Jones industrial average blew past several milestones , closing up 11.08 percent , or 936.42 points , at 9387.61 . 
It was the fifth-largest rally in history on a percentage basis and the largest since the Great Depression . 
It was also , by far , the Dow 's largest point gain , and it snapped an eight-day losing streak fueled by deepening concerns of a global recession . 
Most of last week 's historic 18 percent loss was wiped out . 
The Standard & Poor 's 500-stock index , a broader index watched by market professionals , was up 11.58 percent , or 104.13 , to 1003.35 -- its best one-day gain since 1939 . 
The tech-heavy Nasdaq composite index was up 11.81 percent , or 194.74 , to close at 1844.25 . 
This is gargantuan , and if it continues tomorrow , that would be even better , '' said Art Hogan , chief market analyst at Jefferies & Co. `` You have to remember how low we have gotten . 
It 's great to remind investors that the market goes up , too . '' 
After being steeped in frustration and fear for nearly two weeks , investors and traders seemed more confident in global efforts to stem the financial crisis . 
The British government said it is injecting capital directly into three troubled banks , while the U.S. Treasury is finalizing plans for a similar program that would spend $ 250 billion to buy ownership stakes in a broad range of banks . 
U.S. regulators are expected to announce an expanded response to the crisis today , including unlimited deposit insurance for non-interest-bearing accounts , such as checking and payroll accounts used by small businesses . 
`` It feels like we 're beginning to get the feeling that regulators and governments are doing what they have to , to get the liquidity flowing again , '' said John Wilson , co-head of the equity group at Morgan Keegan in Memphis . 
Morgan Stanley , a battered Wal Street firm , helped lead the rally after announcing that it had closed a $ 9 billion deal with the Japanese bank Mitsubishi UFJ Financial . 
The company 's stock had been dragged down by concerns that the deal -- and the needed cash infusion -- would fall through . 
Morgan Stanley 's stock gained 87 percent , to close at $ 18.10 . 
It is still down more than 60 percent for the year . 
Large-scale sell-offs are often followed by a rebound . 
But the size of yesterday 's gain reflects pent-up bargain hunting , analysts said . 
`` I think there are some people out there that think things are so bad , it ca n't get much worse , '' Wilson said . 
Institutional and individual investors have pulled a tremendous amount of money out of the market in recent weeks that they may be willing to use again , he said . 
But it 's unclear whether the rally signals a market turnaround or a brief reprieve . 
The bond markets were closed for Columbus Day , and many traders took the day off , analysts said . 
The test of the market rebound 's significance will be whether banks remain reluctant to lend to one another -- the crux of the current financial crisis -- and that will take more time to determine , they said . 
`` I am not sure whether this rally is sustainable . 
We 're going to have to wait and see , '' said Joseph Brusuelas , chief U.S. economist at Merk Investments . 
`` I am not ready to call this a market bottom yet . 
We have some bad -LRB- economic data -RRB- and a bad earnings season ahead of us . '' 
The economic outlook remains weak , and a global recession is still likely , said Win Thin , senior currency strategist for Brown Brothers Harriman . 
`` It seems like the Europeans have snapped the panic , and if it continues tomorrow , '' the rebound would be significant , he said . 
`` The U.S. may need to do something more to keep up the confidence '' of the market , perhaps borrowing elements of the British and European rescue plans , he said . 
The Dow was also led yesterday by General Motors , which surged 33 percent , to $ 6.51 a share . 
The company is still off 70 percent for the year , but investors appear focused on recent reports that General Motors was considering a merger with Chrysler , which is owned by Cerberus Capital Management , a private-equity group . 
Both automakers have been bruised by a severe industry downturn . 
Meanwhile , after falling below $ 80 a barrel for the first time in a year last week , oil prices also staged a rebound . 
The price of light , sweet crude jumped 4.5 percent , or $ 3.49 , to settle at $ 81.19 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange . 
The trajectory is still negative , analysts said . 
In a research note , Goldman Sachs said it expects the oil cycle to remain `` cyclically weak '' at least through the first half of 2009 and that prices could fall to $ 75 a barrel by the beginning of the year . 
`` There has been a dramatic change in financial market conditions over the past month and at this point we can not look back and dream about what might have been , '' said the report , from analyst Arjun Murti . '' 
