'' This Story : Read + | Watch + | At Indian Call Centers , Another View of U.S. . 
The Aegis call center in India hums with activity . 
As the U.S. economy drops , outsourced debt collection booms . 
-LRB- By Emily Wax -- The Washington Post -RRB- GURGAON , India -- With her flowing , hot-pink Indian suit , jangly silver bangles and perky voice , Bhumika Chaturvedi , 24 , does n't fit the stereotype of a thuggish , heard-it-all-before debt collector . 
But lately , she has had no problem making American debtors cry . 
For the past three years , Chaturvedi has been a top collection agent at her call center , phoning hundreds of Americans a day and politely asking them to pay up . 
As the U.S. financial crisis plunges Americans into debt , her business is one of the fastest-growing sectors in Indian outsourcing . 
It is also one of the few sectors of outsourcing in India that is still hiring aggressively . 
Sitting in a narrow cubicle , her head-set switched on , Chaturvedi listens every night to increasingly disturbing tales of woe from the other side of the globe . 
`` My mortgage payments are just too high , honey . 
I just ca n't make the payment this month , '' a weeping woman with a Southern accent recently told her in response to a call for a $ 200 credit card payment . 
`` I 'm sure y ' all heard about the credit crunch and gas prices . 
I 'm flat broke . '' 
`` Ma'am , I am here to help you , '' Chaturvedi calmly said . 
`` Ma'am , maybe you could make a small payment , $ 100 or $ 50 , anything that you can . '' 
Few places in India absorb and imitate American culture as much as call centers , where ambitious young Indians with fake American accents and American noms de phone spend hours calling people in Indiana or Maine to help navigate software glitches , plan vacations or sell products . 
The subculture of call centers tends to foster a cult of America , an over-the-top fantasy where hopes and dreams are easily accomplished by people who live in a brand-name wonderland of high-paying jobs , big houses and luxury getaways . 
But collection agents at this call center outside New Delhi are starting to see the flip side of that vision : a country hobbled by debt and filled with people scared of losing their jobs , their houses and their cars . 
`` Lately , 25-year-old Americans are telling me that they are declaring themselves bankrupt , '' said Chaturvedi , raising her eyebrows in shock . 
`` These days the situation is so emotional , so fragile . 
We have to have so much empathy and patience . '' 
`` It 's like people are totally drowning , '' said Omkar Gadgil , 24 , who goes by the alias Richard Rudy and was a math major in college . 
He is brainy and considered the office expert on the intricacies of debt collection . 
`` There has just been years of overspending and now : the crash . '' 
In the past , debt-saddled customers were often annoyed by Chaturvedi 's calls from the open-air office at Aegis BPO Services . 
But now they seem depressed , defeated . 
Even the men sob into the phone , several agents said . 
Under the pseudonym Carol Miller , Chaturvedi 's ability to deftly work around the standard line , `` The check is in the mail , '' is now being challenged by clients throwing out new responses : `` How do you expect me to pay ? 
This is the worst crisis since the Great Depression . '' 
Chaturvedi said she has never seen it so bad . 
Many of the young employees say they are flabbergasted at just how widespread the financial ruin appears to be . 
