There was no plush bar , no glitterati babble over bubbly . 
The audience gathered in a drab school foyer in central London . 
Like many theater first nights , there was a guest list -LRB- `` Katharine Hamnett plus 2 , Jeremy Corbyn plus 5 , military families plus 25 '' -RRB- , but no lavish hospitality . 
Filing into the chilly school hall , with its rows of austere polypropylene chairs and a pair of flaccid white balloons hanging glumly from a rafter , one was reminded of Linda in Nancy Mitford 's The Pursuit of Love : `` The worst of being a Communist is that the parties you may go to are awfully funny and touching , but not very gay , and they 're always in such gloomy places . '' 
This was , however , an Event : the world premiere of Peace Mom , a new play by Dario Fo , the 79-year-old Nobel laureate , based on the writings of Cindy Sheehan . 
Her touching and personal protest after the death of her son Casey , a US soldier in Iraq , has galvanised anti-war sentiment , and last week she brought her campaign to Britain . 
Fo , with Franca Rame , his wife and collaborator , flew over for the performance , staged by Stop the War and directed by Michael Kustow . 
Why had he been attracted to the Sheehan story ? 
`` One of the things that grabbed me is that that there is an epic quality to the letters that Sheehan wrote to George Bush , and especially Barbara Bush , '' he said . 
`` There is a rhythm and tempo in her prose which recalls the great epic writers of Greece . 
When she writes : ' I am the mother of a son killed in Iraq ; you are the mother of the man who killed him , ' it is almost hendecasyllabic -LRB- the classical poetic metre -RRB- . 
`` She has a gift of candor and directness and epic simplicity - Cindy may not know it but she is a born writer . '' 
The play is a monologue , a tapestry of Sheehan 's letters to Bush and Fo 's invention . 
The actor Frances de la Tour performs with script in hand - this was billed as work-in-progress . 
Fo has been sending additions and revisions until the eleventh hour . 
De la Tour 's rich contralto rings out ; a contrast with Sheehan 's fluting , soft soprano . 
Sheehan sits in the audience next to Fo and Rame . 
Her usual beatific smile remains intact . 
But when de la Tour delivers the line : `` About a month after his death I said to myself : I 've had enough of crying for my own son , now I 'm going to cry for all mothers , '' her tears fall . 
In the row in front , vigorous anti-war campaigner Jeremy Corbyn , MP for Islington north , rests his eyes . 
The play is funny and touching ; but not very gay . 
Afterwards , Sheehan and de la Tour entwine hands . 
`` Frances did an amazing job of conveying my feeling of anger and betrayal , especially when she said what I wrote to Barbara Bush , '' says Sheehan . 
`` Casey was honorable and brave and sweet and he was murdered by the Bush family . '' 
Kustow hopes that when de la Tour goes to Broadway in the spring to act in Alan Bennett 's The History Boys they can stage the play in New York , and he would like to produce it on TV . 
Many strange things have happened to Sheehan since her son was killed on April 4 2004 , but surely few can match the surprise that she received a few days ago when she learned that a Nobel-prizewinning playwright had written a monologue based on her letters to George Bush , that she was to watch it in a school hall in London , and that it would performed by one of the English-speaking world 's great actors . 
`` My whole life is surreal and bizarre , '' she said . 
`` I hope the play can be used as an anti-war tool , to put a human face on this war , to show Casey had a life , was a person . '' 
