CAIRO | Mon Jul 25 , 2011 8:38 pm BST CAIRO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A court postponed Monday the trial of Egypt 's former interior minister over the killing of protesters until next week so that he will be tried alongside ousted President Hosni Mubarak . 
The ruling followed a weekend of clashes involving protesters demanding swifter reforms and faster prosecution of Mubarak and his officials . 
Demonstrators clashed with stone-throwing men who blocked a march to the Defense Ministry . 
Many Egyptians believe the army is reluctant to speed up the trial of Mubarak , its former commander-in-chief , and say it wants to prevent his public humiliation . 
They also accuse the army of delaying other reforms . 
Judge Adel Abdel-Salam ordered the trial of Habib al-Adli be postponed until August 3 so it was `` joined with the case related to the trial of the former President Hosni Mubarak , '' adding that the evidence and charges were the same . 
Six others in the Adli case will be tried on the same day . 
Sources had earlier said Mubarak 's trial could be held in the Red Sea resort of Sharm el-Sheikh . 
But merging the case with Adli and other officials could complicate moving the trial from Cairo as all defendants may have to be in the same court , legal experts said . 
`` The cases have been merged together : where Mubarak is tried , Adli is tried , '' Judge Ahmed Mekky , the deputy head of Egypt 's Appeal Court , said . 
Further delays in the case or shifting it to another place could stoke public anger as many Egyptians are particularly keen to see Adli convicted after police used live ammunition , rubber bullets and teargas to try to quash anti-Mubarak demonstrations . 
Some protesters at the court on the outskirts of Cairo on Monday hurled stones at the police van driving away Adli , who had stood in the cage for defendants during Monday 's session . 
`` Why did they postpone the trial today ? 
We are tired of this never-ending postponement . 
The son of my brother died in the revolution ; who will give us our rights ... if the court keeps postponing trials of those who killed him ? '' 
asked Mohamed Abdou , who was outside the court . 
Mubarak and his two sons , Alaa and Gamal , have been charged in connection with the killing of demonstrators . 
About 850 died in the 18-day uprising that ousted the president on February 11 . 
` WHY TAKE ALL THIS TIME ? ' 
Mubarak , 83 , has been in hospital since April , in Sharm el-Sheikh . 
His two sons are being held in a Cairo prison . 
`` I am against the postponement . 
Why take all this time ? '' 
said Foad Kamal , who works in a supermarket chain . 
He had come to the court expecting a verdict . 
About 300 people were injured in Cairo Saturday when thousands of demonstrators fought opponents with stones on a march to the Defense Ministry to urge the ruling military council to speed up reforms . 
Activists blamed the violence on thugs who they said were encouraged by the authorities . 
The army has dismissed the charges and said it did not use force against demonstrators . 
Military police , armed with Tasers and batons , held back protesters as police fired tear gas . 
`` What happened Saturday was a planned attack against peaceful protesters who aim to keep up pressure on the military council to bring about faster reforms , '' said Mohamed Fahmy , a member of the Youth Coalition of the Revolution . 
`` We will continue to muster people on the street next Friday . 
We will respond in peaceful protest to Saturday 's events , '' Fahmy said . 
Protesters have increasingly criticised the army and arranged coordinated demonstrations in Cairo and the port cities of Alexandria and Suez . 
The cabinet pledged Monday to clear out officials who held senior posts in Mubarak 's era , continue with public trials and press on with other reforms , such as setting a maximum wage for higher paid officials within a month . 
Five police officers were referred to trial for inciting violence on February2 , when Mubarak loyalists charged protesters in Tahrir Square on camels and horses , a judicial source said . 
Separately , the military prosecution questioned former prime minister Ahmed Nazif over a charge of facilitating the sale of army land to a businessman , the state news agency said . 
