Corporal Roger Eustis , 47 , a civilian working for the MoD , was compulsorily mobilised for Operation Telic 1 , the invasion of Iraq in January 2003 , and demobilised in September that year . 
His specialist unit provided port operators and vessel crew . 
I left because my missus did n't want me to be in the TA any more . 
I was just doing a back-office job in Iraq , based mostly in Umm Qasr . 
I was n't doing a war-fighting role so I was n't in incredible danger . 
You could have put a 19-year-old guy out of school doing it . 
I came back and stayed in the TA for two years . 
I eventually left because my wife did not want me to be mobilised again - but it was my decision to leave . 
All the way down the line I have said family first , job second , reserves third . 
The key thing for people who were in the early deployment is that TA families do n't have anywhere near the support that the regulars take for granted . 
She did n't know anybody else who was in the same boat . 
Regular army wives all know each other and have a support network . 
Also , I was losing # 500 a month . 
I was quite prepared to go to Iraq . 
I remain proud of the minimal contribution I made . 
The only sour note has been that , two years down the line , I have yet to receive my medal . 
In contrast , the TA unit based in Tony Blair 's constituency , who were deployed a year after us , were issued with their medals in a fine photo opportunity by the prime minister about a month after they returned . 
Mr Eustis 's medal eventually arrived in the post last Thursday Gary Haran Doyle , 34 , from Earlsfield in London , was a Lance Corporal working as a mechanic in the TA . 
In civilian life he is an investment banking consultant and earns # 200,000 a year . 
I joined the TA in 1988 when I was 17 , during the height of the `` red threat '' . 
I served in Bosnia on Operations Resolute and Lode Star -LRB- 1996-97 -RRB- . 
When Operation Telic came about I was firmly in the camp that felt taking out Saddam and imposing a democratic government was a good thing . 
I knew that 45-minute missile readiness was an exaggeration . 
But I was n't called up for the invasion . 
I had the opportunity to volunteer or be called up later and I personally decided it was n't for me . 
Although I backed the government with its new foreign policy objective , I decided that somebody else could do it . 
I understand why the government has issues with paying high-earners . 
If they were going to pay me # 100,000 for driving a truck I understand why they would have trouble justifying it . 
I do miss it . 
I would much rather spend a weekend running around with the lads in the TA once a month than being on the slopes in Austria which is what I do now . 
The TA is much more rewarding , the opportunities to serve in an operational role are wonderful but because of the threat of being called up and having to go through the rigmarole of what you earn , I decided to leave . 
A sergeant major , 39 , who had been in the TA for more than 20 years and resigned after serving in Iraq . 
He does not want to be identified because of his mental health problems . 
I was mobilised with just three days ' notice on Operation Telic 1 . 
I received the letter on the Tuesday and had to attend Chilwell -LRB- the TA training and mobilisation center in Nottingham -RRB- on the Friday . 
I came back from Iraq in July 2003 and due to a monumental cock-up in the army pay office in Glasgow , found that my ex-wife 's payments through the CSA had been collected by the army but were never paid to her . 
My employers were instructed to take 85 % of my salary in deductions . 
I was left with # 280 a month to feed my girlfriend and young family . 
By the time I got back from Iraq I was credit blacklisted . 
It 's just gone from a bad situation to worse . 
I do n't think it 's a unique experience . 
Financially , it 's been a nightmare . 
Then there was the training and kit aspect . 
Most people that went out there had cursory training . 
When we mobilised , supplies at Chilwell were short . 
The war left me damaged in a number of ways . 
I came back in late July , just when David Kelly took his own life . 
People were then being very questioning about the military operation that I had just been on . 
I would be interested to see how a regular soldier coped with this type of thing . 
I bet he does n't have people in his work coming up and saying I bet you feel bad about being involved in that war . 
I boarded an aircraft at 1am in Basra , landed in the UK at 8.30 am British time and got chucked up to Chilwell . 
The medical checking was a joke in terms of depleted uranium . 
By 6pm they said , `` that 's it lads , you can go '' . 
We had only had a 10-20 minute presentation on post-traumatic stress disorder at Basra airport . 
It was given at 11.30 pm at night when we were absolutely fragged and had been through a real nightmare . 
I was sent home with no counselling or decompression talk . 
I eventually had a mental breakdown . 
I went to speak to my doctor because I was having great problems sleeping . 
It took him six weeks to get hold of my medical records from the army . 
In the end it was their opinion that I had PTSD . 
I was signed off for a course of counselling and spent a week in a psychiatric unit because I felt my head was going to explode . 
I was considering taking my own life . 
And while I am having the breakdown it is my civilian employer that is taking the hit . 
The army has screwed me up and spat me out at the other end . 
A major , 39 , was a nurse in the regular army for three years before joining the TA . 
He was mobilised for the Iraq war and left upon his return after six years ' service . 
Significant numbers of TA medical personnel were mobilised in early February 2003 , including many from my unit . 
I was not and assumed I was not required . 
It was a shock when about a month later my mobilisation papers arrived . 
I had to quickly make a will and ensure that money was not an issue . 
My wife does not drive and we have no family within 200 miles and with her job and our small baby son to cope with it was going to be tough . 
However , I felt compelled to go . 
The army has paid for me to go sailing and skiing and I saw this as payback time . 
I had , for all my personal misgivings about the war , a duty to the army and most especially as an army nurse , a duty to those soldiers fighting it . 
We were told our training had been cut short as a result of our late mobilisation . 
I suspect the late mobilisations were a result of the government 's reluctance to be seen to be preparing for war . 
We had no in-theatre training or any time to acclimatise to the desert . 
We were dumped in a war at very short notice . 
No desert kit was issued , though we did get body armor . 
We should have had three Combopens which are used to combat the effects of nerve agents . 
There were not enough to go around . 
The canisters for our respirators were out of date . 
In theater , casualty bags used in the event of a soldier not being able to wear his respirator were in desperately short supply . 
Instead of one per bed we had only two in the whole hospital . 
We were 198 short . 
Some clinical equipment was also in short supply , such as urine bottles and hand soap . 
The body armor issued in the UK had to be handed in to equip the frontline soldiers . 
It seemed unbelievable that we had been sent to war because our enemy might have WMDs , yet our soldiers were under-equipped to defend themselves from that very threat . 
Once the war was over , the two regular field hospitals were sent home before ours . 
The effect on our morale was devastating and when I spoke to my wife on the phone she was so choked she could n't speak . 
I think it was at that point I knew my future in the TA was untenable . 
When I got home my wife was certainly pleased to see me but I knew she resented my absence and my son did not recognize me . 
It hurt like hell . 
Geraint Hughes joined the TA `` out of curiosity '' in 1999 at 24 and was a Lance Corporal with the London Irish Rifles -LRB- the London Regiment -RRB- before requesting his discharge this year . 
He volunteered to go to Iraq in March 2004 . 
My task was to command a four-man team in Basra , and I 'm happy to say that all those I was responsible for -LRB- as well as the platoon as a whole -RRB- came back from Iraq alive . 
After we were demobilised in December 2004 I found adjusting to civilian life a little tricky , but now I 've become adjusted to civvy street . 
My platoon still sticks together , its members stay in touch , and every now and again we meet up for a few beers and for memory 's sake . 
I have a lot of time for my former platoon buddies , and feel glad to have experienced the camaraderie that military veterans speak so much of . 
I left the TA in April this year , mainly because I finally managed to get myself a full-time lecturing post . 
This meant moving to Swindon which made it impossible to train with the London Regiment . 
I could have joined a TA unit in Swindon - there 's a barracks 15 minutes walk from my flat - but I have decided to focus on my academic career . 
I have also , throughout my military career , only worn the headdress and cap-badge of the London Irish , and have no intention of joining another regiment . 
As they say , once you have worn the caubeen -LRB- the Irish soldier 's headdress -RRB- no other hat fits . 
Also , at 30 , I am no spring chicken , and the times when I could happily tab with a heavy bergen on my back , and a rifle in my hand , for kilometres on end has well and truly gone . 
I have absolutely no regrets about serving on Telic - in fact , I 'm pretty sure that I would have regretted not going . 
For all the hard training , the separation from family and friends , the dangers and the days when I was tired , bored , hungry , hot and stressed , it was worth it . 
For all the cock-ups in postwar reconstruction , and the blunders in Washington and London , I still think that the war was necessary , and that leaving Saddam unrestrained and in power would have had disastrous consequences for the Iraqi people , if not for the region as a whole . 
In the end I felt that the work we did on the ground did help ordinary Iraqis . 
