Deepwater Horizon disaster sparks investor panic as oil company braces itself for financial cost Thursday 29 April 2010 17.33 BST The Deepwater Horizon rig burns in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The spillage could create an even bigger environmental disaster than the 1989 Exxon Valdez tanker spill . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP Shares in BP plunged 7 % today as investors panicked about speculation that the blowout on a rig in the Gulf of Mexico could create an even bigger environmental disaster than the Exxon Valdez tanker spill . 
Fund managers and analysts in the City said they were deeply worried about the financial cost to BP of the kind of legal action that could be taken in the US by those damaged by the accident . 
Over # 13bn has so far been knocked off the oil company 's stock market value since the Transocean Deepwater Horizon rig caught fire and the latest dive in value came after it acknowledged the amount of oil leaking from sub-sea wells could be 5,000 barrels a day five times more than previously thought . 
The City of London was alive with rumors that the spill could even reach 10,000 barrels , according to one oil analyst who asked not to be named : `` We have also heard that the state of Louisiana is threatening to sue the company , '' he added . 
A spokesman at BP headquarters in London said the share price fall was `` related to the US incident '' but it denied any knowledge of any legal cases being prepared at this time or that 10,000 barrels could be pouring from the stricken well . 
`` There is no way of accurately measuring how much oil is coming out because all the equipment was destroyed on the rig but the 5,000 figure is coming from the NOAA -LRB- the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -RRB- , '' he added . 
The incident is particularly damaging for BP because the British group is still recovering from the reputational damage wreaked on it by the Texas City fire , pipeline fractures in Alaska and a previous rig accident in the Gulf . 
The financial damage to BP this time round will depend on how quickly it can cap the Macondo well and clean up the spill before it reaches the beaches of the US mainland . 
BP is hoping a plan to cover the well with a steel cap and capture the leaking oil might avert an environmental disaster . 
However , this will take four weeks to put in place , by which stage over 150,000 barrels could have been spilt . 
If the steel cap does not work , BP will have to rely on stemming the flow by drilling a relief well , which would take two to three months . 
By that stage , the spill could be over 300,000 barrels larger than the 258,000 barrels leaked in 1989 by the Exxon Valdez in the US 's worst oil spill to date . 
However , a BP spokesman said the environmental damage from and cost of tackling the leak from the Macondo well would not be in the same range as the Exxon Valdez tragedy , which happened close to shore in the narrow Prince William Sound in Alaska . 
Exxon spent $ 3.5 bn cleaning up the Valdez spill and had hundreds of millions of dollars in damages awarded against it . 
