Gulf oil spill ` five times ' larger than estimated US coastguard says 5,000 barrels a day of oil are spewing from a well beneath site of the Deepwater Horizon rig explosion Thursday 29 April 2010 09.28 BST Five times more oil a day than previously believed is spewing into the Gulf of Mexico from the blown-out well of the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig , the US coastguard has said . 
Coastguard Rear Admiral Mary Landry said National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- experts now estimate that 5,000 barrels a day of oil are spilling into the gulf far more than the previous estimate of 1,000 barrels a day . 
Robot submarines have so far failed to shut off the flow , 1,500 m -LRB- 5,000 ft -RRB- below the surface , but the coastguard said a test burn on an isolated area of the spill was successful . 
The revision came after a new leak was discovered and strong winds were forecast which NOAA said would push the oil towards the US shoreline . 
However Doug Suttle , chief operating officer for BP , disputed the new estimates yesterday , pointing to a diagram that plotted the leaks and saying he did not believe the amount of oil spilling into the water was higher than earlier approximations . 
Landry stuck to the NOAA estimate and said it was based on aerial surveys , study of the trajectory of the oil slick and other factors . 
Landry added that the US president , Barack Obama , had been briefed on the revised estimate , and said the government had offered to have the defense department help contain the spill and protect the US shoreline and wildlife . 
Both Landry and BP said the first test burn had been successful , although neither gave any indication as to when further burns were planned . 
Crews had planned to use a 150m fire-resistant boom to collect several thousand gallons of the thickest oil on the surface , tow it to a remote area , set it on fire , and allow it to burn for about an hour . 
When the flames go out hardened tar is left in the water , which can be removed using nets or skimmers . 
The oil spill response team had recovered 16,311 barrels -LRB- 2.5 m litres -RRB- of an oil-water mix , and 69 response vessels were being used , the company added . 
`` We are attacking this spill on all fronts , bringing into play all and any resources and advanced technologies we believe can help , '' said Tony Hayward , BP chief executive . 
`` Our action plan is safety-focused , multi-layered and has the full resources of the BP Group behind it . '' 
He added : `` The scale of the surface response is truly unprecedented , both for BP and for the oil industry . '' 
BP said it had begun preparations to drill a relief well , approximately half a mile from the main well , however NOAA said this would not be complete for several months . 
NOAA said workers had finished fabricating the containment chamber of a `` collection dome '' which would be used to collect oil as it escaped from the well . 
`` Work will now begin on the piping system that brings the oil to the surface for collection ; this method has never been tried at this depth before , '' the organization said . 
It said evaluations were under way to assess the damage caused by the oil to fish , marine mammals and sensitive resources , and warned the spill was on the move . 
`` Winds are forecast to become strong -LRB- 20 + knots -RRB- and blow from the south-east starting tomorrow and continuing through the weekend , which will continue to push surface oil towards shore , '' NOAA said . 
BP said costs for containing the spill were running at $ 6m -LRB- # 3.9 m -RRB- a day , and it would spend a further $ 100m drilling the relief well . 
Industry officials say replacing the Deepwater Horizon , which was owned by Transocean Ltd but operated by BP , would cost up to $ 700m . 
