GENEVA | Tue Apr 19 , 2011 7:01 pm BST GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Ronald `` Ronnie '' Farquhar , who covered the East-West Cold War for Reuters from almost every East European capital and Beijing in the 1950s and 1960s , died in Geneva on Tuesday , aged 88 , his family said . 
A Scot from Glasgow who joined Reuters in 1952 , he drove over 500 miles -LRB- 800 km -RRB- in fog on crumbling roads from Warsaw to Budapest in October 1956 to be on the spot to break the news when the Soviet Army put down Hungary 's anti-communist uprising . 
Over several days he dodged bullets amid fierce fighting on the streets , filing stories with the help of a trio of women who worked as telephonists in his hotel and once from an ancient telex machine in a rebel command post . 
Forced to take refuge in the British embassy when the Soviet command imposed a 24-hour curfew , he still managed to stay on in Budapest until January 1957 , becoming one of the last Western reporters to leave when the new authorities ordered him out . 
A trooper in the British Army during World War Two , Farquhar survived the destruction of his tank by a German shell in Tunisia , suffering serious facial burns . 
When he joined Reuters after six years with local newspapers in Scotland and England , the burns effectively decided his career path after a doctor decreed that he should not expose his face to strong sun and must never have a tropical posting . 
A German-speaker , he was first sent to Frankfurt and then in 1955 to Czechoslovakia where he met his future wife Vera , an editorial assistant in the Reuters office in Prague . 
Like many Cold War romances between Westerners and East Europeans at the time , theirs ran foul of the communist bureaucracy . 
They were not allowed to marry and Vera was refused an exit visa when he was transferred to Warsaw in 1956 . 
For five years they carried on a long-distance relationship , including during the two years he was in Beijing from 1958-60 . 
Finally , the Czechoslovak authorities relented and they were married in Prague in 1960 . 
In Beijing , he reported on the gradual estrangement between Communist China and the Soviet Union and the flaring of a border dispute with India . 
`` It was a great place to be at the time , totally different to anything else I had known , '' he once said . 
After Beijing , now with Vera , he went to Belgrade for four years , tracking not only Marshal Josip Broz Tito 's improving relationship with Moscow but also the decline of the `` liberal '' Yugoslav version of communism . 
Over the following years he was in Geneva , specialising in disarmament issues , again in Warsaw and the West German capital Bonn and then back to Geneva from 1973 to 1980 . 
His last posting before retiring in 1983 was to Vienna where he followed the decline of the Soviet empire and the economies of the Eastern European countries , training many young Reuters journalists whom he infected with his love for the region . 
He and Vera , who died in 2008 , settled in Geneva , and he worked part-time for Reuters until 1992 . 
He is survived by the couple 's two daughters , Helen and Katarina . 
-LRB- Editing by Stephanie Nebehay and Alastair Macdonald -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
