BEIRUT | Tue Apr 19 , 2011 6:25 am EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian President Bashar al-Assad , facing the gravest challenge of his 11 years in power , has tried repression , economic handouts and promises of reform to quell an unprecedented month-long wave of popular protests . 
Yet the unrest , which rights groups say has cost more than 200 lives , including 17 on Monday , shows no sign of abating . 
Assad and his father before him have ruled Syria under a tough emergency law in force since 1963 , bolstered by the Baath party , the military and an array of fearsome security agencies . 
While the Syrians demanding freedom seem far from dislodging Assad , no Arab ruler can feel secure in a region electrified by the swift fall of autocrats in Egypt and Tunisia this year . 
The Assads , whose country sits on the fault lines of many Middle Eastern conflicts , have pursued relatively predictable external policies . 
Any political change in Syria would be a big deal for its friends and foes alike in a volatile region . 
Following are some scenarios of what could happen in Syria and the risks and opportunities they would present : \* ASSAD KEEPS POWER , ENACTS REFORM Conceivably , the Syrian president may decide to bend with the wind and implement far-reaching reform . 
Last week he promised to replace emergency law and appointed a new cabinet . 
But protesters will want proof the 45-year-old leader can make a real break with the past . 
Previously he has resisted political reform . 
His attempts to modernize a socialist-style economy have failed to create enough jobs or alleviate hardship . 
Assad 's problem is that dismantling the apparatus of repression , enshrining the rule of law to defeat corruption or allowing new parties to challenge his Baath party would remove the props of his power with no guarantees of political survival . 
Such a high-risk course could regain popular support for Assad , but he would have to undermine his own entourage and ditch the authoritarian template used since his formidable father Hafez al-Assad seized power in 1970 . 
\* PROTEST MOVEMENT IS CRUSHED Nearly 30 years ago , the elder Assad ruthlessly put down an armed Islamist uprising , killing thousands of people in the city of Hama in military operations cloaked from international view . 
That degree of violence would be harder to get away with today , when Syrians , despite state curbs on media , can use their mobile phone cameras to post footage of protests on YouTube . 
Nevertheless , the Interior Ministry now says Syria is facing an armed insurrection by Salafi Muslims . 
Security forces led by Assad relatives and allies have shown few qualms in detaining dissidents or using batons , bullets and tear gas on protesters . 
Hanging tough seems the likeliest default option for an embattled Assad as he seeks to rally support from his own minority Alawite community , sections of the Sunni majority and many other Syrians with a stake in the status quo . 
\* ASSAD QUITS OR IS OVERTHROWN Barely thinkable just a few weeks ago , regime change remains a long shot , although the persistence of protests despite bloody crackdowns has shortened the odds that Assad might buckle . 
What might come next -- a peaceful transition of power , a military coup , prolonged instability or civil war -- is anyone 's guess . 
The 2003 removal of Saddam Hussein , the Arab world 's only other Baathist ruler , plunged Iraq into years of violent chaos . 
Sunni-majority Syria , dominated under the Baathists by its 10 percent Alawite minority , has other ethnic-sectarian divides , with restive Kurds as well as Druze and Christian communities . 
Anti-Assad demonstrators have stressed national unity rather than narrower identities -- and many have called only for reform rather than regime change . 
But if Baathist rule collapsed , Syria would enter the unknown and long-hidden strains could surface . 
Under any scenario , Syria is likely to be preoccupied with its internal problems for many months , reducing the chances that it will undertake any major initiative such as resuming peace negotiations with Israel over the occupied Golan Heights . 
The impact of any regime change would reverberate across the Arab world and Iran . 
Syria , still formally at war with Israel , also has borders with Lebanon , Turkey , Iraq and Jordan . 
Israel might be sorry if Assad fell . 
Although he has helped arm Hezbollah guerrillas in Lebanon and harbored Palestinian militant groups Hamas and Islamic Jihad , he has maintained the calm prevailing on the Israeli-Syrian border since the 1973 war . 
Turmoil in Syria might see the pragmatic Baathists dislodged by Islamist or nationalist groups more hostile to Israel . 
The United States , its hands full in Afghanistan , Iraq and Libya , said on Monday it was not working to undermine the Syrian government -- although the Washington Post , citing leaked U.S. diplomatic cables , said Syrian exiles and other dissidents had received up to $ 6 million in U.S. funds since 2006 . 
For all Syria 's opposition to U.S. and Israeli policies in the Middle East , it has played a cautious hand , balancing its Arab nationalist ideology and links with Iran against its desire for acceptance in the West and ultimately peace with Israel . 
On the other hand , Washington would see advantages in a new Sunni leadership in Damascus that might end Syria 's three-decade alliance with Shi'ite Iran and support for Hezbollah , in favor of closer ties with Saudi Arabia and other Sunni Arab powers . 
That would reshape the political landscape in Lebanon , where Hezbollah and its Shi'ite and Christian allies now hold the upper hand over their U.S.-backed Sunni and Christian opponents . 
Any downgrading of Iran 's alliance with Syria , its main conduit for aid to Hezbollah and Hamas , would damage Tehran 's ability to project its influence in the Middle East . 
Iraq , a former Baathist rival of Syria and still on uneasy terms , would also feel the ripples from any upheaval in Damascus , which has played an often ambivalent role in its eastern neighbor since the U.S.-led invasion of 2003 . 
Most combustible for Lebanon , Iraq and the region would be sectarian or ethnic conflict in Syria , should it lose its secular Baathist straitjacket , fuelling tensions elsewhere between Sunnis and Shi'ites , Arabs and Kurds , or Christians and Muslims . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
