By Nastassia Astrasheuskaya , Ben Judah , Alina Selyukh MOSCOW\/WASHINGTON | Fri Jul 2 , 2010 11:22 am EDT MOSCOW\/WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - His face wracked by age and his voice rasping after decades of chain-smoking coarse tobacco , the former long-time Russian Minister of nuclear energy and veteran Soviet physicist Viktor Mikhailov knows just how to fix BP 's oil leak in the Gulf of Mexico . 
`` A nuclear explosion over the leak , '' he says nonchalantly puffing a cigarette as he sits in a conference room at the Institute of Strategic Stability , where he is a director . 
`` I do n't know what BP is waiting for , they are wasting their time . 
Only about 10 kilotons of nuclear explosion capacity and the problem is solved . '' 
A nuclear fix to the leaking well has been touted online and in the occasional newspaper op-ed for weeks now . 
Washington has repeatedly dismissed the idea and BP execs say they are not considering an explosion -- nuclear or otherwise . 
But as a series of efforts to plug the 60,000 barrels of oil a day gushing from the sea floor have failed , talk of an extreme solution refuses to die . 
For some , blasting the problem seems the most logical answer in the world . 
Mikhailov has had a distinguished career in the nuclear field , helping to close a Soviet Union program that used nuclear explosions to seal gas leaks . 
Ordinarily he 's an opponent of nuclear blasts , but he says an underwater explosion in the Gulf of Mexico would not be harmful and could cost no more than $ 10 million . 
That compares with the $ 2.35 billion BP has paid out in cleanup and compensation costs so far . 
`` This option is worth the money , '' he says . 
And it 's not just Soviet boffins . 
Milo Nordyke , one of the masterminds behind U.S. research into peaceful nuclear energy in the 1960s and '70s says a nuclear explosion is a logical last-resort solution for BP and the government . 
Matthew Simmons , a former energy adviser to U.S. President George W. Bush and the founder of energy investment-banking firm Simmons & Company International , is another calling for the nuclear option . 
Even former U.S. President Bill Clinton has voiced support for the idea of an explosion to stem the flow of oil , albeit one using conventional materials rather than nukes . 
`` Unless we send the Navy down deep to blow up the well and cover the leak with piles and piles and piles of rock and debris , which may become necessary ... unless we are going to do that , we are dependent on the technical expertise of these people from BP , '' Clinton told the Fortune\/Time\/CNN Global Forum in South Africa on June 29 . 
Clinton was picking up on an idea mooted by Christopher Brownfield in June . 
Brownfield is a one-time nuclear submarine officer , a veteran of the Iraq war -LRB- he volunteered in 2006 -RRB- and now a nuclear policy researcher at Columbia University . 
He is also one of a number of scientists whose theories rely not on nuclear bombs -- he did toy with that thought for a while -- but on conventional explosives that would implode the well and , if not completely plug it with crushed rock , at least bring the flow of oil under control . 
`` It 's kind of like stepping on a garden hose to kink it , '' Brownfield says . 
`` You may not cut off the flow entirely but it would greatly reduce the flow . '' 
Using nuclear blasts for peaceful ends was a key plank of Cold War policy in both the United States and the Soviet Union . 
In the middle of last century , both countries were motivated by a desire to soften the image of the era 's weapon of choice . 
Washington had big plans to use peaceful nuclear explosions to build an additional Panama Canal , carve a path for an inter-state highway through mountains in the Mojave Desert and connect underwater aquifers in Arizona . 
But the experimental plans were dropped as authorities learned more about the ecological dangers of surface explosions . 
The Soviet program , known as Nuclear Explosions for the National Economy , was launched in 1958 . 
The project saw 124 nuclear explosions for such tasks as digging canals and reservoirs , creating underground storage caverns for natural gas and toxic waste , exploiting oil and gas deposits and sealing gas leaks . 
It was finally mothballed by Mikhail Gorbachev in 1989 . 
The Soviets first used a nuclear blast to seal a gas leak in 1966 . 
Urtabulak , one of its prized gas-fields in Uzbekistan , had caught fire and raged for three years . 
Desperate to save the cherished reserves , Yefim Slavsky , then Minister of Light Industry , ordered nuclear engineers to use the most powerful weapon in their arsenal . 
`` The Minister said , ` Do it . 
Explode it , ' '' recalls Albert Vasilyev , a young engineer and a rising star in the project who now teaches at the Lenin Technical Institute in Moscow . 
Vasilyev remembers the technology behind the program with obvious pride . 
`` The explosion takes place deep underground , '' he says . 
`` We pinch the pipe , break it and the pipe collapses . '' 
According to Vasilyev , the blast at Urtabulak sealed the well shut leaving only an empty crater . 
In all , the Soviets detonated five nuclear devices to seal off runaway gas wells -- succeeding three or four times , depending on who you talk to . 
`` It worked quite well for them , '' says Nordyke , who authored a detailed account of Soviet explosions in a 2000 paper . 
`` There is no reason to think it would n't be fine -LRB- for the United States -RRB- . '' 
But not everything went smoothly . 
Vasilyev admits the program `` had two misfires '' . 
The final blast in 1979 was conducted near the Ukrainian city of Kharkov . 
`` The closest houses were just about 400 meters away , '' Vasilyev recalls . 
`` So this was ordered to be the weakest of the explosions . 
Even the buildings and the street lamps survived . '' 
Unfortunately , the low capacity of the device failed to seal the well and the gas resurfaced . 
Alexander Koldobsky , a fellow nuclear physicist from the Moscow Engineering and Physics Institute , insists the peaceful nuclear explosions were safe . 
The people who worked on the program `` were brilliant professionals '' , he says . 
`` They had a culture of safety , which did not accept the word ` maybe ' , but only accepted the words ` obligation ' and ` instruction . ' 
Any derivation from these in nuclear technologies is a crime . '' 
Still , he concedes , `` there were different scenarios of what happened after an explosion . '' 
At his first blast in a Turkmen gas field in 1972 , `` the stench was unbearable , '' he says . 
`` And the wind was blowing toward a nearby town . '' 
He closes his narrow lips into a smile as if refusing to say more . 
Koldobsky shrugs off any suggestion of fear or emotion when the bomb exploded . 
`` I felt nothing . 
I was just doing my job . '' 
Not everybody is so sanguine about the Soviet experience . 
Speaking on condition of anonymity , an expert from Russia 's largest oil exporter Rosneft , urges the United States to ignore calls for the atomic option . 
`` That would bring Chernobyl to America , '' he says . 
Vladimir Chuprov from Greenpeace 's Moscow office is even more insistent that BP not heed the advice of the veteran Soviet physicists . 
Chuprov disputes the veterans ' accounts of the peaceful explosions and says several of the gas leaks reappeared later . 
`` What was praised as a success and a breakthrough by the Soviet Union is in essence a lie , '' he says . 
`` I would recommend that the international community not listen to the Russians . 
Especially those of them that offer crazy ideas . 
Russians are keen on offering things , especially insane things . '' 
Former Minister Mikhailov agrees that the USSR had to give up its program because of problems it presented . 
`` I ended the program because I knew how worthless this all was , '' he says with a sigh . 
`` Radioactive material was still seeping through cracks in the ground and spreading into the air . 
It was n't worth it . '' 
`` Still , '' he says , momentarily hard to see through a cloud of smoke from his cigarettes , `` I see no other solution for sealing leaks like the one in the Gulf of Mexico . '' 
The problem , he goes on , is that `` Americans just do n't know enough about nuclear explosions to solve this problem ... But they should ask us -- we have institutes , we have professionals who can help them solve this . 
Otherwise BP are just torturing the people and themselves . '' 
Nordyke too believes the nuclear option should be on the table . 
After seeing nine U.S. nuclear explosions and standing behind the control board of one , he estimates that a nuclear bomb would have roughly an 80 to 90 percent chance of successfully blocking the oil . 
According to his estimates , it would have to be an explosion of around 30 kilotons , equivalent to roughly two Hiroshima bombs or three times as big as Mikhailov 's estimate . 
The explosion would also need to remain at least 3 to 4 miles away from other offshore wells in the area . 
The bomb , says Nordyke , would be dropped in a secondary well approximately 60-70 feet away from the leaking shaft . 
There it would create a large cavity filled with gas . 
The gas would melt the surrounding rock , crush it and press it into the leaking well to close it shut . 
Although the BP well is thousands of feet deeper than those closed in the Soviet Union , Nordyke says the extra depth should n't make a difference . 
He also says that so far below the ground , not much difference exists in onshore or underwater explosions -- even though the latter have never been tried . 
Nordyke says fears that radiation could escape after the explosion are unfounded . 
The hole would be about 8 inches in diameter and , despite the shockwave , the radiation should remain captured . 
Even in the case of radiation escape , he says , its dispersed effect would be less than that of floating oil patches . 
But do n't expect an explosion under the Gulf of Mexico any time soon . 
Even a conventional blast could backfire and cause more problems . 
There is a chance any blast could fracture the seabed and cause an underground blowout , according to Andy Radford , petroleum engineer and American Petroleum Institute senior policy adviser on offshore issues . 
The U.S. Department of Energy has no plans to use explosives `` due to the obvious risks involved , '' according to a DOE spokeswoman . 
There 's also the question of time . 
Preparations for a nuclear explosion could take up to half-a-year ; BP has said it will have a relief well in place to stop the leak by August . 
`` I think it has to be considered as only the last resort , '' Nordyke says . 
But `` they ought to be thinking about it . '' 
Would he be willing to work on such an operation ? 
`` I 'd be happy to help , '' he says . 
-LRB- Reporting by Nastassia Astrasheuskaya and Ben Judah in Moscow and Alina Selyukh in Washington ; editing by Simon Robinson and Sara Ledwith -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
parallel proximity shaft place proper amount of explosives seal new shaft detonate ! 
conventional explosive are well understood and should be adequate to blow bedrock through a 21 ? 
shaft -- how about tunnels through mountains or Hover Dam ! 
suggested nuclear explosion is absolutely ludicrous and at least 1000 times overkill . 
This could fracture the seabed floor collapsing into oil reserve and releasing 25,000 cubic miles of oil or 1,000,000,000,000 gallons . 
I was not aware BP had nukes to use ... this news is most startling . 
Mikhailov does not know what BP is waiting for ? 
If they have that much implied power I dont either . 
This is a great idea ! 
This way it elimate all forms of sealife , contimate the waters . 
As Michael said above they would just have skim the oilfrom now on . 
No more deep ocean drilling !! Win win Now everyone is happy !! ARE YOU SERIOUS !! This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
