Emergencies management officials remove trees from a road after Hurricane Irene hit the municipality of Loiza , August 22 , 2011 . 
SANTO DOMINGO | Tue Aug 23 , 2011 6:40 am BST SANTO DOMINGO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Hurricane Irene could hit the Southeast United States as a major Category 3 storm on the weekend after sweeping north of the Dominican Republic and pummelling Puerto Rico on Monday , forecasters said . 
The U.S. National Hurricane Center 's five-day forecast showed the first hurricane of the 2011 Atlantic season swinging up Florida 's east coast on Thursday for a possible landfall in South Carolina on Saturday . 
Irene , the ninth named storm of the busy 2011 Atlantic season , looks set to be the first hurricane to make landfall in the United States since Ike savaged the Texas coast in 2008 . 
Authorities along the United States ' Atlantic seaboard , from Miami to New York , were closely watching the possible path of Irene , with at least some computer forecast models showing it might even sweep up near New York City early next week . 
President Barack Obama was briefed about Irene while on vacation at Martha 's Vineyard , Massachusetts , White House officials said . 
At 5 p.m. EDT Irene was skirting the Dominican Republic 's north coast , carrying winds of 130 kph , the Miami-based hurricane center said . 
The storm 's center was about 80 km northeast of Punta Cana , a major tourist zone in the east of the Dominican Republic . 
Earlier , Irene buffeted Puerto Rico with winds and heavy rain , knocking out power and downing trees in the U.S. territory as it churned westward on a track that will take it over the Turks and Caicos Islands and the Bahamas before approaching south Florida . 
Hotels in the Dominican Republic 's Punta Cana area closed their beaches and asked guests to stay indoors for safety . 
`` We 've recommended that they stay in their rooms , '' Beatriz Lopez , a spokesperson for the Grand Palladium resort , said , and other hotels reported similar precautions . 
The NHC said Irene would track just north of Hispaniola island , shared by the Dominican Republic and Haiti , on Monday , sweep near or over the Turks and Caicos and southeast Bahamas on Tuesday , and near the central Bahamas early on Wednesday . 
Hispaniola has impoverished Haiti on its western side and there were fears that rain from Irene could trigger deadly floods and mudslides in the country , which is still struggling to recover from a devastating 2010 earthquake . 
The U.S. military hospital ship Comfort , which was treating patients and carrying out surgeries in the Haitian port capital of Port-au-Prince , was ordered by its commanders to suspend its operations and seek safe haven at the approach of Irene . 
LANDFALL AS CATEGORY 3 HURRICANE PREDICTED Irene was a Category 1 hurricane on the five-step Saffir-Simpson scale of intensity , but the NHC saw it strengthening into a Category 3 major hurricane over the Bahamas , with winds over 111 mph -LRB- 178 kph -RRB- . 
It was seen making U.S. landfall as a Category 3 . 
Forecasters said a low pressure trough over the eastern United States was expected to keep Irene 's track to the east , reducing the risk of a direct landfall in densely populated south Florida , and steering it instead to the Carolinas . 
Current forecasts showed Irene posing no threat to U.S. oil and gas installations in the Gulf of Mexico . 
In Puerto Rico , authorities said nearly 800 people had sought refuge at emergency shelters as the hurricane passed . 
There were no reports of deaths or major injuries . 
But 800,000 people -- about half of the island 's electricity customers and including the capital , San Juan -- were left without power by the storm , which also felled trees , swelled rivers over their banks and flooded some roads . 
Governor Luis Fortuno said the worst-hit area was the east coast , from Fajardo to Yabucoa , and he had asked the U.S. government to declare Puerto Rico a disaster area so it can gain access to emergency funds . 
On Monday morning , rains and winds had already eased in San Juan and the airport was expected to reopen . 
Schools and government offices were closed for Monday in the U.S. territory of 3.9 million people , but tropical storm warnings were lifted after the hurricane passed . 
