Defense Secretary Robert Gates - who is refreshingly open and honest - said : `` We have n't done something like this , kind of on the fly before . '' 
He was talking about the coalition attacks on Moammar Gadhafi 's forces in Libya , why the United States was still in control , why tensions are rising among members of the coalition , why there 's no plan for any group or nation to take the lead . 
The allies , you see , are n't getting along so well . 
In fact , there are reports today that the coalition is falling apart . 
France yesterday suggested a committee be formed - outside of NATO - to oversee the military operations . 
It would be a political steering committee and would include members of the Arab League . 
See if a committee is running the war , no one has to take responsibility if things go to hell and everyone can take credit if they go well . 
The French were early backers of the no-fly zone and were the first nation to launch airstrikes against Libya on Saturday . 
The Italians have accused the French of not originally backing a NATO-run operation to be in a better position for oil contracts when a new government is established in Libya . 
It 's not just the French causing problems Russia 's defense minister yesterday called for a cease-fire in Libya . 
Germany today pulled its naval ships out of NATO operations in the Mediterranean over a disagreement over the Libyan campaign 's direction . 
It 's not pretty . 
Foreign ministers from Western coalition partners will meet in London Tuesday along with members of the Arab League and the African Union to see what can be done . 
Here s my question to you : France wants a committee to run the war in Libya . 
Is that a good idea ? 
Interested to know which ones made it on air ? 
Yes , I think it is a good idea . 
Handing command over to Allied forces shows solidarity . 
Let the allies figure this one out for a a change . 
Hopefully they will decide to drop a missile on Gadhafi himself so this thing will come to a swift end . 
You 've got to be kidding . 
A camel is a horse designed by a committee . 
This won t come out as good . 
We 've done our part . 
We should tell the coalition they have 48 hrs to take over and then we 're gone , whether they have something in place or not . 
This is the first conflict in recent memory where no one has a plan , everyone is passing the buck , no one knows the players and no one knows the end-game . 
All we know for certain is that we have wasted a vast amount of expensive cruise missiles . 
The replacement costs are extraordinarily high and this approach depletes our stockpile . 
Where is the sense in this approach ? 
I 'm all for propping up democracies , supporting freedom and liberty , but where is the plan ? 
Jack , how many people have to die before the coalition gets rid of the problem in Libya , whether accidentally or purposely ? 
Gadhafi must go , hopefully sooner than later . 
Maje in Vancouver , British Columbia : It 's a great idea if you want to see the Odyssey Dawn crew out-daffy Gadhafi ! 
I can see it all now : Inspector Clouseau draws up the battle plans and Mr. Bean leads Larry , Moe and Curly in the charge . 
And the wacky Libyan colonel dies laughing . 
I worked with an American subsidiary of a French company for fifteen years , and this is so typical , not just of the French , but of the Europeans in general . 
This is a bad , bad , bad idea . 
Define the objective , put an American in charge , and Get ' r done . 
As long as we get to move out and let others have control , with little to no involvement , sounds good to me ... committee away ! 
Fantastic idea as long as they do n't use assets\/resources from the United States . 
Its amazing how many good ideas come to light when another country -LRB- s -RRB- is footing the bill . 
The United Nations is a good example as all of their projects are either partially or fully funded by the west . 
Jack : Leadership by committee is not a good idea . 
Its lead , follow , or get the hell out of the way . 
The military lives and works by a chain of command or commanders to accomplish a common purpose mission . 
The idea of leadership by committee reminds me of the United States Senate where there are alot of ideas , but little is accomplished . 
The military needs one action commander not a committee . 
March 23 , 2011 at 1:46 pm | If the committee is Obama style , a gathering of the best expertise from war departments and State Departments , yes that 's fine , but a la Obama there must be a Chairperson who synthesizes the committee 's determinations . 
March 23 , 2011 at 1:54 pm | I hope so americans are war sick . 
We cannt stop every bad guy . 
March 23 , 2011 at 2:06 pm | I think we should just let France run it , and back out entirely now . 
We do n't need to get involved in another open-ended costly boondoggle , especially when we do n't know what kind of people we 'd be helping replace Khaddafi . 
They could be Islamic radicals for all we know . 
It 's very unlikely they 'll create a Western-style secular democracy , though . 
And since Republicans in Congress refuse to raise taxes , I 'd hate to have to explain to Grandma that they 're going to cut her Social Security check to pay for this . 
March 23 , 2011 at 2:11 pm | Nothing of that magnitude can succeed without an intelligent Committee from all the countries issuing orders . 
March 23 , 2011 at 2:13 pm | Good for France , but bad for military action . 
I have a better idea , let the French take the lead and see whether they 've learned their lessons from Viet Nam and Algeria . 
March 23 , 2011 at 2:18 pm | If having a committee run the war in Libya means not putting a western label on the war then it 's a good idea . 
It is time for the United States to take a backseat . 
We have already bitten off more than we can chew by being involved in two wars . 
March 23 , 2011 at 2:22 pm | Yes , that way the US will not have to take all the blame for the action taken . 
March 23 , 2011 at 2:30 pm | Yes , I think it is a good idea . 
Handing command over to Allied forces shows soloidarity . 
Let the allies figure this one out for a a change . 
Hopefully they will decide to drop a missile on Gadafy himself so this thing will come to a swift end . 
Saving more lives , time and money . 
March 23 , 2011 at 2:33 pm | It 's a great idea if you want to see the Odyssey Dawn crew out-daffy Ghadafi ! 
I can see it all now : Inspector Clouseau draws up the battle plans and Mr. Bean leads Larry , Moe and Curly in the charge . 
And the whacky Libyan colonel dies laughing . 
March 23 , 2011 at 2:37 pm | Committees do not make executive decisions . 
They debate and debate like the UN , then pass resolutions . 
This is a baaaad idea . 
Now you know why U.S. leadership is indispensable . 
Without it , the rest of the world is confused and lost . 
March 23 , 2011 at 2:37 pm | Oh great -- that is just what we need . 
We ca n't get things right when we run the war now we need a committee -- let France deal with it . 
Throughout history war conducted by a committee will almost always end in disaster ! 
One of the principles of war that has been taught since the days of Clausewitz is `` Unity of Command . '' 
Only ONE person is in charge of a military operation if you want a chance to be successful . 
March 23 , 2011 at 2:54 pm | What 's next , going to the U.N. to ask permission to raise taxes ?? Worldwide leadership has reached an all time low . 
Washington , Churchill , and Eisenhower must be rolling over in their graves . 
March 23 , 2011 at 3:02 pm | We do n't need a committe to run the war in libya . 
We need a committe to end the war in libya , iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan . 
Time to stop the bombings , killings , and assasinations of people in other countries we do n't like . 
The entire defense and supplemental war budget is borrowed money . 
Gaddafi blew up one plane , the u.s. has blow up thousands of planes , and buildings . 
The u.s. military killed a million people in iraq , nuked hundreds of thousands of japanese civilians with 2 nuclear bombs and yet we have the nerve to call gadaffi a mad man . 
The rebels in libya drew first blood so it is their mess to clean up not some french fry committee . 
March 23 , 2011 at 3:03 pm | John Moore - New Britain , PA It is well proven that a committee can not run anything . 
Just as there can only be one chef -LRB- french for chief -RRB- in the kitchen there has to be a visible leader for this Libyan campaign . 
March 23 , 2011 at 3:07 pm | Good idea as long it is not the U.S. leading , late France and the U.K. lead it is there OIL ! 
It does n't matter , a committe or take turns , it should be an easy mission that does not take a rocket scientist to figure a strategy to check Khadafy . 
Its seems like its only the people out for a political game thats trying to muddy the waters . 
March 23 , 2011 at 3:13 pm | Committee to do what ? 
The only thing that needs to be done is to Remove the tyrant from office Dead or Alive ! 
March 23 , 2011 at 3:19 pm | I can just imagine what a guy like General George Patton would think of an idea like that : A committee Jack , A COMMITTEE - Not on your life . 
If a committee had been running the war in Europe 67 years ago , Paris would still be in Nazi hands and the French would be speaking German . 
No wonder France has n't won a war in over a hundred years . 
Could France also have a commitee run a war in Ruwanda , Darfur , Congo , Uganda , Ethiopia , Somalia , Zimbabwe , Togo , Burundi , Liberia , Botswana , Colombia , Afghanistan , Palestine , after all they civilian massacres everyday ... , ah , maybe they dont have that much Oil to share with France , does really France care about Libyan civilians ? 
Mike from NYC March 23 , 2011 at 3:31 pm | Of course it 's a good idea . 
NATO has worked together for more than a half century . 
There are decent and capable people in every chair . 
Let the America Firsters go to work building a wall around the country and begin on the part that extends westward from Southern California to surround Hawaii . 
I 'll buy the scuba gear , but no air tanks . 
France wants a committee to run the war in Libya . 
Is that a good idea ? 
Sounds to me like France just expected the US to take the lead and they were sadly mistaken . 
So instead of taking the lead they pass it off on others . 
So typical , no one wants to take responsibility for anything these days . 
The only one who laid it out as it is was President Obama , . 
He told the world that this was not our `` war '' that we were only in a supporting role and would not take the lead . 
I believe we just let France run the entire war and bring all of our troops home . 
This entire issue is just another way to stimulate the economy and take peoples mind off of the real issues in America , jobs and education . 
March 23 , 2011 at 3:38 pm | Cliff Glass - Rego Park , New York What a novel concept . 
Allies equally sharing cost , risk , and responsibility for a global military action . 
Neocons , take cover , American exceptionalism is definitely under attack . 
March 23 , 2011 at 3:53 pm | If you want to see the results of committee rule look at the U.N. Security Council . 
If that does n't scare you check out the NATO Council of Ministers . 
Both are great examples of cowardice and ineptitude . 
If there is a concil running the show I hope we pull out completely . 
March 23 , 2011 at 3:56 pm | As long as we get to move out and let others have control , with little to no involvement , sounds good to me ... committee away ! 
March 23 , 2011 at 3:59 pm | Excuse my confusion , Jack , but are we , along with France et al , `` at war '' with Libya ? 
Did I miss the declaration of war on Libya by Congress and Obama ? 
If indeed we are in another Mid-East war , then we should not be debating who should `` run '' the war and quickly and completely crush the Libyan army and its commander in chief , Gadhafi without debate or hesitation . 
Either we are at war or we are not . 
To play politics with our troops , Libya 's people without total commitment is a crime in itself . 
Either commit to war and victory or get the hell out . 
Gadhafi and his army should have been history by now if we were committed to doing so . 
Are we indeed at war with Libya , Jack ? 
If you want an issue to be killed , all you have to do is assign it to a committee . 
They will kick it around until it changes shape so bad that you ca n't recognize the original issue . 
Most committees ca n't control themselve let along assignments\/issues assigned to them . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:04 pm | We have plenty of committees in this country and they ca n't get anything done efficiently . 
So yeah running a war in Libya by committee should be great . 
Can only imagine how messy this will be in a couple months . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:05 pm | Joe Ft Walton Bch Fl It is a very good idea , if they all decide to take him down . 
Gaddafi got to go now , if not what have we accomplish . ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:08 pm | Why not what a great idea work as a team something the USA lost long ago by the outsource idea that now seems to have been to optimistic to say the least . 
Any large project should work as a committee otherwise known as a team . 
I think the `` team '' should go for it . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:13 pm | Skarkosy wanted this thing to increase his political clout in an upcoming election . 
If he wants to cash in on the glory , he should do the heavy lifting . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:22 pm | Only if the committee does not include us let the rest of the world handle Libya . 
We have no real interest there but France does , so let them do the heavy lifting for once . 
I m tired of fighting everyone else s battles for them . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:26 pm | Dee in New Paris Ohio Do you mean that France wants the U.S. to commit to helping them run the war in Libya ? 
Or do you mean that FRANCE wants to commit to running the war but wants all the other nations that signed on o commit ? 
Anyway , what I want to know is , between France , the U.S. , and all the other U.N. nations who are willing to help get rid of Gadhafi , what 's the holdup ? 
How can it be that Libya has not already been conquered and the despot got rid of ? 
It does not give one a lot of confidence in the ability of the allies if between them they have not accomplished their goal . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:28 pm | What doesFrance want ? 
A committe of Western coalisions , a committe of Arab c ountries , or a combination of those ? 
We are already talking about war . 
Where it is going to end is every ones guess . 
The only solution , of course , would be to catch the dictator , a sly and cruel fox , and cookoo to boot . 
The International court will be impatiently waiting to get its hands on the man . 
The U.N contract ONLY has issued the R2P -LRB- Resolution to Protect -RRB- Even that may prove extremely difficult to do without `` collateral damage '' . 
I have a feeling that the President has been co-erced in taking a military roll in this adventure . 
The U.S.A. should have stayed OUT of it , lest it will later be pilloried by the Arabs who found some fault in the countries engament . 
, something THEY should have wanting to tackle . 
Unfortunately they dislike each other more than anybody else . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:37 pm | What war or even what military action was ever successfully commanded by a committee ? 
What is needed is another Eisenhower . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:39 pm | A war run by committee ? 
If people think the `` plan '' is cockeyed now , give the `` committee '' a chance . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:53 pm | Well , since the only person from the United States who has demonstrated ANY leadership whatsoever during this war is President , Hillary Clinton , perhaps a `` committe '' is the solution to this whole mess ! 
I wonder , which community organizer suggested the creation of a committie ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:58 pm | This kind of stuff is the reason you have your ducks in a row before you act . 
But no , a committee is a terrible idea . 
You ever want to see how effective committees are , take a look at any government . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:59 pm | Looks like we have a `` food fight '' going on in Europe . 
Forming a commitee-sounds like our Congress in action . 
Gadhafi is probably laughing inside his bunker . 
Meanwhile Russia and China are sounding `` high and mighty . '' 
If this is the `` new world order '' , I do n't think I want to be part of it . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:01 pm | Well , why not ! 
war is a business , kind of like congress is . 
Why not run it like one ? 
We can have committees , subcommittees , committee chairpersons , secretaries who secretly run things , vice-president of important stuff , keeper of the keys , bullet managers ... well , you get my drift ! 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:08 pm | Yes , it is a wonderful idea . 
The United States has proven its bravery , courage , and resolve time and time again . 
We have nothing left to prove . 
It makes since both financially and politically . 
Financially , it is time other countries help foot the bill when we are called on to stop a dictator from mass murdering his own people . 
Politically , it lets the world know we are not the only ones sick and tired of these murderous thugs committing genocide . 
We do n't need any more PR . 
As Ann Landers used to say , `` it is better to keep your mouth shut and be thought a fool than to open it and prove it . '' 
Absolutely !! Hold a meeting , form a committee , anything to make it look like someone is doing something to justify transferring money from the taxpayers into corporate coffers . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:13 pm | Fabulous idea . 
Let France do it for a change . 
Time for America to stay out of other countries that hate us anyway . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:16 pm | Yes , it is a wonderful idea . 
The United States has proven its bravery , courage , and resolve time and time again . 
We have nothing left to prove . 
It makes since both financially and politically . 
Financially , it is time other countries help foot the bill when we are called on to stop a dictator from mass murdering his own people . 
Politically , it lets the world know we are not the only ones sick and tired of these murderous thugs committing genocide . 
We do n't need any more PR . 
As Ann Landers used to say , `` it is better to keep your mouth shut and be thought a fool than to open it and prove it . '' 
P.S. I also like Wolf 's idea of withholding Lybian funds to pay for our involvement in this fray . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:16 pm | Sure . 
France has such an outstanding record in military actions in the past couple of centuries . 
Let 's listen to them on matters military . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:19 pm | Rather than a `` committee '' how about a bureau ? 
We can call it the `` Bureau of Misplaced Priorities . '' 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:19 pm | It is a great idea . 
This operation would n't have begun without France and the French have the most interest in Libya . 
US has little interest in being involved and it gives them an easy exit strategy to let others lead . 
If France wants to take the ball , let them have it . 
No one else does . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:20 pm | of course its not !!! the military although it may defend democracy is not one itself . 
there are decisions which must be made immediately and you just cant do that with a fractured committee . 
peoples lives depend on quick action and ive never seen a committee that was able to do that . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:20 pm | I think it is a good Idea since the US does n't have it 's house in order , maybe some other country will do a better job . 
Maybe a country that is n't into debt `` clear up to it 's eyeballs '' would be a good choice for the leadership role . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:20 pm | Yes Jack By all means put the French in charge . 
They have a long history of surrenders and defeats . 
In no time at all The Colonel will be drinking French wine while his body guards shop in Paris . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:20 pm | I dont know if that would work . 
We seem to be close to pulling out and the French are becoming . . 
well , the French to be honest . 
Why would Russia even speak out about this ? 
They abstained from the vote when they could have voted against it . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:20 pm | If France suggested it , I would be against it automatically . 
When did France ever do anything that smelled anything like success , since Napoleon 's time , as far as war efforts are concerned ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:21 pm | Yes . 
This committee is called the United Nations and I am grateful that America is now supporting the vision of a strong United Nations . 
Please stop over-analyzing this no-fly zone , the immediate purpose is to save Libyan citizens from being slaughtered by a dictator . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:21 pm | Sure Jack , a committee sounds like a wonderful idea . 
Let 's put a committee in charge where people can talk for days and no actual action be taken . 
There 's a reason why the military does n't use committees . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:21 pm | Remo , from beautiful downtown Pflugerville Texas Jack , you 've got to wacth the French , they 'll want to surrender to Libya next . 
Well that has been their history . 
We should n't have stuck our necks in there in the first place . 
And we are there in an illegal manner . 
For a president who `` boasts doing thing right '' , he sure as hell tends to do the opposite . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:21 pm | How French ! 
No wonder they have n't won a war in forever . 
Someone has to be in charge -- whether in the newsroom or the battlefield . 
-LRB- I 'm a retired US Military officer who studied at the French Army Staff School in France and worked at our Embassy in Paris . 
I can assure you this is a ` political ' statement and did not originate from French Military officers . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:21 pm | Wow ! 
I worked with an American subsidiary of a French company for fifteen years , and this is so typical , not just of the French , but of the Europeans in general . 
This is a bad , bad , bad idea . 
Define the objective , put an American in charge , and Get ' r done . 
A Committee !!!!!!!! You 've got to be kidding . 
A camel is a horse designed by a committee . 
This won come out as good . 
We 've done our part . 
We should tell the coalition they have 48 hrs to take over and then we 're gone , whether they have somthing in place or not was n't it the Frech who we bailed out in WWI ? 
Was n't it the French who insisted on the war reparations that set up Hitler 's rise to power ? 
Was n't it the French -LRB- Le Grand Charles -RRB- who were angry that we prevented new war reparations after WWII ? 
Then there was Dien Bein Phou . 
Obama better read some history and take charge ! 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:23 pm | Absolutely . 
The question is , is the US going in as a bully oil mogul\/occupier or to help democratically minded people set up a democracy . 
It 's best if we sit equally at the table with everyone else and abide by the opinion of consensus . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:23 pm | This sandbox is the result of a President who has ZERO military experience . 
Come on folks -- when are we going to start requiring prior military service for the Office of Presidency ? 
It 's just common sense . 
Then again , we have n't seen much of that in quite some time now from any party ... March 23 , 2011 at 5:23 pm | Let 's form a committee of intelligent military men and put Hillary Clinton in charge of all . 
She seems to be the only one in office that is where she 's supposed to be . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:23 pm | It 's ok with me , Jack - as long as the US is not on the committee and we get the heck out of Libya and the other places we do n't belong . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:23 pm | A committee o run this `` war '' in Libya would be a fantastic idea , as long as the United States does n't try and run it . 
Its about time that someone else step up to the challenge of trying to be World Peace Keeper ! 
But if they need the muscle the US wont be too far behind ! 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:25 pm | CNN Jack Cafferty : France wants committee to run war in Libya . 
Jct : Under Khadafi , Libyans were burdened with no taxes , free health care , free education at home and abroad , lots to be rebelling against . 
I have no doubt the Committee will be able to `` raise '' them to the same standard of living as in the US . 
Har har har har har . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:25 pm | Here we go again . 
I remember we went into Vietnam to help the French and once we did that , they promptly backed out leaving the US holding the proverbial bag Remember , history does repeat itself . 
First the UAE is MIA , now the collation is fracturing apart . 
So do we enter war # 4 ??? A no fly zone will Not oust Qaddafi from power . 
Qaddafi s ground forces are superior to the poorly equipped freedom-fighters which means there will ultimately be boots on the ground and now the question would be whose boots ? 
Which country will ultimately send in ground troops ? 
I vote NO American ground Military ! 
Enough is enough !! March 23 , 2011 at 5:25 pm | Jack , excluding every previous committee ever set up , how many have failed ? 
The very idea a bunch of French bureaucrats can win a war is absurd . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:25 pm | If it 's a committee , how about calling it a `` C.R.I.M.E. '' - Committee Rationalizing Infiltrating Moammar 's Empire . 
First , why did we let the French pull our strings ? 
What have we ever learned from the French , accept how to lose ? 
NATO has to step forward and take the lead regardless of what others say . 
The Arab leagues that supported this U. N. resolution , needs to put up or shut up . 
They are just to worried about the backlash , but really do not want to defend the freedom that all humans seek . 
NATO has a chain of command , they need to use it , that is why we have NATO . 
People are dieing while the world including the U.S plays in politics . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:26 pm | Sounds like France has never read `` The Art of War '' by Sun Tzu . 
One leader at the top -LRB- with advisors , but one leader is the only effective way to approach conflict . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:26 pm | French is in favor of running everything with commitees . 
Which is excellent way of screwing a war effort beswides anything else . 
Reminds me of a joke : What is a Camel ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:26 pm | Establishing a committee shows how disorganised this coalition forces are . 
A no-fly zone headed by a committe , will have no effect . 
Gadaffi stands a good chance of winning this battle because he has shown leadership , and those trying to remove him , lack a clear vision . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:27 pm | Regarding the recommendation for a committee to run the war . 
It should be a select group of Senators and Reps. My reason for suggesting this is that it would cost billions of dollars , take forever and six months , the war would be over by then which is okay since any plan these dolts come up with would n't work anyway March 23 , 2011 at 5:27 pm | Look at how politicians are running our government and then try to convience me that committee members from different nations can run a war like campaign . 
Moammar Gadhafi would probably die of old age before a committee would come to a concensus on the campaing . 
You know how politicians work together . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:27 pm | No a good idea . 
President `` George W. '' Sarkozy of France is having a problem with re-election next year . 
He is trying to prop up his approval rating in France by being a cowboy . 
Why should we engage in a civil war in Libya ? 
Unlike Sadam , Gadafy is a appeaser of the West . 
Should we pull him down and replace by an Islamic alternative government , an Islam Republic of Libya ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:27 pm | It has been said that a horse is a camel built by committee . 
Suddenly the GOP wants answers about military actions ; funny they were n't so curious when furious George B. went to war because of his beliefs and false rumors . 
We need to finish the job and take Gadafhi out ! 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:28 pm | No one to blame if things go wrong . 
No one is responsible if things go right . 
Sounds like a win -- win to me ! 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:28 pm | No. . 
The U.N. has had more than a half century worth of experience dealing with these kind of problems . 
Will the committee handle the financing , logistics and take responsibility for civilian or other losses ? 
We have started a humanitarian effort to help the people in Libya as well as try to settle the unrest in the area to try and quell the speculators desire to raise oil prices . 
Which is in the U.S. 's and worlds best interest . 
This is a civil war in Libya . 
We have leveled the playing field and now it is up to the Libyans and their neighbors to fight for their Democracy and change ... March 23 , 2011 at 5:28 pm | If the `` politicians would turn over the war to the warriors like Pres. Bush did in the first gulf war , this one would be over with by now . 
Politics do n't win wars , they just prolong them March 23 , 2011 at 5:28 pm | It 's just another attempt by France to be politically safe at all costs . 
I ca n't remember the last time France had a `` good '' idea . 
It was France 's idea to warn Ghadafi when the U.S. tried to cut the head off of this snake more than 20 years ago . 
We should push France out of the equation altogether , since they have protected him in the past , and hand leadership to a country that has the least to gain from the whole situation , This would attempt to gain some form of political neutrality in the military decision making . 
Political and military decision making never go well together . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:28 pm | No , this was France 's idea in the beginning . 
It was politicking all around . 
France just wants oil as usual and they will benefit from this the most this is why they convinced Hillary to convince obama to say yes to this crap . 
No one should ever trust the French when it comes to wars , did n't they abandon us in iraq when they realized people would die ? 
The French are only good at retreating . . 
punks the whole lot ! 
Also CNN stop telling Obama\/what to do and outlining his agenda for him he is a grown man he knows what he is about . 
He talked to congressional leaders and now the tan man is having selective amnesia about it . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:28 pm | A committee is always a good idea because a smaller group can accomplish more by coming into agreement quicker . 
If we get all countries on board with a committee then tensions will ease because everyone will feel like they are part of the oversight of this endeavor . 
This is new , but if other countries contribute resources then its a good thing . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:28 pm | Absolutely a good idea . 
I love my country and respect the presidency , but this jerk and the last jerk attacked countries who did n't first attack us . 
We are supposed to believe in democracy , but it is not democratic to believe you can speak for other countries . 
Plus Obama needs to be more thoughtful of the American people whom he 's helping Bush bankrupt . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:28 pm | Nurse Lisa in Shelton CT Sure France -- compile a committee . 
Hoping the US will not be on the committee nor footing any part of the financial burden of their efforts . 
Was mad about last weeks magical announcement about Daffy 's involvement in terrorist activities of the past -- like we did n't have this intel for yrs . 
The public never gets the truth , just the bills . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:29 pm | Since everyone seems to think having Arab backing is needed , then I do n't see a better approach than the committee . 
If we had consulted with Congress before deploying the no-fly zone then we would not have needed the committee because the opposition forces would all be dead by now . 
There is a reason why the President is the Commander-in-Chief and not the Congress . 
So , France wants a committee to run the war in Libya . 
My only concern is that the US Congress might be involved in some way , shape or form . 
If that happens ... all is lost . 
If those bickering boneheads can be sidestepped ... hey , we just might see something work for a change . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:31 pm | Everything is a bad idea , Jack . 
There are no solutions . 
They need dictators to function . 
They know no other way . 
But , where was Speaker Boehner -LRB- or however you spell his name -RRB- when the U.S. basically unilaterally launched a full scale war and occupation to follow on a country that did n't have anything to with anything ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:31 pm | That is not an excellent idea . 
We already have too many organizations . 
It will just lead to the already economic problems we face in this world today . 
We will see more bloodshed in this world . 
Why are we not making more organizations for world peace ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:33 pm | Why does Committee almost rhyme with dither . 
Committe also means that US forces will be commanded by nations that do n't care to much for us-The French among the others in the EU . 
I usually support Obama , yet this time he is foolish in not wanting to appear imperialistic . 
The timid cringe and make deals ; those that `` CAN DO '' make the rules and lead their lessers . 
The US is the only democracy in the coalition . 
Only the US has a First Amendment . 
So we also `` KNOW HOW '' . 
fn : US troops were under the UN command in Somalia ; That turned out really good ! 
Jack , we should n't be there at all ! 
We keep removing dictaters from power and destablizing the region I only want their Oil . 
I do n't care about them at all . 
Jack From Nice , Ca . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:34 pm | If the strategy is anything other than get in , destroy all Libyan air forces and military vehicles where civilians are being slaughtered , and get out , then the coalition should disband . 
For people to even think about who gets oil from Libya at a time like this is beyond disgusting . 
I hate high gas prices , but I also ca n't stand those who look to profit because of others ' suffering . 
Are they actually thinking , these women and children are being slaughtered , but hey , at least I can make a few million dollars by getting first dibs on their oil ? 
If so , then we need to come up with a vaccine to protect the world from such ignorance . 
Ghadafi could be killed at any time with special forces , so no military action is needed to unseat him . 
Ghadafi is over confident and seems to think that he is immortal . 
He is a perfect target . 
He will soon realize that he is a spec and that his legacy is worthless . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:35 pm | A committee ???? What is this ? 
Maybe it 's a good idea . 
We could abstain from every motion put forward . 
What happens if we do n't have a quorum ? 
They say that it was a committee that created the camel when they were trying to create a horse . 
` nuff said March 23 , 2011 at 5:35 pm | Committee ? 
Your kidding me more . 
I am surprised they have not surrendered to Libya yet ... Someone is always in charge of a committee . 
So who chairs the committee ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:36 pm | Absolutely a good idea . 
I love my country and respect the presidency , but this and the last president attacked countries who did n't attack us . 
We are supposed to believe in democracy , but it is not democratic to believe you can speak for other countries . 
Plus Obama needs to be more thoughtful of the American people whom he 's helping Bush bankrupt . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:37 pm | When you say , `` It 's not just the French causing problems ... '' and then you state `` Russia 's defense minister yesterday called for a cease-fire in Libya , '' are you stating that steps towards peace only cause problems ? 
How is a cease-fire a bad thing ? 
Is this what a committee is needed to discuss , what is a peaceful move and a war-mongering move ? 
Also , with Germany not agreeing with the way Libya is being handled , how are they causing trouble by protecting their citizens and military by not involving them in a dispute that they have nothing to do with ? 
Did Libya do anything to Germany ? 
I have n't seen anything to hint this . 
Did Libya do anything to the U.S. ? 
I have n't heard anything to hint this either . 
Alliances only drag countries into conflicts in which they had nothing to do with originally . 
`` Peace , commerce , and honest friendship with all nations -- entangling alliances with none . '' 
~ Thomas Jefferson But why would we want peace , commerce , and honest friendship ? 
We would n't have any real reasons to go kill and flex our military muscle then , because that solves everything all the time . 
So , no , a committee to run the `` war '' in Libya is a bad idea , just like it was stated , '' ... if a committee is running the war , no one has to take responsibility if things go to hell and everyone can take credit if they go well . '' 
We should know this already by the countless committees in our own Congress and how no one jumps at the opportunity to take responsibility when things go wrong . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:37 pm | Oh good . 
I 'll hold my breath waiting for that to work out well for everyone concerned . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:37 pm | A committee has to have a leader and hopefully parties who desire to work together a for a common goal . 
THis bunch ca n't agree on anything for more than a day or two ? 
We did our part , now either go get Gadaffi without all the baloney from these other clowns or lets go home ? 
We have paid the bulk of this so far and Europe are the one 's who really need this mess cleaned up . 
Geez , is our leadership dumb otr what I think ignoring too many other of our own problems while trying to conceal our very serious financial issues to the rest of the world by appearing strong is laughable . 
Sounds like another money laundering scandal in the making . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:39 pm | France and England wanted to get Gaddaffi and did a lot of tough talk b\/4 this started . 
Why do n't they put their troops in there for a clean up and bring this to a close ? 
We have done enough I think . 
France needs some kind of leadership or steering committee when it comes to military action , but not us . 
Usually they need someone to fight for them since their rifles have all been dropped a time or two . 
We have the green light now so use it , and let the US make Kadafi want to join the French Foriegn Legion . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:43 pm | I have experienced `` decisions '' by committee . 
Listen to the upside , downside , likes , dislikes blah blah blah . 
At the end of the meeting , I make the call . 
Let the French discuss it into the ground . 
I say drop a 2000 pounder on Kadafi and lets , the USA , call it game over . 
Then we can debate that for years . 
Poop or get off the pot ! 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:44 pm | Barbara Teixeira - Las Vegas , NV A Committee ? 
And next they will argue about who should be the chairman ! 
Are there no leaders in this world ? 
How about one leader who knows what the heck he -LRB- or she -RRB- is doing ? 
Maybe we should let Hillary run the show . 
If this is what is going on concerning this mess in Libya , then how about the US pulls out of the `` committee '' . 
We do n't need to have our fingerprints on everything . 
And especially not this mess . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:48 pm | Yes , I think that a NATO-led committee should run the war in Libya and hopefully the U.S. stays out of the affair altogether . 
Let the U.N. assume the control and the expense of this operation . 
We already have enough to deal with in terms of military occupations and do not need to assume full responsibility by occupying a third arab country . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:52 pm | Why not ? 
We have hearings on all manner of things . 
This is a compelling issue which should be discussed . 
We know too little about the Middle East and Islam : and apparently US government if we are to beleive that sad poll of earlier in the week . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:59 pm | Jack Cafferty sounds off hourly on the Situation Room on the stories crossing his radar . 
Now , you can check in with Jack online to see what he 's thinking and weigh in with your own comments online and on TV . 
Would you ride in a car that drives itself ? 
Is she the answer ? 
Should the #LoneStarState be allowed to withdraw from U.S. ? 
