Libyan civil war : An opening for al Qaeda and jihad ? 
March 23 , 2011 | By Paul Cruickshank and Tim Lister , CNN Libyan youths walk past a burnt out building in this file picture in the eastern Libyan town of Derna on February 23 , 2011 . 
The town of Derna is not much to look at -- a heap of Soviet-style concrete buildings in a deprived and windswept corner of eastern Libya . 
But it has a rich history -- fought over and colonized since Roman times -- and a stunning location on the Mediterranean . 
It has also gained a reputation as a hotbed of jihadists . 
And that has diplomats and analysts asking whether the unrest in Libya might provide an opening for al Qaeda and fellow travelers , just a short hop from Europe . 
Derna even made it into U.S. diplomatic cables obtained by Wikileaks . 
A cable from 2008 describes it as a `` wellspring of Libyan foreign fighters '' for al Qaeda in Iraq . 
High youth unemployment , discrimination by the Gadhafi regime and the influence of veteran Libyan jihadists from Afghanistan all played a role in radicalizing a new generation . 
`` Other factors include a dearth of social outlets for young people , -LRB- and -RRB- local pride in Derna 's history as a locus of fierce opposition to occupation , '' the cable said . 
`` Most young men watched a mix of al-Jazeera news , religious sermons and western action films on English language satellite channels broadcast from the Gulf . 
The result was a heady mixture of violence , religious conservatism and hatred of U.S. policy in Iraq and Palestine . '' 
Today , Derna is very much in the opposition 's hands , and accounts from eastern Libya say Islamists and others are fighting side-by-side with one aim : removing Moammar Gadhafi . 
But what comes next ? 
Gadhafi has been quick to raise the specter of al Qaeda as the beneficiary of unrest in Libya , even claiming that it was drugging young Libyans into opposing his rule . 
The regime has also paraded a former member of the Libyan Islamist Fighting Group who had allegedly been `` captured '' during fighting in Zawiyah . 
While the regime 's claims may seem outlandish , a former leader of Libyan jihadists tells CNN that al Qaeda will seek to take advantage of chaos in Libya . 
`` If there is a power vacuum in Libya there will be an open market for al Qaeda , '' says Noman Benotman , a former commander in the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group and one-time ally of Osama bin Laden . 
The LIFG fought the Gadhafi regime in the 1990s , but formally ended its campaign to overthrow the Libyan regime two years ago , and repudiated al Qaeda . 
Benotman is now a senior researcher at the Quilliam Foundation in London , a counter-terrorism think tank . 
