Ezra Klein thinks there are better things to do with our money : The easy response to this is to ask how I can be so diffident in the face of slaughter . 
But consider Obama s remarks . 
Left unchecked , he said , we have every reason to believe that Gaddafi would commit atrocities against his people . 
Many thousands could die . 
Every year , one million people die from malaria . 
About three million children die , either directly or indirectly , due to hunger . 
There is much we could due to help the world if we were willing . 
The question that needs to be asked is : Why this ? 
What are our interests in Libya ? 
Richard Haas argues that the U.S. doesn t have any , anyway : '' U.S. interests are decidedly less than vital . 
Libya accounts for only 2 percent of world oil production . 
The scale of the humanitarian crisis is not unique ; indeed , this is not strictly speaking a humanitarian intervention . 
It is a decision to participate in Libya 's civil war . 
`` I understand the humanitarian impulse to help the underdog , but we have finite resources , and can not hold ourselves responsible for the political freedom of every human being on Earth . 
As many others have said , the obvious problem with this action is that we must set the pretty gauzy-sounding benefits of influencing public opinion in the Middle East , avenging ourselves for the Pan Am bombing , possibly improving the lives of people in Libya and so forth , against the many ways that this could plausibly turn into a much more expensive proposition than is currently anticipated and not only in terms of money . '' 
Who are we helping ? 
Friedman further holds that we don t know who we are helping : '' ... we should be doubly cautious of intervening in places that could fall apart in our hands , a l Iraq , especially when we do not know , a l Libya , who the opposition groups really are democracy movements led by tribes or tribes exploiting the language of democracy ? '' 
James Fallows says that the American military rarely asks this essential question : `` Count me among those very skeptical of how this commitment was made and where it might lead . 
The most predictable failure in modern American military policy has been the reluctance to ask , And what happens then ? 
We invade Iraq to push Saddam Hussein from power . 
Obama increases our commitment in Afghanistan and says that `` success '' depends on the formation of a legitimate , honest Afghan government on a certain timetable . 
What happens then ? '' 
Next up : five arguments in favor of intervention . 
It 's a UN resolution , not a U.S. invasion . 
And we ca n't stay -- we 're tied up . 
Other countries are going to have to take the lead on this , as they are . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:24 pm | Reply So which country is stepping up to take the lead so we can leave ? 
In your reply please also include the link of a credible news organization article that has the country taking the lead from the U.S. DECLARING it is doing so . 
Until then its just wishful thinking . 
NATO just refused to take the lead due to Turkey voting no and that is the only organization capable of coordinating this kind of coalition operation besides the U.S. , whoops . 
That has been an act of war for thousands of years . 
So this should never be treated as a geesh moment . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:51 pm | Reply Hmmm ... Did n't Ronald Reagan send jet fighters to bomb Libya back in the ' 80 ? '' 
How would you catergorize that ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 9:12 pm | Leave ? 
Are we even there ? 
We do n't have ground troops . 
Do you know what war is ? 
Why are you so stupid ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 11:36 pm | It 's easy to criticize , but the alternatives always have consequences . 
People should have to consider the consider those consequences before criticizing . 
I see 5 people who think more innocent Libyans should die . 
I 'd like to write an article criticizing them ! 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:16 pm | Reply And yet , RIGHT NOW , children are dying from starvation all over Sub-Sahara Africa . 
People are being killed in Congo . 
The Japanese are be radiated . 
Why this and why now ? 
Food and medical supplies are one thing , dropping bombs and picking sides is another . 
Why is it STILL our responsiblity to be the policeman of the world ? 
Why wo n't the Arab League , whom have alot more vested interest in this crisis then we do , not sending troops and\/or enforcing a no-fly zone ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 8:08 pm | Ozmodius , becasuse no one else has the balls to step up , nor the means to do so . 
March 23 , 2011 at 9:40 pm | If all it takes to satisfy your itch is to criticize someone , hell , do it and shut the H. . . 
up My son is over there , and even if I criticize , it wo n't bring him back any faster !!!!!!!!!!!!! March 24 , 2011 at 8:42 pm | Our dear president will be remember as NO-FLY OBAMA ZONE . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:34 pm | Reply I voted for the President . 
He is not going to do the right thing all of the time . 
Unlike Egypt that did things peacefully , we ca n't support reckless , and unlawful deeds . 
Let the Mid East step up and now take care of their own . 
Still , I must give credit that their was no ground troops on this mission . 
We have always started wars without a plan to end them ! 
When are we going to see that we are not always doing the right thing . 
Why are we using up all of our resources , while others are saving theirs for the real fight ahead . 
March 23 , 2011 at 9:55 pm | Because if we nedd `` to allow the mid east to step up and take care of their own '' than Africa can do the same by that coin . 
Africa is divided along lines of tribes , beliefs , and who was occupied by what European nation during the colonial era . 
The poor will always suffer , the sick will be sick , the starving will always starve . 
We ca n't change that overnight either . 
We can change the places where a tyrant murders those that starve because of him . 
March 24 , 2011 at 9:15 am | ZotQuix : All things have consequences , and none of us can see into the future to know truly what they will be . 
I see 5 people who would like no one to die , but realize that we 're not God , and can not control all things . 
Our presence may very well escalate and protract the conflict , as well as bolster Qaddafi 's supporters -LRB- remember , they hate us -RRB- . 
Also remember that ALL wars are `` sold '' to us as either promoting freedom\/democracy , or to `` save '' innocent people . 
How many millions have died as a result of this very same sales job ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 6:02 pm | Reply I am disapointed people are so skeptible to freedom its as if they forget we forgot about ours . 
and their is no way we would have won our reveloution without the help of france . 
so we r just trying to help people who r trying to become free . 
and our foriegn interest how about us having the moral responsibility to save peoples lives , because if we do n't help gadhaffi will kill his citizens . 
any way all we have done right now is bomb them we didnt invade it , but i do believe we need to think about what to do next and how to help them with only airstrikes and bombings on military bases threatening the freedom of innocent people . 
March 23 , 2011 at 6:23 pm | Reply Actually , and this is something I hate seeing when I go down past the signs to Yorktown Battlefield , the France that helped us was the Kingdom of France , not the Third Republic that exists now . 
Yet the tricolor is shown on the signs at Yorktown . 
Yes , French peasants came over here and helped us fight with aristocrats over them as officers . 
However , when they revolted against their King we sat aside and did nothing , absolutely nothing . 
It 's a wonder anyone 's trusted us as allies since . 
As for another point I 'd like to make : The American Revolution was income tax evasion on the largest scale ever seen . 
We were subjects of the King of England , France owned Quebec down to what we now know as Maine . 
During the Seven Years War the French attacked colonials , did we raise an army to fight ? 
We left that up to the King to send troops to fight for us . 
The taxes he imposed were to pay off the cost of having to ship troops over to the Colonies in order to fight in our defense . 
We had more than enough manpower to raise an army at the time , militias are not an army because they often lack the courage to stand their ground when faced with professional soldiers . 
As well as they allowed too many of the officers to argue with superiors who were placed in authority based off of who they know or who their father 's were , not skill at leading men into battle , nor being able to inspire men . 
England helped defend us from becoming all French , since we dislike them so much and seem to think they ca n't fight -LRB- they seemed able to hold the Germans back for quite some time during World War One with what help the British could offer -RRB- seems that was what we wanted . 
Seems people have forgotten the things we 've done in our pasts . 
Maybe we should try understanding that while war is terrible , this new century of warfare has nothing on the last . 
Four years = 20 million or more dead , that was World War One . 
In roughly six months worth of actual combat the American Expeditionary Force lost 50,000 dead and hundreds of thousands wounded , today the American people would call John J. `` Black Jack '' Pershing a murderer . 
At the time he was hailed as the greatest hero America had of the time . 
So why do n't all the doomsayers and those that want to espouse opinions without allowing their brains to digest the true information try looking back at what has happened before ? 
I am currently trying to re-enlist in the US military . 
Not because I have to , not because someone told me I should , but because it 's the right thing to do . 
March 24 , 2011 at 9:09 am | Yaa the french wanted to take the colonies over at first but that was in the very beginning were there were very few colonist and actual american 's -LRB- born in america -RRB- and they only attacked then after that the french indian war they only attacked the ohio river valley which as claimed as both french and british , in fact the british strted making bases there and the french were just defending `` their '' land -LRB- thats what president polk did to start the U.s. mexican war -RRB- then pershing actually gave his troops training . 
he refused to let untrained americans fight in trench warfare and that saved lives . 
and it was in trenches the only way to move was to risk lives , it was a deadlock between france and germany -LRB- hitler actualy was a runner in one of the trenches -RRB- they made hundreds of miles of trenches and then neither moved they just shot spied and maurdered . 
When pershimg sent the toops he sent them with training so more could live and almost every1 in the u.s. at the time would do anything to stop germany and the kaiser March 25 , 2011 at 4:19 pm | What was the name of that country that had a revolution and a super power -LRB- France -RRB- came in to help win that revolt ? 
Oh yeah , it was America . 
America and the rest of the world has a moral obligation to help those who can not help themselves , especially when their government is killing civilians . 
I use the term government loosely ; Gaddafi is a thug and in no way represents a legitimate government . 
March 23 , 2011 at 9:13 pm | Reply That is a legitimate argument Mike D ! 
Albeit a world coalition not a U.S led operation . 
March 26 , 2011 at 1:49 am | From the libyan intervention with no clear objective , it is clear that the west is restless with its weapons . 
U. S , and Europe have so much and highly sophisticated weapons that they do not know what to do with . 
This is more true when juxtaposed with the fact that there are ` real ' wars now , only occupations . 
So the U.S and Europe are looking for the slightest opportunity to use their weapons that are getting ` rusty ' . 
There is no objective in this misplaced libyan war . 
U.S and their allies have said Ghaddafi is not the target . 
Then who is the target ? 
I know Obama is against the libyan war but he allowed himself to get forced into it . 
Obama did n't get it the first time because he was looking for a way to dodge the war but could n't see it initially . 
The easy way for Obama to dodge the idea that the neoconservative american interventionist forces were selling to him on the need to start another war was for him -LRB- Obama -RRB- to seek the approval of the congress . 
But he did n't and was cowed into staging an unconstitutional war without getting the congress ' nod . 
March 24 , 2011 at 6:07 am | Reply The President of the United States by law has the ability to commit American forces to any conflict for up to 30 days before seeking a decleration of war from the Congress . 
Truman did it in Korea , which was never actually called a war while it was happening . 
Gahdafi needs to go , he 's a tyrant that gets his jollies by harming the innocent . 
The hell with what the rest of the world thinks the right thing to do is the right thing to do . 
As for the whole `` Americans getting restless with our weapons , the Europeans are more experts on that than us . 
Remember there was a period of twenty or more years that they went through an arms race , forming internal alliances before finally the powder keg caught it 's spark . 
The spark came on June 28 , 1914 , the resulting explosion is what we now call the First World War . 
They could n't even handle that peace treaty without allowing their vindictiveness to blur the lines between vengeance and justice . 
I 'm glad Europe is trying to help in Libya , but it 's ironic that they used to own that area , so if Iraq and Afghanistan are `` America 's mess '' how would they feel if we left Libya to them as `` Europe 's mess '' ? 
March 24 , 2011 at 8:54 am | That would be wonderful if the U.N. had ever won a war against anyone . 
The last time the U.N. led a coalition into an actual war was sixty one years ago . 
All we got out of that was 36,000 dead Americans , millions of dead from the two countries we were fighting in , and who knows how many from the other coalition members . 
A country that is still divided along the same line as it was when that war began . 
That 's called the Korean War . 
The U.N. is as useless as the League of Nations was . 
The League could n't nor did they try to stop Nazi Germany , Japan and Mussolini 's Italy from just walking out on them . 
What did that get us ? 
Oh that 's right , another `` War To End All Wars '' . 
Gahdafi is murdering his people , that 's different from diseases doing the same . 
No government has the right to rule by fear and terrorizing of their own people . 
We stood up against that during the Second World War and thankfully Obama is doing it now . 
I do n't support all of what he does because recently he 's been sounding more and more like Woodrow Wilson . 
He 's been smart enough to avoid using the phrase `` America is too proud to fight '' a cowards defense against war that he used to keep us out of the Great War for so long . 
Yet an untold number of Americans went and fought on both sides for what they believed in before the U.S. got involved in 1917 . 
No , we do n't need to commit troops to battle , but it seems glaringly obvious that the Libyan Opposition needs better training , Noncommissioned Officers and officers who know how to organize their troops and fight . 
If they lose , the result will be equivelent to what Hitler called `` the Final Solution '' . 
March 24 , 2011 at 8:47 am | Reply Why us ? 
cause we can and should step in especially when they come asking for help . 
i love how people think we should stay out cause we having nothing to do with them , but we do . 
this is a planet we live on and everyone has the right to rule themselves how the people see fit . 
i say hell no , we help them make a better country for themselves , unlike Iraq were we forced it upon them . 
also with out foreign powers stepping into help rebels claim there sovereignty we would still be part of the united kingdom . 
the french saved us now we are helping the french save Libya . 
remember we are humans first and foremost , and that should out weigh the idea of American and Libyan March 24 , 2011 at 10:48 am | Reply March 25 , 2011 at 10:17 am | Reply It 's not our affair . 
They did not attack another country . 
It is a Libyan affair March 23 , 2011 at 4:32 pm | Reply In theory , we 're not actually committing to any extended period of time . 
We are helping establish the no-fly zone by Tomahawking the regime 's air defense into very small pieces . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:36 pm | Reply Are you serious ? 
Which war have we entered and after the first salvos , we have let someone else finish the mess ? 
War is unpredictable event as we should have learned in Korea , Vietnam and Iraq . 
Let us take care of the economic decline we are in and let the world fend for themselves . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:45 pm | Reply Obama 's decision to participate in this civil war is baffling . 
There is no compelling reason to believe that French and other foreign help is more then enough to help the Libyan people kick out Ghaddafi , without involving us . 
And the last leader that tried to fight on 3 fronts was Hitler , and everybody knows the results . 
This thing can easily blow up in our faces and become another Vietnam . 
Dabbling in other country 's revolutions carries that risk . 
Are n't two wars enough ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:12 pm | Reply wow do u even know wwII hitler didnt all of a sudden decide yaa lets let them take normandy and oppen a third front ooo and lets do the math germany = 1 country how about france u.s. britian and etc. vs. half of libya . 
and im mad that people dont think about what it would be like if france didnt help us in OUR revolution so it may just be some radical idea that we should help people in theirs ? 
i know mind blowing that we shouldnt let people with low supplies and weopans and almost no training fight for freedom against well suplied trained military . 
March 23 , 2011 at 6:31 pm | When was Hitler fighting on three fronts ? 
Unless you count the two divided allied armies in the west as two different fronts ? 
And are we still counting Iraq as a front ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 10:57 pm | So all those Republicans critical of this small intervention that will cost the USA 1\/1000000 less and last 1\/10 shorter than the ongoing Iraq intervention that went on without any World support and is proven to have been a tactical failure are criticizing this ? 
How do you even look at yourselves in the mirror ? 
Not only is it a bad argument , it is bad form to jump the fence on issues . 
What will it be ? 
Are you Republicans going to take responsibility for anything you believe ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 11:49 pm | Let me get this straight . 
If we can organize a couple hundred thousand people in the US to pick up guns and turn on the government , then Obama will not respond with force and will pack up and leave . 
March 23 , 2011 at 4:50 pm | Reply I think MR. ODUMBO will enforce a No-Fly Zone from NY to CA and from Alaska to Fla. and them reduce to ruins the whole US . 
with the help of french , brits and spain . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:37 pm | Reply He probably wo n't do the No Fly , but the police and security forces will sure be taking care of anyone approaching the capital with weapons . 
You will be arrested , among with bunch of other leaders of the peaceful demonstration . 
How is it different from what Ghadaffi was doing , or for that matter what every country would do , which is to arrest leaders of anti-government protests ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:57 pm | Reply did u seriously say that marching with a GUN was a non-violence form of protest . 
and Obama is doing the best he can with our gov ' t right now and if i remember right he didnt start the recession his time as president the unemployment rate raised but then fell further and that he has done a far better job then bush and clinton -LRB- the good economy during clintons presidency was bc of reagan -RRB- March 23 , 2011 at 6:36 pm | How about the only reason that should matter ? 
That the actions the US have taken in Lybia are not legal , not in any shape form or fashion . 
Most importantly , not legal according to the US Constitution Not legal according to the -LRB- unconstitutional -RRB- War Powers Act Not legal according to the UN Charter This no fly zone , and impending ground war will be the 3rd illegal act of war this country has perpetrated in the last 10 years . 
Why was this blaringly obvious one not listed at the very top of the article ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:11 pm | Reply Dont worry , Obi wan send a letter to Congress from Brazil saying '' I forgot to tell you guys , I just started a war against Lybia , berst regards , OBI WAN . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:43 pm | Reply jeez it still sounds like you are in the Kellog-Briand Pact days March 23 , 2011 at 11:00 pm | Reply According to every news agency , CNN , FOX , whatever , we are just helping those poor rebels , who just need a no-fly Zone to start their long march west to take Tripoli . 
But actually we are creating , a Flat-Zone , let me explain . 
Nothing should stand iun the way for the rebels , houses , roads , everything must disappear and I wonder , would they be able to find Tripoli ? . 
Probably they would end in Algeria . 
Oh , by the way , Libia only produce 2 % of oil , can anybody think how much money that is ? . 
We are protecting civilians , but those with the rebels , the rest are not civilians , either they are with Kadaffi or are classified as `` colateral damage '' . 
I never thought that Nostradamus will be right , 3rd WW will begin in the Middle East . 
Now I have doubts . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:21 pm | Reply Yeah , let 's help the rebbels . 
And once we are at it , let 's help all the rebbels -- the Colombian , the Nicaraguan , the Cambogian , as long as it is anti-government . 
March 23 , 2011 at 6:00 pm | Reply Humanitarian reasons ? 
Stand up for democracy ? 
Now Kaddafi is the bad guy . 
I recalled when he has nuclear and chemical weapons nobody thinks of attacking him . 
Politicians around the world have discovered after 40 years that Kaddafi is a dictator and is massacring his people . 
Let me remind them when he came to power he killed thousands who opposed him , and I do not remember anybody saying a word . 
OK , dear opoliticians , I can tell you that Spain massacred thousands of people when they colonized America . 
I propose a resolution by the UN who allows a coalition to attack Spain for war crimes and bring the King of Spain to an International Court . 
Give me a break . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:32 pm | Reply I think my additional concern beyond the obvious is that we set the precedent for helping in this situation , but what if it keeps happening around the world ... . 
we no-fly venezuela , no-fly congo , no-fly\/bomb ... you fill the blank for your country of choice _________ . 
What if people anticipate our help now but we do n't show , what happens to them ? 
Where is this going , I guess . 
It could easily enlarge beyond libya , are we going to bomb Yemen ? 
We could get alot of people killed as they anticipate support that is n't going to come . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:33 pm | Reply It 's a funny trend . 
Everytime there is `` revolution '' lately in the world we here get all so cheerful , greeting it and supporting , requesting the existing government to step down and wagging our presidential finger . 
This is almost like the `` world 's revolution , '' an idea that got Russian bol ` sheviks so excited almost a centruy ago . 
Somehow , back then we thought this `` world 's revolution '' was not a good idea . 
Why are we so happy to declare every turbulence around the globe a `` revolution '' and then support it like the most fashionable cause ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 6:06 pm | Reply Yeah i must agree . 
If we dont help we look like douchebags and the rebels will hate us if they win . 
If we do help everybody complains and calls it illegal -LRB- for both reasonable and illogical points -RRB- and we end up getting to involved at set a bad precedent of helping every `` fighter of democracy '' . 
America should always stand for democracy wherever it springs up but not at the expense of its own people March 23 , 2011 at 11:06 pm | Reply I could n't agree with the arguments in this article more . 
Why ca n't we learn from our mistakes ? 
And by `` we '' , I mean Obama , as he did n't even consult the officials we elected for that purpose . 
I hope it ends well , and I hope it ends quickly , but History suggests otherwise . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:48 pm | Reply Argument 1 -- Why this ? 
seems to be most relevant . 
The uprising swept across the region . 
Everything happened so quickly . 
Within 6 weeks two regimes were toppled . 
There are still many fires everywhere that need to be put out , Amid the heat , the defiance of Gaddafi , that sparked the emotional debate . 
The other arguments like , who the rebels are , help them at what cost and what all this would lead to , seem quite secondary . 
It looks as if the coalition parties just by ear . 
March 23 , 2011 at 6:39 pm | Reply We should wait and see , how the adventure of the Trio -- Sarkozy , Cameron and Obama -- would come out ! 
Maybe Gaddafi could still have a good laugh . 
He who laughs last , laughs best ! 
March 24 , 2011 at 5:43 am | Reply all of you who believe in the holocast are stupid , americans are fat stupid and lazy and this war is the stupidest thing the europeans and americans are doing June 14 , 2011 at 8:17 pm | Reply I agree that it was a mistake to intervene in the libyan civil war . 
Any money , politrical capital , national effort , would be far better spent mending fences back in the USA . 
I thought we were already broke and exhausted from past wars cold and hot . 
Why do we keep making these mistakes , I wonder ? 
Is it because we have a professional military on retainer with an arsenal of weapons that will soon be obsolete if not used , like the Tomahawks ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 6:54 pm | Reply Being from a Country founded on a `` Revolution '' , I find our actions puzzling . 
Not to mention that the world leaders should respect borders and leaders to rule at will . 
I see everyone is afraid of Yemen . 
If I started a revolution in the U.S. , who would help me ? 
I 'm certain we would be mowed down , who would help us , Britain , France , or the UN , not a chance . 
I really hope the no-fly zone becomes costly , everyone needs to mind their own business . 
The world is not a democracy , well come to think of it , neither are we . 
March 23 , 2011 at 7:07 pm | Reply James Fallow has a huge problem with his understanding of how our military works . 
Our military does not decide whe ther or not to take action . 
Our government does that . 
The military is responsible for carrying out the mission add dictated by the government . 
it is the government who has to ask , what next , not the military . 
March 23 , 2011 at 7:28 pm | Reply If the United States , France , England , and other countries want to be the `` policeman '' for the world , they should adopt the tactics of our police in the large cities in the U.S.A. ... wait until the gunfire stops , then go to the scene of the crime and pick up the bodies . 
Rather than drop bombs , we should employ a very strict arms embargo and quarantine of countries where strife occurs . 
Let them use rocks and sticks to kill each other . 
Why should we continue to allow weapons to enter countries lke Libya or Mexico ? 
One answer , greed . 
March 23 , 2011 at 7:33 pm | Reply Americans do not understand the Arab\/Muslim view of the world . 
The arguments in this article do not take into account the strongest arguments because the US discounts the effect of religion on politics , which is a fatal flaw in the Middle East . 
The political leaders view is that the US will throw the dictators that the US -LRB- and Britain -RRB- set up -LRB- The Shah of Iran , Kuwait , Jordan , Saudi Arabia , Libya , Egypt , Tunisia , etc. not to mention the arming and support of Saddam Hussein by the US -RRB- under the bus whenever it becomes convenient . 
The Saudis see how quickly the US turned on Mubarak and believe the US would do the same to them if their were protests to break out in Saudi Arabia . 
So , whatever remaining allies the US has in the region will become increasingly distrustful of the US . 
The population see it as a religious war and this action fuels Islamist activists . 
The US , and certainly France , can expect to see terrorist attacks on their soil in `` revenge '' for the killing of `` innocent Muslims '' . 
March 23 , 2011 at 7:46 pm | Reply This is HIllary Clinton 's war , just as Bosnia was Maddy Albright 's war . 
They have an ax to grind in destabilizing all male dominant societies Obama and Bill Clinton are weak leaders who let women do their dirty work . 
March 23 , 2011 at 8:04 pm | Reply Despite all the nay-saying , the air strikes are working . 
Gaddafi 's forces have been driven back away from Benghazi and at least mostly from Misrata and Ajdabiya . 
The slaughter of many , many rebels and civilians has been averted . 
Everything could go wrong , of course , and it seems unlikely that air strikes alone will drive Gaddafi from power Tripoli . 
It appears that the main goal of the coalition may be achieved and if it is , the carping will be seen to have been more than a little ungenerous . 
March 23 , 2011 at 8:20 pm | Reply Neoconservatives wanted this ? 
I guess I have n't listened to much Glen Beck or Rush lately , but I really wonder why we are doing this . 
I do feel sorry for people that have to die in these situations , but sometimes wars have to be fought . 
It just does n't seem to be any of our business . 
The US Civil war was much more horrible than what is happening in Libya . 
I 'm not sure why we are the `` world police '' . 
March 23 , 2011 at 8:53 pm | Reply Meant to say that I consider myself a conservative just to give things context . 
March 23 , 2011 at 8:54 pm | Reply The comment that `` no foreign states have vital interests '' in Libya is totally wrong . 
The Europeans , specifically the French , British and Italians , are addicted to Libya 's oil . 
British and French oil companies are angry because they 've been losing oil contracts to the Chinese , Indians and Russians . 
Italy gets most , if not all it 's oil from Libya -LRB- its former colony -RRB- . 
To show that this is about oil : The Chinese reported -LRB- yet not picked up by main stream western media -RRB- that its oil field workers in Libya were attacked by `` gangs '' , who proceeded to destroy the Chinese equipment . 
These `` gangs '' are the so called peaceful protesters . 
China evacuated 20,000-30 ,000 of its citizens from Libya because of these peaceful protesters attacking the oil fields the Chinese were working on . 
India also evacuated its workers . 
This is all about Europe holding onto what it has always seen as its oil . 
Gaddafi has been offering oil deals to Russia , China , India and even Germany . 
Notice they all abstained from the UNSCR 1973 vote . 
So much for `` no foreign states '' have interests . 
It is about the oil ! 
March 23 , 2011 at 9:18 pm | Reply Regarding the comment : `` the American military rarely asks this essential question '' . 
It is not the responsibility of the military to ask such questions . 
It is totally the responsibility of the Commander in Chief -LRB- aka President of the United States -RRB- , and to a lesser extent , the officials that reside in the Congress . 
The military can only advise , they can not officially , and in some cases , legally , question what the President orders them to do . 
It is the stupid elected officials , that stupid American voters keep electing , that keep screwing things up ! 
The military is very good at what it is supposed to do ; kill and destroy . 
The military was never meant to act as law enforcer . 
This is why those who are elected better understand the seriousness of using the military . 
March 23 , 2011 at 9:29 pm | Reply March 26 , 2011 at 2:00 am | Reply We are placing ourselves between two sides in a civil war . 
What if we produce a stalemate ? 
People in the rebel areas have to adjust to the new government , they become collaborators with the rebels and now we can not pull back or even more people are at risk than were originally at risk . 
We are jumping into a mess . 
Libya is in the sphere or influence of France and the UK who led the intervention . 
Let them hop into this quagmire . 
We could have stood back and offered to mediate between the government and the rebels , but now we are digging ourselves into a hole and taking sides . 
Little interventions have a way of becoming big . 
This conflict could spill into Algeria , Chad or Egypt . 
We should want no part of this mess . 
March 23 , 2011 at 10:03 pm | Reply I am an old man just about to die . 
I have seen in my lifetime how the US has manipulated the lives of decent people . 
Are the rebels in Libya likened unto the rebels of Afghan & Iraq or are they `` nice '' rebels as the US rebels of the 18th century . 
Are the rebels the majority vote ? 
Why Libya and not Ivory Coast , Rawanda -LRB- in the past -RRB- , Somalia -LRB- in the past -RRB- , Bahrain , Yemen , Saudi Arabia etc. . 
The reason is the US held a grudge against Khadaffi for some time now ... and did exactly what they did to Saddam for just the same reason . 
What is the reason why the revolt of the Hawaiians a few years were put down . 
They wanted their lands stolen from the monarchy restored . 
King Khalakauia and his sister were imprisoned by the us so that US can grab the land . 
Did the allied pip-squeaks utter a word . 
What would happen if Puerto Ricans were to start the same thing in greater numbers ? 
Do you think anyone in the UN would care ? 
The UN is the US arm to control the world together with the World bank and the us is controlled by rich jews . 
People write that the jews will control the world . 
Sorry , they have been doing that for years . . 
they own the world . 
Would n't it be a good joke if it turns out that most of the rebels are indeed al Qaida agents ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 10:06 pm | Reply raja , the media just bring another concept to the arena DEMOCRATIC REVOLUTION ... when the conflict is started by the allies of the ` Wealthiest and Famous '' the revolt is DEMOCRATIC they can get all the support but when the revolt is started by the `` others '' then they are `` terrorist '' ... it , s what we call `` double moral '' ... Again , people needs peaceful mechanism to solve the differences , , , no more wars , no more deaths and destruction ... ' March 24 , 2011 at 12:12 am | Reply So tell me , now that the Syrian dictator is killing his people , are we -LRB- the US , Britain , France , etc. -RRB- going to bomb Damascus ?????????? March 23 , 2011 at 10:44 pm | Reply These rebels we are supporting may end up as the next Al-Qaeda . 
March 23 , 2011 at 11:06 pm | Reply Imagine the year is 1861 . 
The union has made a blockade on the confederate states and Civil war has broken out because the south has said it does not have representation . 
I know there was no UN , but where was the International protection of the southern citizens that the union slaughtered under the name `` Rebels '' ? 
Different country , different year , SAME ISSUE . 
We should not be in Libya . 
If the northern United States was allowed to take back the south and win the civil war ; then Gaddafi has the right to take back the east and unify his country once again . 
March 23 , 2011 at 11:21 pm | Reply Because the North wouldnt execute all of the `` Rebels '' after the fact . 
Not saying we are right but way off the mark on that one . 
Qadaffi is a ruthless dictator . 
March 26 , 2011 at 2:02 am | Reply To all who are opposed to the minimal support we are providing to the Libyan people : when you say that `` we should not be in Liya '' , do you mean you 're damn glad you do n't have to live under Gadhafi 's brutal thumb , but can hang out on the couch watching `` American Idol '' ? 
The world has demonstrated its lack of responsibility and courage -LRB- with the exception of Ronald Reagan -RRB- for 40 years . 
I 'd say it 's about time we grew a pair . 
March 23 , 2011 at 11:39 pm | Reply Let me ask you ... will you let your neighbor came to house and quietly allow him reorganized your furniture just because he think his ideas about decoration are better than yours ? 
... or what about if he empties your refrigerator and replaces your food by carrots just because he thinks carrots are the best ? 
Ideas as most of the things in this world are relative ... no one owns the true ... I think people in the world do not require wars or armed conflicts to solve the differences ... What people require now are peaceful ways to cope with the differences among them ... March 23 , 2011 at 11:58 pm | Reply I agree with you , in great measure . 
However , you seem to suggest that Ronald Reagan -LRB- and I am not a Reagan admirer -RRB- was the only President to take military action to support US policy . 
Clinton ` had a pair '' -LRB- Kosovo -RRB- , as did both Bushes -LRB- Panama and Iraq -RRB- . 
Give credit where credit is due . 
March 24 , 2011 at 3:54 am | Reply Why journalist and politician still talking about intervention as an humanitarian act ? 
... Why still manipulating the true ? 
The reasons to all military interventions can be many but not humanitarian ... Weapon industry and oil are probably the most relevant . 
Lets say the weapon industry needs a market . 
What is the market for weapons ? 
well let 's promote armed conflicts ... everywhere ... to sell weapons . 
LAst night I hear a new term DEMOCRATIC REVOLUTION ... who decides when a revolution is democratic or when it is just terrorism ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 11:44 pm | Reply Because we are Americans d@mmit ... that 's just what we do ... we invade , we conquer , we change ... March 24 , 2011 at 12:14 am | Reply because we are Americans d \* mmit ... that 's just what we do ... we invade , we conquer , we change ... March 24 , 2011 at 12:16 am | Reply Here 's the answer to `` how are we going to pay for this ? '' 
$ 30 Billion in Gadhafi frozen assets in the U.S. of A. I challenge congress to start drafting the measures required to guarantee this form of payment -- like , right the heck now !! March 24 , 2011 at 1:18 am | Reply Why does the USA get so involved in others fights , I can understand compassion for the weak but the world is full of conflict . 
It would make sense for the USA to spend some time away from world conflicts that do not directly impact them , not to be cold hearted but it does seem that no matter what the USA does there are bad feelings and good feelings about it . 
So why not pull back and regroup , work on yourself for some time USA . 
At least in the places that you can . 
Its time to let the rest of the world solve their own problems . 
March 24 , 2011 at 1:25 am | Reply We are soooo wrong , we are killing innocent people just like we killed in Iraq . . 
And you stupid people do n't understand this , because your thinking that we are helping them ... THAT IS SOOOO STUPID ! 
March 24 , 2011 at 1:29 am | Reply Of these arguments against taking action in Libya , only one is legitimate ... `` who are we helping '' ? 
I do n't think it is clear that the government that would replace Ghadafi would be any better or any more friendly toward us . 
But I believe they deserve a chance to prove that they love Democracy as much as they claim . 
However , here is a point-by-point refutation of the other four arguments : -LRB- 1 -RRB- Why This ? 
There will always be different , and perhaps better ways to spend our resources . 
If we accept this argument as a valid reason for inaction , then we would never do anything at all . 
Doing nothing is a lousy way to remain a world leader . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- What are our Interests in Libya ? 
Why is it necessary that we have an interest there ? 
The fact that Libyans are human beings and Americans are human beings ought to be interest enough . 
Sometimes doing the right thing should be its own reward . 
I can not stand when people will only do something helpful when they expect something in return . 
Doing something for someone else when there is no tangible reward for ourselves makes us better than 99.9 % of all the other nations of the world . 
-LRB- 3 -RRB- At What Cost ? 
Well , war is expensive . 
So is maintaining armed forces in peacetime . 
The fact is that , with the exception of expending ordnance , we are n't really spending anymore than we would if we were not engaged in a military action . 
Every soldier and sailor would continue to be paid whether they were fighting or not . 
We would still fly aircraft of routine missions or training sorties . 
Our aircraft carriers would still be at sea and still would be incurring operational expenses , whether or not we were engaged in Libya . 
Its all in how you cook the books . 
Besides , when we order new cruise missiles from Raytheon , American workers will get paychecks which they will spend here at home to stimulate our sagging economy . 
-LRB- 4 -RRB- What Happens Next ? 
This is unknown , granted . 
However , doing nothing has predictable consequences . 
First , if we do nothing and Ghadafi wins , then we will have allowed a dictator to massacre huge numbers of innocent civilians . 
Since this is something we could have prevented , this would make us at least in part responsible for their deaths . 
Second , if we ignored the opposition 's pleas for help and they won ... well , then do you think they might have some resentment toward us for abandoning them in their time of need ? 
So , our carefully measured actions , supported by the UN and the Arab League is , I believe , precisely the correct course of action at this time . 
March 24 , 2011 at 3:43 am | Reply As an outsider i have read and studied US foreign affairs -LRB- and got indirectly effected by one -RRB- , i have come to one conclusion : The US did not win -LRB- fulfill 100 % of its tasks -RRB- since D day and fall of The Third Reich , not in Korea , Vietnam , The first Gulf war , Bosnia and Ex-Yugoslavia , Kosovo -LRB- Serbia -RRB- , Afganistan , Iraq , and its easy to see that Gadafi isnt giving up ... The US and the NATO tried to enforce No-Fly zone over Bosnia in 95 and Serbia in 99 , didnt do much but to lose a couple planes -LRB- including a F117 -RRB- , target bridges , trains and buildings full of civilians that they called collateral ... Or remember when the US armed the Taliban in Afganistan in the 80s to fight the Russians , and look at who the Taliban are fighting now ... US has no obvious reason to take down Gadafi or get someone else into power . 
Italy , France and the EU might -LRB- as they buy the Libian oil and have many citizens working down there -RRB- . 
But still i have to agree that this would be a long and a costly war for all sides , Obama personally -LRB- i guess the Nobel Prise Comity is rethinking their decision right about now -RRB- ... March 24 , 2011 at 4:02 am | Reply screw obama , he lied . 
They are all liars ... Our country is screw , stupid bush and obama lovers did this to our country . 
I believe this represents an incredible opportunity for the west to consolidate with the Arabs and Islam . 
Its a unique opportunity -- as they save lives , help a surpressed Libyan people in their justified uprising against a regime that has been oppressing them for the last 41 + years . 
The US , France and UK have gained -- savior status . 
Its a win -- win situation for the west and the US -- as they have the chance to show to the Islamic world -- that their help is based primarily on humanitarian reasons -- without negotiating commercial gains . 
Which proves even to the Islamic hard-liners that the West is not what their regimes claim them to be and see the positive side of the Western countries . 
March 24 , 2011 at 5:06 am | Reply I have to disgree . 
The US stood up to the Serbs in Bosnia when no one else would . 
The Arabs on the street will always hate the United States as long as they support Israel . 
Five years from now whatever good will was generated will be gone . 
Now should the U.S. be intervening anyway ? 
All I have to say in do n't go in with a penny , go in for a pound . 
If were gonna go in do n't go half way . 
Airpower alone is not going to work and this is where Obama will fail . 
There is no coherent opposition on the ground . 
The end result will be an indefinite stalmate . 
And Obama 's words will riing hollow as a dozen civil wars rage on in Africa with no American intervention . 
March 24 , 2011 at 9:21 am | Reply live in a prospered country , you ca n't asess how eager for freedom a people in depressed countries have in mind , obama acting as if a world peace and freedom surveyor . 
in my opinion March 24 , 2011 at 6:52 am | Reply Really it comes down to what template you have been brought up on : If I woke up each morning in a country which had the US constitution as my guiding light I would see very clearly why Gaddafi should be removed and why my country was at the forefront of doing so . 
Now if I woke each morning in a country which had Gaddafi s Green Book well then I would leave tyranny and apathy reign not my business . 
March 24 , 2011 at 6:55 am | Reply Those are pretty good questions , especially no. 4 ; I wonder what would be the alternative if there was no intervention and Qaddafi does slaughter civilians . 
March 24 , 2011 at 7:22 am | Reply When you have an hammer every problem looks like nail head . 
That is what i observe with the West 's quest for war to resolve issues every time . 
The military might seems to be their preferred options aginst minnows , I wish they had the gut to deply same against Russia as an humnitarian support to Georgia few years ago . 
No fly zone , yes , but why go ahead and start bombing a Country that had not flouted the UN resolution , or was a Libyan jet found flying after that resolution ? 
If not the West interest in enriching the military industry , is it not far simpler to shoot down any such Libyan jet seen flying in violation of the no-fly resolution ? 
Why must they go ahead and start bombing facilities and calling it pre-emptive strike to bring down radar stations ? 
Should the next terrorist strike in Paris or new York be counted as a pre-emptive strike too ? 
March 24 , 2011 at 7:31 am | Reply '' ... I wish they had the gut to deploy same against Russia as an humnitarian support to Georgia few years ago . '' 
- no , they are reliably nuclear deterred from doing that . 
This is essentially and inherent component of what American People like to call `` system of checks and balances '' - it protects American People by constraining adventurism and lunacy of politicians American People elect in Free and Democratic elections . 
... and speaking that little war in Georgia : it is actually a rare example -LRB- perhaps a unique example in recent history -RRB- when a humanitarian war actually worked . 
Five days of war after 20 years of meddling have solved all the problems . 
Abkhazians got their country at last . 
Paradoxically , it solved Georgian problems as well . 
Have you heard about ~ 150,000 Georgian refugees who fled Abkhazia back in 1993 ? 
When Chevarnadze tried to enforce his constitution , but only got a war which he lost , followed by intolerance and expulsion of georgian population ? 
Those georgians spent the next 15 years living in misery temporal housing and false expectation that newly elected democratic government of Georgia starts an new victorious little war , wins it , and they will be able to come back to live in what left of their houses . 
After 08.08.08 it become very clear : forget it . 
Then , very quickly after the dust settled , Germany intervened with little humanitarian project and built houses for them deep inside Georgian territory . 
... And by saying that , I literally mean `` Germany has came and built '' , not `` Germany provided money or loans , or whatever '' - Georgians would rather embezzle that money and Germany prevented it from happening . 
Thank you , Germany . 
... Anyway , it is peaceful now . 
March 24 , 2011 at 12:55 pm | Reply Just to make sure that the point is clear : Officially U.S.A. spent $ 6 billion of taxpayer money to arm and train Georgian Army which was supposed to solve the problem in what was ment to be a shock-and-awe operation in 08.08.08 , but was defeated and disintegrated in 5 days instead . 
That is , about ~ $ 1300 per every Georgian , including small infants . 
Given the scale of real-estate prices in that area and at that time , $ 10,000 guys house for a family of 4 . 
Germany spent much much less to actually SOLVE the problem . 
Thank you again , Germany . 
March 24 , 2011 at 1:11 pm | Well , since nobody is offering ... I know of a prime strip of land he can set up a tent and would only cost a $ 100 million . 
It would help solve Arizona 's problems . 
And it could become a tourist attraction and give the minutemen some more work . 
March 24 , 2011 at 8:11 am | Reply So this month we 're standing up to ruthless dictators . 
So when do we invade China and North Korea ? 
We only pick fights we think we can win . 
3 Reasons we should n't get involved ... 1 -RRB- Libya is a sovereign nation . 
Like it or not , Muammar can do whatever he wants to his subjects -LRB- like China and North Korea -RRB- ... 2 -RRB- We CAN NOT afford a third-front war . 
I do n't know about the rest of you , but I do n't want ANOTHER nickel spent by the military to defend any place that is n't inside a US state or territory ... 3 -RRB- Libya represents no US interest . 
Sure , bad things are happening to ordinary citizens , but bad things happen to good people every day . 
We can NO LONGER afford to be the world 's policeman ... it 's someone elses turn - OR - for once , we could all just MIND OUR OWN BUSINESS . 
March 24 , 2011 at 9:24 am | Reply Im soo tired of hearing how america this and america that we are always the one to show up first we are always the bullies . 
Is it because we truly are bullies or is the rest of the world to afraid to step up their game in this crazy world . 
I am all for knocking down these dictator 's and terrorist that follow along with all the mess in the middle east and everywhere else in the world . 
The US is always on the front line . 
I think it 's time to see the canadians , British , Spanish , and the rest of these strong countries take a step up ! 
March 24 , 2011 at 9:26 am | Reply Vincenzo Ruello the Italian amateur film scientist has decoded the Holy Shroud on the 10th February 2011 releasing true real life images of the face and body with skin and hair from actual encoded information . 
He films in various angles of light which was the secret in decoding the Shroud . 
His clips and the real face of Jesus Christ can be seen on youtube search Vincenzo Ruello March 24 , 2011 at 9:44 am | Reply My aunt worships a crack in the wall of her garage which looks loosely like a cross . 
She sets up flowers and holds prayer meetings with nuns there and a candle burns like the light-house of Alexandria . 
She did not want to `` touch '' her neighbor with her wall and so the rain falls between the two houses and water damage has created this `` miracle '' . 
I can give you her phone number if you wish to attend . 
March 25 , 2011 at 5:15 am | Reply We should only engage in long , Republican-inspired sport wars . 
These short , Democrat ones are clearly wrong . 
Iraq ... Afghanistan ... they 're OK cause like Bush did it and he 's a Repub . 
But a few days bombing Libya ... no way . 
Clearly Obama has alot of explaining to do . 
Unlike Bush and Co. , who were completely justified and deserving of sainthood . 
March 24 , 2011 at 10:13 am | Reply I ca n't believe we went to war without knowing who is going to be in charge . 
Where I come from they call that a Cluster ... with a capital F. Some Commander and Chief we have ... good grief ! 
March 24 , 2011 at 10:21 am | Reply We do n't need to know who will be in charge , the only thing we need to know is where is the oil , it 's fight them or domestic discontent will bring down the government . 
Happy pigs make better bacon . 
March 25 , 2011 at 5:32 am | Reply When a tyrant by the name of Saddam & his `` family '' were executed in the pretext of setting the Iraqs free , the country only turned into a blood bath , this intervention in Libya runs the risk of setting the country down the same path , another somalia , Afghanistan in the making . 
We need scientific calculators to do the next body count ... ... March 24 , 2011 at 10:25 am | Reply ... we have every reason to believe that Gaddafi would commit atrocities against his people . 
Many thousands could die . 
... more than 2 millions had killed from 1975 -- 1979 in Cambodia under wrong government BUT there were no such intervention from those westerners . 
My believe is `` Cambodia got no oil '' like what Libya has !!! Therefore , no interest ... March 24 , 2011 at 10:29 am | Reply point 2 is ridiculous . 
just because america does n't have interest in libya does n't mean they should n't protect innocent people from being killed . 
this is hardly an argument . 
March 24 , 2011 at 11:10 am | Reply Obviously shame on Russia for not vetoing this stupidity , or , more precisely , shame on Medveded . 
Apparently he had dissagreement with Foreign Ministry -LRB- who unambiguously wanted veto it -RRB- and also with Putin -LRB- who technically had no say , but expressed himself later any way in very clear terms , furthermore he did it twice already -RRB- . 
Medvedev and Foreign Ministry stroke a `` compromise '' between support and veto : this resulted in `` abstain '' , which in this context equivalent to support . 
It is not clear whether Qaddafi will survive this or not , but it is already clear that this is the beginning of end of president Medveded . 
Sorry , guy , your p_e_n_i_s is too small to rule such a big country . 
March 24 , 2011 at 11:58 am | Reply March 24 , 2011 at 12:12 pm | Reply Most of your answers are here : US 2009 military budget = $ 700 billion Rest of world COMBINED = $ 800 billion US is the only nation to have a massive Department of Offense . 
Want to make progress on national debt -- cut defense as well as domestic budget to make both sides compromise . 
March 24 , 2011 at 1:34 pm | Reply While the figures above are true , the problem is that US military budget spending is helplessly inefficient . 
What you should count is the number of warheads , missiles , bombs , warplanes , ships , etc. . . 
Still US has more and better aircraft carriers than the rest of the world combined , more and better destroyers , approximately as many jet fighters -LRB- although F15E is decisively better than anything European , and nobody except US has them -LRB- Israel and Saudi Arabia have just a few -RRB- -RRB- , but a comparison of ground forces is not so impressive . 
March 24 , 2011 at 1:54 pm | Reply I agree with you , we should cut defense spending right after we stop send billions in foreign aid to countries that neither appreciate it or remember who sent it . 
Cut all foreign support to rebuilding other country 's infrastructure , stop sending advanced technology to countries that use that technology against us , stop allowing US companies to outsource work to foreign countries that use child and impoverished labor . 
Stop supporting and bailing out financial institutions that send US dollars to foreign banks . 
Then cut defense spending after we block our borders and keep illegal aliens from using our services and breaking the backs of our public school systems . 
Yeah , I agree with you ... March 24 , 2011 at 11:05 pm | Reply I guess you should just starve a little and you will be able to compete with those outsourced jobs , food is like crack , you want it , you need it , and you will do almost anything to get it . 
At that moment all the world is gone , all that matters is that you get your fix and in your universe there is no politics , tribe , special interest , etc. . 
Born free , stay free , nobody or government will take that from the people but that is what governments do , charge you for existing . 
March 25 , 2011 at 5:27 am | WHY NOT A NON-VIOLENT ACTION SUCH AS GET THE TYRANT TO TALK AND TO STOP THE KILLING HIS OWN PEOPLE ? 
UN 'S JOBS AND ... OK GOOD TO HELP OR INVENTION BUT CAN WE ASSURE THAT NO MORE BLOODSHED AND THE COST AND DAMAGE ENVIRONMENTS ETC. . 
I THINK IT IS ABOUT THE AGE OF WAR FREE TO RESOLVE CONFLICTS , THIS IS THE HIGHEST OF HUMAN BEINGS !! March 24 , 2011 at 4:27 pm | Reply 1 -RRB- we spend the most on military . 
If we spent the most on making broccoli , people would look to us for broccoli assistance . 
Want to cut defense ? 
Great , vote for a candidate that will do it , if you can find one . 
Want to help starving Africans or people without health insurance ? 
We have no direct interest in Libya . 
We are parrot the U.N. And that means we are going to help . 
Do n't try to use past failures to justify bailing on our friends now . 
This is humanity coming to a consensus internationally and trying to do the right thing -- THAT is in our interest . 
3 -RRB- Others are helping , everyone 's chipping in to this problem just like we are all helping Japan , NZ , and helped New Orleans . 
Stop cutting rich and corporate taxes and we will all be fine -LRB- including the rich and the corporate . -RRB- 
4 -RRB- Whoever will bring Libya and its people a real modern government that allows them basic civil liberty they clearly desire . 
If the rebels start killing children and mugging Anderson Cooper , they 'll find themselves on the wrong end of our military alongside gaddafi . 
5 -RRB- We all help Libya . 
We do our part as `` the good guys '' that we like to be while we keep trying to fix our own problems . 
We are the `` haves , '' I would help the `` have not `` s. If you do n't want to help anyone but yourself , there is a whole political party just for you , they even have a tv channel . 
March 24 , 2011 at 6:59 pm | Reply March 24 , 2011 at 7:02 pm | Reply This blog is one of the most interesting I have seen in the last days . 
Those comments from both Hirleman and Osman fits into my personal thoughts : we can learn a lot from the world s history . 
As a Dutchman and born in WW-II , I will never , ever , forget what all of us owe to the American people : the freedom we enjoyed since ever . 
That s not all . 
It was just when the war ended that I myself tasted milk powder , chocolate , cheese , for the first time in my life ! 
And that s not all . 
We also got from American taxpayers vitamins , playing cards and other stuff by parachute , from American planes , dropped by American crews . 
So , I m very sorry , but can neither agree nor admit those comments from other bloggers denigrating the US image on an open worldwide blog . 
In other words , I can fully imagine the feelings of those who are now fighting against a tyranny in Lybia . 
But the world has drastically changed in the last 20 years : cybernetics , drugs , mafias , corruption are nowadays playing an important role in the so-called Globalization . 
Does anybody know how many U$ are in hands of the drug-dealers worldwide and their fantasy companies ? 
Perhaps it may = or be -RRB- than the US Military budget ! 
Are U Americans willing to see your country being invaded by the so many poor folks looking for a better life in the US ? 
The re are already 50 million Latinos in the US , so good it is in L. America , which is just your backyard . 
See your huge problems at the Mexican border . 
What does it cost to US tax payers just to prevent Mexicans crossing the borders of your backyard ! 
Don t U think those Muslims prefer to live in the US than where they live today ? 
EU is crowded with foreign folks today -LRB- mosques are substituting Christian churches in the Netherlands -RRB- , causing already clashes between the locals and unwanted foreigners from poor countries competing in local jobs . 
Perhaps Osman s comments in this blog is envisaging the clash between the poor and the rich a very dangerous comparison made by politicians from the so-called poor '' countries . 
President Obama had no choice than to support the same allies that supports the US in Afghanistan -LRB- Germany abstained to intervene in the conflict , bur is sending more planes and troops to Afghanistan in response -RRB- . 
Even so , U see how problematic are these US allies : 6 days to take a decision , where your Adm. Jim Stavridis has made a superb job in Turkey . 
To make an end : be proud of your country , politics stinks everywhere in the world , but what I like from the Americans is their efforts to keep their ultimate freedom ! 
Wasn t it the US , all of us should be either eliminated from the earth s face or living under the worst tyranny that ever existed . 
March 24 , 2011 at 9:55 pm | Reply The world is a country club with it 's leaders being the members . 
The peoples of the world are simply the fools of the world court . 
With time , all governments will fall , and fall by the hand of their own people they will . 
It 's nothing new , it 's just a matter of time . 
Those who feed from the trough are happy until it runs dry and become those in meager farms that eat their masters . 
March 25 , 2011 at 5:06 am | Reply You might be right David , but many of those leaders does have an elephant skin and are corrupt . 
The worst of corrupt people is when they start threatening with blackmailing . 
The greatest -LRB- unknown -RRB- fortunes are from these guys , who are responsible for what is labeled as the 3rd world ! 
Now , imagine what for a paradise the drug cartels may have in in such a 3rd world ... look at L. America s violent street crimes . 
Latinos kill Latinos in greater numbers than both the casualties from the wars in Korea and Vietnam together ! 
Pray for the 50 millions Latinos in the US , that they may really integrate in the american culture and life , otherwise they ll be strangers forever , as most Latinos have anti-american feelings . 
So , in this complicated world there may also exist a country club of certain folks ... March 25 , 2011 at 6:30 pm | Did you graduate from third grade . 
If you want to make an intelligent argument learn to spell or could it be ESL issues . 
March 24 , 2011 at 10:44 pm | Reply March 25 , 2011 at 5:08 am | Reply This is way more helpful than aythning else I ve looked at . 
July 18 , 2011 at 11:47 am | Reply There is no way out when despots dont want to go . 
Arabs need to stand up as an army to protect each other from these thugs freedom and democracy is a God given blessing kings do not own lands which God gave for His children to live in . 
Governments are suppose to be the minds of God on earth . 
Vincenzo Ruello the dumb ass Italian film scientist who has just decoded the Shroud of Turin revealing skin and hair look at the face world major media has ignored my discovery released in February but there is no escape the entire world will see the face of Jesus Christ as he looks all my clips are now on youtube search Vincenzo Ruello March 25 , 2011 at 5:55 am | Reply As it is a free speech here what I mean in the previous opinion is : WHY NOT A NON-VIOLENT ACTION SUCH AS GET THE TYRANT TO TALK AND TO STOP THE KILLING OF HIS OWN PEOPLE ? 
IT IS THE UN 'S JOB TO HELP OR INTERVENTION -LRB- ERROR WRITING INVENTION donot get me wrong -RRB- Lybia people needs help sured what I mean is to help without blood sheds , the cost and enironmental damaged . 
Another words TO RESOLVE WITHOUT FORCE IN AN IDEAL WORLD WHICH I HOPE WE CAN MAKE IT ONE DAY -- AGREED ? 
March 25 , 2011 at 7:41 am | Reply Not realistic . 
You can not negotiate or bargain with a mad man . 
You only lose and he wins . 
The only method and means that a mad man like Khadaffi , or a thug in the street understands , is force . 
Do you think these people go to church on Sunday or believe in some greater being ? 
They only believe in themselves as gods , as the ultimate hero and everyone else is disposable . 
Look at history : Hitler , Po Pot , Musulini , and many others . 
All you need to do is check their bank accounts and verify if their children run the government or military . 
They all act like thugs ... just with a different robe -LRB- i.e. have you seen Khadaffi 's attire ? -RRB- 
March 25 , 2011 at 5:17 pm | Reply I am deeply opposed to the U.S. providing an air assault to help rebel forces take control of Libya . 
We have taken a side in a civil war and I fear we will end up slaughtering many more Libyans than Qadafi ever would have . 
We go farther every day . 
Will we keep on until we are shooting down the armed Warfalla from fighter jets ? 
The no-fly zone is a good thing . 
When we go beyond that , we become the monster . 
March 25 , 2011 at 8:40 am | Reply You are totally ill informed and disconnected with reality of what is occurring in Libya . 
Have you ever lived under a dictator ? 
Life is not valued . 
You are a slave to the great leader and your live only for him . 
What life is saved ? 
May America , France and Great Britain continue to bomb Qaddafi and his evil followers . 
When the world battles evil and wrong doing , America must stand on the side of `` right '' and support those who aspire for freedom , liberty and democracy . 
You in America would not have a country or democracy if the French had not interceded and help battle the British during your revolution with the British . 
The free Libyan people are looking for the same help and assistance . 
My Allah , the great god , bless American for all it has done to defend the free people of Libya . 
March 25 , 2011 at 5:29 pm | Reply Qhaddafi is going to finance that war . 
NATO countries aint going to pay anything . 
That includes for the illegal Libyan aliens that are in Italy for the next 100 years . 
The costs Italy has to make to send them all back . 
USA has frozen Qaddafi 's 30 billion $ assets . 
That 's enough to pay the first expenses . . 
for next 5 and a halve year . 
When groundtroops would be send , Qhaddafi 's gold is ours to pay for those expenses . 
We 'll sell their companies in the west owned by Libyan state . 
They 've got oil to keep our fighters in the air . 
NATO is n't going to pay anything !! March 25 , 2011 at 10:35 am | Reply It s rather much more that NATO countries are not willing to pay anything '' , they re allies taking any action only when they re under the umbrella or shields of the americans . 
I told above what we got from the americans at WW-II end and I tell you now , that while we got that all from the americans , from the Dutch government we got only our winter wear from the red cross , nothing more . 
But after some years , the government has sent the bill of that wearings to my father ! 
We never ever got a bill from the americans ! 
That s the big difference when you do humanitarian actions in a right way ! 
US real partners and allies of today -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- are only the Brits , Ausis and Canadians ! 
March 25 , 2011 at 6:56 pm | Reply The USA intervention in Libya is totally unwarranted : Africa , through AU and other African Countries had the chance and capacity to handle the Libyan question . 
April 1 , 2011 at 4:42 am | Reply What 's up i am kavin , its my first time to commenting anywhere , when i read this post i thought i could also make comment due to this sensible post . 
July 11 , 2012 at 6:04 pm | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
