NEW : A government spokesman vows Gadhafi 's forces will hold al-Brega NEW : `` We will turn Brega into hell '' Rebel officer : Gadhafi troops set an oil-filled trench ablaze as a line of defense The rebels claim they are moving ahead slowly but steadily Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Libyan government troops will turn the strategic oil city of al-Brega into `` hell '' rather than let it fall into the hands of advancing rebel forces , a government spokesman said Monday . 
Rebel forces moved to within 9 km -LRB- 5.6 miles -RRB- of al-Brega over the weekend after dismantling thousands of land mines , a rebel spokesman said . 
But government spokesman Musa Ibrahim told CNN that forces loyal to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi remained in full control of the eastern city late Monday . 
`` Defending Brega is so vital to the livelihood of the Libyan nation , '' Ibrahim said . 
`` We will turn Brega into hell . 
We will not give Brega up , even if this causes the death of thousands of rebels and the destruction of the whole city . '' 
Ibrahim said Gadhafi 's troops successfully fought off waves of rebel attacks over the last five days , with 30 government troops and 500 rebel fighters killed . 
The claim could not be independently verified . 
Col. Ahmed Banni , a spokesman for the rebel Transitional National Council , said fighting broke out over the weekend after the rebels pulled out thousands of land mines and secured a path for movement toward the strategic oil town . 
Pro-Gadhafi troops dug a trench and filled it with oil only to set it alight as a line of defense near the eastern entrance of the city , he said . 
`` So this may delay our plan to take over the city , since they have linked the trench to an oil pipeline so they keep the fire going , '' Banni added . 
A rebel fighter who did not want to be named said a small rebel force entered the city and clashed with pro-Gadhafi forces , killing at least 11 and injuring dozens among rebel ranks . 
Gadhafi forces withdrew ahead of the rebels , but re-grouped and launched a counter-attack , Banni said . 
`` I can tell that the communication between the Gadhafi brigades is not too good , since they did not immediately fire at our expeditionary troops with Grad missiles . 
That 's what they usually do , but there was hesitation this time , '' Banni said . 
U.S. to Libya : Gadhafi must go U.S. , Libya officials in talks Food shortages in Western Libya Officials with the Gadhafi government in Tripoli have denounced the assault on al-Brega . 
At the start of the latest round of fighting on Thursday , Ibrahim accused the NATO alliance of coordinating with rebels to mount a land , sea and air attack . 
He said the attack exceeded the mandate of United Nations Security Council resolutions that authorize the use of force in order to protect Libyan civilians . 
In the meantime , NATO announced it struck more targets in the Libyan capital on Monday . 
For the first time , NATO forces attacked Tripoli 's main international airport . 
Libyan officials brought journalists to see a radar tower that was bombed in a predawn attack . 
The remarkably precise strike damaged only the top of the radar tower , while also shattering windows in a neighboring office building . 
A NATO military statement accused the Tripoli regime of using the radar device to track warplanes and warn pro-Gadhafi forces of impending airstrikes . 
Officials at the airport scoffed at these claims . 
`` It is 100 % civilian , '' said acting airport director Naji Daw , pointing at the twisted metal at the top of the red-and-white tower . 
Daw said two people were lightly wounded by the attack . 
`` They want us to go back to 100 years ago , '' he said , adding that the airport will now have to rely on an outdated back-up system to track air traffic . 
Not far away , Libyan commercial airliners sat motionless on the tarmac . 
Since NATO and US forces imposed a no-fly zone on Libya last March , this once bustling gateway to Tripoli has been barely operational . 
Daw said the airport now received occasional United Nations and Red Cross flights , as well as planes carrying foreign diplomatic delegations . 
CNN 's Amir Ahmed , Ivan Watson and Jomana Karadsheh contributed to this report . 
