Syria files : Wikileaks releases 2m 'em barrassing ' emails Wikileaks says only by understanding the conflict in Syria can it be resolved `` Ground-breaking '' news stories derived from the `` Syria files '' will be published over the next two months , Wikileaks said . 
Its founder Julian Assange was quoted as saying the material was embarrassing - not only to Syria but its opponents . 
The emails are said to date from August 2006 to March 2012 . 
Syrian authorities have been fighting an internal rebellion for some 16 months . 
Some 15,800 people have died , activists say . 
Emails from the Syrian ministries of presidential affairs , foreign affairs , finance , information , transport and culture are all represented among the data to be released , Sarah Harrison from Wikileaks told reporters in London . 
`` The range of information extends from the intimate correspondence of the most senior -LRB- governing -RRB- Baath party figures to records of financial transfers sent from Syrian ministries to other nations , '' she said . 
Mr Assange remains in the Ecuadorean embassy in London , where he is trying to avoid extradition to Sweden over accusations of rape and sexual assault . 
But Ms Harrison quoted him as saying that this material `` helps us not merely to criticise one group or another , but to understand their interests , actions and thoughts . 
It is only through understanding this conflict that we can hope to resolve it . '' 
Some of the 2,434,899 emails would reveal , Wikileaks promises , `` how the West and Western companies say one thing and do another '' . 
News stories based on the emails will be published by news providers including US news agency Associated Press , Spain 's Publico . 
es and Egypt 's al-Masry al-Youm . 
Some stories which have already appeared seem to concern communications between Syrian representatives and Western suppliers of equipment that could be used for military purposes . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
