Russia to sell arms to Syria , sales overall to rise ZHUKOVSKY , Russia | Wed Aug 17 , 2011 12:26 pm EDT ZHUKOVSKY , Russia -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Russia 's top arms exporter said on Wednesday it intended to continue selling weapons to Syria , despite calls from the United States for Moscow to halt its weapons trade with Damascus . 
Russia , the world 's second largest arms exporter , wants to make up for $ 4 billion of contracts lost when the United Nations placed an arms embargo on Libya this year and is also looking to Africa , South America and Southeast Asia to compensate . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton urged Russia last week to halt arms deliveries to Syria , one of the Russian defense industry 's best clients , following the crackdown on protests against President Bashar al-Assad . 
`` There were deliveries of arms to Syria last year , and there will be deliveries this year . 
They will continue , '' Anatoly Isaykin , general director of Russia 's top arms exporter Rosoboronexport , told a news conference at Russia 's premiere airshow outside Moscow . 
There has been no sign from the Kremlin that Russia is about to respond to Clinton 's appeal by halting arms deliveries to Damascus . 
Russia has repeatedly said sales in the region conform with international law and do not threaten regional security . 
Russia has carved out a niche selling arms to countries unwilling or unable to buy from the top arms exporter , the United States . 
Isaykin said Rosoboronexport would deliver on contracts it has signed with Syria , including a recent agreement for Russia 's Yak-130 light attack fighter plane . 
ROSOBORONEXPORT 'S SALES SET TO RISE He said he expected to make deliveries on at least $ 9 billion worth of arms globally in 2011 , higher than sales of around $ 8.6 billion last year . 
Rosoboronexport makes up 80-90 percent of the country 's arms exports every year . 
`` I 'm sure the volume -LRB- of arms supplies -RRB- will total at least $ 9 billion , '' he said . 
Russia 's arms sales have soared by more than 20 percent in the first half of 2011 to $ 5.9 billion as governments , fearing turmoil like that seen this year in North Africa and the Middle East , boost their arms stockpiles , Isaykin said . 
`` Naturally we are trying to compensate for the losses we saw due to the events of North Africa , '' Isyakin said . 
`` We are trying to work more actively on the African continent , in western-central Africa . 
Southeast Asia , is one of the places where we are trying to market more effectively as are the countries of South America . '' 
The Russian arms industry -- nurtured under Vladimir Putin 's 2000-2008 presidency -- has sold weapons to post-Soviet states and Cold War allies for decades on the strength of Soviet design and technology , which once rivaled that of the United States . 
Today Russia is feeding a hungry market of Asian countries warily eyeing China 's growing military might and African nations preparing for the worst in potential regional conflicts . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
This is the hypocrisy that each side practices and a big reason why the world is descending into chaos . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
