BERLIN | Wed Aug 17 , 2011 11:54 pm BST BERLIN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Plans from France and Germany to move towards fiscal union in 2012 got a chilly response from other euro-zone countries and failed to reassure investors worried about the region 's debt crisis and weakened economies . 
Austria , Finland and Ireland all questioned bold proposals from French President Nicolas Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel to give up sovereignty over budgetary policies as a means to shore up their 17-nation currency union . 
Market analysts warned that political dissent coupled with failure to deliver any concrete pledges to increase the size of Europe 's euro rescue fund , or launch of euro bonds , risks a renewed attack on heavily indebted countries . 
`` There is little in the way of concrete measures in these decisions , '' said Wolfgang Leoni , chief investment officer at Sal . 
`` This is exactly what the markets do n't want . '' 
In a sign of investor jitters , flight from the euro currency resumed on Wednesday as money sought the relative safety of the Swiss franc and the U.S. dollar . 
German debt , another safe haven , was also well bid compared with other euro-zone government debt . 
The region 's stock markets were mixed . 
The message left by Merkel and Sarkozy was that , in the short term , responsibility for warding off any new attacks on indebted euro-zone countries rests solely with the European Central Bank . 
But the central bank , which already has thrown tens of billions of euros into the bonds of countries such as Italy and Spain is internally divided over the wisdom of that move , creating further anxiety for investors . 
`` I think the crisis in fact is likely to get worse before it gets better despite the announcements that we had yesterday , '' Jacques Cailloux , chief European economist at RBS , told Reuters Insider television . 
`` The ECB is trapped here , '' Cailloux said , adding that he sees the ECB could end up buying almost $ 300 billion worth of Spanish and Italian bonds by late September to fight off waves of speculative attacks . 
The prospect of the ECB essentially bankrolling countries with budget deficit problems throws the central bank into the heart of European politics , territory way beyond its monetary mandate causing tensions within its governing council . 
ECB bond buying acts as a bridge until euro-zone parliaments have approved enhancements agreed last month to Europe 's rescue fund , which would allow it to start making bond purchases . 
That process passed an important hurdle late on Wednesday when the Dutch prime minister secured broad political support for the Greek bailout agreed last month by European leaders , a key test before an official vote due within a few weeks ' time . 
The Netherlands is a solid backer of the euro project but its coalition government could face problems with a disillusioned electorate . 
Another traditional German ally Austria on Wednesday criticised the Franco-German move towards `` economic governance . '' 
Ireland reacted sceptically to a pledge by Berlin and Paris to press ahead with a harmonisation of their corporate tax rates in hopes that other euro members would follow suit . 
A separate proposal to write German-style `` debt brake '' rules into national constitutions across the 17-nation currency bloc by mid-2012 faces big hurdles given Sarkozy himself is struggling to secure a parliamentary majority at home for such a plan . 
Finland 's finance minister questioned whether the rule would work at all and said she was `` not too excited '' about making changes to her country 's constitution . 
Some of the steps unveiled at the news conference in Paris on Tuesday would have seemed almost revolutionary as recently as a year ago . 
Merkel bowed to longstanding French calls to hold regular meetings of euro zone leaders and appoint a symbolic president , or spokesman , for the bloc -- steps that are bound to widen the divide between euro `` ins '' and `` outs '' in the 27-nation EU . 
But in the midst of a crippling crisis that has threatened to engulf big countries like Spain , Italy and France , the announcements were criticised by many as `` too little too late . '' 
Spanish and Italian 10-year bond yields hovered near 5 percent , more than a percentage point below where they stood before the ECB first intervened in the markets earlier this month . 
Economists said markets could test the resolve of European policymakers again within weeks . 
`` Markets are looking for a magic bullet and that does n't exist , '' said Julian Callow , an economist at Barclays in London . 
`` Instead of a magic bullet we have more of the same . 
Governments are trying to cut their deficits , that is eating into demand and driving economies weaker . 
Both Spain and Italy held out hope that Merkel and Sarkozy would change their minds and embrace joint euro bonds . 
One worry is that the Franco-German proposals re-open a number of contentious debates within the EU , further sapping investor confidence . 
Merkel and Sarkozy vowed on Tuesday to press ahead with long-stalled plans for a financial transactions tax . 
But the UK has long opposed this , and moving ahead without the City of London could end up hurting the financial sectors in Frankfurt and Paris . 
Irish Finance Minister Michael Noonan said he would insist that any such tax apply to all 27 members of the EU , not just the 17 that share the euro . 
Looming elections in key euro zone member states -- Spain votes in November and France in the spring -- could also complicate implementation of the proposals announced by Merkel and Sarkozy . 
France 's Socialists have strongly opposed the government 's plans to introduce a balanced budget rule to the constitution , threatening to turn it into a campaign issue . 
On Wednesday Francois Hollande , the leading Socialist candidate to challenge Sarkozy in next year 's vote , urged a national debate on the issue . 
-LRB- Reporting from European bureaus ; Editing by Ruth Pitchford and Andrew Hay -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It is the most erudite proposal I have read . 
The simple cure is to realize it is an unmitigated , complete and total disaster -- and then treat it like a lame horse ! 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
