TUNIS | Thu Aug 11 , 2011 10:51 am EDT TUNIS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Tunisia said Thursday its troops were patrolling fuel stations to curb the flow of smuggled gasoline into neighboring Libya , a trade which is helping Muammar Gaddafi hold on to power . 
International sanctions and the effects of Libya 's civil war have disrupted normal supplies of fuel to parts of the country under Gaddafi 's control , but huge volumes of gasoline are instead being smuggled across the Libyan-Tunisian border . 
`` The armed forces are now conducting checks at fuel stations in the south of Tunisia , -LRB- in places -RRB- such as Tataouine and Ben Gardane and Remada , so that neither Tunisians nor Libyans can fill up with large quantities , '' defense ministry official Mokhtar Ben Nasr told a news conference . 
`` These checks are aimed at preventing the smuggling of diesel and gasoline to Libya , '' he said . 
Tunisian police said Wednesday they had seized five container trucks full of contraband fuel which was destined for areas of Libya under Gaddafi 's control . 
Western governments trying to bring an end to Gaddafi 's 41-year rule believe that fuel supplies are crucial to his ability to hold onto power . 
A NATO naval blockade and sanctions that prevent fuel traders from doing business with Libyan companies and individuals on a blacklist have made it extremely difficult for Gaddafi 's administration to bring in fuel by legal means . 
However , smuggling networks help make up the shortfall . 
Libyans buy black-market gasoline in Tunisia , much of which has been smuggled out of neighboring energy producer Algeria , and then carry it across the border into Libya . 
Until now there has been little evidence of Tunisian authorities taking firm action against the illegal trade with Libya . 
Smugglers provide a livelihood for some communities in Tunisia and so they constitute a powerful interest group . 
Any blanket crackdown on fuel smuggling is also likely to hurt the Libyan rebels fighting Gaddafi 's forces . 
Rebels in the Western Mountains region near Tunisia -- who are trying to advance on Tripoli -- depend on fuel smuggled in through a desert border crossing which they control . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tarek Amara ; Writing by Christian Lowe ; Editing by Mark Heinrich -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Libya will have the taste of freedom at last ! 
41 years waiting ... . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
