SHALGHOUDA\/BENGHAZI , Libya | Thu Aug 11 , 2011 7:54 pm EDT SHALGHOUDA\/BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan rebels said they had captured part of the oil town of Brega on Thursday while their forces in the west pushed toward Zawiyah , trying to get within striking distance of Muammar Gaddafi 's capital . 
Gaddafi is clinging to power despite a near five-month-old NATO air campaign , tightening economic sanctions , and a lengthening war with rebels trying to end his 41-year rule . 
The rebels have seized large swathes of the North African state , but are deeply divided and lack experience , and Thursday 's gains in the east broke weeks of stalemate . 
One rebel spokesman said the opposition had captured the residential districts of Brega but Gaddafi 's forces still hold western parts of the town where the oil facilities are located . 
`` It is liberated . 
It is under our control now , '' spokesman Mossa Mahmoud al-Mograbi said of the eastern part of the town . 
The residential area where the fighting was taking place is about 15 km -LRB- 9 miles -RRB- east of the oil terminal and sea port . 
It was not immediately possible for a Reuters reporter to verify the capture of Brega and rebels have repeatedly claimed to have seized towns , only to be repelled by Gaddafi 's forces . 
In the western mountains , rebels said they reached the village of Bir Shuaib , some 25 km -LRB- 15 miles -RRB- from Zawiyah , which has unsuccessfully risen up against Gaddafi twice this year . 
It lies less than 50 km west of Tripoli , on the main road to Tunisia , which has been a lifeline for Libya but has begun to crack down on rampant smuggling of gasoline . 
`` We 've gone past Nasr village and right now we 're about 25 km from Zawiyah , '' said Faris , a rebel fighter . 
Rebels prevented reporters from reaching the front to see for themselves . 
Rebels in the western mountains do not operate as a single force , as each town has its own command . 
But when they join forces for major operations they can muster a few thousand men . 
Their force is poorly trained and short of heavy weapons , despite a French arms drop earlier this year , and most analysts do not think they are capable of capturing Tripoli . 
In an effort to pile economic and military pressure on Gaddafi , more countries are set to announce next week that they will free frozen assets for the rebels , a British official said . 
`` While it 's hard to predict when this will end , it 's easy to see the pressure is building on Gaddafi and it is only a matter of time before he 's forced to leave power , '' the official said . 
Britain is playing a leading role in NATO air strikes against Gaddafi 's forces , which have weakened his armory but have not enabled the rebels to deliver a knockout blow . 
Tightening the economic noose around Gaddafi , Tunisia said on Thursday its troops were patrolling fuel stations to curb the flow of smuggled gasoline into neighboring Libya . 
International sanctions and the effects of Libya 's civil war have disrupted normal supplies of fuel to parts of the country under Gaddafi 's control , but huge volumes of gasoline are instead being smuggled across the Libyan-Tunisian border . 
`` The armed forces are now conducting checks at fuel stations in the south of Tunisia ... so that neither Tunisians nor Libyans can fill up with large quantities , '' Tunisian defense ministry official Mokhtar Ben Nasr told a news conference . 
`` These checks are aimed at preventing the smuggling of diesel and gasoline to Libya . '' 
The western battle is one of three widely separated rebel fronts against Gaddafi forces . 
In the east around the ports of Misrata and Brega , fighting had been bogged down in recent weeks while the western rebels have advanced . 
The two sides have been battling for months over Brega , 750 km east of Tripoli . 
The rebels see securing the oil facilities as a tipping point in the war and hope to resume oil exports from there as quickly as possible . 
In the west , doctor Nuri Al-Fasi said one fighter had been killed and four wounded on Thursday in the rebel push . 
At a nearby field hospital , he looked over a rebel shot in the stomach in the fighting in Nasr . 
`` This is very serious . 
I do n't think he will make it , '' said al-Fasi , shaking his head . 
Dozens of pick-up trucks packed with rebels drove to a staging post a few kilometers behind the front line . 
From rebel-held Misrata , east of Tripoli , rebels were fighting to break a partial encirclement by Gaddafi forces , striking south into the nearby village of Tawurgha . 
Medical sources said six rebels were killed and 70 wounded in their offensive on Tawurgha , from which Gaddafi 's supporters have been firing rockets at Misrata for weeks . 
`` Our rebels have just liberated Tawurgha . 
This is great news ... as this means that the rockets of Gaddafi 's forces can not reach Misrata anymore , '' said rebel spokesman Hassan Algallay . 
Rebels said the offensive was led in coordination with NATO to protect Misrata from missile attacks . 
He said NATO asked rebels on Wednesday to paint their vehicles yellow and red . 
The offensive comes days after Gaddafi 's government accused NATO of killing 85 civilians , including women and children , in an air strike near Zlitan , west of rebel-held Misrata . 
U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon voiced alarm over recent reports of civilian casualties and called on all sides to avoid killing innocent people . 
Dozens of Libyans protested outside the Hungarian embassy in Tripoli , which has become an unofficial contact point for European nations and the United States , against NATO airstrikes . 
Rights group Amnesty International also called on NATO in a statement to `` thoroughly investigate '' allegations of civilian deaths in the strikes on the village of Majar , close to the front line at Zlitan . 
NATO said it hit a military target . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
NATO leadership is so greedy & soulless & desperate to install their puppets from Benghazi who do not even represent a fair number of Libyans-but western interests . 
The Govt troops can let the rebels enter unopposed into some of these towns , then intermingle with them and we see how NATO will use its savagery of bombing street by street , and home to home killing everyone including rebels . 
They may like that better though since after that they can land peacefully in an empty country to enjoy the oil , the only thing they seem care out . 
Even most citizens in the NATO countries are wallowing in poverty , the leaders are having fun with wars abroad and other scandals . 
SHAME ON UK , FRANCE and all NATO leaders . 
What a TRAVESTY the UN has become ! 
Every single liberated city or village in Libya is thanking UK , France , US and NATO for their support . 
Free Libyans , the ones who can speak their minds without the oppression of a tyrant , do support the National Transitional Council -- meaning a free Libya . 
With the help of western countries and NATO , Libya will finally be a free country . 
Thanks to UN and the resolution 1973 , millions of Libyans will enjoy a normal life , at last !!! Freedom !!! It is easy to see the one sided views of some that want to thank UK\/France and USA . 
What about rebel behavior who killed own leader the other day ? 
What about the bodies of Gadaffi soldiers that were found hidden by the rebels ? 
What about the retribution reported in some rebel held areas ? 
Some cities have refused to allow those rebels entry but prefer own tibes fill the Vacuum after soldiers of Govt leave , Just to mention a few ! 
NATO is a for Profit body , otherwise how can one explain the intransigence of rejecting all peace initiatives and sensible efforts by China , Russia , AU etc. . 
No Fly zone was complete achieved , so why propel the rag-tag group to Tripoli , they never even had in the first place . 
It is therefore extreme naivety for anyone to expect NATO to deliver Libya to better times . 
All they can do is destroy it . 
Only Libyans will develop Libya will only happen they make peace after NATO has left-no matter how long that is . 
In the meantime-Libya might join Iraq and other Gulf states that serve the masters and not are really bothered or able to do otherwise-with all the Military bases now in their countries . 
Resolution 1973 was well intended , but the implementers of mission turned out dubious , so all Libyans lose , rebel or non rebels alike . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
