\* Determined to get within striking range of Tripoli \* Signs of NATO strikes SHALGHOUDA , Libya , Aug 11 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Rebel forces in western Libya drove their offensive north toward the town of Zawiyah near the Mediterranean coast on Thursday , trying to get within striking distance of the capital , Tripoli . 
They pushed north to a settlement called Bir Shuaib , taking them within 25 km -LRB- 15 miles -RRB- of their target of Zawiyah , a town less than 50 km from Tripoli , the stronghold of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi . 
`` We 've gone past Nasr village and right now we 're about 25 km from Zawiyah , '' said Faris , a rebel fighter . 
Rebels prevented reporters from getting up to the new front line to see for themselves . 
Evidence of help from NATO air strikes was seen at the village of Shalghouda , on the route of the rebel advance . 
There were signs of recent fighting and a large building had collapsed , apparently after being hit by a NATO bomb or missile . 
A green tent , green army cap and green army uniform lay on the ground among pulverised concrete -- the color of government forces fighting under the flag of Gaddafi 's Libya . 
Rebels said they had taken the village of Nasr , where there was a concentration of pro-Gaddafi forces . 
On the edge of Bir al-Ghanam , south of the new front line , fighters drove by in pick-up trucks and yelled `` Allahu Akbar -LRB- God is greatest -RRB- , victory in Nasr '' . 
At a nearby checkpoint young rebels played football and said they were happy because they expected victory soon . 
There was an array of pick-up trucks with sand oiled on for camouflage . 
Modified helicopter rocket launchers were mounted on the back of the pickup trucks . 
From Misrata , a port city east of the capital controlled by anti-Gaddafi forces , there were unconfirmed reports of a rebel offensive to break through a partial encirclement by Gaddafi forces , striking south in the direction of Tawurgha . 
At least two rebels were killed and over a dozen were wounded there , according to one unofficial report from a source in rebel-held Misrata . 
The rebels in the west have advanced rapidly since capturing Bir al-Ghanam on Saturday , breaking weeks of stalemate on this front in Libya 's civil war . 
Gaddafi 's forces launched Grad rockets at rebel positions in the small desert settlement on Wednesday and rebels fired back with rockets and machine guns . 
Gaddafi describes the rebels as rats and says they are criminals inspired by al Qaeda . 
Thick white smoke was rising at the edge of Bir al-Ghanam during the fighting . 
One rebel was killed and 10 were wounded , doctors said . 
There was no word on government casualties . 
Zawiyah is the hometown of many rebels fighting their way north towards the main highway running parallel to the Mediterranean shore into the heart of Tripoli . 
Rebel reinforcements in jeeps with anti-aircraft guns were brought up to Bir al-Ghanam on Wednesday and both sides exchanged insults over the army radio network . 
-LRB- Editing by Douglas Hamilton and Elizabeth Piper -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
