Saturday 15 January 2005 00.03 GMT The chaos of Iraq is giving rise to a new generation of `` professional '' terrorists who will eventually replace al-Qaida as a global threat , according to a CIA thinktank . 
A report by the National Intelligence Council says the war in Iraq has provided a training and recruitment ground for Islamist militants , much as Afghanistan did for the founding generation of al-Qaida during the war against the Soviet occupation in the 1980s . 
As new terror organizations emerge on the world stage , al-Qaida will splinter into regional separatist groups , says the report , which forecasts global trends over the next 15 years . 
`` Iraq and other possible conflicts in the future could provide recruitment , training grounds , technical skills and language proficiency for a new class of terrorists who are ` professionalised ' and for whom political violence becomes an end in itself , '' the report says . 
It gives warning that veterans of the conflict in Iraq could disperse around the world , exporting their deadly expertise . 
Specifically , the report warns that the US faces an increasing risk of an attack involving biological agents , such as anthrax , and that an emerging and more sophisticated generation of terrorists could also use chemical weapons . 
The bleak forecast undermines one of the Bush administration 's central justifications for invading Iraq : that it was necessary to curb terrorism ; that the country was a central front in the `` war on terror '' ; and that the deposed Iraqi dictator , Saddam Hussein , had links to al-Qaida 's chief , Osama bin Laden . 
Instead , the report describes how hundreds of foreign terrorists entered Iraq after the US invasion , and how the insurgency against American forces was viewed by radical Muslims as a war against a foreign occupier , akin to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict . 
Terrorists also took advantage of postwar chaos , porous borders and a country awash with weapons . 
But unlike the rise of al-Qaida in Afghanistan , the emerging terrorists do not require a geographical base , and are expected to rely increasingly on the internet . 
`` While taking advantage of sanctuaries around the world to train , terrorists will not need a stationary headquarters to plan and carry out operations , '' the report says . 
`` Training materials , targeting guidance , weapons knowhow and fundraising will increasingly be virtual . '' 
The terrorists now recruited and trained in Iraq will eventually become the successor generation to al-Qaida , it predicts . 
`` Al-Qaida membership that was distinguished by having trained in Afghanistan will gradually dissipate , to be replaced in part by the dispersion of the experienced survivors of the conflict in Iraq . '' 
The 119-page report was based on analysis from more than 1,000 US and foreign observers , and is designed to help the White House track world trends up to 2020 . 
Staff Sergeant Cardenas Alban was sentenced at a court martial yesterday to a year in jail for the murder of a severely wounded Iraqi teenager in a Baghdad slum district during a Shi'ite uprising last year , the US military said . 
