US-led forces leave a trail of destruction and contamination in architectural site of world importance Saturday 15 January 2005 16.16 GMT Troops from the US-led force in Iraq have caused widespread damage and severe contamination to the remains of the ancient city of Babylon , according to a damning report released today by the British Museum . 
John Curtis , keeper of the museum 's Ancient Near East department and an authority on Iraq 's many archaeological sites , found `` substantial damage '' on an investigative visit to Babylon last month . 
The ancient city has been used by US and Polish forces as a military depot for the past two years , despite objections from archaeologists . 
`` This is tantamount to establishing a military camp around the Great Pyramid in Egypt or around Stonehenge in Britain , '' says the report , which has been seen by the Guardian . 
Among the damage found by Mr Curtis , who was invited to Babylon by Iraqi antiquities experts , were cracks and gaps where somebody had tried to gouge out the decorated bricks forming the famous dragons of the Ishtar Gate . 
He saw a 2,600-year-old brick pavement crushed by military vehicles , archaeological fragments scattered across the site , and trenches driven into ancient deposits . 
Vast amounts of sand and earth , visibly mixed with archaeological fragments , were gouged from the site to fill thousands of sandbags and metal mesh baskets . 
When this practice was stopped , large quantities of sand and earth were brought in from elsewhere , contaminating the site for future generations of archaeologists . 
Mr Curtis called for an international investigation by archaeologists chosen by the Iraqis to record all the damage done by the occupation forces . 
Last night the US military defended its operations at the site , but said all earth-moving projects had been stopped and it was considering moving troops away to protect the ruins . 
Babylon , a city renowned for its beauty and its splendor 1,000 years before Europe built anything comparable , was chosen as the site for a US military base in April 2003 , just after the invasion of Iraq . 
Military commanders set up their camp in the heart of one of the world 's most important archaeological sites and surrounded the enclosed part of the ancient city . 
At least 2,000 troops were installed , daily passing iconic relics like the enormous basalt Lion of Babylon sculpture . 
In September 2003 the base was passed to a Polish-led force , which held it until today 's formal handover of the site to the Iraqi culture ministry . 
In his report , Mr Curtis accepted that initially the US military presence helped protect the site from looters . 
But he described as `` regrettable '' the decision to set up a base in such an important spot . 
He found that large areas of the site had been covered in gravel brought in from outside , compacted and sometimes chemically treated to provide helipads , car parks and accommodation and storage areas . 
`` The status of future information about these areas will therefore be seriously compromised , '' he said . 
Archaeologists were horrified by the confirmation of reports which have been filtering out of Iraq for months . 
`` Outrage is hardly the word , this is just dreadful , '' said Lord Redesdale , an archaeologist and head of the all-party parliamentary archaeological group . 
`` These are world sites . 
Not only is what the American forces are doing damaging the archaeology of Iraq , it 's actually damaging the cultural heritage of the whole world . '' 
Tim Schadla Hall , reader in public archaeology at the Institute of Archaeology at University College London , said : `` In this case we see an international conflict in which the US has failed to take into account the requirements of the Hague convention ... to protect major archaeological sites - just another convention it seems happy to ignore . '' 
Lieutenant Colonel Steven Boylan , a US military spokes man in Baghdad , said engineering works at the camp were discussed with the head of the Babylon museum . 
`` An archaeologist examined every construction initiative for its impact on historical ruins . '' 
He said plans were being considered to move some of the units in order `` to better preserve the Babylon ruins . '' 
`` The significance of Babylon is not lost on the coalition , '' he added . 
`` The site dates back to the time of Nebuchadnezzar 's Babylon , but there are very few visible original remains to the untrained eye . '' 
