U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article Syrian forces kill 28 ; some troops mutiny AMMAN | Fri Jun 10 , 2011 11:51 pm IST AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian forces shot dead at least 28 at rallies after Friday prayers , activists said , and refugees described gunbattles between mutinous soldiers and other troops in recent days . 
The Syrian army swept into the northwestern border town of Jisr al-Shughour and began to arrest `` armed opponents '' , state television said . 
Thousands of civilians have fled the town into Turkey , fearing the security forces ' revenge for incidents in which 120 troops were reported killed this week . 
State television said that some 35 km -LRB- 20 miles -RRB- away , well-armed `` terrorist groups '' burned police buildings and killed members of the security forces in the town of Maaret al-Nouman . 
The nature of the alleged `` terrorist groups '' was unclear . 
Authorities have repeatedly tried to portray anti-government protesters as armed and violent . 
But protesters , refugees in Turkey and rights activists said some soldiers in the northwest had refused to shoot at protesters and fighting had broken out between loyalist and mutinous forces this week . 
`` There were peaceful protests today -LRB- in Maaret -RRB- calling for freedom and for the downfall of the regime , '' one demonstrator said by phone . 
`` The security forces let us protest , but when they saw the size of the demonstration grow , they opened fire to disperse us . '' 
`` During the protest , two officers and three soldiers refused to open fire so we carried them on our shoulders . 
After that , we were surprised to see helicopters firing on us . '' 
A 40-year-old man who had fled across the border into Turkey from Jisr al-Shughour with a bullet still in his thigh also described mutiny in Syrian ranks . 
`` Some of the security forces defected and there were some in the army who refused the orders of their superiors , '' he said . 
`` They were firing on each other . '' 
Human rights activists aired a YouTube video purporting to be from a Lieutenant Colonel Hussein Armoush saying he had defected with soldiers to `` join the ranks of the masses demanding freedom and democracy . 
`` We had sworn in the armed forces to direct our fire at the enemy and not on our own defenceless people . 
Our duty is to protect citizens and not to kill them , '' he said in the video , whose authenticity could not be immediately verified . 
Fifty-seven Syrians from Jisr al-Shughour were in hospital in Turkey , its state-run Anatolian news agency said on Friday . 
Ahmad Abdellatif , 27 , who lay paralysed in hospital with three bullet wounds , said Syrian military intelligence agents on rooftops had fired on him and other unarmed people who assembled in a public garden after a funeral for a protester . 
Abu Ata , who was shot in the back , said he had been among uniformed Red Crescent workers aiding mourners at another funeral this week when they came under fire from rooftops . 
`` It was a deliberate hit aimed to kill , '' he said . 
The northwest border area , like other protest hotspots , is prone to tension between majority Sunni Muslims and Assad 's Alawite sect , which dominates the Syrian power elite . 
The Jisr al-Shughour violence may hint at splits within security forces , where commanders are mainly Alawite and conscripts Sunni , that would increase the risk of Syria descending into civil war . 
Elsewhere in Syria tens of thousands of people marched to call for the overthrow of the president . 
`` Long live Syria , down with Bashar al-Assad ! '' 
Security forces shot dead at least two demonstrators taking part in a rally in the Qaboun district of the capital Damascus , the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said . 
Some troops fired from rooftops at marchers , activists said . 
Residents said government forces also killed two protesters in the village of Busra al-Harir in the southern Hauran plain and fired on thousands defying a heavy security presence in the southern city of Deraa , fount of the three-month-old revolt . 
`` There was a demonstration of 1,000 people when security police fired from their cars , '' a Busra al-Harir resident said , giving the names of the dead as Abdelmuttaleb al-Hariri and Adnan al-Hariri . 
The latter was an amputee , residents said . 
However , state television said unidentified gunmen killed a member of the security forces and a civilian in Busra al-Harir . 
Another protester was shot dead in the Mediterranean port city of Latakia , the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said . 
A Turkish newspaper said Ankara was looking into creating a buffer zone along the border as a contingency if hundreds of thousands of Syrians were drive out by the military campaign to stamp out protests against 41 years of Assad family domination . 
Demonstrators demanding the `` downfall of the regime '' and chanting slogans in support of compatriots in Jisr al-Shughour took to the streets in the oil-producing eastern province of Deir al-Zor , the central cities of Hama and Homs , the main Mediterranean port of Latakia and the Tabaqa region on the Euphrates River in Raqqa province , activists and residents said . 
Tens of thousands of people marched unchallenged in Hama , they said , well above the turnout of the previous Friday when security forces killed at least 70 protesters . 
Protests were also reported in five Damascus suburbs , Syria 's second largest city Aleppo and Maarat al-Numan near Jisr al-Shughour , but their size was not immediately clear . 
Inhabitants said at least 15,000 troops along with some 40 tanks and troop carriers had deployed near Jisr al-Shughour . 
`` Jisr al-Shughour is practically empty . 
People were not going to sit and be slaughtered like lambs , '' said one refugee who crossed on Wednesday and who gave his name as Mohammad . 
Residents said troops and armored vehicles heading for the town had stormed Sarmaniya village , 10 km -LRB- six miles -RRB- south of Jisr al-Shughour , and cut off the region 's communications . 
`` They began as usual by firing heavy machineguns into the village . 
But the people of Sarmaniya had mostly left . 
Hundreds of troops and security forces have defected in the last several days . 
They -LRB- pro-Assad forces -RRB- might be thinking that they will find some in Sarmaniya , '' said the witness , who was speaking by phone from the outskirts of Jisr al-Shughour . 
RED CROSS CALL FOR ACCESS The International Committee of the Red Cross -LRB- ICRC -RRB- urged Syria to allow its aid workers wider access to the civilian population without further delay , including people who have been wounded or detained in the military clampdown on public dissent . 
Rights groups say over 1,100 civilians have been killed since March in the revolt to demand more political freedoms and an end to corruption and poverty . 
`` Whether Assad still has the legitimacy to govern his own country , I think is a question everyone needs to consider , '' said U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates said on Friday . 
Britain , France , Germany and Portugal have asked the U.N. Security Council to condemn Assad , although veto-wielding Russia has said it would oppose such a move as counter-productive . 
World powers have shown no appetite for any Libya-style military intervention in Syria because it sits on a major fault line of Middle East conflict , allied with Iran against nearby Israel . 
The Syrian leadership has shrugged off mild punitive sanctions imposed so far , and verbal reprimands from abroad . 
At the Yayladagi refugee camp in Turkey , nestled in a scenic valley close to the Syrian frontier , children played football while families sat talking under trees sheltering them from the baking Middle East summer sun . 
Police kept journalists away . 
Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan reiterated on Thursday that Turkey would keep its gates open to people from Syria . 
But he complained that Damascus was taking the issue `` very lightly '' and Ankara could not defend its `` inhumane '' reply to the unrest . 
Assad , 45 , has promised reforms , even while cracking down on unrest posing the gravest threat to his 11 years of iron rule . 
