A pro-Syrian President Bashar al-Assad supporter , who rallied to a Facebook call to sit-in to support the army at Arnous square , carries his picture in Damascus June 7 , 2011 , after the Syrian troops with tanks moved on Tuesday towards Jisr al-Shughour town , where the government has vowed to quell a revolt after accusing gunmen of killing scores of security men . 
BEIRUT | Fri Jun 10 , 2011 8:44 am EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Fears that Syria may slide into civil war are growing after a week when the government said over 120 servicemen were killed at a town near the Turkish border . 
As it sent tanks on Friday into Jisr al-Shughour , a mainly Sunni Muslim town whose 50,000 inhabitants had mostly fled , the cause of last weekend 's bloodshed was still in dispute -- state media blamed unidentified gunmen but democracy activists said troops mutinied after refusing to fire on unarmed demonstrators . 
Whatever the truth , the killings suggest either cracks within President Bashar al-Assad 's security forces or the beginnings of an armed revolt -- or some combination of the two . 
Either way , the scale of the killing in an area prone to tension between Syria 's Sunni majority and Assad 's Alawite sect points to a bloodier turn of events after three months of unrest against 41 years of Alawite-dominated Assad family rule . 
That in turn would rock the entire Middle East , where Syria , Iran 's main Arab ally , sits at the heart of numerous conflicts . 
`` The country is sliding toward civil war . 
It is a step toward civil war , '' said Syria expert Joshua Landis , associate professor of Middle East studies at Oklahoma University . 
He noted that the poor area around Jisr al-Shughour , lying at the foot of the `` Alawite Mountain , '' the heartland of the dominant minority sect , was home to conservative Sunni Muslims . 
Many Syrians who joined the Sunni Islamist insurgency in Iraq against U.S. forces came from that region , he added . 
`` It 's got a history of anti-government agitations , '' Landis said . 
`` The Islamic currents are very strong there . '' 
In 1980 , the late Hafez al-Assad , who preceded his son as president , crushed a Sunni revolt in Jisr al-Shughour , which lies on a strategically important road between Syria 's second city Aleppo and the main Mediterranean port of Latakia . 
Two years later , Assad 's forces put down an armed uprising in Hama by the Sunni Islamist Muslim Brotherhood , killing many thousands and razing the old town -- an event which still resonates for Syrians considering challenging their rulers . 
Those who have taken a lead in demonstrating for reforms , inspired by the Tunisian and Egyptian protests which launched the Arab Spring , stress their insistence on non-violent action . 
Few are willing to speak publicly about taking up arms . 
And some dismiss talk of sectarian and ethnic violence as scaremongering by Assad loyalists intent on keeping power . 
However , in conversations this week with a number of Syrian activists , several said they believed some of Assad 's opponents were already using weapons , including arms smuggled from abroad . 
`` Some people have taken up arms against the security forces in Jisr al-Shughour . 
We know that , '' said one activist who , like many , would speak on the subject only on condition of anonymity . 
`` The question is : Is this limited ? 
Or is it going to spread to other cities ? '' 
After years of repression , it is hard to establish the strength in Syria of organised movements like the Muslim Brotherhood , let alone of other anti-government groups . 
As in several other towns , residents in Jisr al-Shughour have accused Alawite militiamen , known as shabiha and fiercely loyal to the Assads , of helping the security forces . 
Two activists said armed Sunni men , as well as shabiha groups , had set up rival sets of checkpoints on roads -- an echo of the kind of sectarian tension familiar from neighboring Lebanon and Iraq . 
Guns are widely available across Syria . 
`` People have taken arms , '' Landis at Oklahoma University said . 
`` Things are about to get a lot worse than we thought . '' 
Louay Hussein , an activist in Damascus , said he did not know of Sunnis taking up arms in the northwest of the country . 
But he told Reuters from the capital : `` We have warned the authorities from the beginning that the excessive use of violence will , in the end , allow armed groups to use violence against them . '' 
Assad has responded to protests , which began in the southern Sunni town of Deraa , by offering discussions on reform but also by sending in security forces to detain and kill demonstrators . 
The government insists it is willing to listen but rejects Western pressure for radical changes . 
It points out Syria has a potentially volatile mix of ethnic and religious communities , including Christians and Kurds , as well as Sunnis and Alawites . 
`` Syria is a mosaic , '' Syrian government spokeswoman Reem Haddad told Al Jazeera this week . 
`` It is made of many different sects living together . '' 
Many in the Christian and Alawite minorities say they support reforms , but fear that calls for the overthrow of Assad could fragment the country of 20 million and hand it over to hardline Sunni Islamists who would persecute other religions . 
Assad 's initial response to the protests has included steps toward reforms , including granting citizenship to some ethnic Kurds , lifting a draconian state of emergency , freeing hundreds of prisoners and calling for a national dialogue . 
Protests , triggered by anger and frustration at corruption , poverty and lack of freedoms , have been mainly peaceful , though rights groups say the death toll among protesters is over 1,100 . 
At least 200 security personnel have also been killed , the government says . 
Activists say that at least some of the dead soldiers were killed for disobeying orders to stop protests . 
Syria has expelled Reuters correspondents and barred most foreign media , preventing independent reporting from Syria . 
Fayez Sara , an opposition figure who was detained earlier in the uprising , said he still has hopes that a political solution might save the country from descending into chaos . 
`` We should try till the last minute because otherwise the price tag will be high , '' he told Reuters from Damascus . 
`` When we say the time has ran out for a political solution , this means we are opening the country to civil war . '' 
Western powers and their Arab allies have voiced concern but show no appetite for Libya-style intervention in Syria . 
The gravity of the situation particularly alarms some across the border in Lebanon , where officials with ties to Syria privately express concern that some areas may be headed for chaos . 
A Lebanese analyst , who is close to some opposition figures in Syria , said : `` We have been warning our Syrian brothers but they do not want to listen . 
They think the civil war in Lebanon and in Iraq will not reach them . 
They are wrong . '' 
The possibility of splits in the armed forces , where the top command ranks and elite units are largely Alawite while the mass of conscripts are Sunni , is also a concern . 
A Damascus based analyst , echoing many observers abroad , said Assad and his Alawite allies appeared bent on hanging to power at all costs : `` The regime has essentially vowed to break the country over the people 's heads , '' the analyst said . 
`` It will push the country over the cliff unless Syrian society resists its divisive tactics . 
So the fate of Syria lies not in the hands of the regime , but in that of the people . '' 
An activist who took part in an opposition conference in Turkey last week said he believed that widespread violence was a risk many were willing to take , however , to be rid of Assad . 
`` Even if there is ... a civil war or anything like that , people are determined to go all the way , to the end , regardless of the cost , '' he said . 
`` We want him out and we want to be free of this regime . 
`` The regime is pushing the country toward civil war and we are heading that way it seems . '' 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
That would be bad for the other Muslim sects , Kurds and the Christians . 
It appears to me the desire to be free is greater than a desire to embrace a Sunni based religious dictatorship . 
In the end , all of this might have to be settled by a civil war . 
If that happens , the US needs to back the moderates in the country . 
Otherwise , there could be big trouble in the region . 
Journalists are supposed to be neutral . 
The report reveals the reporter 's blatant bias . 
This reporter has an agenda . 
`` Guns are widely available across Syria '' . 
Syrians would crack up if they heard such misinformation . 
To get a pistol , you would have to know the right people , bribe VERY generously , and wait for months . 
Some might also be able to smuggle small pieces but that would be EXTREMELY difficult . 
People in Syria have no access to weapons whatsoever . 
Enraged by the massacre that occurred on June 4th in Jisr el-Shughour , Lieutenant Colonel Husain Harmoush , Division Command , the 11th Division , defected along with a number of other members of the military . 
They refused to gun down unarmed protesters and stood up to the regime . 
Get your facts straight before you say that `` Guns are widely available ACROSS Syria '' like it was Yemen . 
I am sure you have a lot of Syrian contacts . 
Please pose this question to them about the readily availability of guns in Syria and thy will laugh their heads off . 
Both Assad and Gaddafi are brutal dictators who fire on their own people . 
Why UN and NATO adopt double standards toward Syria and Libya ? 
These cold-blooded leaders deserve bunker bombs . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
