AMMAN | Fri Jun 10 , 2011 11:21 pm BST AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian helicopter gunships fired machineguns to disperse pro-democracy protests , witnesses said , in the first reported use of air power to quell unrest in Syria 's increasingly bloody three-month-old uprising . 
The use of the aircraft came on a day of nationwide rallies against President Bashar al-Assad , as unrest showed no sign of abating despite the harsh crackdown by his authoritarian state . 
The helicopters opened fire in a northwestern town after security forces on the ground killed five protesters , said the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights . 
`` At least five helicopters flew over Maarat al-Numaan and began firing their machineguns to disperse the tens of thousands who marched in the protest , '' one witness said by telephone . 
`` People hid in fields , under bridges and in their houses , but the firing continued on the mostly empty streets for hours , '' said the witness , who gave his name as Nawaf . 
Syria 's state television , in contrast , blamed violence in the area on anti-government groups . 
It made no mention of attack helicopters but said an ambulance helicopter had come under fire over Maarat from `` terrorist armed groups , '' injuring crew . 
Britain , France , Germany and Portugal have asked the U.N. Security Council to condemn Assad , though veto-wielding Russia has said it would oppose such a move . 
Foreign Minister Walid al-Moualem wrote to the Security Council accusing the opposition of violence and sabotage , Al Arabiya television said . 
Foreign governments were basing their views on `` inaccurate information , '' it said . 
State television said earlier well-armed `` terrorist groups '' had burnt police buildings and killed members of the security forces in Maarat al-Numaan , which lies 55 km -LRB- 35 miles -RRB- south of Syria 's second city Aleppo on the highway to Damascus . 
Moualem 's letter asked for U.N. help to combat `` extremism and terrorism . '' 
Damascus wanted dialogue with the opposition , the letter said . 
, Syrian authorities have banned most foreign correspondents from the country and have repeatedly tried to portray anti-government protesters as armed and violent . 
`` There were peaceful protests today -LRB- in Maarat -RRB- calling for freedom and for the downfall of the regime , '' one demonstrator said by phone . 
`` The security forces let us protest , but when they saw the size of the demonstration grow , they opened fire to disperse us . '' 
`` During the protest , two officers and three soldiers refused to open fire so we carried them on our shoulders . 
After that , we were surprised to see helicopters firing on us . '' 
The northwest border area , like other protest hotspots , is prone to tension between majority Sunni Muslims and Assad 's Alawite sect , which dominates the Syrian power elite . 
The violence may reflect splits within the security forces , whose commanders are mainly Alawite and conscripts Sunni . 
Activists said Syrian forces had shot dead at least 33 at rallies across the country after Friday prayers . 
A U.N. spokesman said Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon had been trying to call Assad all week but was told that the president was `` not available . '' 
Thousands of civilians have fled from the northwestern border area into Turkey , fearing security forces ' revenge for incidents in which 120 troops were reported killed this week . 
Local people said at least 15,000 troops along with some 40 tanks and troop carriers had deployed near Jisr al-Shughour . 
`` Jisr al-Shughour is practically empty . 
People were not going to sit and be slaughtered like lambs , '' said one refugee who crossed the border into Turkey . 
A 40-year-old from Jisr al-Shughour , with a bullet still in his thigh , also described mutiny in Syrian ranks . 
`` Some of the security forces defected and there were some in the army who refused the orders of their superiors , '' he said . 
`` They were firing on each other . '' 
Human rights activists aired a YouTube video described as from a Lieutenant Colonel Hussein Armoush , saying he had defected with soldiers to `` join the ranks of the masses demanding freedom and democracy . '' 
A Turkish newspaper said Ankara was looking into creating a buffer zone along the border as a contingency if hundreds of thousands of Syrians are driven out . 
The International Committee of the Red Cross urged Syria to allow its aid workers wider access to the civilian population , including the many believed wounded or detained . 
Rights groups say over 1,100 civilians have been killed since March in the revolt to demand more political freedoms and an end to corruption and poverty . 
-LRB- Reporting by Alexandra Hudson , Ece Toksabay and Tulay Karadeniz in the Turkish border area and Mariam Karouny and Yara Bayoumy in Beirut ; writing by Andrew Roche ; editing by Peter Millership -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
