Westminster mourns sudden death of leading Labor firebrand and orator Wife at 59-year-old MP 's side after failed resuscitation on Scottish hillside Robin Cook , the former Foreign Secretary , died in hospital last night after collapsing while walking in the Scottish hills he loved . 
The 59-year-old MP was airlifted to hospital in Inverness yesterday afternoon after being taken ill while walking with his wife , Gaynor , and friends near the summit of Ben Stack , close to Lochinver , Sutherland . 
There were unconfirmed reports last night that he suffered a heart attack and then fell , breaking his neck . 
An unnamed friend who was with the MP on the mountain attempted to give Cook mouth-to-mouth resuscitation for 30 minutes before an Coastguard helicopter arrived at the scene . 
The helicopter 's crew continued efforts to revive Cook on the journey to Raigmore hospital where he was pronounced dead at 4.05 pm , shortly after arrival . 
Cook , who also leaves two sons , Christopher and Peter , was a dominant intellectual force in New Labor . 
He sealed his reputation for political integrity with his resignation from the cabinet on the eve of the Iraq war . 
His death last night left colleagues in shock , eliciting tributes from across the political spectrum to the man whom John Prescott , the Deputy Prime Minister , described as ` the greatest parliamentarian of his generation ' . 
Prime Minister Tony Blair was also quick to pay tribute . 
` Robin was an outstanding , extraordinary talent - brilliant , incisive in debate , of incredible skill and persuasive power , ' he said . 
` His contribution to the politics of Britain was hugely significant . 
His contribution to the Labor Party was immense . 
He will be missed and mourned by all of us . ' 
Ironically , friends said Cook had never appeared healthier and happier since leaving office : he was a keen outdoorsman who kept fit by riding and walking . 
Gordon Brown , the Chancellor , who had known Cook since they were university students , said his thoughts were with Gaynor and the family . 
` With his death so sudden and unexpected , the tragic loss to his family , his constituency , our party and our country is all the greater and is most keenly felt by all of us who knew him and will now miss him greatly , ' Brown said last night . 
` Robin 's mastery of the Commons was acknowledged on all sides and his incisive mind , forensic skills and formidable and wide-ranging debating prowess were seen by the public very clearly when , in opposition , he led the response to the Scott inquiry . ' 
In an age of image-conscious politicians , the diminutive , ginger-bearded Cook did not cut a fashionable figure , but his fiercely burning intellect propelled him to the heights of the New Labor firmament , earning the respect even of his foes . 
He was admired by his civil servants for the apparently effortless speed with which he mastered his briefs and his constant hunger for ideas , but he was also a cultured man , as happy to discuss Victorian novelists as the season 's racing form . 
Despite forging a career on the back benches as a quietly devastating critic of foreign policy , tribal loyalty saw him return to the fold to campaign for Tony Blair 's re-election in May . 
Occasionally given to prickliness , Cook was not always an easy man , but his dry wit and sense of mischief endeared him to friends . 
He spoke movingly of how marriage to his second wife , his former secretary Gaynor Regan , had changed him , teaching him 'em otional intelligence ' and giving him an ability to relate to others ' feelings . 
Born in Bellshill in February 1946 , Robin Cook went to school in Aberdeen and Edinburgh before going on to read English literature at Edinburgh University - where he met his first wife , Margaret , a consultant hematologist . 
He became an MP in 1974 , rising swiftly through the opposition ranks , and when Labor gained power in 1997 , was appointed Foreign Secretary , devising the ethical foreign policy that crystallised the optimism of the early New Labor years . 
His proudest achievement in office , he said , was when Britain intervened to halt ethnic cleansing in Kosovo . 
After the 2001 general election , he was moved abruptly sideways to Leader of the Commons , a job he did not initially want but which became a showcase for his wit - and his tenacious pursuit of House of Lords reform . 
` It 's hard to think of anyone who matched him over the dispatch box - he had such a formidable mind , ' said Stephen Twigg , his deputy during those years . 
In the rare moments that he relaxed , however , Cook could be great company . 
` He was hugely funny . 
I remember we had a Christmas night out - it ended up being in about February . 
He took us all to a jazz club in Camden ; he loved jazz , ' Twigg added . 
Denis MacShane , the former Europe minister who also worked closely with Cook , said his thoughts were with Cook 's wife and family . 
` Robin has illuminated British politics , and especially those of the democratic left , for more than 30 years , ' he said . 
` Even half an insight from Robin was worth 10 speeches from most politicians . ' 
Local emergency services started to receive reports just after 2.30 pm yesterday that the Livingston MP had collapsed near the summit of Ben Stack , 2,365 ft above sea level . 
As Cook 's friends waited for the Coastguard helicopter to arrive , they were given guidance on resuscitation techniques by medical experts via telephone . 
The helicopter 's crew then battled to revive him using cardio-pulmonary resuscitation equipment , before airlifting the unconscious politician to Raigmore hospital . 
Cook 's wife was rushed by police car to the hospital where she watched as doctors unsuccessfully attempted to save his life . 
Cook was a keen hill-walker , and regularly spent his summer holidays with close family and friends enjoying the dramatic mountain scenery of Highland Scotland , rather than going abroad . 
The announcement of his death was delayed for three hours as police contacted relatives . 
Last night , friends of Cook said his demise had left a huge gap in British politics . 
` His death leaves a gaping hole in the leadership of the Labor movement . ' 
said Tony Woodley , general secretary of the Transport and General Workers ' Union . 
` He was a socialist and an internationalist of principle and we are all left poorer by his passing , ' . 
Former deputy Labor leader Roy Hattersley said Cook 's death would be felt keenly in the House of Commons . ' 
I do n't think there has been any parliamentarian of my time who has made more significant speeches , ' Hattersley said . 
