The liberals who say I have deserted the left should ask themselves where they stand on Islamism Looking back on how his generation covered up the crimes of communism in the 1930s , WH Auden explained that he and his friends were n't true communists but fellow travellers . 
At home they defended civil liberties and stood up for freedom of speech . 
Abroad , they tolerated atrocities precisely because they did n't impinge on them . 
` Our great error , ' said Auden , ` was not a false admiration for Russia but a snobbish feeling that nothing which happened in a semi-barbarous country which had experienced neither the Renaissance nor the Enlightenment could be of any importance : had any of the countries we knew personally , like France , Germany or Italy , the language of which we could speak and where we had personal friends , been one to have a successful communist revolution with the same phenomena of terror , purges , censorship etc , we would have screamed our heads off . ' 
To speak of the ` Auden generation ' is to perpetuate a myth of the Thirties . 
The majority of the population , including the majority of Labor supporters , never read an Auden poem or hitched a ride with communism . 
What is meant is the ` progressive ' middle-class left : publishers , authors , academics , teachers , liberal journalists , the odd lawyer and odder advocate of various forms of alternative life styles . 
People like me , in short . 
In their later years , most tried a defense which Auden was too honest , and too filled with disgust at his younger self , to advance . 
Our priority was fighting fascism , the excuse-making ran . 
We were faced with a psychopathic movement of the extreme right which was dripping in blood . 
It looks bad now that we went along with Stalin , but we were socialists and he called what he was doing socialism , and in any event we had other priorities . 
Today 's middle-class left is made up of the same types as 70 years ago . 
The faults of small-mindedness and self-righteousness and the virtues of instinctive suspicion of the British establishment and sympathy for the British underdog have n't changed either . 
What 's new is that no one truly believes in socialism . 
When Tony Blair goes we will have the first Labor leadership election without a serious left-wing candidate . 
Indeed , it is impossible to imagine what a serious left-wing candidate would look like and what his or her program might be . 
I 'm sure that any halfway competent political philosopher could rip the assumptions of modern middle-class left-wingery apart . 
Why is it right to support a free market in sexual relationships but oppose free-market economics , for instance ? 
But his criticisms would have little impact . 
It 's like a religion : the contradictions are obvious to outsiders but do n't disturb the faithful . 
You believe when you 're in its warm embrace . 
Alas , I 'm out . 
Last week , after 44 years of regular church-going , the bell tolled , the book was closed and the candle was extinguished . 
The officiating bishop was Peter Wilby , a former editor of the New Statesman and a friend of long-standing , who delivered his anathema in the Guardian . 
The immediate heresy was a piece I 'd written about how difficult the courts made it to deport suspected Islamist terrorists . 
As I 'd campaigned to protect asylum seekers in the past , Wilby used the article as damning evidence of ' a rightwards lurch ' . 
The old bat did n't understand that genuine asylum seekers are the victims of the world 's greatest criminals - four million fled Saddam Hussein - not criminals themselves . 
Even if he 'd grasped that the Mail was wrong and real refugees were n't villains , I doubt it would have made a difference . 
My mortal sin had been to question ` harshly the motives of the anti-war movement ' , and to that I had to plead guilty . 
The least attractive characteristic of the middle-class left - one shared with the Thatcherites - is its refusal to accept that its opponents are sincere . 
The legacy of Marx and Freud allows it to dismiss criticisms as masks which hide corruption , class interests , racism , sexism - any motive can be implied except fundamental differences of principle . 
Wilby went through a long list of what could have motivated mine and similar ` betrayals ' . 
Perhaps we became right wing as we got older . 
Perhaps we wanted to stick our snouts into the deep troughs of the Tory press . 
Perhaps taking out a mortgage committed us to the capitalist system or having children encouraged petit bourgeois individualism of the most anti-social kind . 
Generously in light of the above charge sheet , he plumped for the conclusion that our restless minds just got bored with the ` straitjacket ' of left-wing thought . 
We left the slog of building a better world to the decent plodders . 
Generous to me , and over-generous to allegedly left-wing thought . 
What he and a large part of the mainstream liberal-left do n't and wo n't confront is that they have become the fellow travellers of the psychopathic far-right . 
Many emotions have been stirred by the grisly spectacle - anger , scorn and incredulity among them - but boredom , no , never boredom . 
As in the 1930s , there 's little doubt that few apart from George Galloway and others in the gruesome leadership of the anti-war movement were keen on saluting Saddam Hussein . 
The reason why one million people marched through London without one mounting a platform to express solidarity with the victims of fascism was that it never occurred to them that there were people in Iraq who shared their values . 
It felt like nit-picking to point this out at the time . 
Wars are usually worth opposing , especially capricious wars advocated by a slippery Prime Minister in alliance with a repellent US President . 
But arguments have their own dynamic . 
If you start by refusing to look Baathism or Islamism in the face , the logic of blaming everything on Tony Blair and George W Bush pushes you into making ever more excuses for the extreme right . 
Auden noticed a retreat from universal principles in the 1930s - communism was fine in ` semi-barbaric ' Russia but would have been a screaming outrage in a civilised country . 
He should have been alive today . 
With no socialism to provide international solidarity , good motives of tolerance and respect for other cultures have had the unintended consequence of leading a large part of post-modern liberal opinion into the position of 19th-century imperialists . 
It is presumptuous and oppressive to suggest that other cultures want the liberties we take for granted , their argument runs . 
So it may be , but believe that and the upshot is that democracy , feminism and human rights become good for whites but not for browns and brown-skinned people who contradict you are the tools of the neo-conservatives . 
On the other hand when confronted with a movement of contemporary imperialism - Islamism wants an empire from the Philippines to Gibraltar - and which is tyrannical , homophobic , misogynist , racist and homicidal to boot , they feel it is valid because it is against Western culture . 
It expresses its feelings in a regrettably brutal manner perhaps , but that ca n't hide its authenticity . 
The result of this inversion of principles has been that liberals ca n't form alliances with the victims of al-Qaeda in Afghanistan or Iraq any more than the Auden generation could form alliances with the victims of Stalinism . 
This is n't simply about international relations . 
Who is going to help the victims of religious intolerance in Britain 's immigrant communities ? 
Not the Liberal Democrats , who have never once offered support to liberal and democrats in Iraq . 
Nor an anti-war left which prefers to embrace a Muslim Association of Britain and Yusuf al-Qaradawi who believe that Muslims who freely decide to change their religion or renounce religion should be executed . 
If the Archbishop of Canterbury were to suggest the same treatment for renegade Christians all hell would break loose . 
But as the bigotry comes from ` the other ' there is silence . 
Perhaps it will break soon . 
There always was far more disquiet on the left at this ` rightwards lurch ' than the Guardian or Radio 4 admitted . 
If my emails are a guide , the London bombs have added a practical reason for breaking with the consensus : now they 're trying to kill us . 
Even if people think that the Iraq war has made Britain a bigger target , they are still confronted with a fascistic cult of murder and self-murder which allows no compromise . 
The thing to watch for with fellow travellers is what shocks them into pulling the emergency cord and jumping off the train . 
I know some will stay on to the terminus , and when the man with the rucksack explodes his bomb their dying words will be : ` It 's not your fault . 
I blame Tony Blair . ' 
My advice to my former comrades is to struggle out of your straitjackets and get off at the next station . 
It would be good to see you on this side of the barrier . 
