By the CNN Wire Staff Demonstrators occupy housing project in January Gadhafi responds with a $ 24 billion fund for housing and development Days after ouster of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak , Libyans call for protests in their country Six days later , hundreds have been injured or killed in clashes -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Pro-democracy movements that have swept across the Middle East and North Africa began to reach Libya in January , when demonstrators broke into a housing project the government was building and occupied it . 
Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's government responded with a $ 24 billion fund for housing and development . 
More demonstrations were sparked when police detained relatives of those killed in an alleged 1996 massacre at the Abu Salim prison , according to Human Rights Watch . 
High unemployment has also fueled the protests , as have anti-Gadhafi groups . 
Here 's a timeline of events : Three days after the fall of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak , calls go out on Facebook for peaceful demonstrations in Libya against leader Moammar Gadhafi . 
Roughly 200 protesters take to the streets in the coastal city of Benghazi to show support for lawyer and human rights activist Fathi Terbil , according to witnesses . 
Several are arrested amid confrontations with police . 
A highly placed source close to the Libyan government tells CNN , `` there is nothing serious here . 
These are just young people fighting each other . '' 
State-run media reports that the government has released 110 political prisoners and that a committee would be convened to consider major changes to the government . 
Calls are posted on websites for a `` Day of Rage '' on what is the five-year anniversary of an incident in which security forces killed at least a dozen protesters . 
Seven people are killed in clashes between security forces and anti-government protesters , according to medical sources . 
Raucous pro-government demonstrators take to the streets in the nation 's capital in support of Gadhafi , witnesses say . 
Images from state television , labeled as `` live , '' feature men chanting pro-Gadhafi slogans , waving flags and singing around the Libyan leader 's limousine as it creeps through Tripoli . 
In Benghazi , human rights groups and protesters claim they 're under attack by pro-government security forces . 
Among the tens of thousands of protesters who take to the streets , at least 20 people are killed and 200 are wounded , according to medical sources . 
Protests continue to turn violent , however the death and injury toll is unclear . 
In Benghazi , witnesses report bloody clashes with soldiers firing tear gas and bullets . 
A doctor treating the injured at Al Jala hospital says at least 30 people are dead , most of them from gunshot wounds to the head . 
Witnesses say protests have erupted in cities across the country , including al-Baida , Ajdabiya and Misratah , where anti-government protesters leaving noon prayers at a local mosque were confronted by demonstrators supportive of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi . 
Human Rights Watch reports that 84 people have been killed in Libyan demonstrations since Tuesday . 
The organization bases that estimate on telephone calls made to medical providers across the country . 
Violence surges in Benghazi where eyewitness say protesters have taken control of the city and much of Tripoli . 
Gadhafi 's son , Saif al-Islam Gadhafi , appears on state television to warn demonstrators that if their protests do not subside , the country could fall into a civil war . 
