2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
After days of unrest , at least 219 people are dead , according to medical sources . 
-LRB- Updated : 1:38 a.m. Monday , Libya ; 6:38 p.m. Sunday ET -RRB- : Libya 's army has been told to restore security `` at any price '' and will remain loyal to longtime leader Moammar Gadhafi , Gadhafi 's son told Libyans in a televised address early Monday . 
-LRB- Updated : 1:30 a.m. Monday , Libya ; 6:30 p.m. Sunday ET -RRB- : Saif al-Islam Gadhafi , the son of longtime Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi , early Monday promised widespread reforms , including increased salaries and a relaxed criminal code , in an attempt to head off a growing revolt . 
TIMELINE : Six remarkable days in Libya -LRB- Updated : 1:19 a.m. Monday , Libya ; 6:19 p.m. Sunday ET -RRB- : The son of Moammar Gadhafi warned early Monday that the country faced `` civil war '' and a breakup of the nation if protesters go on . 
-LRB- Updated : 1:09 a.m. Monday , Libya ; 6:09 p.m. Sunday ET -RRB- : The son of Moammar Gadhafi said early Monday that a `` great sedition '' was under way in Benghazi , the country 's second-largest city , but said the death toll was smaller than what is being reported by international news outlets . 
-LRB- Updated : 12:08 a.m. Monday , Libya ; 5:09 p.m. Sunday ET -RRB- : Multiple eyewitnesses have reported that Benghazi is now in the hands of protesters and their military allies , some after dropping allegiances to longtime leader Moammar Gadhafi . 
VIDEO : Protester describes offensive CNN can not independently confirm these reports , as the Libyan government maintains tight control on communications and has not responded to repeated requests from CNN for access to the country . 
-LRB- Updated : 11:33 p.m. Sunday Libya ; 4:33 p.m. Sunday ET -RRB- : Libya 's ambassador to the Arab League has resigned amid unrest in the country . 
Abdel Elhuni said he quit because he can not be part of a regime that kills innocent people . 
It is in the best interest of Egypt and its neighbors to have a pro-American government that is good to its people while at the same time an enemy to terrorists . 
Iran is terrorist friendly and has indirectly caused loss of American lives ; to use your terminology , Iran does `` butt in other '' people 's business . 
This does not bother you because you hate America , its people , and its military . 
You will NEVER denounce the true enemy . 
And so I put it to you my fellow Americans , let us continue to make our presence known as a friend to democracy and an enemy of oppression and terrorism . 
Make no mistake , our journey will continue . 
Let those true to the people be our friend . 
By the same token , that those oppressive dictators and countries be an enemy not only to their own people , but to the American people as well . 
Freedom for all , thank you ! 
Gee whiz Phunnie boy , if you want to display your arrogance and self righteousness about the right of the U.S. to butt into the affairs of other countries , at least quit using my name to do it , will you ? 
Enough is enough !!! February 21 , 2011 at 12:12 am | Report abuse | I find it disgusting how people clinging to state power always refer to their own political views as `` the country '' . 
So when Saif Gaddafi says Libya , its cristal clear he means his father . 
In Venezuela something similar happens when `` chavistas '' speak of us , `` el pueblo '' ; they usually mean whatever part we should play in their political delusions . 
I gather that social networks are now a tool for people to resist this sort of governmental mis-representations . 
Does anyone know what role are these playing in Libya 's state of affairs ? 
Cezar Cesarr Sesar Sezar Yuma . 
Hello Good night world . 
One oil company that does business with M.G. and Libya is BP . 
That 's why they worked out a deal to release the cancer ridden Lockerbie Bomber who turned out to have plenty of good days left in him - in exchange for consideration for BP . 
Thanks Great Britain , for propping up a dictatorship ! 
And this is yet another despot that the American government has propped up . 
Something to really be proud of . 
We need to stay out of other countries ' affairs . 
The right-wing thugs in Washington are much too spoiled . 
I have to go off line now . 
I am going with Dorothy to see the Wizzard of Oz ; if I only had a brain . 
If anyone tries to touch isreal its all over that 's god chosen people if your not right with god u better repent and be bapitized in the name of jesus and filled with his spirit that the only way u can make it to heaven hell is a place of torment and where the fire is burning hot if u do n't change that where people will be throwed in when the world ends that soon cause u just have to look at the world its getting real bad its not to late to change -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival in Merida , Mexico seems like they favor throwing candy instead of beads ! 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
