BP has fallen short in providing oil leak data , says US Video from BP appears to show vast quantities of oil still leaking from the well BP has `` fallen short '' in providing data about the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , the US government has said , in its latest critical letter to the firm . 
The Obama administration said the British energy giant should act in a `` transparent manner '' and `` promptly '' make all information public . 
Earlier , BP said more oil than the 5,000 barrels a day it first estimated were gushing from the burst well . 
The spill has reached Louisiana and is threatening Florida and Cuba . 
The crude has been flowing since the offshore drilling rig Deepwater Horizon , leased by BP , exploded off the coast of Louisiana on 20 April and sank two days later . 
The Obama administration asked BP to make public all measurements of the growing leak , air and water quality samples , trajectories of underwater plumes and locations of dispersants . 
It is imperative BP promptly provide all information regarding the oil spill '' End Quote Obama administration letter The request came in a letter to BP CEO Tony Hayward from Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano and Environmental Protection Agency -LRB- EPA -RRB- Administrator Lisa Jackson . 
It said : `` In responding to this oil spill , it is critical that all actions be conducted in a transparent manner , with all data and information related to the spill readily available to the United States government and the American people . '' 
The officials said that despite claims by BP it was making efforts to keep the public and the government informed , `` those efforts , to date , have fallen short in both their scope and effectiveness '' . 
They said it was `` imperative that BP promptly '' make public all data on the spill . 
Obama administration officials last week wrote a letter to BP demanding clarification over its commitment to pay for damages from the spill ; the firm said it had already done so . 
Another letter at the weekend cast doubt over the effectiveness of BP 's latest attempt to siphon oil from the gushing well head . 
BP had stuck by its first estimate that some 5,000 barrels , or 210,000 gallons , a day of oil was leaking from the well - despite claims from several experts the real figure was at least 10 times higher . 
But BP spokesman Mark Proegler told news agency AFP on Thursday : `` Now that we are collecting 5,000 barrels a day , it might be a little more than that . '' 
A live video feed showing the oil gushing from the well has been made available by BP after pressure from a US congressman . 
It shows a large , flowing plume of oil and gas next to the tube that is carrying some of it to the surface . 
Meanwhile , the EPA has told BP to use a new dispersant to contain the spill , as fears grow about potential damage from the use of such chemicals . 
BP has used a number of dispersants , all approved by the EPA , to try to break up the crude . 
The oil firm 's temporary solution has been to funnel the oil up to a ship , but on Sunday it is preparing its latest attempt to seal the rupture , which is a mile below on the seabed . 
An ocean current is threatening to carry the oil into the Atlantic Engineers are planning a so-called `` top kill '' operation , in which heavy mud would be injected to stem the oil flow , then cement used to block the well permanently . 
It emerged on Wednesday a small portion of the slick had entered the so-called Loop Current , which could take it to Florida and up the eastern US coast . 
Florida forecasters said it would be at least a week before the oil reached waters near the state . 
Farther south , US officials have been talking to Cuba about how to respond should the spill reach the island 's northern coast . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
