Greenpeace has accused BP of slashing investment in clean energy A balcony protest at BP 's London headquarters over the Gulf of Mexico oil spill has ended with no arrests . 
Two Greenpeace campaigners who unfurled a flag showing the company 's logo smudged in oil and the words `` British Polluters '' came down unassisted . 
Six others held banners as they greeted staff at a side entrance on the ground . 
Oil has been spewing into the Gulf since the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig on 20 April , which killed 11 workers . 
A Greenpeace spokesman said the protesters chose to come down because they had `` made their point '' . 
He told the BBC : `` This is the start of a sustained campaign and not the last they 'll hear from us . 
`` We wanted to draw attention to the discrepancy between BP 's bright green logo and the reality of operations in places like the Gulf of Mexico . '' 
Protests at BP 's headquarters in central London have been peaceful Earlier , one of the protesters , Ben Stewart , 36 , from north London , said : `` The oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico can be traced back to decisions made in this building . 
`` BP has taken huge risks to pump oil from ever more remote places , while slashing investment in the clean energy projects that could actually help reduce our dependence on oil and beat climate change . '' 
A Metropolitan Police spokesman said officers were called at 0500 BST to the building in St James 's Square , central London , but made no arrests . 
Earlier reports suggested the activists had gained access to the roof , but their protest did not get beyond the balcony above the front entrance . 
The rig , owned and operated by Transocean , had been working on behalf of BP . 
A BP spokeswoman said the company had no objections to peaceful protests as long as they did not interfere with members of staff carrying out their work . 
She added : `` BP is doing all it can in the Gulf of Mexico to fight the oil spill on a number of fronts - sub-sea , on the sea and at the shoreline . '' 
BP says it has been funnelling about 3,000 barrels a day from the well to a tanker ship , using a mile-long -LRB- 1.6 km -RRB- tube . 
