Greenpeace campaigners unfurled a protest banner at BP 's headquarters BP has said more oil than the 5,000 barrels a day it initially estimated is flowing from a burst oil well into the Gulf of Mexico . 
The energy giant said a long tube it inserted into the gusher at the weekend was now siphoning 5,000 barrels a day , but that more was escaping . 
Meanwhile , US officials have ordered BP to use a less toxic chemical to disperse the crude . 
The spill has reached Louisiana and is now threatening Florida and Cuba . 
Oil has been gushing since the offshore drilling rig Deepwater Horizon , leased by BP , exploded off the coast of Louisiana on 20 April and sank two days later . 
BP had stuck by its first estimate that some 5,000 barrels , or 210,000 gallons , a day of crude was leaking from the well - despite claims from several experts that the figure was at least 10 times higher . 
But BP spokesman Mark Proegler told news agency AFP on Thursday : `` Now that we are collecting 5,000 barrels a day , it might be a little more than that . '' 
A live video feed that shows the oil gushing from the well has been made available by BP after pressure from a US congressman . 
It shows a large , flowing plume of oil and gas next to the tube that is carrying some of it to the surface . 
Mr Proegler continued : `` We said from the beginning , our experts have been saying there really is no reliable way to estimate the flow from the riser . '' 
The oil firm 's temporary solution has been to funnel the oil up to a ship , but on Sunday it is preparing its latest attempt to seal the rupture . 
Engineers are planning a so-called `` top kill '' operation , in which heavy mud would be injected to stem the oil flow , then cement used to block the well permanently . 
The procedure has worked before to stop oil gushing above ground , but like other methods BP is exploring , it has never been used a mile below the sea , where the well is located . 
The US Environmental Protection Agency -LRB- EPA -RRB- has told BP to use a new dispersant to contain the oil spill , as fears grow about potential damage from the use of such chemicals . 
BP has used a number of dispersants , all approved by the EPA , to try to break up the crude . 
Outrage from environmentalists over the ballooning slick - which is visible from space - has been mounting . 
Greenpeace campaigners scaled the London headquarters of BP on Thursday and unfurled a flag with BP 's logo and the words `` British Polluters '' . 
An ocean current is threatening to carry the oil into the Atlantic It emerged on Wednesday a small portion of the slick had entered the so-called Loop Current , which could take it to Florida and up the eastern US coast . 
Florida 's state meteorologist said it would be at least a week before the oil reached waters near the state . 
Farther south , US officials have been talking to Cuba about how to respond should the spill reach the island 's northern coast , said a US state department spokesman . 
UK and Ireland Obama forms spill commission as oil mess spreads - 44 mins ago Mail Online UK Obama tries to stem rising anger over oil spill with commission appointments - 1 hr ago Times of India Oil spill : US beach shut , BP slammed - 9 hrs ago South Africa Citizen As US beach closes , BP denies botched oil clean-up - 13 hrs ago Times Online BP struggles to salvage its reputation over cover-up of oil disaster - 16 hrs ago The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
