Arab League chief Nabil al-Arabi to visit Syria Nabil al-Arabi will try to negotiate an end to the crisis in Syria , the Arab League says Arab League Secretary General Nabil al-Arabi is to visit Syria to try to resolve the crisis in the country . 
He will take with him an `` initiative to solve the crisis '' , the league said , without giving further details . 
It followed a meeting of Arab foreign ministers in the Egyptian capital , Cairo . 
They also called on Damascus to stop the violence and usher in reforms . 
The UN says more than 2,200 people have died since protests against President Bashar al-Assad began in March . 
The BBC 's Bethany Bell in Cairo says the league is increasing pressure on Damascus but has not suspended Syria from the group , as it did with Libya earlier this year . 
A statement said ministers `` asked the secretary-general of the Arab League to carry out an urgent mission to Damascus and transmit the Arab initiative to resolve the crisis to the Syrian leadership '' . 
Ministers also called for `` respect -LRB- for -RRB- the right of the Syrian people to live in security and ... their legitimate aspirations for political and social reforms '' . 
The league said Syria 's stability was crucial to the whole region . 
But Syria has rejected the statement in a diplomatic note to the Arab League that the AFP news agency says it has seen . 
The note says the statement amounts to `` a clear violation ... of the principles of the Arab League charter and of the foundations of joint Arab action , '' the AFP reports . 
President Assad is coming under enormous international pressure to end the bloodletting - even from his allies . 
Turkey said on Sunday it had lost confidence in its neighbor . 
President Abdullah Gul said the situation in Syria had `` reached a level that everything is too little , too late '' . 
`` Everyone should know that we are with the Syrian people . . 
What is fundamental is the people , '' he told Anatolia news agency . 
Iran - Syria 's closest ally - has also called on President Assad to listen to his people 's demands . 
`` The government should answer to the demands of its people , be it Syria , Yemen or other countries , '' Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi was quoted as saying on Saturday . 
Russia opposes a draft resolution submitted to the UN Security Council by US , France , Britain and Germany which calls for a freeze of President Assad 's assets and an arms embargo against Syria . 
Moscow has submitted its own draft resolution , which calls for the Syrian government to speed up reforms and for the opposition to take part in political dialogue . 
It is sending a `` very important envoy '' to Damascus on Monday , Russian UN ambassador Vitaly Churkin was quoted by Itar-Tass news agency as saying . 
Meanwhile , reports continue to come in of further violence in Syria . 
Sit-ins and protests were reportedly held overnight around Damascus after security officials stormed the al-Rifai mosque in the capital 's Kafar Susseh district as people were leaving prayers . 
Activists said at least one person was killed and several wounded , including the mosque 's elderly imam . 
Shootings were also reported in the Damascus suburb of Saqba , northern Idlib province and the central city of Homs . 
Most foreign journalists have been barred from Syria , making it difficult to verify reports from local activists and officials . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
