Three searing films about US atrocities in Vietnam are suddenly back in demand . 
Jane Fonda relives the role she played in the making of one Fatal immodesty ... Winter Soldier -LRB- left -RRB- and Hearts and Minds When Michael Moore used his Oscar acceptance speech to attack George Bush just days before the outbreak of war in Iraq , it was not the first time the Academy Awards had witnessed a controversial anti-war protest from one of its winners . 
Close to three decades prior , producer Bert Schneider 's outspoken response to receiving an Oscar for the searing Vietnam documentary Hearts and Minds -LRB- 1974 -RRB- so infuriated co-hosts Bob Hope and Frank Sinatra that they immediately cobbled together a disclaimer denying any responsibility for the evening 's `` political references '' . 
The Bush administration 's failure to pull themselves out of their current military quagmire has apparently sparked renewed interest in the films that documented the conflict in Vietnam . 
Hearts and Minds - arguably one of the greatest documentaries ever made , composed largely of interviews with US soldiers and Vietnamese citizens - has been re-released in the UK after revisiting screens in the States . 
Likewise , Winter Soldier -LRB- 1972 -RRB- has hit US cinemas again after more than 30 years . 
Based on the three-day gathering of war veterans in 1971 that I helped fund , it was a film intended to document American war crimes in the conflict . 
A third film , Sir ! 
, details how GIs were converted to leading members of the peace movement and has recently won plaudits at several film festivals . 
Watching Hearts and Minds again after so many years , the parallels between the two conflicts seem quite remarkable . 
The dubious initial premise for war , the polarised society back home of hawks versus doves , and of course Lyndon B Johnson 's promise that `` the ultimate victory will depend on the hearts and minds of the people who actually live out there '' - from which the film takes its name - all still stick in the throat . 
It may not have been the first feature film to attack American policy in the conflict -LRB- Emile de Antonio 's In the Year of the Pig arrived in 1968 -RRB- , but it shook the country like no other . 
While the film received mixed reviews from critics of the time -LRB- ranging from `` a cinematic lie '' to `` brave and brilliant '' -RRB- , Hearts and Minds succeeded in cementing in the US psyche the horrific image of a naked girl running from a US napalm attack , as well as the point-blank execution of a prisoner by a South Vietnamese official . 
Director Peter Davis 's film gave a voice to Vietnamese citizens who up until that point had been painted by the national media only in primary colors . 
He turned the two-dimensional stereotypes into complex human beings - interviewing a coffin-maker about his child-size boxes , an entrepreneur hoping to make a fortune from building a prosthetic limb factory , and showing a grieving family at a funeral - swiftly juxtaposed with a clip of General Westmoreland 's infamous comment that `` the oriental does n't put the same high price on life as does the westerner '' . 
As well as traumatised veterans , he finds draft-card burners , hundreds on peace marches and a returned navy veteran who , when asked by a child what Vietnam looks like , replies : `` If it was n't for the people , it -LRB- would be -RRB- very pretty . '' 
However , it was the focus on the Vietnamese families and the suffering of ordinary individuals that had the biggest effect on Americans in 1974 . 
This was the year after troops had been officially withdrawn from the country , but still a year before the south fell to the National Liberation Front . 
Inflation , unemployment and the Watergate scandal caused Americans to retreat inward in an attempt to forget about the conflict . 
Paul Zimmerman in Newsweek described the film at the time as `` a thoroughly committed , brilliantly executed and profoundly moving document ... Unlike our leaders who encourage us to put Vietnam behind us , Davis wants us to confront our feelings about it first and to understand the experience before we bury it . 
We turn away from this portrait of ourselves at our peril . '' 
The life of the film , eventually edited down to 110 minutes from over 200 hours of footage , began smoothly but soon ran into difficulties . 
Schneider 's success with Easy Rider and Five Easy Pieces led to the unusual step of Columbia offering a generous budget with relative freedom - he soon hired Davis , who was at the time receiving critical acclaim for his TV documentary The Selling of the Pentagon . 
However , the company executives grew nervous after an early version was screened for Columbia lawyers , and expressed their concerns to Schneider . 
Against their wishes , Hearts and Minds was shown at the 1974 Cannes film festival and - just like Moore 's Fahrenheit 9\/11 , which also had problems with its distributors - received rapturous applause . 
Columbia refused to budge , though , leaving them at a stalemate until Schneider and Davis eventually bought the film from them . 
It went on to win best documentary feature at the Academy awards , during which Schneider made the controversial decision to read his message of `` greetings of friendship to all American people '' from the Provisional Revolutionary Government delegation to the ongoing peace talks in Paris . 
Winter Soldier was n't quite as successful in its reach . 
The film documents our attempts during a three-day gathering in Detroit to expose the true nature of our country 's war crimes in Vietnam - known famously as the Winter Soldier investigation . 
It was shown widely in Europe but , until recently , never found a distributor in the US , partly because the conflict was still ongoing . 
The name Winter Soldier invoked Tom Paine 's reference to the revolutionary soldiers who , through the terrible winter of 1777-1778 , volunteered to remain at Valley Forge . 
The idea was for Vietnam veterans to testify about atrocities they had committed or had witnessed while in Vietnam . 
The motivation for the film was the My Lai massacre . 
When the story about My Lai broke in the New York Times in November 1969 , it had staggered the public . 
What had enraged a lot of Vietnam veterans , however , was the way the government was scapegoating Lieutenant William Calley and the men he commanded , calling My Lai an `` isolated incident of aberrant behavior '' . 
To the membership of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War - numbering 25,000 to 30,000 members in 1970-71 - the My Lai massacre was remarkable only in the number of victims involved and the fact that it became public . 
The vets knew that atrocities were occurring as an inevitable part of our Vietnam policies and that if justice was to be served , the architects of those policies - from the president down - needed to be held accountable . 
Preparing for the Winter Soldier investigation required fast fundraising - and I hit the road running , raising most of the money through a six-week speaking tour that took me to 54 college campuses across the country , and during which police arrested me for `` drug smuggling '' -LRB- vitamins , actually -RRB- . 
On January 31 1971 , hundreds of people from all over the country crammed into the large conference room in a motel to witness the event . 
The heart of the Winter Soldier investigation was the testimony from the veterans . 
Sitting solemnly in front of microphones at a long table covered by white cloth , they made an unusual sight with their medals , uniforms , long hair , and beards . 
One by one they said who they were , where they had served , and what category of war crime they would testify about . 
In voices sometimes choked with emotion , the men told how they and others had randomly killed Vietnamese civilians and tortured Vietnamese prisoners . 
They told of raping and mutilating women and girls ; cutting off ears and heads ; rounding up entire villages into concentration camps . 
They told of B-52 carpet-bombing ; throwing Vietcong suspects from helicopters ; using white phosphorous , which burned endlessly though a person 's body . 
Only this week , the US admitted using the same substance during the assault last year in Fallujah . 
I was numb as I listened to speaker after speaker describe these atrocities . 
I heard what was being said , but I could n't get my heart to grasp it . 
This was partly to do with my own emotional state . 
My nerves were shot . 
I could n't sleep . 
Picketers outside the hotel were brandishing signs saying I was a communist . 
My father was n't speaking to me and , because of the news reports about my arrest , probably thought I was a drug-smuggler . 
My Hollywood connections feared I 'd never work again . 
A month or so later , sitting in the projection room of Francis Ford Coppola 's Zoetrope offices in San Francisco , watching a rough cut of the documentary with other funders of the film , I finally broke down . 
And once the tears came , they were unstoppable . 
Until then , I had thought that what was important about the Winter Soldier investigation was its indictment of the US government for sending men to fight a war whose very nature made atrocities inevitable . 
But something far more profound than the question of blame had transpired over those three days in Detroit . 
A spiritual shift had occurred that signalled hope . 
These men , as they gave witness , were pointing the way for all of us : if they , who had done and seen the unimaginable , could transform themselves by their collective truth telling , then could n't we all ? 
Today , we do those who served in Vietnam a grave disservice to feign outrage at what these men said and did , and to deny that any atrocities were committed by Americans . 
These ranks of brave men are joined by the subjects of David Zeiger 's welcome new documentary Sir ! 
, which shows how some of the most dedicated troops turned their backs on violence and devoted themselves to the peace movement - from setting up anti-war groups to wearing peace signs instead of dog-tags . 
It was recently shown at the Lincoln Center in New York and was followed by a dialogue between Vietnam and Iraq veterans - the latter talking about how the film spoke to their feelings about the current situation . 
Reading over old reviews of Hearts and Minds , one comment by the New York Times journalist Vincent Canby , written in 1975 , struck me as identifying with acute precision why each of these documentaries is still so vital : `` An interview with Clark Clifford , the former Secretary of Defense , at the beginning of the film sets what I take to be the theme when Mr Clifford recalls the extraordinary economic , military and industrial power the United States found itself with at the end of the second world war . 
The film goes on to examine the nearly suicidal effects of that power when it was explained , justified , defined and , in particular , when it was wielded as something that had been God-given rather than as something inherited through one of the most marvellous accidents - the unplanned conjunction of people , place and time - in recorded history . 
I do n't think the film means to knock American achievements but only to point out that a certain lack of perspective , of modesty , perhaps , can be close to fatal . '' 
Additional reporting by Jon Bentham . 
Hearts and Minds is out on DVD on November 21 . 
Information on Winter Soldier at wintersoldierfilm.com . 
My Life So Far by Jane Fonda is published by Ebury Press . 
To order a copy for # 17.99 with free UK p & p go to guardian . 
