An elevated view shows the financial district of the City of London April 12 , 2011 . 
LONDON | Wed Sep 7 , 2011 2:13 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The government 's plans to shield taxpayers from the risk of possible future failures by high street banks will trigger a costly and fundamental rewriting of lenders ' so-called `` living wills . '' 
Formally known as recovery and resolution plans -LRB- RRP -RRB- , the wills - also known as `` death plans '' - detail how a bank will survive a crisis , such as which assets or businesses would be sold off to improve capital . 
They also spell out how the bank would be wound up speedily without destabilising the broader financial system if it proves impossible to save . 
The Independent Commission on Banking -LRB- ICB -RRB- is expected to confirm that domestic banks must `` ringfence '' deposits with a bespoke capital cushion so that accounts are still safe if a bank gets into difficulties . 
Its final recommendations due on September 12 will force a major reworking of living wills as they will effectively split lenders into a deposit taking arm separate from a unit for riskier , investment banking activities . 
`` If you take one of the large universal banks , at the moment their living wills will be predicated on them being one institution , '' said Peter Snowdon , a regulatory lawyer at Norton Rose . 
`` Once they are two institutions , they have to have two living wills . 
It 's like a living will for suicide , '' Snowdon said . 
The betting among lawyers is that even if the effective date of the ICB-led changes is pushed back to 2015 or later , UK regulators will pressure banks to rewrite living wills sooner rather than later to make them workable . 
Michael McKee , a financial partner at DLA Piper , said the ICB will say little about living wills but its recommendations will force banks to reorganise their structures . 
`` They will then have to modify their resolution plans to fit the new structures created , '' McKee said . 
It wo n't be cheap , though costings are hard to come by . 
`` This amounts to a huge job : given the length of time to generate one of these things and amount of resources , there will be armies of consultants and lawyers lining up , '' said Bob Penn , a partner at Allen & Overy lawfirm . 
`` The outcome of it for a big clearing bank is going to be a document that runs into thousands or even tens of thousands of pages , '' Penn said . 
The government spent over a trillion pounds to shore up its banking sector and buy stakes in or nationalise lenders such as Northern Rock , Royal Bank of Scotland -LRB- RBS . 
L -RRB- and Lloyds -LRB- LLOY . 
L -RRB- in the fallout from the financial crisis . 
This galvanised the UK Financial Services Authority to pioneer living wills well ahead of a global initiative which world leaders are expected to endorse in November . 
The FSA has already forced six banks , including Barclays -LRB- BARC . 
L -RRB- , HSBC -LRB- HSBA . 
L -RRB- , Lloyds and RBS , to submit living wills under a UK pilot program . 
`` The very important but largely unsung recovery and resolution plans , better known by the distasteful term ` living wills ' , are nearly complete in the UK banks , '' British Bankers ' Association Chief Executive Angela Knight said in a blog last month . 
The changes that will be wrought by the ICB 's ringfencing will be of a different scale to the tweaks that could be anticipated from the pilot program , lawyers working for banks say . 
`` Using living wills to effect structural change is like operating with a scalpel while the ICB has been asked to wield an axe - cleaving banks into two without regard for the risks they pose individually , '' Penn said . 
Living wills will also have to be updated each time a bank makes any major changes to its business model and the whole process will be time consuming for senior management . 
`` The tentacles stretch out through the whole business . 
You ca n't get the tea lady to do it because it 's something the regulators will crawl over , '' Snowdon said . 
The new structures created by the ICB recommendations , coupled with regulation from the European Union and global bodies to beef up bank capital and liquidity , will spark a fundamental rethink of banking business models . 
`` The ICB is part of a much broader structural debate for banks as boards ask what are we going to look like in five years ' time , '' Penn said . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
