\* Police confiscate five trucks loaded with gasoline \* Cargo ` was to be smuggled to Gaddafi-held Libya ' \* Fuel supplies key to whether Gaddafi can hold on TUNIS , Aug 10 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Tunisia has intercepted five truckloads of fuel set to be smuggled into neighbouring Libya , an official said on Wednesday , in a move to curb an illegal trade which is helping to keep Muammar Gaddafi in power . 
International sanctions and the effects of Libya 's civil war have disrupted normal supplies of motor fuel to parts of the country under Gaddafi 's control , but huge volumes of gasoline are instead being smuggled across the Libyan-Tunisian border . 
A spokesman for Tunisia 's Interior Ministry said the trucks were seized at the weekend in the town of Msaken , in the Sousse region about 160 km -LRB- 100 miles -RRB- south of the Tunisian capital . 
`` The police seized five trucks of gasoline -LRB- destined -RRB- for the pro-Gaddafi side , '' said the spokesman . 
`` They were heading for Libya but the police stopped the trucks . '' 
Amateur footage posted on video-sharing site YouTube by Libyan opposition activists purported to show the trucks which were seized . 
In the video , the door of a shipping container on the back of one of the trucks was swung open . 
Inside , concealed behind some cardboard packaging , was a large plastic tank which one of the men present said contained fuel . 
The seizure was confirmed by a source in western Libya , near the border with Tunisia , who is working with anti-Gaddafi rebels . 
`` Container trucks with gasoline were trying to go from Tunisia to Libya and were blocked from entry . 
They were heading for the -LRB- Libyan -RRB- government , '' said the source , who did not want to be identified . 
Western governments trying to bring an end to Gaddafi 's 41-year rule believe that fuel supplies are crucial to his ability to hold onto power . 
A NATO naval blockade and sanctions that prevent fuel traders from doing business with a list of Libyan companies and individuals have made it extremely difficult for Gaddafi 's administration to bring in fuel by legal means . 
However , smuggling networks help make up the shortfall . 
Libyans buy black-market gasoline in Tunisia , much of which has been smuggled out of neighbouring energy producer Algeria , and then carry it across the border into Libya . 
Until now there has been little evidence of Tunisian authorities taking firm action against the illegal trade with Libya . 
Smugglers provide a livelihood for some communities in Tunisia and so they constitute a powerful interest group . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tarek Amara in Tunis and Emma Farge in London ; Writing by Christian Lowe ; Editing by Gareth Jones -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
