VIENNA\/MILAN | Wed Aug 10 , 2011 4:54 am EDT VIENNA\/MILAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Civil war in Libya shut off oil supplies to Austrian energy group OMV -LRB- OMVV . 
VI -RRB- and Italian refiner Saras -LRB- SRS . 
MI -RRB- in the second quarter , taking a toll on profit and clouding the outlook in the region . 
OMV said the unrest in Libya would continue to halt its production there for the rest of the year while Saras , which swung to a net loss , said it will reduce refining runs in the second half to help offset the shortfall . 
Saras , Italy 's No. 3 refiner , is normally a big buyer of Libyan crude , with some 35 percent to 40 percent of supplies coming from the North African country . 
`` Until the Libyan situation stabilizes I do n't see Saras doing great things , it 's a catalyzer for the stock , '' a Milan-based analyst said . 
At 4:19 a.m. EDT Saras shares were down 1.49 percent at 1.127 euros while OMV shares were up 4.95 percent at 23.83 euros . 
The STOXX Europe 600 Oil and Gas index . 
SXEP was down 0.57 percent . 
OMV 's Libyan production was normal until February 20 and then fell sharply as the revolt against Muammar Gaddafi 's rule forced it to turn to oil from other countries . 
It obtained around a tenth of its oil from Libya last year but production is now zero . 
The group has a long-term stake in the crisis-hit country with 12 exploration and production licenses and Libyan petroleum contracts running up to 2032 . 
In its half-year report , Saras said it had established ties with the new political structures being created in Libya , adding this had allowed it to close a commercial deal . 
In July sources said a tanker carrying crude oil had sailed from Benghazi to Sardinia , as Libya 's rebels sold the last of their stockpile to raise urgently needed funds . 
OMV said high exploration expenses , lower refining margins and foreign exchange rates hurt results as high oil prices failed to offset lower output . 
Net profit excluding one-offs and unrealized gains from valuing inventories fell 25 percent in the second quarter to 236 million euros -LRB- $ 332.4 million -RRB- , in line with a Reuters poll of analyst forecasts . 
Saras , which swung to a net loss of 44.3 million euros from a profit of 2.4 million euros a year ago , said its refining margin in the second quarter fell to $ 0.5 per barrel versus $ 1.2 per barrel a year earlier . 
A shortfall in Libyan production and the weak dollar also took their toll on Total -LRB- TOTF . 
PA -RRB- and Eni SpA -LRB- ENI . 
MI -RRB- in the second quarter . 
Last Friday Italian refiner Erg -LRB- ERG . 
MI -RRB- said it was expecting worse refining results in the second half of the year . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
