Ricky Gervais comedy Life 's Too Short gets 2.5 m viewers Life 's Too Short is presented as a faux-documentary , in the vein of The Office and Extras Life 's Too Short , the new comedy by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant , attracted 2.5 million viewers for its BBC Two debut on Thursday . 
It stars Warwick Davis as an actor whose career on the slide , and hopes a reality show will reverse his fortunes . 
The audience was above the channel 's average for that timeslot - which is 1.8 m - but lower than that of Gervais and Merchant 's previous series , Extras . 
Religious sitcom Rev also fared well , with a record audience of 2.4 million . 
The BBC Two series , which stars Tom Hollander as a hapless vicar , returned for its second run . 
In its first season , the comedy had an average audience of 1.87 million . 
Gervais and Merchant appear as versions of themselves in Life 's Too Short , playing Davis ' agents . 
The show also features cameos from stars including Johnny Depp and Liam Neeson . 
It was conceived when Davis played a part in the duo 's previous comedy , Extras , in 2006 . 
Writing on the BBC 's TV blog , the actor , who is 3ft 6in -LRB- 1.06 m -RRB- , called this series the highlight of his career , ahead of roles in Return Of The Jedi and the Harry Potter franchise . 
`` Filming the series was one of the hardest things I 've ever done , but it was also the most fun , '' he said . 
But the opening episode fared less well than Extras , which averaged 3.67 million viewers for its second series , and peaked with five million for the feature-length Christmas finale . 
The most-watched programs in the UK last night were EastEnders , with 8.4 million viewers and Coronation Street , which was seen by 8.1 million . 
But Channel 4 's exclusive interview with Dr Conrad Murray , who was convicted of the involuntary manslaughter of pop star Michael Jackson this week , only attracted 757,000 viewers . 
It was a late addition to schedules that had not been heavily advertised . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
