Old friends : Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez -LRB- left -RRB- meets Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi in a tent in Tripoli , 2004 . 
Gadhafi 's overseas backing is based on a shared anti-colonial narrative , say analysts Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez says Gadhafi , `` has been my friend for a long time '' China , Russia and Turkey would not support an invasion or no-fly zone , says analyst -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Despite facing intense pressure from parts of the international community to relinquish power , the Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi can still count on the continued support of some prominent world leaders , say analysts . 
Much of Gadhafi 's overseas backing is based on a shared anti-colonial narrative and the instincts of some regimes to undermine the norms of the international community , experts believe . 
So while many countries have criticized Gadhafi in the aftermath of protests that have left more than 1,000 people dead and many more injured , according to the U.N. , some of his allies , including Venezuela and Zimbabwe , refuse to publicly criticize Libya . 
`` There is a natural alignment between all regimes which are into power maximization , that is , regimes trying to accumulate as much power as they can for themselves , '' says Barak Seener , a Middle East research fellow at the Royal United Services Institute , a London-based think tank . 
Who is the opposition in Libya ? 
`` Venezuela , for example , also has close links with Iran , '' added Seener . 
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez has called for an international good will commission to mediate in Libya ; in contrast the U.N. Security Council over the weekend voted for tough restrictions and possible war crimes charges against the Libyan regime . 
On Monday , Chavez said Gadhafi , `` has been my friend and our friend for a long time , '' in remarks broadcast on Venezuelan state television . 
And in comments made on Thursday , Chavez described alleged preparations to invade Libya as `` a madness , and in front of that madness , as always , the Yankee empire that tries to dominate the world , at the cost of fire and blood . '' 
The former Cuban President Fidel Castro on Thursday also condemned what he described as the inevitable U.S.-backed invasion of Libya by NATO to get its hands on that country 's oil . 
Seener said that countries with a record of `` domestic abuse , '' such as limiting freedom of speech and having no independent judiciary , have no sense of accountability to their people in the same way that elected powers do and that lack of perceived accountability tends to spill over into their foreign polices . 
Another close allay of Gadhafi is Zimbabwean president Robert Mugabe . 
Libya has good relations with Zimbabwe , which has few international friends , says Jane Kinninmont , senior research fellow at the think tank Chatham House . 
`` She notes the contrast with Sudan , which was able to count on a far broader range of allies , including China and most of the Arab world , when it faced condemnation from the West over the ethnic conflict in Darfur '' . 
She adds that , for example , during the bloody ethnic conflict in the Sudanese region of Darfur , Sudan faced international condemnation but `` did still have its friends in the international world . '' 
There is also a second group of nations -- including China , Russia and Turkey -- which while unlikely to openly back Gadhafi , would not support an invasion and they would also be against a no-fly zone , said Seener . 
`` It is not simply a case of being anti-Western . 
Turkey for example is increasing diplomatic and economic links with Iran and as it does so it is entering the Iranian sphere of influence . 
They will not condemn what Gadhafi is doing in Libya , '' says Seener . 
Despite the continued backing of Gadhafi by his allies , some analysts predict a sorry end for the leader . 
Scott Horton , an international lawyer said : `` Deposed dictators now are subject to lawsuits , both civil suits by the governments that succeeded them and human rights suits , and they wind up being prosecuted and successfully sued . '' 
However , Barak Barfi of the New America Foundation said : `` I think there is a very good possibility he 'll fight to the death knowing he has very few options . '' 
