By the CNN Wire Staff Libyan opposition leader speaks to CNN NEW : The United Nations cites unconfirmed reports of violence against children `` Messengers from Gadhafi '' warn Zuwarah residents `` The longer the situation carries on , the more blood is shed '' Gadhafi 's regime offers reward for capturing a top opposition figure Tune in to `` AC360 '' for the latest on what 's next for Libya , the opposition and Moammar Gadhafi . 
Watch `` AC360 '' at 10 p.m. ET Wednesday on CNN . 
Benghazi , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The head of the interim government in eastern Libya pleaded Wednesday for the international community to move quickly to impose a no-fly zone over Libya , declaring that any delay would result in more casualties . 
`` It has to be immediate action , '' Mustafa Abdul-Jalil told CNN in an exclusive interview in this eastern opposition stronghold . 
`` The longer the situation carries on , the more blood is shed . 
That 's the message that we want to send to the international community . 
They have to live up to their responsibility with regards to this . '' 
After the uprising began February 15 , Abdul-Jalil was among the government officials who broke with the regime . 
He has gone on to lead the opposition 's National Transitional Council , a 31-member group representing most regions in Libya . 
The group has met in Benghazi , an eastern town that has become an opposition stronghold . 
Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi told a Turkish reporter in an interview Tuesday that the imposition of a no-fly zone would simply unite the Libyan people behind him . 
`` They will be united against the new attempt for occupation and imperialistic interests and it will be clear that they are conspiring against Libya , '' he said . 
`` It will also be clear that the intentions are to control Libya 's oil , choke Libya 's liberty , land and people . '' 
Secret voices speak out in Libya Massive explosions rock Libyan oil town The risks of a Libya no-fly zone Abdul-Jalil 's remarks came shortly after Gadhafi 's regime announced a reward for Abdul-Jalil 's capture , branding him `` an agent spy . '' 
In an `` urgent '' banner on state television , the government said its General Administration for Criminal Investigation was offering 500,000 Libyan dinars -LRB- $ 410,900 U.S. -RRB- `` for whoever captures and hands over '' the `` agent spy '' Abdul-Jalil , and `` another offer of 200,000 Libyan dinars -LRB- $ 164,300 U.S. -RRB- for whoever offers information leading to his actual arrest . '' 
In a letter to the U.N. General Assembly , the transitional council asked that it be recognized as `` the sole representative of all Libya . '' 
It also asked the international community to `` fulfill its obligations to protect the Libyan people from any further genocide and crimes against humanity without any direct military intervention on Libyan soil . '' 
The letter , which was dated March 5 , was made public Wednesday . 
The move to target Abdul-Jalil came as Gadhafi fought to advance against rebels who have taken control of many parts of the country . 
On Wednesday , pro-Gadhafi forces launched fresh attacks on Ras Lanuf , using planes and heavy artillery in an effort to retake the eastern oil city . 
Opposition fighters , armed with anti-aircraft guns and Soviet rifles , were outgunned by the heavily armed pro-Gadhafi forces . 
CNN 's Ben Wedeman reported that an intense artillery bombardment was under way on the western edge of Ras Lanuf , where ambulances lined up to the emergency ward at Ras Lanuf 's only hospital to drop off the wounded . 
More than 25 people were wounded , said Dr. Ali Al-Bart , at Ras Lanuf Hospital . 
`` It 's very bad , the situation is very bad , '' he said . 
Opposition efforts remained , but appeared weak . 
Ahmed Faturi left his clothing store in Benghazi to carry a SAM-7 surface-to-air missile , but knew he had little chance of hitting a plane with it . 
And he expressed little hope that a no-fly zone would ever materialize . 
`` Just talk , '' he said . 
A few days ago , the rebel forces were advancing steadily westward toward Gadhafi 's stronghold in the capital city of Tripoli . 
But that advancement appears to have reversed . 
In Ras Lanuf , an oil storage tank to the west was hit in the fighting , though it was not clear who was responsible . 
Libyan state television reported that `` armed groups supported by al Qaeda blew up an oil tank as they withdrew from Ras Lanuf against the advancing Libyan armed forces . '' 
The attack marked the first time since the rebellion began more than three weeks ago that Libya 's oil infrastructure has been damaged . 
Gadhafi has shown no sign of giving up . 
On state television , he again insisted Tuesday night that youths misled and drugged by al Qaeda were to blame for the fighting . 
`` For them , everybody 's their enemy , '' Gadhafi said . 
`` They know nothing other than killing . '' 
Inside the mind of a dictator The speech was recorded earlier Tuesday when Gadhafi addressed a youth group of tribal supporters , urging them to defend Libya from those who envy its standard of living . 
`` They want to take your petrol , '' he said . 
`` This is what America , this is what the French , those colonialists , want . '' 
A private Libyan aircraft crossed Greek airspace Wednesday en route to Cairo , Egypt , and the pilot said there were two passengers on board , according to Greek civil aviation authorities . 
The pilot did not identify the passengers , aviation authorities said . 
Multiple media reports said the plane landed in Cairo . 
The development raised questions about whether Libyan officials may have flown to Cairo . 
On Tuesday , an opposition member said Gadhafi was negotiating an exit deal , but other opposition members and the government denied that . 
In the fourth week of what has become a civil war , Gadhafi 's regime has held on to the capital , while losing control to the opposition in some other areas . 
Benghazi , in eastern Libya , is an opposition stronghold . 
People in some towns in the western part of the country told CNN Wednesday their areas were under rebel control . 
In Zuwarah , two sources said the city , which is located between Zawiya and the country 's western border , with Tunisia , was surrounded by Gadhafi supporters but most shops and banks were operating normally . 
A witness described the scene as tense , with schools , government offices and businesses closed . 
Demonstrations were no longer being held because , the witness said , `` There is no one to protest against . '' 
Two Zuwarah residents said `` messengers from Gadhafi '' had warned local leaders Wednesday to surrender or face attack . 
The `` messengers '' told the leaders that replacing the pre-Gadhafi regime flag in the city with the government 's green flag would be interpreted as a sign of solidarity with the regime , the sources said . 
They added that there had been implicit threats against Zuwarah to bomb two nearby facilities : a petro-chemical plant 15 kilometers away and a gas export facility 30 kilometers away . 
In Zawiya , two sources said the fighting continued in the city center Wednesday , but to a lesser extent than on Tuesday . 
They said the opposition occupied the city center , which was surrounded by the military . 
On the outskirts of the city , pro-Gadhafi rallies were being held , they said . 
But Libyan television reported that Gadhafi supporters were celebrating `` the liberation of the town from the armed terrorist elements backed by al Qaeda '' in the main square . 
Access to the city was limited . 
A witness told CNN she tried to travel from Tripoli to Zawiya but was turned away at various checkpoints . 
Communications were so difficult that CNN was not able to talk with anyone in the city . 
One Zawiya resident , who told CNN she had to make the 40-minute trip to Tripoli to make a phone call , said there had been no electricity in Zawiya for the previous day . 
In addition , two medical clinics that were shut Tuesday by the military remained closed Wednesday , she said . 
Another source who fled Zawiya Tuesday for the Tunisian border said many bodies in the city lay unclaimed because relatives -- fearing violence -- would not go to graveyards to bury them . 
Residents of Zuwarah sent weapons , explosives , and medical supplies via a small boat to Zawiya , the witness said . 
The man who drove the boat dropped the supplies immediately upon arrival and fled out of fear . 
Libyan state TV showed video of government supporters cheering in Zawiya 's streets and hoisting the government flag on Wednesday . 
Witnesses said fear remained widespread in the capital , where schools were closed . 
A resident said she called several banks to ask about taking out money but was told that there was a shortage of cash . 
Nalut was under opposition control and calm Wednesday , a witness said . 
In Ajdabiya and Misrata , spokesmen for opposition groups said those towns remained under opposition control and were calm as well . 
Two doctors in Misrata said medical supplies were in short supply . 
More than 80 people remained at Central Misrata Hospital recovering from wounds suffered Sunday in fighting , they said . 
Libya 's government sought Wednesday to influence international sentiment , announcing that Libya 's secretary of state for international relations will travel to Portugal , Greece and Malta on an exploratory fact-finding mission that may include other destinations . 
Libya has invited British , French , Dutch and German fact-finding teams to Libya to examine reports of aerial bombardment and massacres . 
Libya had received no response from any of the invitees . 
The decision about whether to impose a no-fly zone is a complicated one , said Nicholas Burns , a former U.S. ambassador to NATO . 
`` There 's no assurance that the imposition of even a no-fly zone would make a decisive difference in the battle , '' Burns said . 
`` Gadhafi has ground forces . 
He has artillery , he has a mercenary army . 
That 's 95 percent of the fighting under way in Libya . '' 
And it would not prove to be a panacea , the head of the U.S. Marine Corps told lawmakers Tuesday . 
Marine Corps Commandant Gen. James F. Amos said that a no-fly zone would do little to thwart Libya 's helicopters , which he called `` their greatest threat . '' 
A no-fly zone would typically be enforced by fighter jets whose speed and altitude make it difficult to target helicopters , which move low and slow , Amos said . 
For its part , Libya said it was not misusing its air force . 
Any no-fly zone would be tantamount to an act of war , Libyan Deputy Foreign Minister Khalid Karim said Tuesday . 
The military , he said , `` are taking purely defensive positions ; they are not taking offensive ones . '' 
He said the Libyan government has asked for international monitors to verify that assertion . 
The protests against the 68-year-old Gadhafi began February 15 as anti-government demonstrators sought his ouster after nearly 42 years of rule . 
Death toll estimates have ranged from more than 1,000 to as many as 2,000 . 
And the war has forced out 215,000 people , many of them poor migrant workers who have been stranded at both the Tunisian and Egyptian borders , the U.N. refugee agency has said . 
While many countries chartered planes and dispatched ships to whisk away their citizens to safety , those stuck at the border are sheltered in cramped , unsanitary quarters with little to eat . 
The United Nations ' special representative for children and armed conflict , Radhika Coomaraswamy , said her office had received unconfirmed reports of violence against children , `` including killing and maiming and use of children as combatants and the denial of humanitarian access . '' 
Valerie Amos , the United Nations under-secretary-general for humanitarian affairs and emergency relief coordinator , called for all Libyan civilians to be protected . 
`` I am deeply concerned about the reportedly indiscriminate nature of the fighting , and particularly the use of heavy artillery and aerial bombardments , '' she said in a statement . 
`` We are also hearing reports of hospital closures at the very time when people most need medical care . '' 
The U.N. World Food Programme has initiated a $ 39.2 million emergency operation intended to provide food to more than 1 million people in Libya , Egypt and Tunisia over a three-month period . 
In the latest sign of international solidarity with the Libyan opposition , a group of people entered a home in London Wednesday owned by Saif Gadhafi , the Libyan leader 's son who has spoken on behalf of the regime in recent weeks . 
They could be seen hanging a banner out an upstairs window with a picture of Gadhafi in a red circle with a line through it . 
`` Out of Libya , '' the sign says , `` Out of London . '' 
London Metropolitan police said only the situation was `` being treated as a civil matter . '' 
CNN 's Ben Wedeman , Whitney Hurst , Nic Robertson , Chris Lawrence , Arwa Damon , Salma Abdelaziz , Jomana Karadsheh and Caroline Faraj contributed to this report 
