Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal looks over the berm system on the northern end of the Chandeleur Islands , La. , July 15 . 
-LRB- AP Photo -RRB- The BP oil spill may be choking the Gulf ecosystem , but for a few well-positioned coastal politicians it has breathed new life into their careers . 
Across the Gulf states , the spill has over the past 100 days given lawmakers the chance to step into the national spotlight and show a little leadership -- by wrestling with the Obama administration , sounding off against BP and pulling the battered Gulf region through yet another environmental and economic crisis . 
Though Gulf fisherman , rig workers and practically everyone tied to coastal tourism are facing an uncertain future , the worst environmental disaster in U.S. history , nevertheless , could bolster a handful of political fortunes , especially with voters having 97 days to decide on their candidates before the Nov. 2 election . 
But first , there may be no better example of a political comeback than Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal . 
A year ago , the governor was pilloried for delivering a lackluster GOP response to President Obama 's first address to Congress . 
The performance appeared to bench him as a potential 2012 presidential hopeful for the Republican Party . 
He was n't even a choice on the 2012 straw poll ballots at the Southern Republican Leadership Conference or the Conservative Political Action Conference this year -- though he said he was n't interested anyway . 
But Jindal sprung into action shortly after the deadly April 20 explosion that triggered the spill at the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
He criticized the federal government for being slow to respond and he fought the administration over its moratorium on offshore drilling . 
And he made a very public and visible effort to show he was on top of the disaster response -- touring the coast , putting out a restoration plan and holding frequent press conferences to talk about it . 
Images of Jindal giving his allegedly bumbling response to the presidential address were replaced by images of Jindal on a boat getting up close and personal with the oil damage . 
`` Probably the person who 's come out of this the best is Bobby Jindal , '' said Kirby Goidel , political science professor and director of the Public Policy Research Lab at Louisiana State University . 
`` This is all a chance to be redefined as someone who 's an advocate . '' 
A Rasmussen Reports poll released at the end of June showed Jindal 's state approval rating at 74 percent -- a 10-percentage-point jump from April . 
Goidel said Jindal has virtually assured re-election in the 2011 gubernatorial race . 
He said despite claims that Jindal has the job he wants , `` there 's no question '' the governor has ambitions for the White House . 
He said both Jindal and Florida Gov. Charlie Crist have shown oil spill leadership in a way that should help them with voters . 
Of the two , Crist faces the most immediate political challenge . 
The former Republican made the risky move of switching his affiliation to independent in his run for the U.S. Senate this fall . 
But the Real Clear Politics average of polls now has him leading Republican Marco Rubio by nearly 4 percentage points -- though a recent Rasmussen poll showed Rubio up by 2 points . 
Democrat Kendrick Meeks continues to trail in general election matchups . 
The impact of the spill on the U.S. Senate race in Louisiana is a little more fuzzy . 
On one hand , it 's allowed Sen. David Vitter to steer clear of questions about his connection to the D.C. Madam scandal and a longtime aide with a lengthy criminal history . 
He uses his interviews and public appearances to slam the Obama administration over its drilling moratorium and response effort . 
But the spill has also given Democratic challenger Rep. Charlie Melancon exposure statewide . 
`` The oil spill has given Charlie Melancon a chance to showcase his leadership skills , '' said Kevin Franck , spokesman for the Louisiana Democratic Party . 
`` The most stark contrast Louisianans have seen during the oil spill is Charlie Melancon has been able to actually deliver results and David Vitter has been relegated to complaining loudly . '' 
Franck pointed to Melancon 's efforts getting a mobile health unit for clean-up workers and pushing a bill to make small business loans more affordable for spill victims . 
He said the oil spill has been bad for Vitter 's image , accusing the senator of sticking up for BP by pushing measures that could limit the firm 's compensation liability for Gulf residents . 
Vitter pushed a bill that would tie BP 's liability to its profits -- the senator claimed that could be as high as $ 20 billion , though Franck said given BP 's losses it would be far less than what Gulf Coast residents need . 
Melancon also drew some attention in May when he got choked up at a subcommittee hearing about the Gulf oil spill damage on Capitol Hill . 
Though most recent polls have shown Vitter well ahead in general election match-ups , internal polling from the Melancon campaign shows the race a dead heat with Vitter leading by just 1 percentage point . 
The internal polling showed Melancon 's image generally improving among those surveyed in recent weeks . 
Vitter spokesman Luke Bolar , though , highlighted the senator 's efforts to fight the administration 's drilling moratorium and dismissed Melancon 's performance . 
`` The people of Louisiana know Senator Vitter has been a strong leader throughout this disaster and a desperate political opponent , Charlie Melancon who gave Obama an ` A ' for his job performance , is n't helping bring back the 150,000 jobs that Obama 's moratorium will cost Louisiana 's economy , '' he said in an e-mail . 
Goide said the internal poll seems like an outlier . 
He said it does n't yet appear Melancon has gained much traction from the spill . 
He said the fact that a Democratic president is in the White House ties Melancon 's hands , preventing him getting too tough on the administration and effectively ceding that role to Vitter . 
Goidel said Jindal 's challenge will be to sustain his restored image after the leak is plugged and after the spill is cleaned up . 
`` That 's what he 's got to think about , '' Goidel said . 
`` Your shelf life of being the hot thing in politics is not particularly long . '' 
