On Day 100 of the Gulf catastrophe -- and one day after a rig accident caused yet another oil leak in Gulf waters -- it 's worth recalling that memorable line from `` Spiderman : The Movie '' : `` With great power comes great responsibility . '' 
As one of the world 's largest companies , BP wields awesome power , which it uses to find and exploit reservoirs of crude oil thousands of feet below the ocean floor . 
Such power put BP in a position to risk not only the destruction of a rig and the deaths of workers , but also incalculable harm to the Gulf 's environment and local economies . 
Ethical reflection on BP 's actions leading up to the oil spill holds a lesson for other powerful firms involved in perilous enterprises . 
The Deepwater Horizon was a machine of immense size and complexity , with employees of various companies carrying out a host of often difficult and complicated tasks . 
And certainly the challenges of risk management would have been daunting when safe operation of the rig relied on so many variables relating to equipment , personnel , weather , deepwater conditions and subterranean geology . 
Precisely because the risks were so great and so numerous , BP 's prime responsibility of minimizing catastrophic risk would have required having an official , with the requisite skills and authority , in charge of safety on the rig . 
This supervisor , dedicated solely to safety oversight , would have coordinated the constant monitoring of risk factors and made sure that risks related to proposed deviations from standard practice were duly evaluated and authorized . 
This official would have assured that emergency response plans were current and that all workers were trained to implement them . 
Emergency equipment and procedures would have been regularly and rigorously tested , using established , data-based criteria . 
Top managers would have made sure that every rig had a strong safety culture , such that an overriding concern for safety would have been built in to management practices . 
Sadly , this seems not to have been the case . 
BP has declared that its `` absolute No. 1 priority '' is safety . 
But evidence to the contrary , at least on the Deepwater Horizon , appeared in a recent New York Times story about the now-famous `` blowout preventer . '' 
It turns out that there are hundreds of ways this `` ultimate fail-safe device '' can fail . 
Indeed , a study commissioned by Transocean , the Deepwater Horizon 's owner , concluded that , historically , blowout preventers on deepwater rigs had a failure rate of 45 % . 
Equally astonishing is that their key component , the `` blind shear ram , '' is vulnerable to catastrophic failure through the breakdown of just a single part . 
In a blowout , this apparatus -- whose powerful blades are pushed together by hydraulic fluid -- is designed to sever and seal the drill pipe . 
However , one of the ram 's shuttle valves is such that , if it sticks or leaks , the blades ca n't be activated . 
Incredibly , this valve has no backup . 
-LRB- There are indications that the calamitous failure of the Deepwater Horizon 's blind shear ram was due to leaks in one or more shuttle valves . -RRB- 
Moreover , a blind shear ram 's effectiveness is diminished by the extreme pressure and cold of deep water , the fact that modern drill pipe is twice as strong as older pipe , and the impossibility of slicing through the joint-sections that make up nearly 10 percent of a drill pipe . 
BP and the rest of the oil industry were well aware of the weaknesses of blowout preventers , particularly since the failure of blind shear rams had been implicated in several major oil spills . 
Drillers had begun to address the problems by installing two blind shear rams in their blowout preventers . 
In fact , on the day of the Gulf oil spill , every other BP rig under contract from Transocean was equipped with dual blind shear rams . 
The last thorough maintenance review of the Deepwater Horizon , in 2005 , revealed serious problems with the blowout preventer , including faulty controls and a badly leaking line connecting the rig to the blowout preventer . 
Despite such well-documented vulnerabilities , BP decided not to reconfigure the Deepwater Horizon 's blowout preventer with a second blind shear ram . 
In the days preceding the April 20 explosion , against the advice of contractors and over the protests of workers , BP skipped several crucial safety steps needed to make sure gas would n't escape from the well and ignite . 
Such actions cast doubt on any suggestion that a `` safety culture '' existed on the rig . 
Thus , it comes as no surprise that , as The Times also reported , no BP official had overall responsibility for safety on the Deepwater Horizon . 
This points to the main lesson of this case : In hazardous operations -- such as the search for energy sources in increasingly dangerous environments -- minimizing catastrophic risk demands strong , accountable safety supervisors and workable , realistic planning for emergencies . 
Otherwise , companies conducting such operations -- in oil exploration , coal mining , nuclear power generation , or any other high-risk business -- are following BP 's path to disaster . 
Dana M. Radcliffe is the Day Family Senior Lecturer of Business Ethics at Cornell University 's Johnson Graduate School of Management . 
Fox Forum is on Twitter . 
