June 28 , 2010 - 6:39 AM | by : Jonathan Serrie Gulf Coast states have launched multimillion dollar ad campaigns , funded in large part by BP , to reassure tourists that they can still enjoy seaside vacations , despite the oil spill . 
`` Florida has 825 miles of beaches , 221 of them right here in Northwest Florida , '' says the narrator in one TV spot for Visit Florida . 
`` That 's a lot of beach to choose from . 
There are plenty of places in Florida where you can enjoy crystal clear waters and a great beach vacation . '' 
The VisitFlorida.com website offers real time images and information on the status of beaches . 
In neighboring Alabama , Gulfshores.com provides similar updates to help tourists `` make an informed travel decision . '' 
One TV spot promoting Gulf Shores , Alabama and neighboring Orange Beach features features Lucy Buffett , a local restaurant owner and sister of music legend Jimmy Buffett . 
`` I love my gorgeous Alabama beaches , '' Lucy Buffett says in the ad . 
`` We 're keeping a close eye on the beaches so you can enjoy them too . 
So , get on down here ! '' 
The Alabama campaign also touts the area 's shopping , food , golf and entertainment . 
The official state and regional tourism ads largely avoid direct references to `` oil '' and speak only to their specific destination -- not the situation in neighboring communities . 
However , Spirit Airlines raised some eyebrows with a recent promotion for flights to Ft. . 
Lauderdale , Florida , Atlantic City , New Jersey , Cancun , Mexico and San Juan , Puerto Rico . 
With the banner `` Check Out The Oil On Our Beaches , '' the ads feature a sunbather next to a bottle of sunblock in the BP colors of yellow and green . 
Although the company faces criticism for the ad 's timing and humor , Spirit Airlines officials offer no apology , just an explanation : `` It is unfortunate that some have misunderstood our intention with today 's beach promotion . 
We are merely addressing the false perception that we have oil on our beaches , and we are encouraging customers to support Florida and our other beach destinations by continuing to travel to these vacation hot spots . '' 
FOX News covers the action from all the angles . 
Get constant updates from our in-the-field reporters and producers and read stories you 'll only see here . 
