WASHINGTON -- WASHINGTON -LRB- AP -RRB- -- The BP oil spill has hammered the fishing and tourism industries along the Gulf of Mexico . 
But it appears the economic damage to the rest of the nation will be limited . 
Analysts say the spill will reduce economic growth by only about one-half of 1 percentage point this quarter , and even less during the second half of the year . 
Even for an economy as large as the United States ' -- $ 14.6 trillion -- a $ 73 billion cut is barely a nick . 
-- Spending on tourism is moving elsewhere . 
Beachgoers who might have headed for Pensacola , Fla. , for example , are looking toward Atlantic coast sites such as Myrtle Beach , S.C. Gulf hotel rooms going unused by tourists are being booked by cleanup crews . 
-- Damage to Gulf fishermen may last , but , as with tourism , the Gulf 's commercial fishing makes up only a tiny fraction of the U.S. economy . 
And most fish eaten in the United States is imported , says Michael Feroli , an economist at JPMorgan Chase . 
-- The Gulf energy industry , which makes up about 10 percent of the regional economy , is not vital to the nation 's . 
The six-month ban on deepwater drilling that a judge blocked Tuesday would only deduct about 0.03 percent from the U.S. economy . 
-- If deepwater drilling becomes too much of a financial burden and oil companies move their rigs abroad , coastal communities would be hurt in Louisiana and Texas would be hurt . 
But the national impact would be slight because of how small a portion of U.S. oil consumption the Gulf supplies , says Ed Friedman , economist at Moody 's Analytics -- less than 10 percent . 
The local communities will suffer damage to their economies and environments for years , even if the spill is capped later this summer . 
Wells Fargo economist Mark Vitner estimates that up to 250,000 Gulf jobs in fishing , tourism and energy will be lost in the second half of the year . 
The new jobs in cleanup wo n't make up for what 's been lost , and will probably pay less , Vitner and others say . 
Consumers in the region will spend less as a result . 
That will lower the U.S. economy 's growth rate in the July-to-September quarter by a slight 0.2 percentage point , Vitner said . 
He envisions little or no effect on growth in the fourth quarter of the year , assuming the leak is plugged by then . 
Some cleanup jobs are paying $ 15 to $ 18 an hour . 
By contrast , the thousands of rig workers idled by the deepwater drilling moratorium earn up to $ 1,800 a week -- roughly $ 45 an hour , trade groups estimate . 
That amounts to a collective loss of tens of millions of dollars in pay . 
Fishermen earn less -- on average about $ 13 an hour , the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics says . 
But the destruction of fishing industry jobs is still taking a heavy toll . 
Take Rocky Ditcharo , a dock owner in Plaquemines Parish , La. , whose family has been in the shrimping business for four generations . 
Shrimpers sidelined by the spill are n't using his dock . 
Neither are boats involved in containing the spill by laying booms . 
Ditcharo , 44 , survived Katrina and other hurricanes . 
But he fears this may be the end of his business . 
`` I 'm in dire straits , '' he says . 
BP has committed to a $ 20 billion fund for oil-spill victims . 
In addition , it will pay $ 100 million into another fund to help oil workers sidelined by the moratorium on deepwater drilling . 
And President Barack Obama has pledged additional resources to the coastal states , though he has n't provided details . 
Yet despite the promises by BP and the government to restore the region , economists say they fear some affected people and businesses will still be awaiting help years from now . 
Vitner points to Hurricane Katrina and New Orleans , where many buildings and homes await restoration . 
Businesses are still shuttered . 
Vitner and others fear a similar scenario this time : A local economy remains devastated even as the national economy moves ahead . 
`` This particular situation is much more than can be measured by GDP , '' says Lynn Reaser , president of the National Association for Business Economics . 
`` It is a real tragedy for people 's livelihoods and culture in the region . '' 
