cents Experts say it is catching 10,000 barrels every day cents Two relief wells drilled to block oil with heavy mud Sunday 6 June 2010 22.31 BST Flames are captured by the Discoverer Enterprise , top center , as gas and oil are brought up from the oil spill site 5,000 ft beneath the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Tannen Maury\/EPA Engineers trying to contain the oil spill from the stricken BP Deepwater Horizon well in the Gulf of Mexico have expressed optimism over the `` containment cap '' placed over the broken well , although it remains uncertain just how effective the method will be in capturing all of the oil . 
Latest estimates released today suggest that about 10,000 barrels of oil a day are being caught in the device that was placed over the leaking pipe using remotely operated equipment . 
The oil is being collected in the funnel-like cap and then ushered up to the surface , where it is collected in a tanker called the Discoverer Enterprise sitting above the wellhead . 
In a familiar pattern in the crisis , now in its 48th day , a notably more upbeat impression of the containment operation was given by BP than by the US government . 
BP 's chief executive Tony Hayward told the BBC that , once the production flow was up to full speed , he would expect the proportion captured `` to be the majority , probably the vast majority of the oil '' . 
But Thad Allen , the US coastguard admiral who is co-ordinating the response of government agencies in the Gulf , gave a much more cautious assessment . 
He told Face the Nation on CBS : `` I 'm hoping we catch as much oil as we can , but I 'm withholding any comment until production is at a full rate . '' 
Behind Allen 's caution lies fears that the procedure could come a cropper as it did when a containment cap was first attempted over the leaking well : this was the result of icy hydrates forming from the mixing of oil and water , a process that clogs up the cap . 
To prevent that happening again , methanol is being pumped into the cap in an attempt to stop the formation of the slush , while the pressure of the oil is slowly being increased through the use of vents on the side of the cap . 
The final success of the process will not be known until all the vents are closed . 
The current rate of extraction of 10,000 barrels a day compares with the US government 's worst-case scenario which estimates that up to 25,000 barrels a day of oil could be spewing from the well . 
Even if the cap proves to be largely successful in siphoning off the outpouring oil , Allen stressed that the damage of the oil that has already escaped would be long term . 
He said the spill was not monolithic , but was in fact hundreds of thousands of smaller spills spreading across a 200-mile radius . 
`` We are in the middle of a long-term campaign , '' he said . 
`` We are fighting on three fronts : the sub-sea , the surface area above the well where the oil is coming up , and when it gets to shore we are fighting the battle there . '' 
Two relief wells are being drilled down into the well to `` bottom kill '' it that is , to intercept the oil beneath the ocean bed and stop it rising up by blocking it with heavy mud . 
The first relief well has now reached 7,000 ft beneath the sea bed and the other 3,000 ft beneath it , but neither is expected to intercept the well board until August at the earliest . 
The multiple efforts under way to drill the relief wells , spread dispersants below and on the sea surface and operate the containment cap is reflected in a hive of activity around the Deepwater Horizon site . 
According to Allen , up to 20 vessels are deployed at any one time in a one-mile radius of the wrecked well . 
As oil continues to come ashore on beaches in Alabama and the Panhandle of Florida , clean-up operations are being stepped up . 
More than 400 fishing vessels are laying container booms and skimming oil from the surface off Alabama . 
Unemployed people are being used in Alabama , Mississippi and Florida in the clean-up operation in a new scheme launched on Saturday . 
Some 400 jobless individuals were put to work over the weekend . 
The aim is to train up to 4,500 workers across the three states . 
In his BBC interview , Hayward admitted that safety standards in deep-sea drilling were not up to scratch . 
The BP chief executive said : `` It 's clearly unacceptable that it 's occurred , so what has to happen on the part of the industry and certainly BP is to move safety standards to a completely different level . '' 
A version appeared on p20 of the Main section section of the Guardian on Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
