The BP oil spill demands we move beyond petroleum The disaster in the Gulf of Mexico highlights the need for green energy Under the reign of its former chief executive , Lord Browne , the initials BP stood for Beyond Petroleum . 
But far from shifting into a brave new world of clean renewable energy , the company has continued to pursue oil and gas in ever more difficult and dangerous locations . 
Enlightened investors have long argued that this is a high-risk strategy and so it has proved . 
The oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico has wiped more than # 40bn off the company 's value and it is under attack from President Obama for its plans to pay a dividend . 
Humourists in the City say the initials should now stand for Battered Pensions . 
This spill should not have been completely unexpected ; it was all too conceivable . 
So was the explosion at the company 's Texas City refinery in March 2005 and the Prudhoe Bay leak in Alaska the following year . 
As Richard Ward , chief executive of Lloyd 's of London , pointed out , we now have to ask ourselves whether the environmental and economic costs of our continued reliance on oil are proving too great . 
Some of our politicians have argued that green technology offers a way of reinventing the UK economy so that it is no longer so dependent on financial services or , for that matter , mega-corporations such as BP . 
Businesses , including BP , have the financial firepower to lead the green energy agenda and at the same time secure their own long-term economic gain . 
So far , the signs are not good . 
The current chief executive , Tony Hayward , shut down the group 's alternative energy HQ last year and imposed swingeing budget cuts . 
He has also taken the company into controversial tar sands projects , despite a protest vote from shareholders . 
Environmentalism is too often made a sideshow , viewed by executives as optional or sacrificed on the altar of supposed shareholder value . 
We can no longer ignore the need to get beyond petroleum . 
The lesson here is that it is a social and financial imperative . 
Time for a ban . 
