BENGHAZI | Fri Jun 10 , 2011 6:26 pm EDT BENGHAZI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Heavy fighting between pro-Gaddafi troops and rebels broke out in a Libyan city just 160 kilometres east of Tripoli , potentially opening the coastal road to the capital , just as cracks appeared among NATO allies . 
Gaddafi forces also shelled for the first time the world heritage-listed city of Gadamis , some 600 kilometres southwest of the capital on the Tunisia and Algerian border , opening a new front in the five-month long civil war . 
World powers gave mixed signals on how the deadlocked civil war might play out , with Russia trying to mediate reconciliation . 
Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan said on Friday he had offered a `` guarantee '' to Gaddafi if he left Libya , but received no reply . 
With diplomacy stalling , rebels said fighting was erupting on new fronts . 
Ahmed Bani , a military spokesman in Benghazi , told Reuters clashes had broken out in Zlitan on Thursday and resumed on Friday with Gaddafi forces killing 22 rebels . 
Zlitan is one of three towns that are under government control between the rebel-held Misrata and the capital and were it to fall could act as a stepping stone to allow the anti-Gaddafi uprising to spread from Misrata , the biggest rebel outpost in western Libya , to Gaddafi 's stronghold in Tripoli . 
`` Large numbers of troops are surrounding Zlitan from all directions and are threatening its residents with having their women raped by mercenaries if they do not surrender , '' Bani said , adding the rebels controlled parts of the city . 
Rebels also said the oasis town of Gadamis with a population of about 7,000 people , mainly Berber , was under attack after an anti-government protest in the old Roman city on Wednesday . 
`` Gadamis is being shelled by Gaddafi forces , according to witnesses in the town , '' spokesman Juma Ibrahim said from the rebel-held town of Zintan in the Western Mountains region . 
`` This is a retaliation to anti-regime protests , '' he said . 
The old town was de-populated by Gaddafi in the 1990s and its inhabitants moved into modern buildings . 
It was not clear if the attack targeted the old town , a labyrinth of narrow , underground passages and houses known as the `` Pearl of the Desert . '' 
The accounts in Zlitan and Gadamis could not be independently verified and the Gaddafi government did not immediately comment . 
In the besieged port city of Misrata , a doctor at the Hekma hospital said 31 people were killed and 110 wounded in government shelling on Friday . 
The fighting comes after the United States accused some NATO allies on Friday of failing to pull their weight in the campaign against Muammar Gaddafi 's forces , as the Libyan leader kept up shelling of the rebel-held town of Misrata . 
`` The mightiest military alliance in history is only 11 weeks into an operation against a poorly-armed regime in a sparsely-populated country -- yet many allies are beginning to run short of munitions , requiring the U.S. , once more , to make up the difference , '' Defense Secretary Robert Gates said in a valedictory speech at NATO headquarters in Brussels . 
Gates 's exasperation has been echoed by rebels , who control the east of the country and some other areas but do not appear to pose an imminent threat to Gaddafi 's rule . 
Turkey , which is a member of NATO , said Gaddafi had no way out , but to leave Libya and offered the him an exit . 
`` We ourselves have offered him this guarantee , via the representatives we 've sent . 
We told him we would help him to be sent wherever he wanted to be sent . 
We would discuss the issue with our allies , according to the response we receive . 
Unfortunately we still have n't got a response from Gaddafi . '' 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton , appearing at the Abu Dhabi meeting of the Libya contact group on Thursday , said talks were under way with people close to Gaddafi who had raised the `` potential '' for a transition of power but added : `` There is not any clear way forward yet . '' 
Under pressure to come up with plans for a transitional government while still in disarray , the rebels have said the onus is on foreign powers to hasten assistance . 
`` Our people are dying , '' rebel Oil and Finance Minister Ali Tarhouni said . 
`` So my message to our friends is that I hope they walk the walk . '' 
Gaddafi describes the rebels as al Qaeda terrorists and says foreign intervention is a front for a grab at the country 's oil . 
Mikhail Margelov , Russia 's Africa envoy , who traveled to Benghazi on Friday , said he would go to Tripoli as soon as NATO provided a corridor through its Libyan no-fly zone . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
They are killing civilians maybe more than Gaddafi . 
They have more arsenal than Gaddafi and have all air power , Gaddafi has none . 
They are now aided with Money with a more ONE LOPSIDEDNESS cause than before . 
You better believe that NO ONE would be leaving Gaddafi to stand alone if NATO was not there for the rebels . 
People only leave Gaddafi only because there is only one outcome from this awesome one sided unjustified intervention by NATO and the us . 
NATO has tied Gaddafi 's hands behind his back , plucked out his eyes and are aiding the rebels against the crippled Gaddafi . 
NATO should be exposed for what they are , immoral cowards . 
`` At the United Nations , the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court -LRB- ICC -RRB- said its investigators had found evidence linking Gaddafi to a policy of raping opponents . '' 
As is commented below , in an apparent defense of Gaddafi , as to the NATO alliance , `` They are killing civilians \* maybe more \* than Gaddafi . '' 
all the way round . 
Love living in this world ? 
= -RRB- Daniwitz ... where do you have any proof NATO has killed even a fraction of the people Gaddafi has . 
This is an insane mass murderer . 
It is scary to see your support for a regime that has absolutely no regard for life . 
In fact , most of the images from Gaddafi have turned out to be false as is the case with most everything he says . 
Hopefully , the ICC will eventually have him so he can receive his due justice ! 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
