GENEVA | Fri Jun 10 , 2011 5:07 pm BST GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Rape is still being used as a brutal weapon of war in conflicts worldwide including Libya to terrorise populations and often force civilians to flee , a United Nations expert charged Friday . 
Most perpetrators go unpunished as sexual violence thrives in a climate of impunity where victims are denied justice or reparations , said Margot Wallstrom , special representative of the U.N. Secretary-General on sexual violence in conflict . 
`` Sexual violence has become a tactic of choice for armed groups , being cheaper , more destructive and easier to get away with than other methods of warfare , '' she told a news briefing . 
Wallstrom , making her first speech to the U.N. Human Rights Council since taking up the post in March 2010 , called for all countries caught up in conflict to prevent such war crimes and prosecute soldiers or commanders under suspicion . 
`` Violence against women is no more permissible in times of war than it is in times of peace . 
And yet , in contemporary conflicts , women and girls are the primary targets of sexual violence , including as a tactic of war , '' she told the forum . 
Her office is drawing up a blacklist to ` name and shame ' states who may be subject to Security Council sanctions , under a resolution adopted last December , according to Wallstrom . 
It will probably start with Democratic Republic of the Congo , where at least 200,000 women and girls have been abused , although some estimates are 20 times that figure , she said . 
In Liberia , which is recovering from 14 years of intermittent civil war in which rape was rampant , it is still the most reported crime , she said . 
International Criminal Court investigators have evidence linking Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi to a policy of raping opponents and may bring separate charges on the issue , ICC chief prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo said Wednesday . 
Cherif Bassiouni , head of a U.N. rights inquiry which went to areas controlled by both rebels and Gaddafi , appeared to cast doubt on the ICC report Thursday , although his team 's report accused government forces of murder , torture and abduction . 
Bassiouni said each side had accused the other of deploying fighters armed with impotency drugs to carry out rapes , creating what he called a `` massive hysteria '' in Libya . 
His team uncovered only four alleged cases -- Eman Al-Obaidi who claimed she was gang-raped by pro-government militiamen and three women in Misrata who said they had been sexually abused . 
`` Can we draw a conclusion that there is a systematic policy of rape ? 
In my opinion we ca n't , '' Bassiouni said . 
`` For the time being , the numbers are very limited . '' 
But Wallstrom , a former Swedish minister , said information collected by her office backed Moreno-Ocampo 's view . 
`` Everything we see and hear reported points to that , '' she told reporters . 
`` What we have is consistent reports from people , from organizations , from U.N. entities and others on the ground , '' she added . 
`` It is difficult to give you a figure , but this is part of the arsenal , the weaponry that Gaddafi 's troops use . '' 
Sharia-inspired laws in Libya and Sudan that can be used to punish a rape victim should be scrapped , Wallstrom said . 
`` I understand in their -LRB- Libyan -RRB- legislation for example , you could be flogged . 
Very often women who report rape can themselves be accused of adultery or risk this kind of punishment , '' she said , adding that Sudan allows stoning . 
Political leaders must ensure that laws are modern and women do not run a risk in just reporting a rape , she said . 
`` That is what they all have to look at so it is not stone-age legislation as well that will prevent women from actually coming forward . 
They will never get the reports on rape if this is the risk that women run . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
