Oil spill will hurt U.S. economy , but not big enough to cause recession The ecological damage in the Gulf of Mexico is a national tragedy and has been economically devastating for some coastal communities . 
But will all the spilled oil lead to significant economic losses on a national level ? 
We do n't think so . 
After extensive research into the economic consequences of the spill , and crunching industry data as well as figures from several state and federal agencies , we estimate the disaster will lower U.S. economic growth in 2010 by roughly 0.1 percent -- and will dampen growth in the four states most affected -LRB- Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama and Florida -RRB- by 1.6 percent of their combined gross domestic product . 
In dollar terms , we see the oil spill leading to a net loss of just under $ 20 billion for the U.S. economy in 2010 . 
This is a big hit , to be sure , but it 's not a severe enough external shock to tip the United States into a double-dip recession . 
Even factoring out the losses to BP , which are large but wo n't weigh directly on U.S. gross domestic product , the oil industry seems likely to suffer the most from the spill . 
Interestingly , the two factors most commonly cited -- the oil lost into the ocean and President Obama 's now-sidelined moratorium on new deepwater drilling projects -- do n't account for the bulk of the damage . 
Our analysis shows increased expenses from regulation of deepwater drilling and insurance costing the industry roughly $ 6.5 billion ; it would mean $ 2.3 billion in collateral losses for oil and gas support industries . 
By contrast , the costs of the moratorium should be less than $ 200 million in 2010 , even if it continues for six months as originally planned . 
And even using the most extreme estimates on the size of the spill , the cost of the crude lost in the ocean will be well under $ 1 billion , assuming oil prices stay near current levels . 
Nor do we see the spill creating a supply shock that significantly affects the price of oil . 
The U.S. oil market is well supplied , with inventories above their five-year averages , and consumption remains subdued . 
Shipping lanes do not seem to have been affected much , and the United States could always tap its Strategic Petroleum Reserve in a pinch . 
The Gulf of Mexico produces only 1.7 percent of the world 's petroleum , and most of this production is continuing as scheduled . 
After the energy industry , we estimate the biggest losses will be suffered by tourism : $ 8.4 billion regionwide , with Louisiana and Florida taking the biggest losses . 
Particularly in Florida , many of these losses wo n't necessarily result from actual pollution but , rather , from fearful tourists canceling trips . 
The insurance industry has dodged a bullet . 
BP is self-insured and thus will cover most cleanup costs . 
Many of the coastal wetlands degraded by the spill were not insured for environmental damage . 
Still , using data from Moody 's , we estimate that the insurance industry will lose $ 2.5 billion , given payouts to affected companies and private property owners . 
Although fishing has received a great deal of media coverage , and losses will be painful for some local economies , we project the industry 's losses at $ 1.2 billion , well below those of oil and tourism . 
The long-term impact of the spill could be more profound for the environment , specific industries and the overall economy . 
It 's possible the spill could hasten a shift toward energy companies forgoing insurance -- and planning to eat the costs in the event of spills . 
This could spell losses for the insurance industry and could create risks that a company wo n't be able to cover its losses and will file for bankruptcy in the wake of a future spill . 
Another possibility is that the spill will change the calculus of countries considering offshore oil drilling projects , thereby suppressing global output in the long run . 
The chances of this are low , however , given the economic imperatives facing many of these countries ' governments , particularly in emerging markets . 
Finally , the Obama administration seems inclined to use the spill to rally support for a `` clean energy '' bill , which has been stalled in the Senate . 
Yet even if this effort succeeds , the legislation most likely to be pushed through does n't have much in the way of teeth , meaning it wo n't radically alter U.S. oil consumption and thus wo n't represent a direct swipe at U.S. oil and gas interests . 
The situation in the gulf is urgent . 
BP and policymakers should do everything in their power to speed the recovery effort . 
But economic prognosticators can take heart . 
This sunken oil rig is n't likely to sink the U.S. economy . 
Lee Hudson Teslik is senior editor and commodities analyst at Roubini Global Economics . 
Christian Menegatti is head of global research at Roubini Global Economics . 
They are co-authors of a new paper , `` Deepwater Does n't Mean a Double Dip . '' 
