-- The House of Representatives passed the first major U.S. bill related to the Gulf of Mexico oil rig explosion , voting to allow families of workers who were killed or injured to be compensated far more generously than current law allows . 
They passed the bill on a voice vote ; it now goes to the Senate . 
-- The world 's largest oil-skimming vessel is in the gulf . 
Officials hope the ship can scoop up to 21 million gallons of oil-fouled water a day . 
Dubbed the `` A Whale , '' the Taiwanese-flagged former tanker spans the length of 31\/2 football fields and is 10 stories high . 
It was extensively retrofitted to prepare it for the gulf . 
-- The administrator of the $ 20 billion escrow fund established to pay BP claims says he is changing the system so businesses can get emergency , lump-sum payments . 
Kenneth Feinberg said the payments will be expedited and wo n't have a predetermined limit . 
-- Based on the highest estimates by the government , the oil spill became the largest ever in the Gulf of Mexico , hitting the 140.6 million-gallon mark and eclipsing the 140 million-gallon Ixtoc I spill off Mexico 's coast from 1979 to 1980 . 
On the lower end of the government 's estimates , at least 71.7 million gallons are in the gulf . 
-- Although skimming operations and the laying of booms were halted across the gulf because of Hurricane Alex , vessels that collect and burn oil and gas at the explosion site were still operating . 
Efforts to drill relief wells that experts hope will stop the leak also continued . 
In Florida , lumps of tar the size of dinner plates filled a large swath of beach east of Pensacola after rough waves tossed the mess onto shore . 
Streaks of rust-red oil could be seen in the waves off Pensacola Beach as cleanup crews worked in the rough weather to prepare the beach for the holiday weekend . 
In Grand Isle , La. , heavy bands of rain pounded down , keeping cleanup crews off the water and tossing carefully laid booms around . 
But oil had stayed out of the passes . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
