WEEMS , VA. -- The nearest glob of leaked oil is more than 800 miles away from this spot , where low buildings and the tang of dead shellfish hug a tributary of the Chesapeake Bay . 
But for all the crying that BP 's spill in the Gulf of Mexico has caused at W.E. Kellum seafood , it may as well be seeping under the door . 
`` It 's no more work . 
It 's all over , '' said Margaret Yerby , 77 , who has shucked oysters at the plant since Harry S. Truman was president . 
It feels , she said , `` like the world 's going to stop still . '' 
Since the 1970s , when the Chesapeake 's famous oyster harvest was starting to decline , Kellum has been supplementing the local crop with oysters trucked in from the gulf . 
Others did the same : Today , the bay 's oyster-packing industry relies heavily on imported bivalves . 
Now , a second great body of water has gone south on them . 
Kellum seafood is a case study : The oil spill has cut off most of its oyster supply , creating a little pocket of Gulf Coast desperation on the Rappahannock River . 
Without enough work , the plant 's 32 shuckers have pinned their hopes on a long-distance request that BP replace their lost income . 
`` I guess it had to come to an end sometime , '' said Alfred Tiggle , 67 , who was hired full time in 1974 . 
`` I never thought oil could stop it , '' said Yerby , who began in 1952 . 
The Kellum plant in Weems , near the tip of Virginia 's Northern Neck , looks like a moving diorama of Chesapeake history . 
The shucking house has a long table , with a stall allotted to each shucker . 
Their work has not changed much in decades : Stand each oyster on its hinge . 
Whack it with a metal bar called an `` iron '' to make an opening for the knife . 
Stick the knife in and slice the meat free of its connective tissues . 
Dump the meat into one of two buckets , large and small . 
Kellum 's workers -- many of whom are older African Americans and Mexican men brought in on temporary visas -- did it hundreds of times an hour , wearing depressions into the table 's concrete top . 
Tiggle , a supervisor who also shucked oysters , said he liked the work : `` Nobody standing over you '' telling you what to do . 
There were side benefits : The workers could keep any of the dark , misshapen pearls they found , usually about one per month . 
And they could get a free pint of oysters ... if they wanted to eat any . 
`` After working around 'em every day , you do n't want to , '' Tiggle said . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
