BEIRUT | Tue Nov 15 , 2011 2:51 pm EST BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Long-restrained tensions in Lebanon over the uprising in its powerful neighbor Syria have burst into the open after an Arab League vote to suspend Damascus -- even bringing politicians to blows on live television . 
Divided over their relationship to Syria , politicians previously trod carefully in statements for or against the Syrian government whose army has been struggling to crush eight months of protests against President Bashar al-Assad . 
But Saturday 's vote at the Arab League , in which Lebanon was one of only two countries to oppose Syria 's suspension , exposed the depths of divisions in a country where many are linked to Syria by religious , political and family ties , but others have bitter memories of three decades of Syrian military presence in Lebanon . 
The Lebanese talk show `` With Objectivity '' was abruptly taken off air on Monday evening when local politicians Mustafa Alloush and Fayez Shukr , seated on-set in business suits , started throwing glasses at one another and raising their chairs -- sending insults and papers flying . 
Shukr , from Lebanon 's pro-Syrian Baath Party , fumed as Alloush said Assad was `` a liar . '' 
Shukr and Alloush , from Lebanon 's anti-Syria opposition parties , then traded expletives . 
Prime Minister Najib Mikati 's government , which is backed by Hezbollah and other pro-Syrian parties , angered the opposition and surprised even some cabinet members by choosing to vote against Syria 's suspension , rather than abstaining as it has done at United Nations votes on Syria . 
`` We are seeing an escalation of political tensions . 
It is a sign Lebanon is split , '' said Minister of Public Works Ghazi Aridi . 
`` We should have taken a neutral stance ... What we saw on television last night is a direct result of these rising tensions . 
It 's not only unfortunate and embarrassing , it 's worrying , '' he told Reuters . 
Lebanon has maintained relative calm despite the bloodshed across its borders . 
Many Lebanese , haunted by the specter of their 1975-1990 civil war that divided the country along sectarian lines , have been tight-lipped about Syria 's conflict , which many also worry could spiral into sectarian war . 
Some politicians have posted increasingly heated comments on Twitter , which has grown in appeal as a platform for Lebanese political leaders from President Michel Suleiman to former prime minister and opposition leader Saad al-Hariri . 
On Sunday , after Lebanon 's vote against Syria 's suspension in the Arab League , Hariri posted a string of critiques on the social network . 
`` They will be judged by the Lebanese and the Arabs and by history for their immoral and subservient abandonment of all national and human dignity , '' he wrote , adding that the vote put Lebanon on `` The side of murder , dictatorship and anti-Arab identity . '' 
Mikati , who has also become a regular Twitter user , even hosting Twitter debates , defended the vote against Syria 's suspension . 
`` Leadership is not just about followership or giving people what they want to hear , '' he told Twitter followers , arguing the decision to vote was done in the national interest . 
The prime minister also said he was informed of the on-air political scuffle on Monday : `` Unfortunately , it happens on TV in many democracies ... but , not my style . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
