WASHINGTON | Tue Nov 15 , 2011 5:53 pm EST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian President Bashar al-Assad 's refusal to halt his government 's violence against its own people has made his departure from power inevitable , a senior Saudi prince said on Tuesday . 
Prince Turki al-Faisal , the former chief of Saudi intelligence services , said Assad had made his position clear by failing to live up to commitments made under an Arab League initiative to stop the bloodshed and start political dialogue . 
`` Inevitably , I think , the lack of response of Mr. Assad to all the efforts made to end the fighting in Syria means that he 's taken the view of not accepting these matters , '' he told a Washington , D.C. , audience . 
`` In that context , there will be growing popular opposition to him , and killing every day . 
I think it 's inevitable that he will have to step down in one form or another . '' 
The nephew of Saudi Arabia 's king is a former ambassador to Washington and London and remains an influential public voice of Saudi Arabia 's royal family although he has held no official government role since retiring in 2006 . 
The prince said the Arab League had given Assad a `` last chance '' to comply with its proposal to resolve the situation and would now be expected to take further steps -- citing Libya as a precedent . 
He said that Saudi Arabia and its partners in the Gulf first brought Libya to the Arab League in March `` and pushed the Arab League to take a decision to move the issue to the United Nations Security Council and bring about the resolution that allowed for intervention in Libya . '' 
`` Whether the Arab League will go that route -LRB- on Syria -RRB- , I really ca n't say , but it is an option and it has been practiced by the Arab League , '' he said . 
The Arab League on Saturday voted to suspend Syria , but stopped short of calling for Assad 's departure or proposing any sort of Libya-style foreign intervention to resolve the crisis . 
Arab foreign ministers are due to meet in Morocco on Wednesday to consider the next steps on Syria , where the United Nations estimates that some 3,500 civilians have been killed since anti-government protests began in March . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
all the articles are unverified and assumptions of what people are thinking . 
you toppled gaddaffi over the internet . 
but you cant hit to birds with one rock . 
maybe your propaganda campaign would have worked if you hit syria first . 
I agree with U . . 
if these Clowns stop their predictions about others and maybe work on fixing their own twisted society like let the women walk next to their men instead of ten steps behind , thats one example . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
