LONDON | Wed Apr 29 , 2009 11:17 am BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Leaflets giving advice about the new H1N1 swine flu virus are to be sent to every home in the country , the Department of Health said on Wednesday . 
The leaflets will contain information about the flu outbreak and advice on preventing its spread . 
In Scotland , medical officials are waiting for the results of flu tests on 23 people . 
The health department said it was `` urgently '' investigating how to increase its stockpile of face masks for healthcare workers who would come into contact with infected patients if the outbreak became widespread . 
But it said it was not advising the general public to wear masks . 
`` Although we are aware that face masks are being given out to the public in Mexico , the available scientific evidence does not support the general wearing of face masks by those who are not ill whilst going about their normal activities , '' a health department spokesman said . 
Two people in Britain have tested positive for the infection , a honeymooning Scottish couple who recently returned from Mexico , the epicentre of what has become a global flu alert . 
Scottish Health Secretary Nicola Sturgeon said on Tuesday that nine of the 23 people awaiting the results of tests had been in contact with the couple , who are said to be recovering well . 
The remaining 14 people waiting for results have travel links to Mexico and the United States . 
Prime Minister Gordon Brown has said Britain is among the best prepared countries in the world to deal with the outbreak . 
In Mexico , the only country to have suffered swine flu deaths , the government puts the toll at more than 150 and says 1,300 people are in hospital , some of them seriously ill . 
The World Health Organisation says 26 cases of swine flu had been confirmed in Mexico and that seven of those had died . 
The WHO said the current outbreak could lead to only a mild pandemic but warned that the 1918 flu pandemic , which killed tens of millions , started that way . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tim Castle ; Editing by Steve Addison -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
