Credit : Reuters\/Cynthia Goldsmith\/Centers for Disease Control\/Handout LOS ANGELES | Wed Apr 29 , 2009 9:12 pm EDT LOS ANGELES -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - About 30 Marines on a Southern California military base , the nation 's largest , have been quarantined after one became the first U.S. serviceman known to have contracted the swine flu virus , the Marine Corps said on Wednesday . 
The case at the Twentynine Palms Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center , the principal U.S. training facility for Marines and sailors deployed to Afghanistan and Iraq , was confirmed by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , the base said in a statement . 
Occupying about 935 square miles -LRB- 2,420 square km -RRB- in the California desert , not much smaller than the state of Rhode Island , Twentynine Palms is the largest military base in the United States with some 8,000 active-duty personnel . 
The ill Marine , the first member of the U.S. armed forces reported by the military to have contracted the H1N1 virus , is being treated as an outpatient at the base and will remain isolated at his barracks . 
`` He is doing well , and his condition continues to improve , '' the base statement said . 
About 30 other Marines who had been `` active socially '' with him are being quarantined as well , the statement said . 
They will be permitted to return to full duty after five days if they display no flu-like symptoms , it added . 
`` The Marine Corps , along with all of the armed forces , is monitoring the health of our force to ensure we 're taking the necessary precautions to educate and safeguard military and civilian personnel , as well as family members , '' the statement said . 
At a Pentagon briefing earlier in the day , Marine Corps Commandant General James Conway said the ill Marine at Twentynine Palms had not been to Mexico , where as many as 159 deaths have been attributed to the virus . 
Two other major Marine bases in Southern California , Camp Pendleton and the Marine Corps Air Station Miramar , reported no suspected or confirmed cases of swine flu on Wednesday . 
In an unrelated case reported by the U.S. military , two 16-year-old boys described as military family members were treated at an Air Force base clinic in Texas last month for what turned out to be swine flu . 
The American Forces Press Service said those two cases were initially identified as part of the U.S. military 's worldwide influenza screening program . 
-LRB- Editing by Dan Whitcomb and Peter Cooney -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
