\* 23-month-old child dies in Texas of swine flu \* Death is first outside Mexico and first in U.S. \* Official says child was in Houston for treatment By Maggie Fox , Health and Science Editor WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A 23-month-old child has died in Texas from the new H1N1 swine flu , becoming the first death in the United States from the virus , a U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention official said on Wednesday . 
A Houston health official said the child was a Mexican who traveled to the city for medical treatment . 
It is the first death from swine flu reported outside Mexico , the country hardest hit by this influenza outbreak . 
U.S. officials have confirmed 65 cases of swine flu , most of them mild but with five hospitalizations in California and Texas . 
`` Unfortunately , this morning I do have to confirm that we have the first death of a child from H1N1 flu virus . 
And this is in Texas , a 23-month-old child , '' Dr. Richard Besser , acting head of the CDC , told the CBS `` Early Show . '' 
`` The child came to Houston for medical treatment . 
The family had traveled to South Texas . 
The child became ill and they transported the child to Houston for medical care , '' Houston health department spokeswoman Kathy Barton told CNN by telephone . 
She said she did not know which part of Mexico the child came from . 
President Barack Obama , speaking at the White House before a one-day visit to Missouri , said the confirmed death underscored the urgency of taking steps against the disease . 
`` This is obviously a serious situation . 
Serious enough to take the utmost precautions , '' Obama said , urging state and local authorities to increase their vigilance . 
`` Every American should know that the federal government is prepared to do whatever is necessary to control the impact of this virus , '' he said . 
Besser of the CDC had predicted that as they searched for cases , CDC experts would find severe infections and deaths in the United States , even though most of the patients had mild illness . 
`` As we look , we 're going to find more cases . 
We 're going to find more severe cases and I expect that we 'll continue to see additional deaths , '' Besser told NBC 's `` Today '' show . 
He said additional details would be released by Texas authorities . 
Mexico previously had reported the only deaths -- 159 , based on symptoms and initial tests , with seven deaths so far confirmed by additional laboratory analysis at the World Health Organization . 
Influenza regularly kills people around the world , with an estimated 250,000 to 500,000 deaths from the seasonal virus every year . 
Every year at least a few perfectly healthy children die from seasonal influenza in the United States . 
WHO and CDC officials have been trying to assess just how serious the new H1N1 swine influenza strain is . 
It has been found globally , with cases across North America , Europe and New Zealand . 
`` We have about 100 cases outside Mexico , and now you have one death . 
That is very significant , '' said Lo Wing Lok , an infectious disease expert in Hong Kong . 
The CDC recommends frequent hand-washing to avoid infection with the new flu virus . 
It also recommends that people who are sick stay home , cover sneezes and coughs , and avoid unnecessary travel to Mexico until more is known . 
