By Niu Shuping and Ken Wills Nevermind that the H1N1 `` swine '' flu , which has killed more than 150 people in Mexico , is not directly caused by pigs and has so far not led to any outbreaks among pigs . 
Nevermind that the World Health Organization has ruled out any risk of infection to humans from eating pork . 
Nevermind that the influenza-A virus contains DNA from avian and human as well as swine H1N1 viruses , but unfortunately -LRB- for the pork industry -RRB- has been tagged as `` swine flu '' by global health authorities and therefore by the media . 
The net result is that , amid the confusion and potential risks of appearing unprepared , at least six countries have decided to panic over pigs , imposing import bans on live pigs and pork products from Mexico and the United States . 
Indeed , the country with the largest pig population in the world -- China -- is going full-bore on a perceived threat to the domestic pig industry . 
China 's quaratine authority took immediate action by banning pork imports from Mexico as well as 3 states in the United States , vowing to destroy any pigs that arrived at its borders . 
On Tuesday , in a meeting hosted by Premier Wen Jiabao , China 's cabinet worked out an 8-point flu prevention strategy , including one to strengthen inspection to detect any outbreaks of swine flu among pigs and to strictly supervise trade of live pigs as well as some pig breeding areas . 
Why all this attention to pigs ? 
Agriculture Minister Sun Zhengcai said the possibility of the virus spreading to pigs can not be ruled out , although there was no mention that the avian portion of the virus 's DNA might also lead to an outbreak among poultry . 
To be fair , screening of people arriving at China 's airports has also been stepped up , though so far no human cases of the flu have been announced in the country . 
What is clear is that when the world 's most populous nation raises concerns about a staple food in the country 's diet , it most certainly will affect prices . 
Early signs are that consumers have begun to avoid pork , much to the dismay of breeders and others in the industry . 
In fact many farmers want to avoid publicity at all costs for fear that any further news coverage even to correct the misimpressions -- will hurt business . 
The Beijing News on Wednesday reported that pork prices in the capital have dropped significantly . 
It cited a pig breeder in a Beijing suburb , Li Wei , as saying he worries that consumers might shift to mutton or beef if the `` swine '' flu scare keeps spreading . 
Two years ago , China 's pork industry was racked by blue ear disease , which decimated pig numbers and caused prices to spike skyward . 
Since the start of the year , prices have been falling in response to subsidies Beijing offered to replenish supplies . 
Now they 're dipping faster , this time in part due to government efforts to protect the sector . 
Hopefully , when we look back , the sudden recent dip in pork prices will turn out to have been the worst of China 's casualties from the global flu scare . 
Photo captions : Top : A labourer feeds piglets at a farm on the outskirts of Suining , Sichuan province April 27 , 2009 . 
Bottom : Piglets suckle milk from their mother at a farm in Ganyu County , Jiangsu province April 27 , 2009 . 
REUTERS\/China Daily I think the Chinese government should act more tactfully in this politcal PR game . 
You ban Mexican pork and flights , they already reprised tit-fot-tat in kind . 
But if we as an integrated world community tender aid and relief to each other to irradicate such borderless virus , would n't we live with more mutual accommodation and less discrimination ? 
Swine flu originates from humans , not pigs . 
Never lay blame on ranch farmers . 
They are already going broke . 
I am in travel industry which is already battered by last year 's financial tsunami until now . 
Admittedly , this flu scare is over-exaggerated by mass media . 
The USA records just one death , whereas its total flu deaths amount to more than 200,000 every year . 
Now is just another rock dropped on us in a trapped pit . 
carrier and quarantine him merely because he presents a Mexican passport is simply `` racial profiling '' and is of course , downright discrimination which should be condemned by our civilized world . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
