LONDON | Wed Apr 29 , 2009 12:20 am BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Foreign Office advised against all but essential travel to flu-hit Mexico on Tuesday as holiday firms started canceling flights and made plans to repatriate British tourists . 
A honeymooning Scottish couple who recently returned from Cancun , one of the country 's biggest beach resorts , have became the first in Britain to test positive for swine flu . 
On its website , the Foreign Office also said routine consular and all visa services at its embassy in Mexico City had been suspended until further notice . 
`` British nationals resident in or visiting Mexico may wish to consider whether they should remain in Mexico at this time , '' it said . 
Travel firms Thomson Holidays and First Choice said they had decided to repatriate their customers from Mexico and to cancel flights bound for Cancun from Gatwick and Manchester on Tuesday . 
Thomas Cook said it was canceling all flights to Mexico until May 5 , but British Airways said it would continue to operate its services . 
Prime Minister Gordon Brown said he would take part in a meeting of the government 's COBRA emergency committee on Tuesday chaired by Health Secretary Alan Johnson . 
`` We have been preparing for this kind of scenario for many years . 
Britain is among the best prepared countries in the world , '' he told a news conference during a visit to Poland . 
`` We , together with the World Health Organisation and our partners in Europe and internationally , will continue to take all the urgent action that is necessary to halt the spread of this virus . '' 
On Tuesday , newspapers named the Scottish couple who tested positive for the illness as newlyweds Iain and Dawn Askham from Polmont , near Falkirk , who had been on honeymoon in Cancun . 
They flew back to Scotland last week and are being treated in hospital in Airdrie , near Glasgow , Scotland 's health minister Nicola Sturgeon told reporters in Edinburgh on Monday . 
They are recovering well and Brown said it was hoped that one of them could return home later on Tuesday . 
Seven other people who came into contact with the two are receiving treatment for mild symptoms of the potentially deadly H1N1 virus . 
So far , 149 people have died , all in Mexico , and the virus has since also spread to the United States , Canada and Spain . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
