Helicopter crashes into crane on London tower , kills two . 
Full Article Egypt orders cull of pig herds , U.N. says a mistake CAIRO | Wed Apr 29 , 2009 11:31 pm IST CAIRO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Egypt , hit hard by bird flu , has ordered the slaughter of every pig herd in the country as a precaution against swine flu , a step the United Nations said was a mistake . 
The H1N1 swine flu virus is spread by people and is not present in Egyptian animals but culling pigs , largely viewed as unclean in Muslim Egypt , could help quell any panic . 
Twenty six people have died in Egypt from the highly pathogenic H5N1 bird flu virus and experts fear any flu pandemic could have a devastating impact in a country where most of the roughly 80 million people live in the densely packed Nile Valley , many in crowded slums in and around Cairo . 
But the United Nations said the mass cull of up to 400,000 pigs was `` a real mistake '' . 
`` There is no reason to do that . 
It 's not a swine influenza , it 's a human influenza , '' said Joseph Domenech , the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organisation 's chief veterinary officer , told Reuters . 
He said the FAO had been trying unsuccessfully to reach Egyptian officials . 
Pigs are mainly raised by Egypt 's Christian minority . 
In a statement earlier on Wednesday , Health Minister Hatem el-Gabali said : `` It is decided to slaughter all swine herds present in Egypt , starting from today . '' 
Cabinet spokesman Magdy Rady said Egypt would compensate farmers for their losses . 
Rady said swine farms in Egypt were in poor condition and constituted a health hazard . 
`` That 's why people are really getting afraid , '' he told Reuters before the decision was taken . 
Swine flu has killed up to 159 people in Mexico and one in the United States , and cases have also been reported in Europe as well as in neighbouring Israel . 
Egypt has not reported any cases , but has stepped up monitoring at airports . 
Egypt has been harder hit by the H5N1 bird flu virus than any other country outside Asia . 
Experts have long feared the bird flu virus could mutate into a form that spreads easily among people , sparking a pandemic that could kill millions . 
Egypt has suffered a surge in human cases of bird flu this month even as the flu season nears an end . 
Experts say the culling of pigs is unlikely to have an impact on the spread of swine flu if it reaches the country via air travellers . 
`` I would n't say it is beneficial for swine flu . 
It would be beneficial for the general hygiene ... Generally speaking , pigs can transmit many other diseases , '' Hussein Gezairy , regional director for the World Health Organization , told journalists . 
Mona Aly Mehrez , director of the state-run Animal Welfare Research Institute , said Egypt had long wanted to move pigs away from urban centres as a precaution due to the bird flu threat . 
But Rady said relocation , which would could six months , was not viable and Egypt wanted to remove even a theoretical risk . 
Experts say that it is technically possible but extremely unlikely that swine flu -- a mix of swine , human and avian flu -- could find a way to combine with H5N1 in Egypt to create yet another flu strain . 
-LRB- $ 1 = 5.6406 Egyptian pounds -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
