\* CDC website traffic up sharply this week \* Random Google search of `` swine flu '' yields 5.4 mln hits By Sue Zeidler and Steve Gorman LOS ANGELES , April 28 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Swine flu chatter spread swiftly through blogs and social network sites like Twitter and Facebook on Tuesday while U.S. cable news networks ' saturation coverage of the outbreak gave way to a major political story . 
`` As the number of swine flu cases continues to climb , so does public interest in the -LRB- flu -RRB- outbreak . 
Americans are looking for more information on the outbreak and specifically for symptoms to look out for , '' said Heather Hopkins , analyst for Hitwise , which tracks Internet usage . 
Online searches for the phrase `` swine flu '' during the past week have sent millions of Internet users to Wikipedia , Google and websites of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta , according to online tracking experts . 
For example , a random Google search on the words `` swine flu '' late on Tuesday yielded about 5.4 million hits . 
Online traffic to www.cdc.gov jumped 442 percent in the week ending April 26 , and `` we are likely to continue to see an increase in Internet visits to the CDC site over the coming days , '' Hopkins said . 
Much of the online buzz was propelled by social networking sites , said Susannah Fox , associate director at the Pew Research Center 's Internet & American Life Project . 
`` Social media create a hive of information , and we are the bees who are dipping into the hives and then going back into the real world with the information that we find , '' she said . 
`` Some people are really into the hive ... spending a lot of time on Twitter , Facebook and using these social media . '' 
The new strain of flu has been blamed for as many as 149 deaths in Mexico , while the cases documented in the United States and other countries have been mild by comparison . 
Still , some experts believe the intensity of media coverage has raised the public 's anxiety level . 
`` There 's a distinction between obviously keeping our readers and viewers up to date and sensationalizing the story . 
The media tends to love doomsday scenarios like bird flu , Y2K -LRB- year-2000 computer scare -RRB- and the guy flying around with TB -LRB- tuberculosis -RRB- , '' said blog publisher Arianna Huffington . 
`` It 's easy for the media to get into panic mode coverage , but very often these things do n't pan out , and the problem is that we 're becoming like the boy who cried wolf , '' she said . 
Robert Thompson , professor of media and popular culture at Syracuse University in New York , agreed that the media has to balance restraint with the imperative of covering an important story . 
`` If as many people had swine flu as those that are covering swine flu then it would be a pandemic to reckon with , '' he said . 
After wall-to-wall flu coverage on Monday , the major U.S. cable networks -- CNN , Fox News Channel and MSNBC -- turned much of their attention on Tuesday to U.S. Senator Arlen Specter 's switch from the Republican to the Democratic Party . 
`` Cable news channels have a very hard time covering two different stories simultaneously , '' independent media analyst Andrew Tyndall said . 
MSNBC President Phil Griffin said Monday 's flu coverage was `` event-driven '' by briefings from high-ranking officials , including President Barack Obama , Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano and New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg . 
But the networks filled time between news conferences with interviews of public health officials urging people to wash their hands and cover their faces when they sneeze or cough . 
`` The public health authorities know they have these channels available for getting their message out , '' Tyndall said . 
`` There 's not much journalism going on . 
They 're offering carriage to a message that they 're not controlling very much . '' 
Griffin said news executives are always mindful of the potential for stoking unwarranted public anxiety . 
Pew Research 's Fox said those following the story are increasingly turning to the Web and seem headed toward informative rather than sensational sites . 
`` Blogs , Twitter and other social technologies are helping to turn up the volume , but mostly people still get most of their news from mainstream sources , '' she said . 
-LRB- Editing by Frances Kerry and Eric Beech -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
