WASHINGTON | Wed Apr 29 , 2009 6:57 pm BST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Just how bad is this new flu strain , how far will it go and how long will the outbreak last ? 
Here are some questions and answers about the outbreak : HOW MANY PEOPLE HAVE DIED ? 
HOW MANY ARE INFECTED ? 
All deaths so far have been in Mexico , where 20 of the 149 reported fatalities have been confirmed to be from the H1N1 swine flu virus . 
There are 1,600 suspected cases in Mexico and 64 confirmed cases in the United States , and a few cases in Canada , New Zealand , Britain , Spain and Israel . 
WHY ARE THERE ONLY DEATHS IN MEXICO ? 
No one is sure . 
It is important to remember that health officials are now taking a snapshot of the past -- they are not reporting on new infections at this point , just tracking down old infections and they are only finding them where they are looking . 
The Mexican authorities looked in hospitals , where serious cases will , of course , be found . 
U.S. health officials found their cases during routine screening of people with flu-like symptoms , most in walk-in clinics , so they have naturally found milder cases . 
Influenza experts say they fully expect to find deaths in other places , including the United States and elsewhere , as the search goes on . 
One problem is that people die of respiratory diseases regularly and the cause is often not determined . 
WHY WOULD IT KILL SOME AND NOT OTHERS ? 
Seasonal influenza kills 250,000 to 500,000 people every year in a normal year and all sorts of factors determine who dies . 
Elderly people often die but sometimes perfectly healthy adults and children die . 
Sometimes flu makes people susceptible to bacterial infections , called secondary infections , and if the virus and the bacteria are circulating at the same time in the same place there can be clusters of deaths . 
WHAT KIND OF FLU IS IT AND HOW IS IT SPREADING ? 
The virus is an influenza A virus , carrying the designation H1N1 , but it contains DNA from avian , swine and human H1N1 viruses . 
It appears to have evolved the ability to pass easily from one person to another , unlike most swine H1N1 viruses which only very occasionally infect people and usually only infect one person and then stop there . 
Flu viruses are all passed on by sneezing , coughing or when people pick up the virus on their hands . 
This one likely originated in pigs , but the Mexican government and the World Health Organization have ruled out any risk of infection from eating pork . 
The Geneva-based WHO has declared the flu a `` public health emergency of international concern '' and raised the threat level for a pandemic , a global epidemic of new disease . 
H1N1 swine flu poses the biggest risk of a large-scale pandemic since avian flu re-emerged in 2003 , killing 257 out of 421 infected in 15 countries . 
It is not clear yet whether this virus could actually become a pandemic . 
HOW IS THIS FLU DIFFERENT FROM ORDINARY FLU ? 
The swine flu is characterized by common flu symptoms -- sudden fever , muscle aches , sore throat and dry cough -- but may cause more severe vomiting and diarrhea . 
New flu strains can spread fast because no one has natural immunity and a vaccine can take months to develop . 
This strain is confusing because it is an H1N1 -- a type that has been around since the 1918 `` Spanish Flu '' pandemic that killed at least 40 million people globally . 
Usually if a new flu strain is related to one that has been around for years , people have some immunity and they no longer can cause pandemics . 
But this new strain has taken on genetic elements from animal viruses , and this may be genetically unique enough to pose a pandemic threat . 
HOW BAD COULD IT GET ? 
A 1968 a `` Hong Kong '' flu pandemic killed about one million people globally . 
The 1957-58 pandemic killed about 2 million . 
The 1918 pandemic killed between 40 million and 100 million , according to some estimates . 
However , the WHO says the world is now better prepared to withstand a flu pandemic . 
Vaccines and antiviral drugs are available that were not around during previous pandemics . 
In 1918 , there was a first wave of mild flu in April . 
It then seemed to disappear during the Northern Hemisphere 's summer but came back severely in August . 
WHO and CDC officials say it is possible this virus could behave in the same way , or completely differently . 
ARE THERE ENOUGH DRUGS AND VACCINES ? 
Most countries have been stockpiling supplies of two antiviral drugs -- Tamiflu , known generically as oseltamivir and made by Roche AG and Gilead Sciences Inc ; as well as Relenza , known generically as zanamivir and made by GlaxoSmithKline and Australia 's Biota Inc. . 
A third company , BioCryst Inc. is working to license its experimental flu drug peramivir . 
Older flu drugs called amantadine and rimantadine do not work very well any longer against any influenza strain except sometimes in combination with newer drugs . 
There is no vaccine yet against this new strain and health officials say the seasonal flu vaccine is unlikely to provide any protection against it . 
The CDC and WHO are working with companies to start making a new vaccine if it is needed , but the process takes months . 
It is proven to be the best way to protect against infection with a range of germs , including flu . 
Experts generally agree that face masks , especially the surgical masks now seen on the street of Mexico City , offer very little protection . 
Flu viruses can float on little particles of spit or mucus , in general no further than three to six feet , but they then settle on surfaces and can be transferred to the mouth , eyes or nose . 
-LRB- Reporting by Maggie Fox , Editing by Anthony Boadle -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
