By Maggie Fox , Health and Science Editor WASHINGTON | Wed Apr 29 , 2009 7:30 pm BST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The new H1N1 swine flu has spread to nine countries , may have infected more than 2,500 people and killed dozens in Mexico , including a toddler from Mexico visiting Texas who became the first U.S. death . 
The World Health Organization says it can not be stopped and the best the world can do now is try to mitigate its effects . 
Although it is not yet a pandemic -- a global epidemic of a new and serious disease -- it could quickly start one . 
Here are a few ways the situation could develop : This is the worst-case scenario . 
Every 30-40 years the world suffers an influenza pandemic , with a new strain of flu spreading rapidly , causing serious disease and killing hundreds of thousands of people within a few weeks . 
The 1918 pandemic is considered the worst-case scenario . 
At least 40 million people died in 18 months and the epidemics passed over communities in waves . 
But that was in the pre-antibiotic era , in a time when even simple infections killed people , no mechanical ventilators were available and vaccines were primitive at best . 
The general population had little idea of how diseases were transmitted . 
Even so , experts predict a 1918-like flu would keep 40 percent of the workforce out at any time , with people either sick , caring for sick relatives or children out of school , or simply lying low . 
That would lead to shortages of supplies and even power outages . 
If this kind of pandemic struck today , millions could die , world trade would slow to a crawl and many economies would crumble . 
This last happened in 1968 . 
The H3N2 strain killed an estimated 1 million people . 
Experts predict that a strain of such virulence today would have less severe effects , with antivirals available that were not on the market 40 years ago . 
Even with vaccines , drugs and better public education , ordinary seasonal flu kills between 250,000 and 500,000 people every year . 
The difference with a pandemic strain is that there would not immediately be a vaccine against it and it would likely cause serious disease among broader age groups than the very young , very old and immune-compromised who are generally vulnerable to influenza . 
There could be disruptions to trade and travel , currency fluctuations , interruptions of supplies needed for manufacturing and a shortage of antivirals and the antibiotics needed to treat the `` co-infections '' that often accompany flu . 
Some reports predict a shortage of ventilators , and hospitals in many countries , especially the United States , already operate at full capacity and would be overwhelmed by an influx of newly sick people . 
Everyone is hoping this flu strain will just fizzle out . 
Influenza is a promiscuous virus , readily swapping genes with other flu viruses in a person 's or animal 's body . 
It also mutates constantly . 
Both these factors mean it can quickly grow worse , or become milder . 
It could at any time lose its ability to transmit easily from one person to another , or could become as mild as regular , seasonal flu . 
But it would take months to know whether this has happened . 
Flu strains often disappear over the summer months , re-emerging in late summer or early autumn . 
The 1918 flu strain did this with a vengeance . 
For now , the World Health Organization says only that a pandemic is possible . 
`` It 's probably premature to think of this as a mild pandemic , as a severe pandemic , '' the WHO 's Dr. Keiji Fukuda told a briefing on Wednesday . 
`` It is very clear that we can not predict what the course of this will be . '' 
-LRB- For a graphic on the flu 's spread , click here #swine -RRB- -LRB- Reporting by Maggie Fox ; Editing by Xavier Briand -RRB- -LRB- For more Reuters swine flu coverage , please click here : here -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
