\* UN agency criticises Egypt order to cull pigs \* Says flu virus is human , not swine \* Renews calls to change `` swine flu '' name ROME , April 29 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Egypt 's order on Wednesday to cull all the country 's pigs is `` a real mistake '' and another reason why the world needs to rethink using `` swine flu '' to describe a virus affecting humans , a U.N. agency official said . 
Egypt , where pigs are mainly raised by the country 's Christian minority , described the order to slaughter the animals as a precautionary measure in a country hard hit by bird flu . 
Up to 400,000 pigs could be culled , a cabinet spokesman said . 
Joseph Domenech , the chief veterinary officer at the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organisation , told Reuters his staff were trying to reach Egyptian authorities to correct any confusion about a virus that has killed humans but not been found in pigs . 
`` It 's a real mistake . 
There is no reason to do that . 
It 's not a swine influenza , it 's a human influenza , '' said Domenech , adding the FAO had been trying to reach Egyptian officials but has so far been unsuccessful . 
`` There is certainly no support from FAO for that decision . '' 
The new H1N1 flu strain -- a mixture of swine , human and avian flu viruses -- has killed up to 159 people in Mexico and a 23-month-old boy in the United States . 
But since no pigs have been found with the disease , groups like the FAO and the Paris-based Organisation for Animal Health -LRB- OIE -RRB- are lobbying for a name change . 
`` This is one of the results of this strange way of defining the disease as a swine influenza . 
That 's why the FAO and OIE are fighting to get that name changed because it 's a totally undue focus on swine , '' he said . 
Egypt , harder hit by the H5N1 bird flu virus than any other country outside Asia , is deeply worried about the effects of another flu virus after extensive damage to its poultry industry and economy . 
Egypt 's al-Ahram newspaper said owners of culled pigs could receive 1,000 Egyptian pounds -LRB- $ 177 -RRB- per animal in compensation , although an Egyptian cabinet spokesman said the issue was still under discussion . 
