GENEVA | Wed Apr 29 , 2009 7:31 pm EDT GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The World Health Organization said on Wednesday the world is at the brink of a pandemic , raising its threat level as the swine flu virus spread and killed the first person outside of Mexico , a toddler in Texas . 
`` Influenza pandemics must be taken seriously precisely because of their capacity to spread rapidly to every country in the world , '' WHO Director General Margaret Chan told a news conference in Geneva as she raised the official alert level to phase 5 , the last step before a pandemic . 
`` The biggest question is this : how severe will the pandemic be , especially now at the start , '' Chan said . 
But she added that the world `` is better prepared for an influenza pandemic than at any time in history . '' 
Nearly a week after the H1N1 swine flu virus first emerged in California and Texas and was found to have caused dozens of deaths in Mexico , Spain reported the first case in Europe of swine flu in a person who had not been to Mexico , illustrating the danger of person-to-person transmission . 
Both U.S. and European officials have said they expect to see swine flu deaths . 
Despite worries that a major flu outbreak could hit the struggling global economy , world stocks rallied on Wednesday after the Federal Reserve said the U.S. recession appeared to be easing . 
Almost all cases outside Mexico have had mild symptoms , and only a handful have required hospitalization . 
`` We doubt that the markets will react with the same worry as found during avian flu scares in the past , '' said Citigroup analyst Tobias Levkovich in New York . 
Chan also urged companies who make the drugs to ramp up production . 
Two antiviral drugs -- Relenza , made by GlaxoSmithKlin and Tamiflu , made by Roche AG and Gilead Sciences Inc. -- have been shown to work against the H1N1 swine flu strain . 
Drugmakers have donated millions of doses of their drugs to the WHO . 
She also alerted governments to be ready to distribute stockpiles of their drugs . 
Vaccine makers were on standby to begin making a new vaccine if needed . 
In Mexico , where up to 159 people have died from the virus and around 1,300 more are being tested for infection , people struggled with an emergency that has brought normal life virtually to a standstill over the past week . 
`` I 'm depressed . 
I do n't understand where this came from , how it spreads , how long it will last or what it will to the economy , '' said an elderly woman named Licha , sitting on a Mexico City park bench and wearing a surgical mask . 
Germany and Austria reported cases of the illness , bringing the number of affected countries to 9 . 
Texas officials said a 22-month-old boy had died -- the first confirmed U.S. swine flu death -- while on a family visit from Mexico . 
In the Texas border city of Brownsville , where the young Mexican was first diagnosed and many residents have families on both sides of the Rio Grande river border , some residents said they were now reluctant to venture south to Mexico . 
`` I am extremely concerned because you could die , '' said Santiago Perez , 18 , a student at Pace High School . 
About 30 U.S. Marines in southern California on the biggest military base in the United States were quarantined after one was confirmed to have contracted the illness . 
President Barack Obama , facing the sudden flu emergency along with his broader drive to pull the United States out of its deep recession , said the Texas death showed it was time to take `` utmost precautions . '' 
Kathleen Sebelius , Obama 's newly confirmed health secretary , spent her first day in office on a rapid-fire media tour as the administration sought to calm public fears while urging public health vigilance . 
`` We know that the cases will continue to rise , '' Sebelius said . 
Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano said the Customs and Border Patrol was keeping an eye out for sick travelers , as usual , and had checked 49 people with flu-like symptoms . 
She said 41 had been cleared of H1N1 infection and eight were still being studied . 
`` We are preparing for the worst ; hoping for the best , '' Napolitano said . 
`` All of us should be dusting off our business contingency plans , looking at things like telecommuting and the like so that things keep operating . '' 
Many Americans were heeding the warnings , snapping up hand sanitizers , wipes and soap . 
`` I figure it 's going to get worse before it gets better , right ? '' 
said Kathy Ivcich , 53 , a real estate agent in Chicago . 
Mexico 's central bank warned the outbreak could deepen the nation 's recession , hurting an economy that already shrank by as much as 8 percent from the previous year in the first quarter . 
France said it would seek a European Union ban on flights to Mexico . 
The EU , the United States and Canada have advised against non-essential travel to Mexico , a popular tourist destination , with many of the cases linked to travel there . 
Many tourists already in Mexico were hurrying to leave , crowding airports and trying to change their tickets . 
`` We did n't want to get stuck here , '' said Australian Alex Grinter , who left her beach vacation in the southern state of Oaxaca to get an early flight to Vancouver . 
In Mexico City , a metropolis of 20 million , all schools , restaurants , nightclubs and public events have been shut down to try to stop the sickness from spreading . 
H1N1 swine flu is seen as the biggest risk since H5N1 avian flu re-emerged in 2003 , killing 257 people of 421 infected in 15 countries . 
In 1968 a `` Hong Kong '' flu pandemic killed about 1 million people globally , and a 1957 pandemic killed 2 million . 
Seasonal flu kills 250,000 to 500,000 people in a normal year , including healthy children in rich countries . 
-LRB- Reporting by Maggie Fox and Tabassum Zakaria in Washington , Jason Lange , Catherine Bremer Alistair Bell and Helen Popper in Mexico City ; Matt Bigg in Atlanta ; Writing by Andrew Quinn , editing by Frances Kerry and Todd Eastham -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
