RAS LANUF , Libya | Tue Sep 13 , 2011 12:19 am BST RAS LANUF , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Muammar Gaddafi loyalists killed 15 guards in an attack on an oil refinery on Monday in an apparent attempt to disrupt a drive by Libya 's new rulers to seize the ousted leader 's last bastions and revive the oil-based economy . 
A Syrian-based television station said it would soon broadcast another message from the fugitive Gaddafi , who has issued regular battle calls to his followers in the three weeks since Tripoli was overrun . 
The new ruling National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- says that as long as Gaddafi remains on the run he is capable of attracting followers to a dangerous insurgency . 
Witnesses to the refinery attack said the assailants damaged the front gate of the facility , 20 km -LRB- 13 miles -RRB- from the coastal town of Ras Lanuf , but not the plant itself , which is not fully operational . 
About 60 staff were there at the time of the attack , according to one of two wounded survivors at a hospital where the dead were also taken . 
Refinery worker Ramadan Abdel Qader , who had been shot in the foot , told Reuters that gunmen in 14 or 15 trucks had come from the direction of the Gaddafi-held coastal city of Sirte . 
`` We heard firing and shelling at around 9 in the morning from Gaddafi loyalists , '' he said . 
Staff had been asleep . 
The assault occurred only hours after the NTC announced it had resumed some oil production , which had been all but halted since anti-Gaddafi protests turned into civil war in March . 
The interim council is struggling to assert its control over the entire country and capture a handful of stubbornly defended pro-Gaddafi towns . 
Many senior NTC officials also see scooping up Gaddafi and the members of his family who are still on the run as crucial to finally declaring victory in the seven-month old war . 
Gaddafi 's son Saadi arrived in neighbouring Niger on Sunday after crossing the remote Sahara desert frontier . 
On Monday the U.S. State Department said that the government of Niger had confirmed to it that it intended to detain the former soccer player . 
But a Nigerien government spokesman told Reuters that Saadi Gaddafi was only being watched for now . 
`` Nothing has changed in the government 's position . 
There is no international search for him . 
Like the others he is just under surveillance , '' the spokesman said , referring to other Gaddadfi loyalists who have recently fled to Niger . 
Two other sons and Gaddafi 's only biological daughter have fled to Algeria . 
One son is reported to have died in the war and three others are still on the run . 
The NTC has said it will send a delegation to Niger to seek the return of anyone wanted for crimes . 
Niger , like Algeria , has cited humanitarian reasons for accepting fugitives of the former government , but has promised to respect its commitments to the International Criminal Court , which wants to try Gaddafi , son Saif al-Islam and intelligence chief Abdullah al-Senussi for war crimes . 
NTC forces , which seized Tripoli on August 23 , said they were meeting fierce resistance on the fourth day of fighting for the Gaddafi-held desert town of Bani Walid , 150 km -LRB- 95 miles -RRB- southeast of the capital , and were edging towards Sirte . 
Libya 's economy is almost entirely dependent on oil , and restarting production is crucial to restoring the economy . 
Interim Prime Minister Mahmoud Jibril said on Sunday some oil production had resumed , but would not say where or how much . 
Libya holds Africa 's largest crude oil reserves and sold about 85 percent of its exports to Europe under Gaddafi . 
Western oil firms , including Italy 's Eni and Austria 's OMV , are keen to restore production . 
Eni 's chief executive told Reuters his priority was to restart gas exports via a pipeline from Libya to Italy by October or November . 
Resuming oil output was less urgent . 
`` We are by far the biggest player in Libya , both in oil and in gas , so I came here with the idea of ` back to normal ' , '' Paolo Scaroni said during a visit to Tripoli . 
In Bani Walid , fleeing residents reported intense street fighting while NATO warplanes could be heard overhead . 
Families trapped there for weeks escaped after Gaddafi forces abandoned some checkpoints on the outskirts . 
Dozens of cars packed with civilians streamed out of the area . 
`` We are leaving because of the rockets . 
They are falling near civilian homes , '' said one resident , Ali Hussain . 
The United Nations says it is worried about the fate of civilians trapped inside besieged pro-Gaddafi towns . 
`` Our big concern right now is Sirte , where we are receiving reports that there 's no water and no electricity , '' U.N. humanitarian chief Valerie Amos told Reuters in Dubai . 
The NTC has sent extra units to Bani Walid , but some fighters said this only worsened tribal tensions between fighters from other areas and those from the town . 
`` Our fighters are from all over Libya . 
There was little control over them yesterday . 
Today we will control them better , '' said NTC commander Mohamed el-Fassi . 
He said five NTC fighters were killed and 14 wounded in Sunday 's clashes . 
Some NTC combatants said they suspected local fighters of the Warfalla tribe , Libya 's largest , of passing tips to Gaddafi forces in Bani Walid . 
`` We believe there are traitors among them , '' said Mohammed el Gahdi , from the coastal city of Khoms . 
NTC military spokesman Ahmed Bani told reporters the plan for Bani Walid for now was to wait . 
`` When our forces entered Bani Walid they found the brigades of Gaddafi using citizens as shields , '' he said , adding that missile launchers had been placed on the roofs of homes , making it impossible for NTC forces or NATO warplanes to strike . 
