TRIPOLI | Tue Sep 13 , 2011 7:57 am BST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya 's interim government chief , Mustafa Abdel Jalil , made his first speech to a crowd of about 10,000 in the capital Tripoli on Monday -- a sign of growing confidence from the former rebels . 
Abdel Jalil arrived in Tripoli on Saturday for the first time since his allies chased Muammar Gaddafi out of the city , a move that political analysts saw as key to his credibility . 
The chairman of the ruling National Transitional Council called on the movement 's fighters not to engage in reprisal attacks against remnants of the Gaddafi government . 
Repeating a call made before , he also said that Islamic sharia law should be the new Libya 's main source for legislation . 
`` We need to open the courts to anyone who harmed the Libyan people in any way . 
The judicial system will decide , '' he told the crowd , calling for no attacks on former Gaddafi allies . 
`` We seek a state of law , prosperity and one where sharia is the main source for legislation , and this requires many things and conditions , '' he said , adding that `` extremist ideology '' would not be tolerated . 
Abdel Jalil had been running the provisional administration from the eastern city of Benghazi , cradle of the revolt that overthrew Gaddafi in late August . 
NTC officials told Reuters they did not advertise the public appearance for fear pro-Gaddafi elements would try to disrupt it . 
The crowd cheered , waved the independence tricolor flag . 
Balloons , fireworks , music and the smell of popcorn gave the gathering a carnival atmosphere . 
`` The most important thing was what he said about building a nation of laws , and his reassurances about extremism , from the left or the right , Islamists or secularists , '' Osama Gheriani , a 30-year-old dentist , told Reuters . 
`` It 's a moderate country . 
This was the most important point . '' 
Some of the hesitation in Abdel Jalil 's arrival in Tripoli after the fall of Gaddafi seemed to stem from long-standing regional rivalries and from a sense that Tripoli -- run by rebel brigades that swept in from towns and provinces eager for a share of power -- may not be a safe place for every official . 
The NTC 's timetable which sets out plans for a new constitution and elections over a 20-month period , should start once the NTC declares Libya 's `` liberation . '' 
It has yet to do so and it is unclear exactly how the disparate groups which have taken over the country will define what constitutes `` liberation . '' 
Several parts of the country 's south and three major towns -- Bani Walid , Sirte and Sabha -- are still controlled by forces loyal to Gaddafi . 
`` Bani Walid , Sirte and Sabha are now under siege by Gaddafi forces . 
We are betting that our brothers in those cities will fulfil their expectations and you will see them do so soon , '' Abdel Jalil said . 
