CAIRO | Tue Sep 13 , 2011 5:44 pm BST CAIRO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan said on Tuesday it was time to run the Palestinian flag up over the United Nations in a rallying call to Arab states ahead of a Palestinian U.N. membership bid opposed by Washington . 
Speaking to Arab foreign ministers , he said Israel had undermined its legitimacy by irresponsible behavior . 
He made no specific accusations but has in the past criticised Israel for building settlements on occupied land envisaged as part of a Palestinian state . 
He has also protested over Israel 's offensive against Gaza in 2008 , which largely spelt the end of a close alliance between Turkey and Israel , and its attack on a Turkish ship heading for Gaza that killed nine people last year . 
Erdogan 's recent criticism of Israel has drawn strong support in the Arab world , buttressing his campaign to promote Ankara 's blend of Islam and democracy as a model for movements that have toppled several Arab autocrats , including Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak . 
`` While Israel is trying to secure its legitimacy in our region on one hand , it is taking irresponsible steps which unsettle its legitimacy on the other , '' Erdogan said . 
With the souring of relations between Turkey and Israel , military cooperation has been frozen and diplomatic ties downgraded . 
Erdogan 's tour will include Tunisia and Libya , which have all witnessed the fall of entrenched leaders to grassroots revolts this year , challenging the old order across the region . 
`` Erdogan , Erdogan ! '' 
cheered a group of demonstrators as the Turkish prime minister left the headquarters of the Arab League in Cairo where he had been speaking . 
They were calling for change in Syria , whose military is trying to stamp out popular unrest . 
Displaying a populist touch , Erdogan stopped and shook the demonstrators ' hands . 
He told an Arab League ministers meeting that international recognition of a Palestinian state was `` not an option but an obligation . '' 
`` It 's time to raise the Palestinian flag at the United Nations . 
Let 's raise the Palestinian flag and let that flag be the symbol of peace and justice in the Middle East . 
Let 's contribute to securing well deserved peace and stability in the Middle East , '' he said . 
Palestinians will bid for full membership of the United Nations later this month , a move opposed by the United States , which has a veto . 
Arab states endorsed it at the Cairo meeting . 
Erdogan said Turkey offered its help to Arab nations facing turmoil but , in an apparent reference to Syria , he said some had turned down the offer . 
`` However , we continue to insist they meet their people 's demands . '' 
Arab League Secretary-General Nabil Elaraby introduced the Turkish prime minister saying : `` All the Arab peoples appreciate what you are doing . 
We consider that there is a strong friendly state who is always standing on the side of justice . '' 
Outside the League , Syrian protester Samer Zaher , 30 , said : `` Erdogan has turned into an Arab hero ... We have not found a leader as powerful as him addressing -LRB- Syrian President Bashar al-Assad -RRB- and asking him to quit . '' 
Turkey expelled the Israeli ambassador last week in a row over an Israeli raid last year that killed nine Turks on a flotilla bound for Gaza , the Palestinian enclave controlled by the Islamist group Hamas and under blockade by Israel . 
While winning over ordinary Arabs , particularly because of non-Arab Turkey 's tough line towards Israel , Erdogan 's growing popularity and clout could be a headache for more cautious Arab leaders who could see their own influence overshadowed . 
`` Turkey wants to play a regional role , especially when Egypt is busy with the revolution . 
Turkey thinks it 's best placed to play this leadership role , '' said Adel Soliman , head of Cairo 's International Centre for Future and Strategic Studies . 
Egypt has traditionally seen itself as the leading diplomatic player in the Arab region . 
But its position has been eroded by wealthy Gulf countries , such as Qatar , and lately overshadowed by Turkey , with its fast expanding economy . 
Erdogan met Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi , who heads the military council that took over after Hosni Mubarak was ousted by mass street demonstrations in February . 
Egypt has also been embroiled in a dispute with Israel after Israel shot dead five Egyptian border guards in repelling cross-border raiders it said were Palestinian militants . 
But Egypt 's generals have faced popular criticism for not taking a firmer line . 
Cairo said it would expel Israel 's ambassador but did not follow through with threat . 
Protesters attacked Israel 's embassy in Cairo last week , prompting the ambassador to fly home and an embarrassed Egyptian government to affirm to Washington , its major aid donor , that it remained committed to a 1979 peace treaty with Israel . 
Egypt has received billions of dollars in U.S. military and other aid since making peace with the Jewish state , so the military council faces a difficult balancing act responding to public calls for an assertive policy towards Israel . 
Erdogan was cheered by a crowd when he arrived in Cairo and met by Egyptian Prime Minister Essam Sharaf . 
Many appeared to be from Islamist groups such as the Muslim Brotherhood , who approve of Erdogan 's bringing Islamists into mainstream Turkish politics . 
`` Erdogan , Erdogan -- a big welcome from the Brothers ! '' 
`` Hero Erdogan '' was written on a photo of the prime minister . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
