US urges Syria to work with Annan peace plan The 15 Security Council members backed a non-binding statement on Annan 's peace plan for Syria The United States has warned Syria to co-operate with a UN-backed peace plan . 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton urged President Bashar al-Assad to `` take this path , commit to it , or face increasing pressure and isolation '' . 
The peace plan , put forward by UN envoy Kofi Annan , has now been endorsed by the UN Security Council , with support from Russia and China . 
Meanwhile , government tanks shelled two suburbs of the Syrian capital Damascus , according to opposition activists . 
The military assault on Hasrata and Irbin began in the early hours of the morning , after rebels attacked a government intelligence compound , they said . 
There are reports of army offensives in other parts of Syria . 
A UN Security Council statement on Wednesday expressed full support for Mr Annan 's plan to end to all violence , secure humanitarian access and to facilitate a political transition . 
We all have a responsibility to work for a resolution of this profound and extremely dangerous situation , a crisis that has potentially massive repercussions for the region and the world '' End Quote Ban Ki-moon UN secretary general It also says the council will `` consider further steps as appropriate '' , without specifying a time frame . 
It is not binding and falls short of a formal resolution . 
But the BBC 's Nada Tawfik at the UN says diplomats hope it will intensify pressure on Mr Assad to work co-operatively with Mr Annan . 
Diplomats said Western powers had agreed to soften the statement in order to gain the support of Russia and China , which had threatened to veto an earlier , tougher draft . 
China and Russia have in the past blocked two resolutions by the council condemning Mr Assad 's actions . 
Mr Annan has spent the last few weeks meeting all sides in the conflict - putting forward proposals to try to bring about an immediate ceasefire by both sides , access for humanitarian aid and the beginning of political dialogue . 
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon earlier warned of serious repercussions if the crisis in Syria is not resolved . 
Speaking at a conference in Indonesia he warned the world could not afford to look away . 
`` We all have a responsibility to work for a resolution of this profound and extremely dangerous situation , a crisis that has potentially massive repercussions for the region and the world , '' he said . 
In Syria itself , the British-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the army had been active in the Khalidiya district of Homs . 
Activists have also reported shelling in Rastan , north of Homs , and at Qalat Mudiq , northwest of Hama . 
Syria restricts access to foreign media which often makes it impossible to independently verify reports coming out of the country . 
The UN says more than 8,000 people have been killed in the year-long uprising , while tens of thousands of people have fled their homes . 
On Tuesday , Russia - a key ally of Damascus - warned Syria 's leadership it was making `` a lot of mistakes '' , signalling Moscow may be hardening its stance on Damascus . 
The same day US campaign group Human Rights Watch -LRB- HRW -RRB- accused elements of Syria 's armed opposition of carrying out serious human rights abuses , including kidnapping , torture and execution . 
The opposition Syrian National Council said in a statement that it `` deplores the reported incidents of human rights violations by armed opposition groups in Syria '' and it is working to ensure `` abuse does not happen in the fight for freedom '' . 
HRW has frequently accused Syria 's government of abuses during the conflict . 
The Syrian government has been trying to suppress an uprising inspired by events in Tunisia , Egypt and Libya . 
The UN says thousands have been killed in the crackdown , and that many more have been detained and displaced . 
The Syrian government says hundreds of security forces personnel have also died combating `` armed terrorist gangs '' . 
The family of President Bashar al-Assad has been in power since his father , Hafez , took over in a coup in 1970 . 
The country underwent some liberalisation after Bashar became president in 2000 , but the pace of change soon slowed , if not reversed . 
Critics are imprisoned , domestic media are tightly controlled , and economic policies often benefit the elite . 
The country 's human rights record is among the worst in the world . 
Syria is a country of 21 million people with a Sunni Muslim majority -LRB- 74 % -RRB- and significant minorities of Alawites - the Shia heterodox sect to which Mr Assad belongs - and Christians . 
Mr Assad promotes a secular identity for the country , but he has concentrated power in the hands of family and other Alawites . 
Protests have generally been biggest in Sunni-dominated areas . 
Under the sanctions imposed by the Arab League , US and EU , Syria 's two most vital sectors , tourism and oil , have ground to a halt in recent months . 
The IMF says Syria 's economy contracted by 2 % in 2011 , while the value of the Syrian pound has crashed . 
Unemployment is high , electricity cuts trouble Damascus , and critical products like heating oil and staples like milk powder are becoming scarce . 
Pro-democracy protests erupted in March 2011 after the arrest and torture of a group of teenagers who had painted revolutionary slogans on walls at their school in the southern city of Deraa . 
Security forces opened fire during a march against the arrests , killing four . 
The next day , the authorities shot at mourners at the victims ' funerals , killing another person . 
People began demanding the overthrow of Mr Assad . 
The government has tried to deal with the situation with a combination of minor concessions and force . 
President Assad ended the 48-year-long state of emergency and introduced a new constitution offering multi-party elections . 
But at the same time , the authorities have continued to use violence against unarmed protesters , and some cities , like Homs , have suffered weeks of intense bombardment . 
The opposition is deeply divided . 
Several groups formed a coalition , the Syrian National Council -LRB- SNC -RRB- , but it is dominated by the Sunni community and exiled dissidents . 
The SNC disagrees with the National Co-ordination Committee -LRB- NCC -RRB- on the questions of talks with the government and foreign intervention , and has found it difficult to work with the Free Syrian Army - army defectors seeking to topple Mr Assad by force . 
International pressure on the Syrian government has been intensifying . 
It has been suspended from the Arab League , while the EU and the US have imposed sanctions . 
However , there has been no agreement on a UN Security Council resolution calling for an end to violence . 
Although military intervention has been ruled out by Western nations , there are increasing calls to arm the opposition . 
Correspondents say a peaceful solution seems unlikely . 
Syria 's leadership seems intent on crushing resistance and most of the opposition will only accept an end to the regime . 
Some believe the expected collapse of Syria 's currency and an inability to pay salaries may be the leadership 's downfall . 
There are fears , though , that the resulting chaos would be long-lasting and create a wider conflict . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
