The BBC 's Jonathan Head : Syrian refugees report `` relentless attacks '' After speaking to the UN secretary general , Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said the refugee issue was becoming an `` international problem '' . 
Some 2,800 Syrians have crossed in 36 hours , with the total now near 24,000 . 
Troops and rebels were engaged in heavy fighting across Syria on Friday , just six days before the UN hopes a full ceasefire will come into effect . 
The UN estimates more than 9,000 people have died in the year-long uprising against the rule of President Bashar al-Assad . 
Mr Davutoglu said he had spoken to UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon early on Friday to express concern about the rate of refugees . 
Syrian-led political process to address the aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people 2 . 
UN-supervised cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties to protect civilians 3 . 
All parties to ensure provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the fighting , and implement a daily two-hour humanitarian pause 4 . 
Authorities to intensify the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons 5 . 
Authorities to ensure freedom of movement throughout the country for journalists 6 . 
Authorities to respect freedom of association and the right to demonstrate peacefully In later televised remarks , Mr Davutoglu said : `` We have spared no efforts to accommodate Syrians fleeing the violence back home , but if they continue to arrive at this rate , we will need the UN and international community to step in . '' 
The UN and Arab League envoy Kofi Annan has set out a six-point peace plan that Syria has accepted , part of which envisages a UN-supervised cessation of armed violence by all parties from 10 April , with a full ceasefire on 12 April . 
However , the US and many regional countries have expressed scepticism that Syria is committed to the plan . 
Mr Davutoglu said the rate of refugees had doubled since Mr Assad agreed to implementing Mr Annan 's plan . 
`` Those who are giving -LRB- Mr Assad -RRB- time should also know that the number of fleeing Syrians is increasing and this is turning into an international problem , '' Mr Davutoglu said . 
There appears to be no halt in the violence in Syria . 
On Friday , the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights and Local Coordination Committees groups monitored reports from many parts of the country , including : Shelling , including tank fire , in Douma , near Damascus . 
Shelling in Zabadani , north-west of the capital Rebel fighters confront tanks trying to enter Rastan , north of Homs Protests after Friday prayers in the eastern province of Hasakeh , in the town of Qamishli in the northern Kurdish region and in the eastern city of Deir Ezzor . 
Snipers on roofs in Damascus and Hama Heavy fighting in central Homs province - in the villages of al-Tiba , al-Qabu and Shniyeh Fighting between soldiers and army deserters in Dmeir , 40km -LRB- 25 miles -RRB- north of Damascus International media can not report freely in Syria and it is impossible to verify reports of violence . 
The Syrian government says 2,000 security personnel have been killed in the uprising and blames the violence on `` armed gangs '' and `` terrorists '' . 
10 April : Government must withdraw troops and heavy weapons such as tanks from towns , cities and villages Following 48 hours : Ceasefire to be implemented on the ground with the onus on the opposition to follow the government 's lead 06:00 local time on 12 April : All forms of violence must be stopped on all sides Next step : All parties to hold talks on a political solution The BBC 's Jim Muir in Beirut says that in Homs - much of which is a real battlefield - and some other areas , especially Idlib province , the approach of the deadline to halt all violence seems to have brought an escalation rather than a reduction . 
He says activists are accusing the government of trying to complete its crackdown come what may ; but government officials say it is the rebel fighters who are exploiting the impending withdrawal of the military from towns and cities . 
Syria 's official Sana news agency said on Friday that Damascus had sent a message to the UN saying that `` terrorist acts committed by the armed terrorist groups in Syria have increased during the last few days '' and demanding a written commitment that the opposition would not try to make territorial gains . 
A UN team is currently in Damascus to negotiate the possibility of deploying UN monitors to oversee any ceasefire . 
Mr Annan has said that if the truce is successful a small mobile UN monitoring mission of some 200-250 observers could be brought into Syria . 
Mr Annan is also expected to travel to Iran on 11 April , the day after the partial ceasefire is due , to try to win further regional support for his peace plan . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
