Syria 's Christians caught in the middle Christians fear they will lose whatever the outcome of the struggle between the government and opposition `` The university has become a battlefield between the supporters and the opposition of the regime . '' 
That was what Lena -LRB- not her real name -RRB- , a medical student at the University of Aleppo , had said in her email informing me that she will not be able to meet me at campus as agreed . 
She continued : `` As a Christian , both sides are suspicious of me . 
In fact I 'm not with or against the regime . '' 
Lena said she never cared about politics until she and her family found themselves talking about it everyday when the crisis in Syria began over a year ago . 
Christian churches are seeing congregations falling `` We followed the simple rule ` do n't talk politics ' , and then you can do anything else , '' she said . 
In the past , when I was going to my exams , my mother 's main concern for me was to do an ` excellent ' job . 
Now her main concern is for me not to take a taxi because of the kidnappings , '' Lena said . 
While some Christian intellectuals have openly opposed President Bashar al-Assad and were imprisoned by his regime , it seems that the majority fear the unknown if the regime were to collapse . 
They cite the situation of Christians in Iraq and recently Egypt as the basis for their fear . 
The Syriac Orthodox Church was once one of the major Christian churches in the Eastern Roman Empire ; Syriacs translated Greek documents into Arabic . 
Their number has decreased now to 140,000 according to Father Gregorious Yohanna Ibrahim , the Metropolitan of Aleppo . 
When I met him in his monastery I asked how the Christian minority is dealing with the crisis which has engulfed the country . 
Syrians belong only to their homeland not to regimes , it 's that patriotism Christians have that made them the first to sacrifice for their country '' End Quote Bishop Louka al-Khoury `` Do not call us a minority , we are a unique community with deep roots in the country , '' he said angrily . 
`` The opposition and the regime committed mistakes , -LRB- they -RRB- did not return to wisdom , and blood brought more blood , '' he continued . 
`` We call for dialogue that should include everybody who represents the opposition , not just those the government calls the opposition . '' 
I asked Father Gregorious Yohanna if some Christians side with the regime because of fear . 
`` Look , we have concerns , we have great concerns , we ca n't wish the Iraqi model for anyone and the Christians of the region also feel uneasy with what happened in Egypt recently , '' he said . 
`` Our concerns are not related to who will come to power , we are afraid that whoever will come may close their eyes and ears , or will not like to deal with us , '' he continued . 
`` We do n't fear the Islamists , we fear the violent extremists who will not accept the other , '' he said . 
When I visited , few people were out in the streets around the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate in the old city of Damascus . 
Names of the streets , buildings and bazaars in this tourist area , still carry much of its Christian past , but the church where I met Bishop Louka al-Khoury was nearly empty . 
Bishop Louka prides himself in belonging to the oldest Arab church . 
Bishop Louka al-Khoury says Christians belong to their homeland , not to regimes `` Can you name one single Syrian party or political movement that did not have a Greek Orthodox among its leaders ? '' 
I noticed the nostalgic tone in his words . 
`` Christian Syrians were accused of siding with the regime , but this is not true , '' he insisted . 
`` Syrians belong only to their homeland not to regimes , it 's that patriotism Christians have that made them the first to sacrifice for their country . 
`` We have some fears no doubt , because we have never witnessed violence like that which we see on the ground now . 
`` But we do n't side with a regime ; we side with our country and with anybody who serves our homeland and our interests , '' Bishop Louka al-Khoury said . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
