US President Barack Obama ` to extend oil drilling ban ' BP hope to stem the flow of oil by pumping mud into the breached well US President Barack Obama is set to extend a moratorium on deep-water offshore drilling for six months , the White House says . 
The move comes as his administration faces criticism of its handling of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
The ban will stay in place while a commission further investigates the circumstances of the disaster . 
BP says its latest effort to stem the flow of oil from the well after a rig explosion is going to plan . 
Thousands of barrels of oil have been spewing into the Gulf at a depth of 1.6 km -LRB- 1 mile -RRB- every day since April 's explosion on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig . '' 
-LRB- Mr Obama -RRB- will announce standards to strengthen oversight of the industry and enhance safety , a first step in a process that the independent Presidential Commission will continue , '' a White House aide was quoted as saying by Reuters . 
`` While the commission performs its work to determine how to prevent this from ever happening again , the moratorium on permits to drill new deep-water wells will continue for a period of six months . '' 
President Obama is also expected to announce delays in exploration and drilling off the coasts of Alaska , and the cancellation of leases off the coast of Virginia . 
He is due to visit the Gulf of Mexico for a second time on Friday . 
On Wednesday Mr Obama said the `` heartbreaking '' oil spill underscored the need to find alternative energy sources . 
Tighter safety standards are also set to be recommended following the release of a preliminary report from the US Department of the Interior on lessons to be learned from the oil spill . 
BP is attempting a `` top kill '' procedure to stem the flow of oil , which involves pumping mud into the breached well . 
The US government has backed the procedure , which has never been tried at such a depth . 
If pressure and density sufficient , oil and gas flow stops BP is under intense pressure to succeed after previous attempts to stem the leak failed . 
A BP official said he believed mud , not oil , was exiting the well 's ruptured pipe six hours after the work began . 
`` What you 've been observing coming out of the top of that riser is most likely mud , '' said BP Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles . 
Company officials say it could be a couple of days before they know whether the `` top kill '' operation has worked . 
BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward has put the operation 's chance of success at 60-70 % . 
London-based BP has acknowledged a series of failures occurred on the Deepwater Horizon in the hours before the explosion that killed 11 workers and triggered the spill that has so far spewed at least 7 million gallons -LRB- 26.5 million litres -RRB- into the Gulf . 
Questions have been raised about whether proper procedures were followed on the rig . 
On Thursday , US lawmakers will grill a number of officials on issues ranging from the environmental damage from the spill , the response of the administration and the impact on local businesses . 
`` You look at these thousands of gallons coming out - what can you say - it hurts , '' said Jarvis Davis , who runs a New Orleans seafood restaurant . 
`` They say they are going to help and cap things but they are destroying everything and they are not doing anything for us , '' Mr Davis told the BBC . 
The spill is threatening a delicate coastal ecosystem and wildlife in the Gulf of Mexico , much of which was recovering from the effects of Hurricane Katrina which devastated the region in 2005 . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
