The company 's `` top kill '' effort has `` stabilised the wellhead '' , Coast Guard commander Admiral Thad Allen said . 
But he cautioned it was too early to declare success . 
This is the first step in BP 's plan to seal the well for good . 
Meanwhile , a panel of US scientists said the oil leak was much worse than previously estimated , making it the nation 's worst spill . 
US Geological Survey Director Marcia McNutt said BP ` slows leaking Gulf oil well ' government teams estimated the flow ranges from 12,000 barrels -LRB- 504,000 gallons or 1.9 million litres -RRB- to 25,000 barrels per day . 
Up to now , BP had estimated the leak at 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons -RRB- per day , while cautioning that figure was unreliable . 
If the new estimates are confirmed , it would mean the leak has far eclipsed the previous worst oil spill in US history - the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster . 
Later on Thursday , President Barack Obama is expected to extend a moratorium on deep-water offshore drilling for six months , the White House has said . 
The move comes as his administration faces criticism of its handling of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
Hours before Mr Obama was due to speak , US officials announced the resignation of the head of the Minerals Management Service -LRB- MMS -RRB- , the US agency which oversees drilling operations . 
Elizabeth `` Liz '' Birnbaum , who had run the MMS since July 2009 , has endured criticism in the weeks since the oil spill over alleged lax oversight of drilling and what President Obama has called an overly cozy relationship with industry . 
Eleven workers were killed in the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig on 20 April . 
Millions of gallons of oil have poured into the sea since then . 
Adm Allen told US media the `` top kill '' procedure , which began on Wednesday , has pumped enough drilling fluid to block some of the oil and gas escaping from the well . 
Earlier , he had indicated that all the leaking oil and gas had been stopped , telling National Public Radio that BP engineers had `` been able to force mud down and not allow any hydrocarbons to come up . '' 
An aide to Adm Allen later clarified his statement , saying the procedure had a way to go before it proved successful . 
It was the first positive official assessment of BP 's latest attempt to plug the well , after previous efforts failed . 
If pressure and density sufficient , oil and gas flow stops BP shares were up more than 5 % in London trading following the announcement . 
BP has not yet commented in detail on the situation , saying merely that its `` subsea efforts -LRB- were -RRB- advancing on several fronts '' . 
The company did not know how long the operation would take , a BP official said . 
The top kill attempt , which began on Wednesday , involves pumping heavy drilling fluids into the top of the well to try to halt the oil flow . 
If it succeeds , cement would then be injected to seal the well . 
The oil leak has already soiled more than 110km -LRB- 70 miles -RRB- of Louisiana 's coastline , threatening fragile marshlands and putting the Louisiana fishing industry at risk . 
US officials warn the coming hurricane season could make things worse . 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- forecasts 14 to 23 named storms , with 8 to 14 developing into hurricanes , making it one of the most active on record . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
