Obama defends Gulf of Mexico oil spill response President Obama : `` People are going to be frustrated until -LRB- the leak -RRB- stops '' US President Barack Obama has defended his government 's handling of the huge oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
He unveiled a series of measures , including a continued moratorium on drilling permits for six months . 
The move comes after an opinion poll said 60 % of Americans were unhappy with the government 's response . 
BP has resumed pumping heavy mud into the ruptured well after a pause to assess the effect of its `` top kill '' operation . 
The procedure is aimed at stemming the oil flow , from what some experts say is the country 's worst-ever spill . 
New estimates from a panel of US scientists said at least 12,000 barrels -LRB- 504,000 gallons -RRB- were leaking into the Gulf every day , far exceeding the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster . 
The leak was caused by an explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig on 20 April , which also killed 11 workers . 
Speaking at the White House , President Obama vowed to hold BP accountable for the `` horrific disaster '' . 
He stressed that his administration , and not oil company BP , was in charge . 
If pressure and density sufficient , oil and gas flow stops But he admitted the government did not have the technology to deal with the damaged oil well nearly a mile -LRB- 1.6 km -RRB- below the surface , meaning that Washington must rely on BP to plug the ruptured well . 
The president 's comments came as questions were increasingly being asked about whether he had been sufficiently engaged in handling the disaster , says the BBC 's Adam Brookes in Washington . 
In a shake-up of the offshore oil industry , Mr Obama suspended test drilling on 33 rigs in the Gulf of Mexico , as well as halting exploratory deepwater drilling for another six months . 
In addition , he canceled the sale of some offshore leases off the coasts of Alaska and Virginia . 
Correspondents say the move marks a shift in policy since March , when President Obama gave the go-ahead to widen the scope for offshore drilling in order to reduce dependency on oil imports . 
Hours before Mr Obama spoke , the head of the Minerals Management Service -LRB- MMS -RRB- , which oversees drilling operations , resigned . 
Elizabeth Birnbaum and the MMS have come under fire from lawmakers over lax oversight of drilling operations . 
The president blasted the `` scandalously close relationship '' between oil companies and regulators , and said officials granting exploration permits would no longer be responsible as well for ensuring safety . 
Also on Thursday , Mr Obama 's top spill response official - Coast Guard commander Admiral Thad Allen - approved part of an ambitious plan to build barrier islands to stop oil from coming ashore in Louisiana . 
The oil leak has already soiled more than 110km -LRB- 70 miles -RRB- of Louisiana 's coastline , threatening fragile marshlands and putting the Louisiana fishing industry at risk . 
In the first official estimate of the size of the oil leak , US Geological Survey Director Marcia McNutt said government teams estimated the flow ranges from 12,000 barrels -LRB- 504,000 gallons or 1.9 million litres -RRB- to 25,000 barrels per day . 
Up to now , BP had estimated the leak at 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons -RRB- per day , while cautioning that figure was unreliable . 
If the new estimates are confirmed , it would mean the leak has far eclipsed the previous worst oil spill in US history - the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster . 
Making matters worse , US officials warned the coming hurricane season could be one of the worst on record . 
But BP said its latest attempt to stem the flow was making progress . 
It would take 24-48 hours before BP engineers could tell whether the `` top kill '' procedure had worked , company officials said at about 2000 GMT on Thursday . 
The procedure , which began on Wednesday , involves pumping heavy drilling fluids into the top of the well to try to halt the oil flow . 
If it succeeds , cement would then be injected to seal the well . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
