Russian President Dmitry Medvedev sent an envoy to Libya Monday to meet with rebels trying to bring about an end to Moammar Gadhafi 's 42-year-rule , a move that comes after he called for the Libyan leader to step down . 
Mikhail Margelov , the presidential special envoy on Africa , was expected to meet with leaders of the rebel Transitional National Council based in the eastern Libyan rebel-stronghold of Benghazi , his spokeswoman , Varvara Paal , said . 
Margelov did not rule out traveling to Tripoli to meet with Gadhafi , Paal said . 
`` My task is to meet with rebel leaders . 
However , I do not rule out that I may have to go to Tripoli , too , if I get the corresponding order from the president , '' Margelov told Interfax , the Russian news agency . 
Last month , Medvedev joined American and other European leaders in calling for Gadhafi to step down from power . 
The chief prosecutor for the International Criminal Court has issued arrest warrants against Gadhafi , his son and Libya 's intelligence chief for alleged crimes against humanity . 
Meanwhile , on Monday , the Swiss government authorized the state 's attorney general to open a criminal investigation into the kidnappings of two of its citizens , Rachid Hamdani and Max Goeldi , who allegedly have been held hostage in Libya for nearly two years . 
The developments came as rebels on the front line in Misrata said the main station supplying electricity to the city , which had been targeted by Gadhafi forces , had been hit . 
The attack left some areas of the city without power . 
According to various rebel fighters , Gadhafi 's forces carried out an early morning offensive on both the western and eastern fronts of Misrata . 
Government forces pushed 2 kilometers -LRB- 1.25 miles -RRB- into the city of Dafniya on the west side of Misrata and fired dozens of Grad rockets , destroying a plastic factory which killed one person and injured at least one other . 
Rebel fighters were able to stop the attacks and pushed toward the west 3 kilometers -LRB- 1.9 miles -RRB- to the outskirts of the city of Zlitan , rebels said . 
Two people were killed and 17 others were wounded in the fighting on the western front of Misrata , rebels said . 
Libya has been in the throes of a civil war for months , since Gadhafi dug in his heels against popular efforts to force him out of power amid anti-government protests sweeping the Arab world . 
