Syria crisis : Deadly shooting at Damascus funeral The BBC 's Jim Muir : `` We 're told that security forces opened fire . '' 
This footage has not been verified . 
Syrian troops have fired on mourners during a funeral that turned into a demonstration in Damascus , killing at least one person , activists say . 
The shooting occurred at a funeral for people killed during a protest against President Bashar al-Assad on Friday . 
The violence comes during a visit by a Chinese envoy , who urged dialogue in a bid to defuse the 11-month crisis . 
State TV quoted him as saying he backed government plans for a referendum on a new constitution followed by elections . 
The opposition has called for a boycott of the 26 February referendum , saying it can not be held as violence continues . 
Activists say there was a huge turnout for Saturday 's funeral in the Mezzeh district on the western edge of Damascus . 
Mourners were burying three youths shot dead during protests following Friday prayers . 
The funeral procession turned into one of the biggest demonstrations the capital has seen , with thousands of people chanting slogans calling for an end to the Assad regime . 
According to activists , security forces opened fire , killing at least one protester and injuring several others . 
Zhai Jun said that `` a nation can not develop without stability '' Despite the current crackdown , there were similar protests after Friday prayers in many parts of the country . 
Opposition activists say government forces on Saturday renewed their bombardment of the restive central city of Homs . 
The violence came after Chinese envoy Zhai Jun held talks with President Assad in Damascus . 
Syrian TV quoted Mr Zhai as saying : `` The position of China is to call on the government , the opposition and the rebels to halt acts of violence immediately . 
`` We hope that the referendum on a new constitution as well as the forthcoming parliamentary elections pass off calmly . '' 
After the meeting , Mr Assad was quoted as saying : `` What Syria is facing is fundamentally an effort to divide it and affect its geopolitical place and historic role in the region . '' 
China was one of the nations that voted against a recent UN General Assembly resolution calling on Mr Assad to stop his 11-month crackdown on dissent and step down . 
Beijing , along with Moscow , has insisted outsiders can not force regime change in Syria . 
Opposition activists said government forces were continuing their two-week rocket and artillery attack on the opposition stronghold of Baba Amr in Homs on Saturday . 
Activist Mohammad al-Homsi told Reuters news agency : `` Troops have closed in on Baba Amr and the bombardment is mad , but I do n't know if they are willing to storm the neighborhood while it is snowing . 
`` There is no electricity and communications between districts are cut , so we are unable to get a death toll . '' 
The BBC 's Jim Muir in neighbouring Lebanon says the Syrian government clearly wants to quell all armed resistance and seal its borders to prevent supplies to the opposition . 
Meanwhile the human rights group Amnesty International said it had obtained new evidence of torture being used by Syrian forces against opponents . 
Amnesty researcher Neil Sammonds said one man told him that part of his hand was blown off with explosives after he refused to pray to a photograph of President Assad . 
Other Syrians at a camp in Jordan said detainees were subjected to protracted beatings . 
One prisoner said he had been forced to witness the rape of another male detainee . 
Syria restricts access to foreign media and it is often not possible to verify some reports and casualty figures . 
Human rights groups say more than 7,000 people have died throughout Syria since last March . 
The government says at least 2,000 members of the security forces have been killed combating `` armed gangs and terrorists '' . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
