By Damian Kahya Business reporter , BBC News Is investing in oil firms no longer such a good idea ? 
We might not think of ourselves as shareholders in a big oil company , but many of us are . 
If you hold an occupational pension you probably own shares in BP . 
Investors will have watched last week 's news that the company is to delay a decision on its next dividend payment with concern . 
BP accounts for about 8 % of all the income going into the UK 's pension funds . 
But just as the financial crash raised concerns over banking stocks , BP 's Gulf of Mexico spill is leading some to worry about the risks of owning shares in oil companies . 
Leading economist Lord Stern recently suggested environmental risks including climate change should be factored into long-term investment decisions . 
`` Investing long-term in ` dirty ' technologies is actually risking their clients money , '' he said referring to pension funds . 
But is there an alternative ? 
Most British pensions are partly invested in shares linked to the list of the country 's biggest firms , the FTSE 100 . 
It comes down to whether BP are doing the right and responsible thing when they are trying to improve safety and so on '' End Quote Adrian Lowcock Investment advisor , Best Invest BP is one of the largest on the list . 
Before the oil spill it accounted for around 9 % of the FTSE 100 's value . 
It is also one of relatively few stocks to pay a high dividend . 
But as new oil gets harder to find , international firms are trying to find it in ever more hazardous locations - a mile under the sea , the Arctic and tar sands . 
`` Oil companies are increasingly being forced into these extreme frontier environments where the inherent risk is going up and up , '' says Seb Beloe , head of socially responsible investing at fund management firm , Henderson Global Investors . 
`` Maybe this will prove to be an isolated example , but I would n't be surprised if it was n't . '' 
Many pension funds do now take into account social , political and environmental risks . 
Some ethical investment funds do n't buy shares in tobacco companies But avoiding such stocks entirely is difficult . 
Other big players on the FTSE include fellow oil company Shell , mining giant Rio Tinto , cigarette firm British American Tobacco and defense contractor BAE systems . 
Leaving out shares in such firms could leave a portfolio unbalanced , and so vulnerable to problems in a particular industry , such as banking . 
Instead some pension trustees focus on pushing for companies they own to reform practices . 
`` It comes down to whether BP are doing the right and responsible thing when they are trying to improve safety and so on , '' says Adrian Lowcock an investment advisor from Best Invest . 
Even companies critical of BP , such as the Co-operative Group , own shares in the firm for their employee pension scheme . 
`` We engage with management on performance on environmental and social issues , '' says Mike Fox its head of UK equities . 
There are some private income funds which avoid BP - available to a small number of people . 
Hendersons has a fund which sold out of the stock after BP 's last safety incident in 2003 . 
Since the incident it had out-performed the FTSE by more than 2 % - most of that down to not owning plummeting BP shares . 
But even that fund owns shares in a gas firm . 
`` If you want a dividend and you do n't want to be in oil and gas I do n't know if there is a fund that can meet those criteria , '' says Mr Beloe . 
The situation is different when it comes to investments - such as a share ISA . 
BP boss Tony Hayward has delayed a decision on the dividend Here a range of products offer `` sustainable '' or `` ethical '' ways to invest . 
There is considerable choice as to what areas you may want to focus on or avoid , from animal testing , to climate change , to encouraging renewable energy . 
But these investments carry their own risks . 
`` Funds that choose not to invest in certain markets will always carry some volatility , '' says Mr Fox from the Co-op . 
To begin with they sometimes exclude many of the companies which do relatively well during a recession . 
`` Ethical funds suffer from a lack of diversification , '' says Mr Lowcock . 
`` Defensive companies which are protected from downsides in the market such as alcohol or gambling may not be included . '' 
During the credit crunch some `` ethical '' investments which avoided oil and mining shares instead held shares in banks and small companies - two big losers . 
Individual funds vary , but figures from the Investment Management Association -LRB- IMA -RRB- show # 1000 invested in an ethically filtered group of UK companies earned marginally less over the last one , three , five and 10 years than those in a generic basket . 
The reverse was true for international investments . 
The recovery has also been led by commodity companies - such as BP . 
`` That presents a real challenge , '' says Mr Fox . 
`` And we 've not been exposed to that , so the sustainable market has not been the best-performing . '' 
Currently # 5.9 bn is invested in ethical funds - an all-time record . 
But new sales have not been increasing . 
Gross sales figures from the IMA showed ethical funds accounted for 1.3 % of gross sales in 2007 . 
That figure had almost halved by the first quarter of 2010 . 
Many believe the economic recovery and BP oil spill could see a change in this pattern . 
BP 's shares lost a third of their value after the spill - nothing comparable happened after the Exxon Valdez disaster in 1989 . 
`` Things like socially responsible investment and corporate responsibility move in jumps due to shocks to the system , '' says James Marriot from Platform , an NGO critical of the oil and gas industry . 
He calls stocks such as BP and Shell `` national treasures '' , held by investors because of their reputation for reliable high returns . 
Some , such as Lord Stern , are now arguing these should be seen as rather more risky investments than they were before . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
