By Barry Neild for CNN Refugees from Ivory Coast rest in a village in southern Liberia in this photo dated March 24 . 
Situations in both Libya and Ivory Coast have prompted international intervention Some analysts say Libya is more of a strategic priority for West because of oil U.S. involvement seen unlikely , as Obama struggles to sell intervention to jaded public -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Violence is escalating in the west African nation of Ivory Coast , where president-elect Alassane Ouattara is trying to oust incumbent Laurent Gbagbo , who refused to leave office after losing an election . 
But the international response -- limited to a U.N. peacekeeping force already deployed there -- has paled by comparison with the U.S. and NATO air strikes targeting forces to Moammar Gadhafi in Libya to prevent attacks on rebels and civilians . 
Ivory Coast : Search for justice Ivory Coast 's Gbagbo negotiating way out Reported massacre in Ivory Coast Are there any similarities to the situation in Libya ? 
Analysts say that there are sharp differences in the problems facing the two countries , with Ivory Coast 's problems evolving over a period of years before coming to a boil in recent weeks compared to Libya 's relatively recent turmoil . 
But , they say , there are humanitarian concerns over the violence in both countries . 
`` The two conflicts are very separate , but what is similar is the potential threat to the civilian population , '' says Phil Clark , a lecturer in Comparative and International Politics at London 's School of Oriental and African Studies , who points out that global intervention in both countries has been focused on protecting hundreds of thousands of people at risk rather than on regime change . 
But , says Gilles Yabi , a West Africa analyst with the International Crisis Group , the situation on the ground is vastly different with Gbagbo -- whom the United Nations and the United States have urged to stand down -- having no access to planes and helicopters like those initially deployed by Gadhafi . 
`` We have to be quite prudent about making comparisons , '' he said . 
What are the differences in international response ? 
Again there are similarities , with both situations prompting U.N. Security Council resolutions mandating international military intervention , albeit on different scales . 
In Libya , aircraft were deployed to attack Gadhafi 's air defenses and to protect opposition rebels and civilians from government troops . 
In Ivory Coast , extra troops were authorized earlier in the year increasing the size of the U.N. peacekeeping force to 11,000 , while France has dispatched 300 military personnel . 
Tom Cargill , an Africa expert at the Chatham House think tank , says U.N.-sanctioned air strikes in the Ivory Coast conflict are unlikely . 
`` The situation has moved quickly with the rebels moving into built up areas , so there has n't been time to get a mandate from the U.N. , but because they are in built-up areas , that kind of intervention probably wo n't be something air forces would consider . '' 
Analysts disagree on the reasons . 
Cargill says the two can not be compared since Ivory Coast has endured years of crisis and a sustained international engagement aimed at finding a political solution . 
Others like Clark point to more strategic factors , not least the fact that Western countries feel over-stretched by Libya and are unwilling to commit to the same level of action in Ivory Coast . 
`` I think Libya has in a sense acted as a kind of deterrent to collective action , '' says Knox Chitiyo , head of the Africa program at the UK 's Royal United Services Institute for Defense and Security Studies . 
`` In terms of escalation , -LRB- Ivory Coast -RRB- has been unfortunate in terms of timing , as the world 's attention has been focused on the Middle East and particularly Libya , so the Ivory Coast , which has been a slow-burning crisis , fell off the radar . '' 
Yes , say some analysts . 
As a major oil producer , Libya 's strategic significance is far greater than cocoa - and coffee-producing Ivory Coast , says Clark . 
Libya 's potential as an incubator for Middle Eastern democracy is also an attention-grabber for Western countries , he says . 
`` There is significant concern over Libya 's oil and what that would mean for Western strategic interest and there 's a sense that Libya fits into this wider pattern of democratization and the falling of draconian regimes in North Africa and the Middle East . '' 
Knox adds : `` Oil is seen by the West as a more strategic commodity than cocoa if we 're to be quite blunt . '' 
Is America likely to get involved in the same way it has in Libya ? 
No , says Knox , partly because as he has shown with Libya , President Barack Obama is unwilling to take a leading role in multinational intervention . 
But , he says , this is also because Obama would find it tough to convince a public disillusioned by America 's experiences in Iraq and Afghanistan , particularly given Ivory Coast 's perceived lack of strategic significance . 
`` We 've seen that Obama has had a real problem selling -LRB- intervention -RRB- to the U.S. audience , '' he said . 
Why is France so involved ? 
As Ivory Coast 's former colonial ruler , France not only has experience of working in the country but also appears to feel a duty to do so , pressing for Security Council action and dispatching troops . 
This , says Yabi , creates its own problems as Gbagbo uses the French presence for his own benefit . 
`` Anti-colonial discourse is one of Gbagbo 's political weapons and he is trying to resuscitate that rhetoric against France . '' 
Knox adds that France 's involvement points to a broader campaign by Paris to inject itself into the international arena , as punctuated by President Nicolas Sarkozy -LRB- who is seeking re-election next year -RRB- taking a lead role in urging military action in Libya . 
