Join Fred Pleitgen , CNN Producer Jonathan Wald and CNN Photographer Scotty McWhinnie as they travel with international organizations delivering aid to the war-torn Libyan city of Misrata . 
During an 18-hour boat trip from Malta , the team travels through treacherous waters , keeping an eye out for possible assaults from Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's forces . 
When the team reaches shore , they hook up with rebel fighters who take them into the heart of the battle-weary city . 
At one point Fred and the team run and take cover from incoming fire . 
Fred also shows us what he calls `` one of the worst humanitarian situations '' he 's seen in a long time . 
-LRB- And Fred has seen some pretty bad stuff during his years of reporting -RRB- And finally , watch as Fred , Jonathan and Scotty travel back to Malta by boat in the dead of night , battling rough surf but still managing to do back-to-back live shots while on board . 
A fascinating and informative journey . 
Fred , jonathan and scotty , you guy are doing a great job !!! Very successful at turning tragic Civil War into a `` worlds deadliest catch '' format . 
Nice one boys , top notch journalism , cutting right to the heart of the issue ... Next could you perhaps get a Rebel to Wrestle a Bear ? 
How come the team was rightfully checked by the navy whilst crossing the Meditterranean and yet thousands upon thousands of illegal immigrants cross the same sea to Malta and Lampedusa risking life and limb and causing a huge humanitarian tragedy at the receiving end ? 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Notify me of follow-up comments via email . 
Notify me of new posts via email . 
A new Back | Story series that unearths fascinating new secrets about places and stories you thought you knew . 
Every other Thursday on Back | Story Join the action on our new series , The Revealer . 
Use the photo clues to figure out what the subject of this week s episode will be . 
Click on the picture to the left for more . 
CNN site devoted to helping others . 
www.impossible2possible.com - `` use adventure as a medium to educate , inspire and empower ... '' www.filterpurefilters.org - `` providing safe water for the undeserved '' 
