cents One patient is pupil at school closed due to outbreak cents Johnson : no evidence of ` sustained ' human transmission South Hampstead high school , which was reopening today . 
Photograph : Carl de Souza\/AFP\/Getty Images Two new cases of swine flu have been diagnosed in the UK , one in a child , the health secretary , Alan Johnson , said today . 
The child is a pupil at one of the five schools that have already been closed due to the outbreak . 
Johnson said there was no evidence of `` sustained '' person to person transmission of the virus in Britain . 
But he warned in a Commons statement : `` This does remain a serious situation which could rapidly escalate . '' 
The new cases bring the UK total to 34 . 
Johnson told MPs an alternative quick-response system was being developed in case the outbreak escalates before a dedicated flu helpline is opened in the autumn . 
The exams regulator Ofqual was meeting today to discuss contingency plans for pupils disrupted by the outbreak . 
It is understood that children could sit exams elsewhere or , if they are sick with the virus , be awarded a grade based on papers or coursework they have completed . 
Johnson and the chief medical officer , Sir Liam Donaldson , will give a further update on the outbreak later today . 
Laboratory tests are being carried out on 390 people who may have the H1N1 virus , the Health Protection Agency said . 
News of the latest cases came as South Hampstead high school , in north-west London , became the first of the five closed schools to reopen . 
Four other schools Paignton community and sports college , in Devon ; Alleyn 's school , in Dulwich , south-east London ; Downend school , in south Gloucestershire ; and the private preparatory Dolphin school , in Battersea , south London remain closed . 
GCSE exams began across the UK today with a design and technology practical test , under the OCR board . 
It was not known whether pupils at any of the affected schools were sitting this exam . 
Schools hit by the illness are rescheduling exams or asking for special consideration for GCSE and A-level pupils . 
A Department for Children , Schools and Families spokeswoman confirmed that officials were working with Ofqual and the exam boards to put in place contingency plans . 
She said : `` Arrangements will be made on a case by case basis , so that all students are fairly treated . 
Basing final results on other evidence , like coursework or modules already completed -LRB- also known as special consideration -RRB- , is just one contingency arrangement , and would only happen in specific circumstances where a student was unable to take a particular exam . 
`` This is a tried and tested system that exam boards use to award students grades if they are unable to take an exam for a given reason . '' 
Alleyn 's school , which closed after five year seven pupils were diagnosed with swine flu on Monday , said it was rescheduling A-level exams in art , biology and foreign languages for next week . 
The government today pledged # 6m in aid to help poor countries in the global fight against swine flu . 
The money from the Department for International Development will be given to the World Health Organisation and the UN for drugs , logistics and training to assist efforts to stop the spread of the virus and to prepare countries for a pandemic . 
