The U.S. financial system this weekend faced its gravest crisis in modern times , as regulators resorted to triage on Wall Street to contain the spreading damage from a meltdown in the housing and mortgage market . 
Two of the world 's biggest investment banks , Merrill Lynch and Lehman Brothers , appeared almost certain to disappear , Merrill into the arms of banking behemoth Bank of America and Lehman into bankruptcy . 
American International Group , once the country 's largest insurer , was seeking a financial lifeline . 
This came just seven days after the government took over housing finance giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
For all the drama of the weekend , these were the first steps -- but far from the last -- in finding a fundamentally new architecture for the financial world . 
The titans of Wall Street have , over the past 72 hours , been forced to reckon with the reality that the financial sector they built is , in its current form , too big , uses too much borrowed money and creates too much risk for the broader economy . 
In a weekend of intensive and almost nonstop meetings behind the massive stone facade of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York , Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. and New York Fed President Timothy F. Geithner oversaw a series of meetings that essentially forced the chief executives of every major firm to grapple with a crisis of their own making . 
The work proceeded along parallel tracks . 
Paulson and Geithner were trying to find a buyer for Lehman Brothers . 
But from the beginning , they were also running meetings to try to game out the problems that could result if Lehman did fail . 
This morning will offer an acid test of whether that contingency planning was enough . 
However things go on Wall Street and financial capitals around the world today , the reworking of the global financial system will continue apace . 
Among the issues likely to be scrutinized : How much of a day-to-day role should the government and regulators take in financial markets ? 
Which agencies should oversee financial institutions ? 
Should the basics of the financial world be rethought ? 
Paulson has offered a blueprint to overhaul this financial regulation , and Congress plans to take it up next year . 
The deepening of the financial crisis will almost certainly make that effort more pressing . 
Wall Street firms have been allowed to grow with relatively few restrictions ; the regulator that oversees their financial soundness , the Securities and Exchange Commission , is historically more focused on protecting investors than preventing a run on a bank . 
Indeed , the investment banks -- there were , as of March , five major ones , but after this weekend there now appear set to be only three -- agreed voluntarily to that `` prudential supervision . '' 
The Federal Reserve , the agency that has more explicit focus than any other on rooting out risks to the financial system , has little authority over institutions that are n't commercial bank holding companies . 
Regulators of all stripes have had difficulty getting the information they need to fully understand the risks that financial firms are taking . 
The $ 50 trillion corporate derivatives market is a model of obscurity . 
The same could be said of many structured debt products , which slice up mortgages , credit card debts , or corporate loans in such ways that understanding how risky they are requires a PhD in mathematics . 
Indeed , it is increasingly clear that Wall Street chief executives themselves did n't fully understand the risks they were taking on during the boom years of this decade ; they have seemed as blindsided as any regulator . 
The problems on Wall Street may go deeper . 
Financial firms have expanded vastly in the past decade , hiring tens of thousands of bright business school graduates to engineer new financial products , find ever more complicated ways to manage other peoples ' money , and dream up new ways to combine , divide , and recombine corporate America . 
Some large portion of that work , it now appears , was n't really creating any value for the company 's clients or for the U.S. economy . 
No matter how many times crummy mortgage loans are recombined into clever packages , they 're still crummy . 
In a perfect world , those excesses would be corrected by a gradual , orderly decline , in which a few firms get bought out by competitors , some modest layoffs occur , and Wall Street cuts back on its hiring for a few years . 
In the real world , that correction is occurring before our eyes , through a series of convulsive weekends in which the entire financial world appears at risk of coming off the rails . 
So far , the conflagration has only singed the broader U.S. economy . 
Gross domestic product grew at a 3.3 percent annual rate in the second quarter , and the unemployment rate has risen sharply this year but , at 6.1 percent , is not as high as it has been in past bad economic times . 
The question that remains is : How much more of Wall Street 's problems can the rest of America take ? '' 
