Why I 'm tearing up my Labor party card The treatment of Walter Wolfgang , after Iraq , proved too much for one long-time supporter I 'm writing to you as the leader of the party from which I am now resigning . 
I joined the Labor party in 1964 but this week is the first time I have felt ashamed of my membership . 
You will say it was an accident that two men were viciously bundled from the conference hall on Wednesday . 
But then you lie as you breathe . 
It is impossible that you do not know that when you took power as Labor leader you were determined to stamp out all public dissent and discussion within the party . 
It is impossible , in a more recent time frame , that you did not know and approve of the decision that there would be no debate on Iraq . 
Even as I write this phrase , its absurdity , its grotesqueness hits me again . 
No debate on Iraq , no debate on the most important foreign policy issue that has confronted Britain since World War Two . 
No debate on Iraq , which has brought such a fear of violence to London . 
No debate on Iraq - on the national disaster with which the names of Guantanamo and Britain will be linked in infamy for our generation and probably beyond . 
It is unthinkable that the Labor party could not debate the Iraqi war . 
But , of course , it is equally unthinkable that it could . 
For the situation there is so dire , the peril in which you have placed the nation is so acute that if even the smallest murmurs of evidence and argument were to be heard they would soon become a gale that would sweep you from office . 
It was telling that you did not even dare to speak to the old geezer they roughed up . 
But you had only to take one look at Walter Wolfgang and you could see Old Labor incarnate . 
An Old Labor that believed in swaying democratic opinion by fact and reason . 
An Old Labor that believed in debate . 
Given 60 seconds in front of the television cameras with Wolfgang and you 'd have been mincemeat . 
You presided over a government which suborned its security services to provide false headlines for you to mislead the Commons into voting for the war . 
Worse , you ignored every lesson of our last imperial disaster in Mesopotamia - a campaign which became a byword for our soldiers being slaughtered to satisfy the vanity of politicians . 
Political parties are institutions which allow debate to be turned into action ; they allow people from different class backgrounds , from different regions , from different races to debate policy knowing that the conclusion of the debate will be the determination of a particular course of action . 
There are no debates now because there is no question about what action will be taken . 
The Chancellor 's peculiarly Presbyterian form of neo-liberalism is absolutely not open for debate . 
If it were , then the scandal of PFI , which represents a continuous tax on the poor by the rich , would be common knowledge . 
Worse in the short term , this lack of debate has allowed no political dissent from the disastrous economic policy of running deficits to fund unproductive investment . 
Old Labor used to run deficits to employ low-paid workers in the unproductive old public sector ; New Labor runs deficits to employ highly-paid consultants in the even more unproductive new public sector . 
In the only industry that I know at first hand , the scale of government handouts is jawdropping . 
New Labor has created a new film body , the Film Council , whose overheads now exceed the production budgets of the very efficient bodies that it replaced . 
There is enormously wasteful duplication of government resources . 
Friends from every sector report the same story . 
It is true that your news management is breathtakingly effective but I do not think this is cause for congratulation . 
You have produced systems of Treasury funding in which there 's always a government nark in the room and you have backed it up with a relentless use of patronage which would make an 18th-century Whig blush . 
No one dares to complain about the Film Council , for example , because they know it will prejudice their next funding application . 
Last week a woman broke down in tears at one of the fringe meetings when she recounted how she could n't talk about Iraq in her constituency . 
Looking at Wolfgang being manhandled from the hall , I was reminded of that chilling footage when Saddam staged his coup in the Baath party at a meeting of the central committee and pointed out the individuals who were to be frogmarched from the room . 
This is Britain , so what awaited Walter Wolfgang outside the conference doors was not a bullet in the head . 
The lady 's tears were caused by her fear of expulsion , not of imprisonment . 
If the method is soft , however , the totalitarian desire to crush debate is hard . 
If Nazi Germany was fascism by radio , New Labor is the corporate state by television . 
The determination to control the party 's image on television is incompatible with a democratic party and , indeed , with democracy . 
I have not been an activist for decades . 
I live in Islington and watching Margaret Hodge and the Loony Left morph effortlessly into New Labor was not a pretty sight . 
Networking with power-mad social climbers was not my idea of the good life . 
I have remained a member of the Labor party , however , because it still seemed to me to be a way of connecting at the national level with people who shared my beliefs in the possibility of a fairer and more equal society . 
Last week has made clear what I 've known but not wanted to admit for at least six years : that you have made it impossible for me to enjoy any such connection . 
For well over a century the Labor party has provided a crucial forum where the marginal and the powerless could speak . 
You have ensured that this is no longer the case . 
The white working class of this country has lost its most important institutional voice as it undergoes the most brutal economic transformation since the Industrial Revolution . 
Indeed , it is clear that you yourself have no belief in any goal of real equality - the New Labor aim , Brown as well as Blair , is just to manage the underclass . 
Of course , there can be no debate . 
When I joined the Labor party I was a schoolboy and I remember learning Kipling 's poem ` Mesopotamia ' by heart . 
It is a savage attack on the politicians who had sent young men to die pointlessly in what is now Iraq . 
In a Labor party defined by its opposition to Suez and opposed to all imperial adventure , it seemed a poem about a far distant past . 
But when I remember it now under a Labor government in the 21st century , it seems directly contemporary . 
You have told the world , to this country 's enduring risk and shame , that Britain will back any American government , no matter how dangerous , in pursuing reckless schemes of military adventure . 
In so doing , you despise all the Labor party 's best traditions . 
Kipling puts it better than I can : -LRB- Your -RRB- lives can not repay us - -LRB- your deaths -RRB- could not undo - The shame that -LRB- you -RRB- have laid upon our race . 
But the slothfulness that wasted and the arrogance that slew , Shall we leave it unabated in its place ? 
A longer version of this letter will be published in Critical Quarterly vol .48 . 
