Aided by Financial Crisis , China Snaps Up Natural Resources Worldwide SHANGHAI -- Chinese companies have been on a shopping spree in the past month , snapping up tens of billions of dollars ' worth of key assets in Iran , Brazil , Russia , Venezuela , Australia and France in a global fire sale set off by the financial crisis . 
The deals have allowed China to lock up supplies of oil , minerals , metals and other strategic natural resources it needs to continue to fuel its growth . 
The sheer scope of the agreements marks a shift in global finance , roiling energy markets and feeding worries about the future availability and prices of those commodities in other countries that compete for them , including the United States . 
Just a few months ago , many countries were greeting such overtures from China with suspicion . 
Today , as corporations and banks in other parts of the world find themselves reluctant or unable to give out money to distressed companies , cash-rich China has become a major force driving new lending and investment . 
On Feb. 12 , China 's state-owned metals giant Chinalco signed a $ 19.5 billion deal with Australia 's Rio Tinto that will eventually double its stake in the world 's second-largest mining company . 
In three other cases , China has used loans as a way of securing energy supplies . 
On Feb. 17 and 18 , China National Petroleum signed separate agreements with Russia and Venezuela under which China would provide $ 25 billion and $ 4 billion in loans , respectively , in exchange for long-term commitments to supply oil . 
And on Feb. 19 , the China Development Bank struck a similar deal with Petrobras , the Brazilian oil company , agreeing to a loan of $ 10 billion in exchange for oil . 
On Saturday , Iran announced that it had signed a $ 3.2 billion agreement with a Chinese consortium to develop an area beneath the Persian Gulf seabed that is believed to hold about 8 percent of the world 's reserves of natural gas . 
Even as global financial flows have slowed sharply overall , China has dramatically stepped up its outbound investment . 
In 2008 , its overseas mergers and acquisitions were worth $ 52.1 billion -- a record , according to the research firm Dealogic . 
In January and February of this year , Chinese companies invested $ 16.3 billion abroad , meaning that if the pace holds , the total for 2009 could be nearly double last year 's . 
Worldwide , the value of mergers and acquisitions transactions so far this year has dropped 35 percent to $ 384 billion . 
By comparison , the United States had $ 186.2 billion in outbound mergers and acquisitions in 2008 and Japan had $ 74.3 billion . 
China 's state-run media outlets are calling the acquisition spree an opportunity that comes once in a hundred years , and analysts are drawing parallels to 1980s Japan . 
`` That China started investing or acquiring some overseas mineral resources companies with relatively low prices during the global economic crisis is quite a normal practice . 
Japan did the same thing in its prime development period , too , '' said Xu Xiangchun , consulting director for Mysteel.com , a market research and analysis firm . 
It 's not just Chinese corporations that are taking advantage of the economic crisis to help others while helping themselves . 
The Chinese government also has come to the rescue of ailing countries , such as Jamaica and Pakistan , that it wants as allies , extending generous loans . 
Even Chinese consumers are taking their money abroad . 
In a shopping trip last month organized by an online real estate brokerage , a group of 50 individual investors from China traveled to New York , Los Angeles and San Francisco to purchase homes at prices that have crashed since the subprime crisis . 
