We must not be blackmailed by Merkel 's neoliberal gang Schr der 's government has made mistakes , but it is on the side of the disadvantaged and kept us out of an illegal war As hard as it will be to achieve this result in the German elections , I none the less make the case for the Social Democrat and Green coalition to continue in government under the chancellor , Gerhard Schrder , and the foreign minister , Joschka Fischer . 
Both have the courage to undertake difficult reforms ; both have demonstrated responsible behavior in the face of crises . 
Let us recall : four years ago the attack on the World Trade Centre shook America - and Germany . 
The chancellor promised the US unswerving support in the fight against terrorism - but he added a caveat that Germany would not get involved in military adventures . 
That warning proved all too necessary . 
Shortly afterwards , in the words of the US president , Iraq was declared the No 1 rogue state . 
America 's former ally , Saddam Hussein , became the devil incarnate . 
Based on the flimsy claim that nuclear weapons were being produced in Iraq , a war ensued that made victims of Iraq 's civilians and has not ended . 
We now know that the US deceived its allies , and some were led a merry dance into volunteering for war . 
The German government - whose predecessors were known for their unthinking allegiance - had the courage to speak out against the president of a superpower ; Willy Brandt would have described it as `` courage before a friend '' . 
Of course , the opposition CDU-CSU was horrified . 
How could the superpower be rebuked in such a foolhardy way ? 
The chancellor and foreign minister were not swayed . 
To this day , they have stood by this responsible decision and at the same time shown themselves to be loyal to the role of the UN . 
If the Stoiber-Merkel duo had won the last election , in 2002 , Germany and its soldiers would be embroiled in the war , suffering the consequences that the people of Iraq and every `` willing '' ally are enduring to this day . 
Angela Merkel still refuses to recognize her political misjudgment . 
To vote her into federal office would be reckless . 
And who would take over Fischer 's responsibility for foreign policy ? 
A joker named Guido Westerwelle -LRB- from the Free Democratic party , the CDU 's coalition partner -RRB- , for example ? 
Here we already have a party that , seeking to favor high earners , has submitted to the dogmas of neoliberalism . 
With lunatic plans for tax cuts it , along with the CDU , has cosied up to big business . 
Others have made mistakes , and I do not want to minimize the misjudgments that chancellor Schrder 's government has made . 
Promises made by employers were believed for too long ; considerable income-tax cuts resulted only in demands for further cuts ; profits are being pocketed , not invested in new jobs ; directors of banks and major industries are giving themselves fraudulently high salaries and payoffs - while demanding , often using blackmail , that workers go without wage rises . 
The permanent threat of job losses allows trade unions to be intimidated and the working population to be manipulated . 
The Social Democrats and Greens have given in to such pressure too often - in a manner that is detrimental to democracy . 
How will we get anywhere if groups outside parliament , such as the powerful pharmaceutical lobby , continue to influence legislation ? 
If this continues , injustices will accumulate . 
Let us hope it is not too late for the current government to recognize that the financial consequences of its reforms should no longer favor only the very wealthy , but need to be for the good of all parts of society . 
The FDP wants the highest rate of income tax to fall to 35 % . 
Then again , Paul Kirchhof , Frau Merkel 's wunderkind and her choice for finance minister , plans to outdo them with his neoliberal masterpiece of a 25 % flat-rate income tax for all . 
One can only hope that as many people as possible will recognize this swindle before he gets near government . 
Please do n't tell us that the big parties are all the same , and that there is no longer a left and a right . 
It is the Social Democrats and the Green party that stood up for employees ' rights against the Christian Democrats ' neoliberal obsession with redundancy . 
It is the Social Democrats that stood up for comprehensive schools . 
It is the CDU and CSU , on the other hand , that are always attempting to block the way to educational justice . 
It is the Greens ' admirably brave minister Renate Kunast who takes the farming lobby to task and is committed to protecting the consumer . 
It is the Greens and Social Democrats who imposed a nuclear ban and promoted renewable energy , creating new jobs . 
It is true that the initial move towards reform by the red-green coalition was full of mistakes . 
But they had the desire to learn from their errors . 
At the same time , the CDU made a point of badmouthing Germany , particularly from an economic standpoint . 
In parliament 's upper house , the CDU has been blocking a multitude of reforms . 
Its conduct as an opposition party has taken on a destructive nature . 
The only thing it is good at is complaining . 
Our country must not sink into self-pity nor lapse again into the stagnation of the Helmut Kohl era . 
More courage is needed to make essential changes , even those that may hurt . 
Thanks to new legislation , hundreds of thousands of foreign nationals have gained the possibility of German residency . 
They are an asset to our country , because their cultures contribute to the color and variety of our society . 
Only when their own cultures are respected will they be ready to recognize the enrichment they would get from the German culture and language . 
With this we come again to Schrder and Fischer . 
Both are capable of admitting mistakes and correcting them . 
Both are occasionally criticised for their arrogance . 
That 's all very well , but when one has drive and energy , and the other self-confidence , and both fearlessly handle the media , they deserve to survive . 
After all , it is thanks to their fierce determination that our soldiers escaped a war that was contrary to international law . 
Their actions reinforced Germany 's reputation abroad . 
I will vote for the red-green alliance because it protected us from war ; had the courage to face difficult reforms ; is on the side of the socially disadvantaged ; and will save us from descending into a US-style class system . 
Gnter Grass was awarded the Nobel prize for literature in 1999 ; a version of this article first appeared in the Sddeutsche Zeitung Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : G nter Grass : We must not be blackmailed by Merkel 's neoliberal gang This article appeared on p33 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 03.04 BST on Friday 16 September 2005 
