BP agreed in 2004 to the installation of a test valve and replacement of another key part on the Deepwater Horizon 's blowout preventer , even though it acknowledged that doing so would reduce redundancies and increase risks on the drilling rig . 
The agreement was the subject of a letter , obtained by The Washington Post , written by rig owner Transocean and signed by a BP representative . 
BP told members of Congress this month that it did not know about a reconfiguration of the blowout preventer . 
Rep. Bart Stupak -LRB- D-Mich . -RRB- 
, after reviewing information provided by BP , called the test valve `` useless '' and questioned Transocean about its placement . 
He said BP told his subcommittee that while oil was spilling into the Gulf of Mexico the company spent `` an entire day 's worth of precious time ... engaging rams that closed the wrong way '' because a test valve was in the place where BP expected to find a variable bore ram capable of pinching off the oil flow . 
BP and Transocean have said there were still more than the number of rams required by the Minerals Management Service . 
Rams are devices designed to cut off surging oil and natural gas after a well blowout like the one that set the Deepwater Horizon on fire on April 20 and started the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
But given the failure of the blowout preventer to stop the explosion and oil spill , investigators are looking closely at every aspect of the operation . 
It remains unclear what caused , and what might have stopped , the spill . 
In the letter , dated Oct. 11 , 2004 , Transocean senior marketing executive Christopher S. Young wrote to document an agreement with BP that Transocean would convert a variable bore ram with a test ram at BP 's expense . 
He said that by signing the letter , BP would be acknowledging that the conversion `` will reduce the built-in redundancy '' of the blowout preventer , `` thereby potentially increasing Contractor 's risk profile . '' 
A BP representative signed the letter on Oct. 19 , 2004 . 
A company spokesman said Saturday that Transocean was responsible for any modifications . 
A variable bore ram can clamp down and seal openings around pipes of different sizes . 
It is one of a series of rams on a blowout preventer designed to stop the flow of oil and gas if a driller loses control of the pressure in a well . 
After installing the test valve , two variable bore rams still remained on the blowout preventer . 
Some companies have advocated the permanent installation of test valves on the blowout preventer to save time and money during testing . 
When the issue came up during the May 12 hearing of the House subcommittee on oversight and investigations , Transocean chief executive Steven Newman said modifications to the blowout preventer were done in 2005 at BP 's request and expense . 
BP America President Lamar McKay then said , `` I do n't personally know whether those were the exact modifications '' that BP discovered after the accident `` or -LRB- whether -RRB- there were additional ones . 
And I think that 's a very , very important piece of the investigation . '' '' 
