HOUSTON | Wed May 26 , 2010 7:46 pm EDT HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc said an ambitious deep-sea operation to choke off a gushing oil leak in the Gulf of Mexico was proceeding as planned on Wednesday , while President Barack Obama cautioned Americans there was no guarantee it would work . 
BP is under intense pressure from Obama to bring a swift end to the five-week-old leak that threatens an environmental catastrophe and a blow to Obama 's crisis-manager image . 
Undersea robots were helping to inject heavy fluids and ultimately cement pumped down about a mile to the sea-bed well , while BP chief executive Tony Hayward and U.S. Energy Secretary Steven Chu monitored operations together in Houston . 
`` The operation is proceeding as we planned it , '' Hayward said in a media briefing four hours after launching the `` top kill '' strategy to stanch the leak . 
`` It will be another 24 hours before we know whether or not this has been successful , '' he added . 
The embattled CEO stood by BP 's 60-70 percent odds of success . 
But top kill , a routine procedure on the surface , has never been attempted at such depths , prompting one industry expert to put the odds of success at less than 50 percent . 
`` You have got some of the smartest guys in the business trying to figure this out , but it has never been done before , '' David Pursell , partner at Houston investment bank Tudor , Pickering , Holt & Co , told Reuters Insider . 
`` I think the odds have to be 50 percent or less , '' he added . 
Obama said that if successful , BP 's plan to cap the well should greatly reduce or eliminate the flow of hundreds of thousands of gallons -LRB- liters -RRB- of crude billowing into the Gulf . 
If it fails , `` there are other approaches that may be viable , '' he said on a trip to California . 
Obama , who has told aides to `` plug the damn hole , '' will head to Louisiana on Friday for the second time since the April 20 rig blast that killed 11 and unleashed the oil . 
BP says the next approach would be to install a containment device over the broken blowout preventer , a structure at the top of the well on the ocean floor , to try to stop the oil flow . 
It would attempt this in the next three or four days . 
It is still unclear how much oil is flowing from the well , but it is already shaping up to be the worst oil spill in U.S. history and a long-term threat to a rich ecosystem . 
The oil 's destruction of critical habitats continued to spread , with Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal saying that more than 100 miles of the state 's 400-mile coastline were now affected . 
A BP statement said the top kill action began at 1 p.m. CST after the U.S. Coast Guard approved the operation , the most ambitious effort to date to cap the well . 
PIVOTAL DAYS FOR OBAMA , BP These days may be critical for the London-based energy giant and Obama . 
BP 's reputation and its big presence in the United States is at stake and investors , who have wiped $ 50 billion off BP 's market value since the start of the spill , will watch closely to see whether the latest attempt to seal the well works . 
BP shares seesawed in London trading , with investors boosting the share price about 2.6 percent at one point before it closed up 1.4 percent . 
BP 's announcement that it had launched the new operation came after London markets had closed . 
If the effort fails , Obama may have no choice but to take charge of the response . 
He has so far deflected calls for the government to take a more direct role and said BP has legal responsibility for fixing the mess . 
What he can do is unclear because the government does not have its own deepwater tools and technology and will have to rely on BP . 
But even with Obama applying constant pressure on the company , polls show that nearly half of Americans are unhappy with how he has handled it . 
That sentiment could play into the November elections that are widely expected to erode his Democratic Party 's control of the U.S. Congress . 
Florida Democratic Senator Bill Nelson said if BP failed to plug the leak this week , Obama must seize personal control of the effort immediately . 
`` If this thing does n't work then the president ought to turn this over to the military . 
It has the command structure to bring in all the civilian agencies , '' said Nelson . 
Residents of the Gulf region are particularly concerned about the impact of spreading oil on wildlife and area shorelines , home to a lucrative fishing and tourism business . 
Billy Nungesser , president of Plaquemines Parish , one of the worst affected Louisiana coastal districts so far , sharply criticized BP executives and Coast Guard leaders , saying they had no comprehensive plan to defend the coast from the oil . 
`` We will lose more coastline from this catastrophe than from all four hurricanes -- Katrina , Rita , Gustav and Ike , '' said Nungesser . 
Commercial fishing , shrimping and oyster harvests have been shut down for weeks along much of the Gulf coast , home to a $ 6.5 billion seafood industry . 
BP said it had appointed an independent mediator to oversee damage claims . 
More than 26,000 claims have been submitted so far , resulting in payments of more than $ 36 million . 
BP has estimated that about 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons\/795 ,000 liters -RRB- have been leaking every day , although some scientists have given much higher numbers for the size of the leak -- up to 20 times more . 
The head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , Jane Lubchenco , told a congressional hearing the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration would provide a new estimate within two weeks on the amount of oil leaking from the well . 
`` It 's only been in the last couple of days that we have gotten video that was high enough resolution , long enough length and fast enough shutter speed to really do credible calculations , '' Lubchenco said . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Yet , nobody actually says what he should do . 
What we 're seeing in the Gulf , is exactly what the GOP , Conservatives , Libertarians , etc , have been whining for , for decades -- - sparse Federal regulation , with Corporations monitoring themselves . 
Just like the financial meltdown , we 're seeing the result of that ideology . 
Yet , now they 're whining for Obama to do more -- - for more Federal intervention . 
The hypocrisy , kind of makes one 's mind explode . 
And sadly , due to the Corporate influence of the Federal Government , the Government is n't prepared to do anything . 
They do n't even have submersibles capable of working at that depth . 
Maybe Obama can dive down there himself , and pump all the GOP hot-air into the well , to equalize the pressure ... Several people need to go to jail for this but sadly no one will . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
