Special report : Civil fine in Gulf spill could be $ 4,300 barrel NEW YORK | Wed May 26 , 2010 8:25 am EDT NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Just how many barrels of oil are gushing into the Gulf of Mexico from the Deepwater Horizon spill is a billion dollar question with implications that go beyond the environment . 
It could also help determine how much BP and others end up paying for the disaster . 
A clause buried deep in the U.S. Clean Water Act may expose BP and others to civil fines that are n't limited to any finite cap -- unlike a $ 75 million limit on compensation for economic damages . 
The Act allows the government to seek civil penalties in court for every drop of oil that spills into U.S. navigable waters , including the area of BP 's leaking well . 
As a result , the U.S. government could seek to fine BP or others up to $ 4,300 for every barrel leaked into the U.S. Gulf , according to legal experts and official documents . 
So far , analysts and experts calculating potential oil spill liabilities have mostly concentrated on the cost of the clean-up and compensation for economic damages to affected parties . 
Some have also discussed criminal liabilities . 
But the potential for civil fines has received scant attention -- and they could add up very quickly , depending on how aggressive the U.S. government is in pursuing them . 
The threat of hefty fines underscores the importance of quantifying how much oil is pouring into the Gulf . 
As BP seeks to staunch the leak that has now been gushing for at least 33 days , it has estimated a spill rate of 5,000 barrels per day . 
But some experts say the volume -- and hence the fines -- could be more than 10 times higher . 
The little-known , seldom applied clause in the Clean Water Act was added in 1990 after the Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska , and was intended to beef up the arsenal of penalties the government can apply to oil spillers to deter future disasters . 
`` These civil penalties could be staggeringly high , possibly running into the billions , '' said Professor David Uhlmann , director of the Environmental Law program at University of Michigan . 
Total liability -- including civil fines as well as the cost of clean-up , economic damages and potential criminal liability -- `` will run into the billions and may be in the tens of billions , '' Uhlmann said . 
Under the Clean Water Act , the Environmental Protection Agency can seek in federal court to fine any party whose negligence results in an oil spill in U.S. federal waters . 
Other companies involved at the Horizon platform and the oilfield could share liability with BP , experts said . 
They include rig-owner Transocean Ltd , cementing contractor Halliburton Co. , blowout preventer manufacturer Cameron , and Anadarko and Mitsui , which also hold stakes in the oilfield . 
The basic fine , according to the act , is $ 1,100 per barrel spilled . 
But the penalty can rise to $ 4,300 a barrel if a federal court rules the spill resulted from gross negligence . 
The fines were originally set at $ 1,000 to $ 3,000 but that was raised in 2004 to keep up with inflation , according to Tracy Hester , head of the Environmental Law and Policy program at the University of Houston . 
-LRB- To see an EPA memo on 2004 revisions to penalties outlined in the Clean Water Act , click here : here -RRB- It is unclear , however , that the EPA would try to apply the fines , or seek maximum penalty levels . 
EPA officials did not respond to several calls and e-mails requesting comment . 
If the agency does act , the per-barrel fines could push oil companies ' liability well beyond the cost of cleaning up the spill and paying legitimate claims for economic damages it causes , experts told Reuters . 
`` There are civil fines that could be quite substantial . 
I think BP 's exposure to this is far greater than people initially thought , '' said Harvard Law School professor Jody Freeman , who recently served in the White House as Counselor for Energy and Climate Change . 
BP has already said it will voluntarily exceed a $ 75 million cap on liability for economic damages , pledging to pay any `` legitimate claim '' it receives . 
But the civil fines are another wild card . 
BP spokesman Mark Salt said the company had nothing further to add to what it has said about the costs of the oil spill response . 
Cash raised from such fines would be funneled to government pollution funds , which provide economic aid for hazardous material spills . 
BP or other parties facing fines could appeal them , or try to settle with the government for a lesser amount . 
Another option would be for BP or other responsible parties to seek a far-ranging settlement covering various areas of liability . 
`` The amount of barrels being released from the well is going to be critical , '' said Hester of the University of Houston . 
Under pressure over the government 's response to the disaster , President Barack Obama last Friday created a bi-partisan commission on the spill , and the administration has pledged to independently verify the volume of oil leaking into the Gulf . 
`` We 're not depending on what BP is telling us , '' Interior Secretary Ken Salazar told CNN last week . 
After past oil spills , experts said , civil fines have comprised a modest proportion of total liability , but they said the magnitude of the Gulf spill may lead the government to seek unprecedented penalties . 
It is common for the government to wait until an oil spill clean-up is well underway before pursuing civil penalties , experts said . 
Authorities would also need an accurate accounting of the spill volume before seeking the fines . 
Bernstein Research estimated in late April that BP 's liability could reach $ 8 billion , but that figure did n't include any potential penalties . 
BP 's stock price has plunged by around 30 percent since deadly explosions rocked the Transocean Deepwater Horizon rig on April 20 , setting off an oil leak that may become the biggest environmental disaster in U.S. history . 
An EPA legal document leaked online and viewed by Reuters shows the agency evaluated applying per barrel civil fines on BP for a 5,000-barrel oil spill in Alaska 's Prudhoe Bay in 2006 . 
The EPA and U.S. attorneys declined to confirm or deny the contents of the document , which was found on a whistleblower website called peer.org . 
When the penalty clause was introduced into the Clean Water Act by Senator Joseph Lieberman 16 years earlier , he argued that caps on spill liability might lead oil companies to take undue risk . 
`` Large civil penalties ... are also especially important because , in certain cases , the liability of the spiller for clean-up costs under federal law is limited , '' Lieberman told Congress in 1990 , according to congressional records . 
`` Aggressive penalties may need to compensate for this limited liability , '' he told Congress at the time . 
If BP 's estimated spill rate of 5,000 barrels per day is accurate , responsible parties could face civil fines between $ 5.5 million and $ 21.5 million per day , depending on levels of negligence . 
BP 's net profits in the first quarter of 2010 were around $ 6.7 million per day . 
Other companies may share responsibility and face a portion of the civil fines , lawyers said . 
`` I would expect the government to go after BP and other parties for the maximum civil fines , '' said William Bode , managing partner at the Bode & Grenier law firm in Washington . 
`` The case could be brought in a Louisiana court where it would most likely succeed , although it might be settled for less than the maximum . '' 
Any gross negligence ruling against BP or others could depend on whether the companies knew they were taking undue risks in the Gulf , lawyers said . 
`` If a driller like BP knew or should have known about a condition that could lead to a disaster , it might face gross negligence , '' said a lawyer and insurance underwriter who does business with BP and asked not to be named . 
If the government pursues civil fines based on the volume of oil spilled , it would take into consideration whether companies have made their best effort to mitigate the spill , their prior history of offenses , if any , and whether they can bear the cost of fines , among other factors , experts said . 
BP received the third-largest criminal penalty , of $ 50 million , for an environmental offense in U.S. history for a Texas City refinery fire in 2005 . 
BP subsidiaries remain under federal probation for prior offenses in Texas and Alaska . 
`` There 's only so much blood you can get from a stone , '' Uhlmann said . 
`` I do n't think bankrupting BP will be the goal . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
In a world that offers multiple renewable resources this oil spill and the irresponsible actions of BP should stand as deacons for how AFFORDABLE change can be . 
Please ... 4300 per barrel ... as if we have never seen the long term damage and clean up of MINOR oil spills . 
I 'm just a small businessman in Florida but I have a sound idea on stopping the leak in the well . 
Is there someone who will listen to just a regular guy ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
