U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article Libya rebel official aims for oil export in 2-3 months TRIPOLI | Fri Aug 26 , 2011 4:41 am IST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Libyan rebel government hopes to restart oil exports within two to three months and reach full volumes in about a year , Ali Tarhouni , the official in charge of financial and oil matters told Reuters from Libya 's oil ministry in Tripoli . 
It was the first time an official from the rebel National Transitional Authority was seen in the capital taking up the reins of government , after rebel fighters swept into the city four days ago aiming to topple Muammar Gaddafi . 
`` The NOC -LRB- National Oil Corporation -RRB- initial estimate is that we can have about 500,000 to 600,000 barrels within two to three months . 
And then we ramp this up to the normal , which is about 1.6 -LRB- million -RRB- . 
My expectation is that this will be done within a year or so , '' Tarhouni said . 
Damage on most of Libya 's oilfields from the civil war has been minimal , he said . 
`` The state of the oil fields are a lot better than expected , '' he said . 
`` Overall if we want to put a number on it , the average is about 10 percent or so . 
Most of the fields are more than 90 percent fine . '' 
He added that Libya would continue to honor existing contracts with oil companies . 
Asked if there would be any block for companies from countries that had not supported the rebels , he responded : `` Not that I know of . '' 
`` We have contracts with most of the major companies . 
Wintershall , Shell , Repsol , Eni . 
We have n't signed any new contracts . 
These are pre-revolution contracts . 
We are going to continue those '' . 
He also said it was too early to discuss awarding any new contracts : `` It 's the last thing on my mind . '' 
`` We 're just going to put back things as they used to be . 
The NOC is the one that is practically running the oil industry . 
We will restructure that to make sure that it 's nimble . '' 
Asked who will be running the oil industry for the foreseeable future until a general election , Tarhouni said : `` I 'm in charge until they decide to use somebody else . '' 
Tarhouni , formerly a U.S.-based academic and opposition figure in exile , returned to take charge of economic , financial and oil matters on the rebels ' executive committee . 
