An employee holds a gas pump to refill a car at a petrol station in central Seoul April 6 , 2011 . 
LONDON | Fri Aug 26 , 2011 4:18 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Oil prices are likely to stay above $ 100 a barrel next year despite increasing downward pressure from the expected return of some Libyan production and fears of a double-dip recession , a Reuters poll showed . 
According to 29 analysts polled by Reuters , Brent crude prices will average $ 107.90 a barrel in 2012 , down from the forecast of $ 109.30 a barrel in last month 's poll . 
U.S. light crude oil , also known as West Texas Intermediate -LRB- WTI -RRB- , will average $ 96.30 a barrel next year , down from a forecast of $ 99.40 a barrel last month . 
Despite doubts about how fast Libyan oil production could restart as fighting between rebels and loyalists to Muammar Gaddafi continues in Tripoli , analysts are beginning to account for some output in the medium term . 
`` The possible comeback of Libya as oil exporter after half a year of civil war will lead to even more oil supply , '' LBBW analyst Frank Schallenberger said . 
`` On the other hand , the slowing down of the global economy will limit demand . '' 
A flurry of poor economic data from the United States and Europe in the past week has already led to a sharp correction in risk assets . 
In the short-term the market will focus on a speech by U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke on Friday for hints of more quantitative easing , but U.S. investment bank Citigroup -LRB- C. N -RRB- noted this week that even if the United States printed more money , weak economic growth and fresh supplies from Libya would weigh on prices . 
`` If crude prices have been retreating in August , it was not because of positive expectations on the restart of crude oil exports from Libya but on negative expectations about oil demand , '' Olivier Jakob from Petromatrix said in a note . 
Brent crude futures were trading above $ 110 a barrel on Friday morning . 
`` Growth expectations are likely to be in focus , and Bernanke 's much anticipated speech is likely to play a pivotal role for near-term price direction across all asset classes , '' said Gain Capital Forex.com analyst Daniel Hwang . 
The previous round of quantitative easing announced a year ago has led to a sharp boost in commodity prices but has failed to revive growth of the world 's largest economy . 
In the euro zone , the latest data from economic powerhouse Germany showed a steep drop in business confidence and worries about the fiscal troubles ripping through the common currency area . 
`` The month of August has seen one of the most dramatic turnarounds in the outlook for the global economy in living memory . 
Continued political squabbling , combined with poor historical economic data released around the turn of the month , led to a dramatic collapse in financial market sentiment , with many risk assets experiencing the largest falls since the period immediately following the collapse of Lehman in September 2008 , '' Credit Suisse analysts said . 
Analyst Davide Tabarelli from Nomisma Energy expected oil prices to shed a political risk premium gained on the back of the Libyan conflict . 
`` Prices increased by $ 20 because of Libya ; now they should fall by at least that portion , '' Tabarelli said , adding it could take around three months to bring production in line with previous levels . 
But Tabarelli was in the minority . 
Four out of five analysts in the Reuters poll still saw 2012 Brent prices above $ 100 . 
`` With the resumption of supplies from Libya , the oil price could come under pressure in the coming months , though it is unlikely to fall below $ 100 per barrel for long , '' Commerzbank analysts said in a note . 
The fall in prices should also help tighten the gap between Brent and U.S. light crude prices to an average of $ 11.60 per barrel in 2012 from around $ 24.90 a barrel currently . 
Despite an expected correction of feedstock prices , Petromatrix 's Jakob warned that product prices remained at high levels that are hampering demand , and the trickle of downward revisions to oil demand projections was underway . 
The latest available data from MasterCard showed U.S. retail gasoline demand fell last week despite a drop in pump prices , in what analysts warned had been a difficult driving season . 
-LRB- Reporting by Zaida Espana ; Polling by Bangalore Unit ; Editing by -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
