TRIPOLI | Fri Aug 26 , 2011 6:23 pm EDT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan rebels claimed to be close to capturing Muammar Gaddafi on Friday as their NATO backers bombed diehard loyalists in his tribal bastion , but there was no sign of an end to the war , or to international wrangling over Libya 's riches . 
Leaders of the National Transitional Council , which has Western support , pressed foreign governments to release Libyan funds frozen abroad , warning of its urgent need to impose order and provide services to a population traumatized by six months of conflict and 42 years of eccentric , personal rule . 
But Gaddafi 's long-time allies in Africa , beneficiaries of his oil-fueled largesse and sympathizers with a foreign policy he called anti-colonial , offered the fugitive strongman a grain of comfort and irked the rebels by refusing to follow Arab and Western powers in recognizing the NTC as the legal government . 
Combined with the reluctance of major powers like China , Russia and Brazil , to see Europeans and Americans dominate a nation with Africa 's biggest oil reserves , the African Union 's resistance may slow the pace at which funds are released . 
Mahmoud Jibril , head of the government in waiting , said time was short . 
Visiting NATO member Turkey , he said : `` We have to establish an army , strong police force to be able meet the needs of the people and we need capital and we need the assets . 
`` All our friends in the international community speak of stability and security . 
We need that too . '' 
While many African states have recognized the NTC , the AU would not do so as long as fighting continued , South African President Jacob Zuma , a vocal advocate for Gaddafi , said after a meeting in Addis Ababa at which the AU called for all sides in the conflict to negotiate a peace and work for democracy . 
`` If there is fighting , there is fighting , '' Zuma said . 
`` The process is fluid . 
That 's part of what we inform countries -- whether there is an authority to recognize . '' 
Rebel leaders are determined to show they are in charge , though estimates vary of when the TNC will move formally from its Benghazi base in the east to the war zone that is Tripoli . 
`` We have come to operate the country . 
We are now the legal authority , '' declared Mohammed al-Alagi , a lawyer who has been the TNC 's justice minister for some months , as he met foreign journalists in the capital wearing a rebel flag as a bandana . 
Other TNC leaders , who stress they want to work with other rebel groups which sprang up later in the west as well with those who have previously supported Gaddafi , say the war will only be over once the fallen leader is caught , `` dead or alive . '' 
Alagi voiced confidence that Gaddafi and his entourage of sons and aides was surrounded and would soon be captured : `` The area where he is now is under siege , '' he told Reuters , while declining to say where in Tripoli he thought Gaddafi was . 
`` The rebels are monitoring the area and they are dealing with it . '' 
Similar confidence has proved misplaced since the irregular armies overran Gaddafi 's compound on Tuesday , however , and analysts do not rule out that the 69-year-old , a veteran master of surprise , might have slipped away to rally supporters for an insurgency . 
He has not been seen in public for two months , but made a defiant audio broadcast on Thursday . 
Colonel Hisham Buhagiar of the rebel force in the capital said Libyan commandos were targeting several areas : `` We are sending special forces every day to hunt down Gaddafi . 
We have one unit that does intelligence and other units that hunt him . '' 
NATO forces , notably from France and Britain , are helping the rebels . 
Many analysts assume they are giving intelligence and may have their own special forces troops on the ground . 
Despite sporadic gunfire as rebel fighters tried to take pockets of loyalist resistance , Tripoli was quieter than in recent days . 
Dead bodies , the stench of rotting garbage in the oppressive summer heat , wrecked cars and the other detritus of war were evidence of frantic battles and wildly erratic firing . 
Some of Tripoli 's two million people , suffering from power cuts , dwindling supplies and a critical shortage of medical supplies and healthcare , ventured out to local mosques , some praying Gaddafi can be found by Monday , when Muslims mark the end of the fasting month of Ramadan with the festival of Eid . 
`` Gaddafi is the biggest criminal and dictator and we hope we will find him before the end of Ramadan , '' said Milad Abu Aisha , a 60-year-old pensioner who joined friends at his local mosque for traditional worship on the last Friday of Ramadan . 
`` It will be the happiest Eid in 42 years , '' said Mohammed al-Misrati , a 52-year-old office worker who was among hundreds streaming toward the mosque under the protection of armed local men who have formed ad hoc security units across the capital . 
`` We have a taste of freedom after 42 years of repression . '' 
British aircraft fired cruise missiles at a headquarters bunker overnight in Gaddafi 's birthplace of Sirte . 
A city beyond rebel control , on the Mediterranean coast 450 km -LRB- 300 miles -RRB- east of Tripoli , some believe he might seek refuge there among his tribesmen . 
Loyalist forces also still hold positions deep in the Sahara desert . 
`` Sirte remains an operating base from which pro-Gaddafi troops project hostile forces against Misrata and Tripoli , '' a NATO official said , adding that its forces had also acted to stop a column of 29 vehicles heading west toward Misrata . 
In Benghazi , rebel military spokesman Ahmed Bani said the bombing in Sirte was aimed at ammunition stores and depots for Scud missiles . 
`` Maybe the mercenaries will run away , '' he said , referring to suggestions Gaddafi 's forces include hired fighters from Chad and other sub-Saharan African countries . 
`` After this bombing , maybe the people there will try to rise up . '' 
he added , saying TNC commanders were also in contact with tribal chiefs in Sirte , hoping to avoid bloodshed . 
Such negotiations will be a major challenge across the country for Libya 's new rulers as they try to meet expectations of young men now bearing arms and to heal ethnic , tribal and other divisions that have been exacerbated by civil war . 
-LRB- Reporting by Peter Graff , Ulf Laessing , Mohammed Abbas , and Samia Nakhoul in Tripoli ; Robert Birsel , Emma Farge and Alexander Dziadosz in Benghazi , Barry Malone in Addis Ababa , Hamid Ould Ahmed and Marie-Louise Gumuchian in Algiers , Giles Elgood , Christian Lowe , Tarek Amara and Richard Valdmanis in Tunis , ; Ibon Villelabeitia in Ankara , Jon Hemming in London , Arshad Mohammed in Washington and Justyna Pawlak in Brussels ; Writing by Alastair Macdonald -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
One prayer answered ; a million more to go -- and those are just mine . 
I just ca n't help thinking about the level of weapons attrition we 're creating in that area . 
Losing so many weapons leaves that vicinity open to foreign invaders from their north or northeast . 
We should be seriously be reconsidering our tactical resources and approach in that theater . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
