If in Libya , why not also in Ivory Coast ? 
When Ivory Coast s election last year left the country with two men claiming to be president and a flood of warnings of the threat of civil war , the world s diplomatic and media interest was unprecedented . 
After a turbulent four months , which have seen two North African revolutions , a tsunami and near nuclear meltdown in Japan , and Libya s ongoing war , how that has changed . 
The West African nation s crisis is grizzly but also in a slow-burn mode and hardly getting a look in with all the drama elsewhere . 
The international recognition of Alassane Ouattara as victor and sanctions slapped on his rival , incumbent Laurent Gbagbo , who refuses to step down , are still in place . 
But so is Gbagbo , and Ouattara remains holed up in a hotel , protected by a ring of United Nations peacekeepers . 
Threats , made by West Africa s ECOWAS bloc , to oust him have rung hollow . 
Scores of people have since been killed , hundreds of thousands of have fled their homes amid heavy fighting and rights groups are warning crimes against humanity may have already taken place . 
Both sides have been accused of abuses but the most serious charges including the killing of women protestors calling for Gbagbo to leave have been levelled at Gbagbo . 
One was even been caught on camera , here , but Gbagbo 's camp has denied responsibility . 
The country s economy has disintegrated while the IMF warns the regional one is in peril . 
The long-flagged war has , arguably , already begun . 
Yet , it appears there are only so many crises the world can handle at any one time and , right now , television cameras and diplomats are looking elsewhere . 
Nigeria s foreign minister has accused the international community of double standards by imposing the no-fly zone in Libya while doing little in Ivory Coast . 
Liberia , still recovering from its own conflict , is struggling to raise funds it needs to deal with the refugees it is now taking in . 
Ouattara has scolded his U.N. backers for not doing enough to protect civilians . 
With a crisis like Libya taking place , is it only natural that Ivory Coast should drop down the agenda ? 
Civilians in Ivory Coast , where there is a U.N. peacekeeping mission with a robust mandate , have also been promised protection . 
Yet , so far , no robust action has been taken , even though the U.N. has accused pro-Gbagbo forces of using heavy weapons against civilians in Abidjan . 
What is the difference between Ivory Coast and Libya ? 
Is it just the scale of the abuses or are there other factors at play ? 
Some analysts and this blogger say Libya s oil makes it more important than Ivory Coast , the world 's top cocoa grower . 
The African Union had only just finally ironed out internal divisions over supporting Ouattara when it then had to set up another crisis team to deal with Libya . 
It is wary about too robust an intervention in either case and was still speaking out against military intervention in Libya even after a U.N. resolution had authorised it , and the Western forces had fired their first shots . 
Can the AU play a meaningful role in resolving Ivory Coast s crisis . 
If so , what ? 
Earlier today I was asking myself the same question and it is very hard to not imagine that oil is more important to the world that chocolate , why else would the events in Libya be attracting so much more attention than similar atrocities being committed on African 's across the continent . 
What worries me is that the winds of change are blowing but more often than not the response will be that of Libya and the World 's policemen -LRB- US , UN , NATO , EU , etc. -RRB- can not be in all the places they will be needed at the same time . 
The AU in my opinion is rather pointless and too often seems to want to fall back on ex-South African president Thabo Mbeki 's ` quiet diplomacy ' ! 
Simple the two scenario are not same ; Libyan people started the move in Tripoli , while UN is orchestrating what is happening in Ivory Coast . 
Nations should be allowed without any form of inducement or cohesion to settle their problem internally . 
Election dispute in Ivory Coast would have been a thing of the past if UN had not taken side in the dispute . 
Maybe the UN verdict into the elections was not perfect and there were problems from both sides . 
However , peace is nearly always better than war . 
I admire those leaders who have preferred to step down , even if they do n't think the outcome was fully fair , rather than see a lot of bloodshed . 
A leader 's position should never be more important than the lives , safety and futures of the people . 
Are values not more important than power ? 
Is the western world really interested in saving the libyan population ? 
They are just looking after the Libyan oil . 
If saving the people was really important , they should be going to Cote divoire where Gbagbo is killing his own people every single day just to stay in power . 
unfortunately there 's no oil in Cote dIvoire . 
world should oppose ongoing western air strikes launched against Libya on the ground that ordinary Libyans would be affected and the air attacks would prove counterproductive to the US ' purported humanitarian objective . 
there are many other hot spots around the world would US do the same . 
In fact as per records US has never been seen saving lives where they matter most . 
The video of the female protesters being killed is disturbing . 
Those unarmed women were not a threat to anyone . 
Someone did not like what they were saying or perhaps more accurately , someone did n't like that those women decided that they had a right to voice their opinions . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
I have been previously based in a number of African cities , including Abidjan , Kinshasa and Dar es Salaam . 
