LONDON | Tue Apr 19 , 2011 8:42 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Britain said on Tuesday it would send military officers to advise Libyan rebels , worrying critics who fear the country is being dragged into a civil war . 
London said it would send about a dozen officers to Libya to help insurgents improve their organization and communications , but would not arm the rebels or train them to fight . 
With the Libyan conflict risking getting bogged down in a long stalemate , Western powers are searching for ways to bolster the rebels , whose military campaigns have been disorganised . 
Foreign Secretary William Hague said the decision to send military advisers was in line with a United Nations ' resolution aimed at protecting civilians in Libya and denied Britain was putting military `` boots on the ground . '' 
`` There is going to be no ground invasion of Libya , '' Hague told the BBC . 
The U.N. resolution bars an occupation force in Libya . 
Britain 's move is likely to anger Russia , which has already said that Western attempts to topple Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi violate a U.N. resolution which only authorised the use of force to protect civilians . 
`` The U.N. Security Council never aimed to topple the Libyan regime , '' Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said in Belgrade on Tuesday . 
`` All those who are currently using the U.N. resolution for that aim are violating the U.N. mandate . '' 
French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe told reporters on Tuesday he also opposed sending troops into Libya . 
But a French diplomatic source told Reuters Paris might send military liaison officers to Libya in the days ahead . 
Britain 's move also caused some dissent among supporters of British Prime Minister David Cameron 's coalition government . 
Several lawmakers from Cameron 's Conservative Party called for the recall of parliament , now in recess , to debate the move , saying that the ground had shifted since parliament approved British participation in the Libya no-fly zone last month . 
Conservative member of parliament John Baron said there was clear evidence of `` mission creep . '' 
`` What the no-fly zone has effectively become is the air force of the rebels , '' he told Sky News . 
Peter Bone , another Conservative lawmaker , voiced concern that Britain seemed to be `` taking sides in a civil war . '' 
Britain 's recent experiences in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars , where hundreds of British soldiers were killed , have led to caution about new foreign military ventures . 
The leaders of the United States , Britain and France pledged last week to continue the military campaign until Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi leaves power . 
Britain 's Foreign Office said the team would advise the rebel interim national council on how to improve its organization , communications and logistics , but would not help plan rebel military operations . 
Britain says it has supplied rebels with telecommunications equipment and body armor but not arms . 
