SINGAPORE , June 9 | Tue Jun 9 , 2009 5:33 am EDT SINGAPORE , June 9 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - GlaxoSmithKlyne -LRB- GSK . 
L -RRB- plans to start producing vaccines from 2011 in Singapore to fight pneumonia-causing bacteria , which kills more than 1 million children each year around the world . 
The world 's second biggest drugmaker opened a S$ 600 million -LRB- $ 411 million -RRB- plant in the city-state on Tuesday , its second global site to manufacture the pneumococcal conjugate vaccine after Belgium . 
GSK would take up to two years to test run the plant before commercial production starts , CEO Andrew Witty said . 
`` It is going to take a year or two to finally make sure all the production processes are running at the appropriate level of quality , '' Witty told reporters . 
The pneumococcal conjugate vaccine protects infants and children under age 2 from the bacterium streptococcus pneumoniae , which causes diseases like pneumonia , meningitis , bronchitis , acute sinusitis and inflammation of the inner layer of the heart or endocarditis . 
Those kill nearly a million children worldwide each year , 90 percent of them in developing countries . 
The vaccine was introduced in 2000 in the United States and resulted in a sharp drop in pneumococcal disease in children , but is still unavailable in many underdeveloped countries , where it is most urgently needed , because of high costs . 
Witty said GSK 's new policy on price flexibility would make its vaccines and other drugs more affordable to poor nations . 
`` Vaccine is particularly important , a potential important product line for the emerging markets and Asia , '' he said . 
Witty welcomed a World Health Organisation recommendation last week that oral rotavirus vaccines be included in all national immunisation programs , but said they would not make a significant contribution to GSK 's revenues . 
`` I am excited about that . 
It 's great news , but that in itself is n't going to be a commercial opportunity , because obviously we are talking about product at much lower price being supplied to the developing world , '' Witty said . 
WHO 's new global guidance , aiming to avert half a million diarrhoeal deaths and 2 million hospitalisations a year , is expected to boost demand form Merck 's -LRB- MRK . 
N -RRB- and RotaTeq , GSK 's Rotarix vaccines in Africa and Asia . 
Rotavirus is a leading cause of severe gastroenteritis , including vomiting and diarrhoea , in infants and young children . 
The contagious infection kills an estimated 1,600 children under the age of 5 every day , mostly in Africa and Asia . 
-LRB- $ 1 = 1.460 Singapore dollar -RRB- -LRB- Reporting by Nopporn Wong-Anan ; Editing by Tan Ee Lyn and Jerry Norton -RRB- -LRB- nopporn.wong-anan@thomsonreuters.com, +6564035665 -RRB- -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
