RABAT | Fri Apr 22 , 2011 2:51 pm EDT RABAT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Morocco is seeking a political solution to the Libyan crisis , an official source at the foreign ministry said on Friday after Moroccan officials met representatives of Muammar Gaddafi and rebels this week . 
The source gave no details of how close any such deal might be or what it might entail . 
`` Morocco 's efforts are limited to humanitarian aid and to working and contributing to reaching a political solution through dialogue , '' the source told Reuters . 
Such solution should `` respond to the aspirations of the Libyan people and ensure a return of stability which is extremely important for the Mediterranean and sub-Saharan Africa , '' the source added . 
Late on Wednesday , Foreign Minister Taieb Fassi Fihri met officials from the rebels ' National Transition Council . 
Two days earlier , he met an envoy of Gaddafi -- a rare diplomatic contact between Libya and one of the staunch allies of the Western coalition seeking to overthrow him . 
The source said Morocco favored a political agreement within the framework of the United Nations resolution which imposed a no-fly zone and called for a solution that would meet the demands of the Libyan people . 
`` Nobody has asked us to mediate , '' the source said . 
Morocco has been one of the small number of Arab countries and the only North African state openly involved in talks with Western powers over the Libyan crisis . 
Several Libyan tribes have their origins in Morocco so the historical link is strong . 
Less than two weeks ago , an African Union bid to halt Libya 's civil war collapsed , after Gaddafi 's forces shelled the besieged city of Misrata and rebels said there could be no deal unless he was toppled . 
Foreign ministers of Western powers and Arab states called at a meeting in Doha last week for Gaddafi to leave power . 
Britain , France and the United States say they will not end their air campaign in Libya until Gaddafi leaves power . 
The top U.S. military officer said air strikes had hobbled Libyan forces but the conflict was moving into `` stalemate '' as Gaddafi 's forces pressed their siege of Misrata . 
-LRB- Editing by Matthew Tostevin -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
