Libyan ground forces degraded by up to 40 percent : U.S. BAGHDAD | Fri Apr 22 , 2011 5:09 am EDT BAGHDAD -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Coalition air strikes have degraded Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 's main ground forces by 30 to 40 percent , but the battle appears to be heading to a stalemate , the top U.S. military officer said on Friday . 
`` It 's certainly moving toward a stalemate , '' said Admiral Mike Mullen , chairman of the U.S. military 's joint chiefs of staff , addressing U.S. troops during a visit to Baghdad . 
`` At the same time we 've attrited somewhere between 30 and 40 percent of his main ground forces , his ground force capabilities . 
Those will continue to go away over time . '' 
Mullen said there was no sign of al Qaeda representation in Libya 's opposition , playing down concerns about any militant groups edging their way into the Libyan conflict . 
`` We 're watchful of it , mindful of it and I just have n't seen much of it at all . 
In fact , I 've seen no al Qaeda representation there at all , '' he said . 
Mullen arrived in Baghdad on Thursday . 
The United States is planning to withdraw its remaining troops from Iraq by the end of December , more than eight years after the U.S.-led invasion . 
-LRB- Reporting by Phil Stewart ; Editing by Serena Chaudhry and Elizabeth Fullerton -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
And now , BHO is helping to arm those that would kill us . 
The only reason that the Euros were front and center so quickly was to protect their petroleum interests and nothing more . 
The only reason that US force is being used is to protect the petroleum interests of the Europeans . 
The Europeans and the rest of NATO do not have the capabilities that the US has for enforcing a no-fly zone -- Navy Air , Surface and Subsurface Arms and , now , drones . 
Ya know they do n't do anything for humanitarian reasons . 
And , they got all that favorable legacy media support . 
Do ya think the US would get the same favorable coverage if they had done the same in Kuwait\/Saudi Arabia or Iraq ? 
Ya know they would n't and did n't . 
Remember all those placards of , `` No Blood For Oil !! '' And we still have n't been repaid by either country ; not just for the fiscal expenditures , but for the lost and disrupted lives . 
I was a regressive -LRB- aka liberal progressive -RRB- until I learned to read , got a job and was mugged by willful tax and spend regressives and acolytes ; i.e. , unions . 
An oxymoron like ` humanitarian warfare ' raises my skepticism , especially after the same nations turned a blind eye to Operation Cast Lead . 
Intervention in a civil war is never justified , but I see no problem with cutting off the arms flow to both sides . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
