ANTAKYA , Turkey\/ISTANBUL | Fri Oct 7 , 2011 12:11 pm EDT ANTAKYA , Turkey\/ISTANBUL -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Turkey is piling pressure on Syria with border military exercises , economic sanctions and the harboring of Syrian opposition groups and army defectors , but Ankara must tread carefully to avoid arousing the suspicion of Arab states or spurring Syrian counter-measures . 
Turkey has shifted , in the space of six months , from being Syria 's new best friend forever to a center of gravity for opposition to President Bashar al-Assad outside the country . 
Having started out by advising Assad to exercise restraint and make reforms when pro-democracy unrest first erupted in March , Turkey is now on the verge of invoking sanctions against a government it once sat down with for joint cabinet meetings . 
Syrian dissidents abroad , and some who have managed to sneak out of the country , have flocked to Istanbul over the past few months to give the revolution a united political front . 
And Turkey has given sanctuary to the most senior Syrian military officer to defect , while this week it began maneuvers in a province over which Syria has had longstanding claims . 
`` Turkey is clearly taking sides now , '' said Cengiz Aktar , professor at Istanbul 's Bahcesehir University . 
`` Turkey expects this opposition and the upheaval in the country will eventually finish the job and the revolution will bring an end to the regime . '' 
But Turkey 's policy shift , which has aligned Ankara more closely with the West , comes with risks . 
`` Syrian intelligence might use every opportunity to instigate Kurdish violence , '' Aktar said , referring to Turkey 's restive minority population . 
Aktar said Turkey , whose clout in the Middle East has grown out of a combination of economic growth and secular democracy , could see goodwill evaporate if it is perceived to be meddling in Syria . 
`` At the end of the day , Turkey risks being told to mind its own business and to first put its house in order . 
The more it wants to be a soft power the more it is going to be told by the international community to apply the same standards with its Kurds minority . '' 
For all their closeness over the past decade , the two countries almost went to war in the late 1990s over Syria giving refuge to Kurdish militants fighting the Turkish state . 
Living under Turkish protection , Syrian Colonel Riad al-As ` aad exhorts his former comrades to desert to organize the armed struggle he believes is needed to drive Assad from power . 
`` We assure them -LRB- the Syrian people -RRB- they should be patient , and God willing , very soon , Bashar will be between their hands , '' As ` aad told Reuters in an interview on Thursday . 
-LRB- nL5E7L642X -RRB- `` We must be patient . 
We hope the Syrian people will be stronger and remain committed to continue to bring down the regime . '' 
Revolted by the killing of Syrian civilians , and seeing the tide of history turn with the `` Arab Spring '' of popular uprisings , Turkey has calculated that its long term interest lies in supporting the Syrian people 's struggle for democracy . 
That Syria , like Turkey , has a Sunni Muslim majority , while Assad and his clique belong to the Alawite minority , an offshoot of Shi'ite Islam , made that choice even simpler . 
The breakdown in their relationship leaves Iran as Syria 's closest backer , though the Russian and Chinese vetoes earlier this week of a U.N. Security Council draft resolution censuring Syria showed Assad retains some support elsewhere . 
Anti-Assad factions meeting in Istanbul -- ranging from Islamists through liberals , along with ethnic and tribal leaders -- have coalesced under a revolutionary Syrian National Council with a stated aim of ousting Assad within six months . 
Offering itself as a potential future interim government , this broad-based opposition group has helped instill some confidence among governments , like Turkey , who disapprove of Assad but had not known who to support . 
Hitherto , they have feared Assad 's fall would leave Syria without a central authority capable of stopping the country sliding into religious , sectarian and ethnic violence . 
One Western diplomat , asked about Turkey 's hesitation in the past to ditch Assad , said Ankara had come to see Assad as `` the devil we know . '' 
Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan , who had previously enjoyed a close rapport with Assad , is expected to visit a camp in the border province of Hatay sheltering some of the 7,500 Syrians who have fled the violence at home . 
Due to the death of his mother , Erdogan delayed a visit that had been set for Sunday , but he has already promised to announce sanctions against the Syrian government . 
Turkey is expected to freeze bank accounts held by members of Assad 's inner circle , cut ties with Syrian state banks , and halt deals between state-run companies , notably in oil and gas , while avoiding measures that could hurt the people . 
Erdogan predicted last month that Assad will be ousted `` sooner or later , '' but how far he is willing to go to make it happen is an open question . 
`` What we have at the moment ... is a war of words between Assad and Erdogan , '' said Gareth Jenkins , an Istanbul-based security analyst . 
`` It 's a bit like two jilted lovers , because they were very , very close . 
There is a lot of personal spite . '' 
Compounding tensions this week , Turkey began military exercises in Hatay province , which Syria has had longstanding claims over since it was ceded to Turkey in 1939 when France controlled Syria and Lebanon . 
The exercises , relatively small-scale logistical drills involving a large contingent of less experienced reservist troops , are seen as a symbolic reminder to Damascus that the second largest army in NATO is just across the border . 
`` It is part of the Turkish government 's campaign to apply increased psychological pressure on the regime in Damascus because previous warnings have gone unheeded , '' said Fadi Hakura , analyst at Chatham House think-tank in London . 
Turkey has begun intercepting arms bound for Syria passing through its waters and air space . 
Some analysts say it is easy to foresee Turkey eventually helping to equip and organize Syrian rebels , like Colonel As ` aad , who want to wage an armed struggle against those units of Assad 's security forces leading the repression of protesters . 
Other analysts believe it would be a mistake for Turkey to go beyond support for peaceful protests by letting itself become a rear base for an armed opposition or being seen as a provocateur in Syria 's internal conflict , especially if it developed a stronger sectarian dimension . 
Turkey , after all , is vulnerable to mischief-making among ethnic Kurds and developments that could cause unease within its own Alevi minority community . 
Speculation keeps resurfacing that Turkey 's military could end up entering Syria to create a buffer zone for the protection of Syrians from Assad 's security forces . 
During the 1991 Gulf War , about half a million Iraqi Kurds fled to Turkey , returning only after Western powers , along with Turkish contingents , set up a safe haven across the border . 
But analysts see this option still as a last resort for Ankara , and one that is unlikely to be taken without first getting a U.N. mandate . 
As it has done in other Arab countries gripped by upheaval , Turkey has played on sentimental attachments to the Ottoman era , when Istanbul counted vast swathes of Arabia , North Africa and the Balkans among its dominions . 
Whereas Erdogan has earned admiration among Arabs for championing the Palestinian cause and leading democratic change in Turkey , analysts say Arabs would not like to see Turkish troops crossing into Syria . 
`` I do n't think Turkey ... would be stupid enough to intervene militarily , '' Jenkins said . 
`` The Arab world does n't want to see Turkish boots on the ground in an Arab country . '' 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
2-Turkey have gone beyond supporting peaceful protesters and aided financially and politically MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD ORGANIZATION WHICH IS KNOWN BY ITS TERRIFYING ACTS IN SYRIA . 
AND ALL ITS ACTIONS HAVE BEEN PROVED . 
3 - Muslim brotherhood had sidelined the opposition that refuses its claims , and more over they started to assassinate them one by one . 
4-Ask your self why assassination happens to those opposition leaders whom are against international intervention and calling for dialogue of unity in syria . 
5-Syrian public or ready lost all of it sympathy to ERDOGAN . 
He is taking side with Muslim Brotherhood whom his personal association beign proved and approved by Ghazi Masry , and they are shameless to announce it publicly . 
6 - ERDOGAN losing significant support in Turkey as he continous to support Sectarian groups in other nations . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
