By the CNN Wire Staff Gadhafi makes first appearance in weeks Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi was last seen on video April 30 A Libyan government spokesman says Gadhafi is alive and well Some wonder if he was killed in a NATO airstrike Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Renewed bombing could be heard Thursday morning in Tripoli shortly after NATO jets were heard flying over the city . 
The explosions came a few hours after Libyan state television broadcast video late Wednesday that it said showed Col. Moammar Gadhafi meeting earlier in the day with tribal elders in a hotel in the capital -- marking the Libyan leader 's first public appearance in nearly two weeks . 
`` The leader met with tribal elders in Tripoli a few hours ago , and this proves the perseverance and permanence of the Libyan nation and its leader , '' the announcer said . 
`` God willing , they are victorious . '' 
The camera panned from a television program bearing the date May 11 to the group of more than a dozen men , including Gadhafi . 
The TV appearance was the first for Gadhafi -- who was wearing sunglasses and dressed in dark clothing -- since April 30 , the same day a NATO airstrike hit the Tripoli compound reportedly housing him and one of his sons . 
Libyan officials said at the time that Saif al-Arab Gadhafi was killed , but his father had escaped . 
Libyan television ran a banner that said he was meeting with tribal elders . 
The camera showed a seated Gadhafi speaking to the men , who were also seated . 
Wednesday 's appearance took place in the Rixos Hotel , a government official said . 
The hotel houses a number of international journalists , including those working for CNN . 
`` Let me tell you something , dear leader , '' one of the men says . 
`` I swear to God you will surely win . '' 
Libyan government spokesman Musa Ibrahim had said earlier in the day that Gadhafi was `` alive , well and very healthy . '' 
Ibrahim added that Gadhafi had been targeted three times by NATO airstrikes and that government officials were worried about his safety . 
`` We need him to lead , to be safe , '' Ibrahim said . 
Earlier Wednesday , the chief operations officer of NATO 's Operation Unified Protector told reporters in Brussels , Belgium , that the organization had no evidence about what Gadhafi was doing . 
`` And I tell you the truth , we 're not really interested in what he is doing , '' Brig. Gen. Claudio Gabellini said . 
`` Our mandate is to protect civilians from the attacks and from the threat of attacks , so we 're not looking after individuals . '' 
NATO took over the mission to protect Libyan civilians authorized by a United Nations resolution and is using airstrikes to target installations that may be used to facilitate attacks against civilians . 
Gabellini said that NATO is targeting military objectives , not individuals . 
CNN 's Barbara Starr , Jasmine Amer , Ben Brumfield and Jomana Karadsheh contributed to this story . 
