Deepwater Horizon oil spill : BP 's efforts to contain the leak Stemming the flow of oil is proving a huge challenge as the source lies beneath more than a mile of water Monday 3 May 2010 20.04 BST Rescuers tend to a seabird that was covered in oil from the Deepwater Horizon spill . 
Photograph : Mark Ralston\/AFP\/Getty Images Efforts to stem the oil leak have focused on a standard piece of drilling kit called a blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- . 
The BOP acts as an emergency cut-off that should prevent oil gushing from an open well head , as depicted in numerous films when prospectors strike it rich . 
The recent explosion caused a spill because the BOP failed to engage fully . 
It is proving so hard to fix because the BOP , and so the source of the leak , lies beneath more than a mile of water . 
Simon Boxall of the National Oceanography Centre said : `` Oil extraction from the deep sea is new and the technology used is at the cutting edge . 
Well head incidents on land or in the shallow North Sea are relatively easy to cap and the methods are tried and tested . 
At 1,500 metres the head is as easy to get to as if it were on the moon . 
The water pressures are huge and the logistics very complex . '' 
He added : '' BP are in the unfortunate position of having to pioneer ways of dealing with it which are new and untested and this will take weeks if not months . 
Many have asked why is n't there some form of safety valve or stopcock to turn the oil off . 
There was , and it is this that has gone . 
It is like the mains stopcock in the street for your house . 
If a water leak occurs in the house or in the driveway then you just turn off the mains stopcock while you deal with the problem . 
But what do you do when the mains stopcock breaks ? '' 
BP has used robot submarines to try to trigger the BOP , but their efforts seem to be failing . 
It could try to install a second BOP on top of the first , and to prepare , engineers are set to measure the pressure of the escaping oil . 
One drawback is that tampering with the faulty mechanism might increase oil flow . 
While oil continues to pour out , containment is the best strategy . 
BP has rushed to produce giant domes called cofferdams that it intends to place over the leaking well head , to isolate the oil from the surrounding sea . 
The plan would then be to pump the trapped oil and water mix into storage barges on the surface . 
It will take at least a week to fit these domes , and engineers are uncertain how they will perform at deep sea pressures . 
In the long term , the threat will only be removed by giving the pressurized oil in the tapped reservoir another escape route . 
BP has plans to drill another two wells , probably into the reservoir itself , to divert the oil from the leak . 
Experts say this could take months . 
In the meantime , oil that reaches the surface is being tackled with floating booms , burnt and treated with chemicals though much of this effort may be better for the television cameras than the environment . 
Martin Preston , senior lecturer in marine pollution at the University of Liverpool , said : `` I am not convinced that burning the oil is the right strategy to adopt because it can leave a very persistent residue that can be more resistant to natural breakdown and is also impossible to treat in other ways . 
Continuing to use chemical dispersants would be a better option . '' 
A version appeared on p18 of the Main section section of the Guardian on Follow the latest business news , comment and analysis on Twitter dominicru : Average Goldman Sachs pay : $ 399,506 . 
