Thu Dec 23 , 2010 7:59 pm EST LOS ANGELES -LRB- Hollywood Reporter -RRB- - In the midst of the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico by BP drilling rig , Deepwater Horizon , a number of news outlets got a bunch of yuks with news that Kevin Costner was the potential savior for the crisis -- that his company , CINC -LRB- `` Costner in Nevada Corporation '' -RRB- , had developed a technology that separated oil from water . 
In a new lawsuit filed in Louisiana District Court on Wednesday , actor Stephen Baldwin and a friend named Spyridon Contogouris claim they were tricked into selling shares of the company that marketed CINC 's technology . 
According to the complaint , Contogouris was approached in the early 2000s by Costner 's representatives to market the actor 's technology to various customers . 
He says he entered into an agreement in which he would receive a commission on sales of units . 
Flash forward to April 17 , 2010 . 
Costner and Contogouris had a meal together in Biloxi , Mississippi , where Costner 's band , Modern West , was playing a gig . 
By that time , says the complaint , Costner 's attempts to market his technology had proven unsuccessful , and he sold all his rights and ownership in CINC to a man named Bret Shelton . 
Three days after Costner and Contogouris had gotten together , Deepwater Horizon exploded , which would eventually lead to the leak of nearly 5 million gallons of oil into the Gulf of Mexico before the wellhead was capped . 
Contogouris knew it was a big opportunity for CINC . 
He says he attempted to contact Costner , but could n't , because the actor was filming a movie in Canada . 
Instead , Contogouris spoke to one of Costner 's friends , who advised him that the actor 's stock in the company had already been sold . 
So Contogouris spoke with Shelton , and then tried unsuccessfully to get in touch with BP . 
Now , Baldwin enters the picture . 
In late April , Contogouris and Baldwin got together in New Orleans with a local attorney , John Houghtaling , and discussed making a documentary film based on the BP oil spill . 
Costner 's technology was then discussed . 
Houghtaling mentioned he could make an introduction to BP , and before long , a joint venture agreement was confected between Baldwin , Contogouris , Houghtaling , and others to market the CINC technology to BP . 
On May 13 , the joint venture , Ocean Therapies Solutions -LRB- OTS -RRB- , signed an agreement with CINC , whereby Contogouris got a 28 percent ownership and Baldwin got a 10 percent ownership in the new company . 
That same day , BP agreed to test the CINC technology for possible use in cleaning up the Deepwater Horizon spill . 
Members of the joint venture , OTS , began disagreeing about how to license the technology to BP -- whether it should be a long-term relationship or a one-time sale for a `` quick kill '' of the Gulf of Mexico disaster . 
Plus , there was said to be a falling out over the failed documentary about the oil spill , which soon resulted in a separate lawsuit . 
The disagreements threatened to blow up OTS , until Costner got involved again , testifying before Congress on June 9 about his technology . 
Soon after that , BP agreed to meet . 
But Contogouris and Baldwin claim in their new lawsuit that they were purposefully excluded from the meeting with BP , which resulted in an $ 18 million deposit for a larger purchase price of the technology . 
Contogouris and Baldwin say they were kept out of the loop about this money and were instead told that BP had placed no such order . 
Having believed that OTS had failed , Contogouris says he sold his interest in CINC 's new partner company . 
It 's alleged that the money that came from BP was used by Costner and one of his associates to buy Contogouris and Baldwin out of their interest in the venture . 
The deal was executed on June 11 in a `` Transfer , Withdrawal , Release and Indemnity Agreement '' whereby Contogouris gave up his 28 % share and Baldwin gave up his 10 % share in OTS for about $ 2 million total . 
A day later , BP purchased 32 units of the CINC technology for a gross price alleged to be in excess of $ 52 million . 
Two days after that , Costner and his associates\/co-defendants `` clandestinely , secretly and wrongfully caused an unauthorized bank account to be opened '' without the knowledge of Contogouris and Baldwin . 
The account was allegedly used by Costner and an associate as `` their own personal piggy bank . '' 
The plaintiffs say they did n't discover what had happened , how they had been supposedly tricked out of their involvement in OTS , until mid-July . 
They are now suing for securities fraud and misrepresentation . 
Contogouris claims $ 10.64 million in damages . 
Baldwin claims $ 3.8 million in damages . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
I like Stephan Baldwin ! 
He 's the good Baldwin ! 
But this is a non-story . 
Even if everything said here is true ; and seems unlikely . 
Baldwin and his greek friend should be , and probably are embarrassed about making bad business decisions . 
When you make snap business decisions like the ones described here you risk everything -- you 're all in . 
And you can lose . 
If this goes forward and they lose they should have to pay legal expenses . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
