Industry officials acknowledge it could take months to entirely contain leak from well on ocean floor The Deepwater Horizon oil rig burning last week . 
It later sank with the presumed loss of 11 lives . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP Underwater robots dived to the ocean floor yesterday in a new effort to staunch the 42,000 gallons of oil a day being pumped into the Gulf of Mexico in America 's worst offshore oil rig spill in 40 years . 
The robots will attempt to activate a blowout preventer , a 450-tonne valve on the ocean floor that offers the only timely option for stemming the flow . 
With the oil now coating 1,800 square miles of water , BP officials acknowledge it could take months to entirely contain two separate leaks from the wrecked oil rig . 
The US coastguard discovered the leaks on Saturday , two days after the Deepwater Horizon oil rig leased by BP sank off the coast of Louisiana . 
The rig was destroyed in an explosion last Tuesday , with 11 workers missing and presumed dead . 
What initially seemed a manageable spill is now rated by the US coastguard as a serious environmental problem , with 1,000 barrels of oil a day being pumped into the Gulf of Mexico , an area rich with dolphins , whales and other marine life . 
Three sperm whales have been sighted in the area of the slick , officials said yesterday . 
The spill , which occurred just as senators were preparing to roll out energy and climate proposals , has deepened debate about America 's energy policies . 
In an effort to win support for the proposals , Barack Obama had come out in favor of more oil and gas drilling in the Gulf of Mexico . 
High winds and big waves forced clean-up vessels , which have been trying to skim the oil from the surface of the water before it washes up on shore , to remain in port at the weekend . 
But Mary Landry , the coast guard commander , insisted the four states that lie in the path of the slick would have ample warning to protect fragile wetlands . 
Forecasts suggest the oil will make landfall on Thursday . 
The plan put into operation yesterday called for four underwater robots to dive 1,500 metres -LRB- 5,000 ft -RRB- below the surface of the water to try to activate the gargantuan system of pipes and valves that sits next to the well on the ocean floor . 
BP said it was the first time such an operation had been mounted at this depth . 
`` It is a slow process , '' said Ron Rybarczyk , a spokesman at the command center in Louisiana . 
`` If you can visualise it , it 's like robotic arms doing something outside the space station . 
It is operating something with a mechanical claw on it that grasps things and turns things and adjusts equipment way down at the floor of the ocean . '' 
BP also admits that the robots may not be successful . 
Doug Suttles , the chief operating officer of BP 's exploration unit , said activating the blowout preventer was a highly complex task in part because it remains unclear whether the valve is working . 
The valve should have stopped the leak at the outset . 
`` The issue we have is that we do n't know the condition inside that blowout valve , '' he said . 
The laborious effort is by far the quickest means available for capping the leak . 
Another option being pursued would be to lower a giant , upside-down funnel to the ocean floor , which would collect the escaping oil and divert it to a barge or a pipeline . 
That too would be a first the method has only been deployed in shallow waters and it would take time . 
Rybarczyk noted the device would have to be custom-built , though he did not give an estimate of how long that would take . 
BP is also pursuing a more traditional fix , which would involve drilling relief wells nearby . 
Suttles said the first rig was due to arrive in the Gulf last night . 
The last spill from an oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico of similar magnitude took more than 10 months to contain , said Dagmar Schmidt Etkin , president of Environmental Research Consulting . 
But that was more than 40 years ago , and technology has advanced since then . 
But she warned cleaning up after this accident would also prove challenging , especially if there continue to be stormy seas . 
Collecting such thin surface deposits is an inefficient process . 
`` Even under the best circumstances you might get 10 % -25 % at most and that is when the weather is co-operative , '' she said . 
`` That is really pushing it . '' 
As of yesterday morning , the crews have retrieved about 1,152 barrels of an oil-and-water mix , BP said . 
Louisiana , which is in the most immediate path of the slick as it moves north , has been putting in place containment booms to try to keep the oil away from fisheries and wetlands . 
`` With this kind of concentration coming in one particular location like that you could have some localized toxic impacts on fish and fish eggs , '' said Etkins . 
So long as the oil stays offshore , the greatest threat is to fish and fish eggs , which could affect future populations . 
But if it hits the coast , it could damage wildlife and commercial shrimp and crab operations . 
