The article about the number of oil-related incidents in the Gulf of Mexico outpacing the ability of the Minerals Management Service to investigate them said that the agency , recently renamed the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement , received 12,087 reports of such incidents over the past five years . 
That is the currenct number of Incidents of Non-Compliance reported to the agency , but not all were in the gulf ; a small percentage of the incidents occurred in Alaska or elsewhere in the Pacific Ocean . 
The number includes relatively minor matters such as inspection violations ; as the article reported , the number of incidents involving deaths , injuries , fires and blowouts was much lower . 
According to a database on the agency 's Web site , the number of serious incidents in the gulf totals 650 to 850 a year . 
The article also incorrectly described Frank Patton as the lead investigator of a 2009 investigation into gas rising dangerously in one well and an averted rig explosion . 
Patton was one of four members of an investigative team . 
MMS investigations of oil-rig accidents have history of inconsistency A year and a day before BP 's Deepwater Horizon oil rig exploded in the Gulf of Mexico , crew members on a neighboring oil rig found themselves bracing for their own potential disaster . 
A dangerous gas bubble surged up a well pipe , and the blowout preventers had n't worked . 
The crew reported hearing a `` deafening roar '' as fluids shot up , knocking over huge metal equipment on the deck . 
Some workers ran to lifeboats , while others stayed behind to control the well . 
The accident on the rig , leased by Louisiana Land Oil and Gas -LRB- LLOG -RRB- , was one of the 12,087 oil-related incidents in the gulf reported over the past five years to the federal Minerals Management Service -- the now-revamped agency investigating the BP oil spill . 
The number of accidents , spills and deaths regularly occurring in the region has far surpassed the agency 's ability to investigate them . 
Until now , 60 inspectors were tasked with investigating all types of incidents . 
Between 2006 and 2009 , those included 30 worker deaths , 1,298 injuries , 514 fires and 23 blowouts that left wells out of control . 
They conducted 378 investigations in the gulf in roughly the same time period , with 21 considered worthy of more rigorous and extended scrutiny by a panel . 
As federal inspectors work to dissect the underlying causes of the BP accident -- an issue to be probed this week in a new round of joint panel hearings in Kenner , La. -- The Washington Post reviewed several dozen serious MMS investigations in recent years to assess how they were conducted and found large variations in aggressiveness and outcome . 
In some cases , investigators ran their own tests , tracked down witnesses and did complicated technical calculations . 
In others , they relied heavily on information and witness interviews provided by companies . 
Once their findings were forwarded to agency officials for review , many probes resulted in small fines or none at all . 
MMS levied financial penalties 154 times in the past five years , agency officials testified last month . 
Although the agency now may assess fines of up to $ 35,000 per day , in five years it collected only $ 8.5 million . 
Its largest fine between 2000 and 2009 was $ 697,500 , according to an MMS Web site . 
It took 11 months for MMS to finalize its report in the LLOG case , and along the way it sometimes accepted the accounts of company officials without probing more deeply , the report shows . 
Investigators asked to see a safety valve provided by a subcontractor , Halliburton Corp. . 
When Halliburton told investigators the device was under repair and could n't be examined , an inspector accepted the company 's assertions and data . 
Kendra Barkoff , an Interior Department spokeswoman , said Saturday that the valve played no role in the accident . 
The inquiry concluded that no rules had been broken , no fines were warranted , and the agency 's response should be to alert the industry to potential risks . 
Barkoff noted that `` some accidents are just that : accidents that involve no wrongdoing or criminal or negligent behavior . '' 
The team looking into that case was led by Frank Patton , a veteran investigator also responsible for monitoring the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
In recent weeks , Patton has testified that he approved a BP drilling plan that other oil companies and drilling experts have said was deeply flawed . 
The supervisor who approved the LLOG report was J. David Dykes , co-chairman of the joint panel with the Coast Guard that on Monday begins its second round of hearings into the BP blowout . 
Dykes referred questions to Barkoff , who also answered for Patton . 
`` Frank Patton and David Dykes ... are committed to ensuring the safety of offshore energy operation , '' Barkoff said . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
