How BP 's oil spill mess could be much worse The Deepwater Horizon oil spill has been with us nearly three months , and the news just is n't getting better . 
Even when there 's hope of a cleanup , an accident sends us back nearly to square one . 
The American public is incensed , the finger-pointing refuses to end , the U.S.-British `` special relationship '' is straining , an offshore moratorium is declared but overruled , and even as the blown-out gulf well was sealed Thursday , anxiety lingered about whether the cap would hold . 
It 's a mess in every sense of the word . 
But this could be far worse . 
Imagine if BP were a state-owned oil company . 
Instead of reasoning with an incompetent chief executive , we 'd be reasoning with a protectionist prime minister . 
Regarding BP , this is a thought experiment . 
But there are plenty of state-owned companies drilling in U.S. waters and abroad . 
The next oil spill could be more than just an economic and environmental crisis . 
It could be a diplomatic one . 
As it is , the BP spill has caused tension between the United States and Britain . 
President Obama has been accused by British media and officials of xenophobia , waging a campaign of hate , and general '' Brit-bashing . '' 
British Prime Minister David Cameron , meanwhile , has been criticized for not taking a stronger stance in favor of BP . 
At a time when some are saying the `` special relationship '' is over , a tiff over BP is n't exactly what the friendship needs . 
Humor me and picture what would happen if BP were owned by the British government . 
We would be facing a situation in which a foreign government would be directly responsible for the ever-worsening spill on our domestic shores . 
The United States and Britain have had arguments before , and the nationalistic vitriol coming from both sides would be 10 times worse as issues of blame , recovery costs , national pride , domestic security , and economic competition are endlessly debated between leaders , economists , and cable pundits . 
That 's still the rosy scenario , because at least Britain is an ally . 
There are plenty of countries that are not , and they happen to own their oil companies -- Venezuela , China , Iran , and Russia being among the biggest . 
These petroleum-rich countries are placing more importance on their nationalized oil companies as a way to ensure a steady supply to guard against growing domestic demand and changing market conditions . 
The oil industry is dominated by state-owned companies . 
Multinationals might have more name recognition with the public -- ExxonMobil , Royal Dutch Shell , BP , Chevron -- but they have full access to 6 percent of worldwide oil reserves . 
Eighty-eight percent of reserves are held by national oil companies , which also represent the majority of worldwide production . 
-LRB- It 's unknown the percentage of oil that state-owned companies get from outside their countries ' shores . -RRB- 
Companies such as Aramco , Petrobras , Sinopec and Pemex are n't household names , but they will be as oil becomes scarcer and they can throw around their weight even more due to their dominance of existing oil reserves . 
We 're already seeing potential hotspots , and the United States is n't the only country that should be worried . 
Chevron and Rosneft -LRB- owned by the Russian government -RRB- will begin drilling in the Shatsky Ridge of the Black Sea at the end of 2011 . 
The Black Sea is bordered by Russia , Georgia , Turkey , Bulgaria , Romania and Ukraine -- countries that , to put it lightly , do n't always get along . 
Any substantial accident would be seen as a Russian oil company contaminating its oft-slighted neighbors . 
Cue the international crisis . 
More potential trouble could happen in the South China Sea , where China-owned CNOOC continues to expand its operations . 
As many as 10 countries surround the South China Sea , and its importance as a major shipping zone and an area of ecological diversity can not be overstated . 
It is already a geopolitical hotspot , and any disaster caused by a state-owned company might unravel any diplomatic progress being made . 
Even the Gulf of Mexico might see trouble again . 
Brazil 's Petrobras drills in the gulf , and has been ramping up its operations in the area for several years . 
Brazil has relatively good relations with its neighbors in the Americas , but a Deepwater Horizon-style disaster could significantly change the political dynamics of the region . 
It does n't have to be a blown offshore platform that changes everything . 
Accidents can happen at any point in the supply chain . 
A recent death at the Port Arthur , Tex. , refinery -LRB- owned by Shell and Aramco -RRB- highlights the potential for more tension . 
A substantially destructive accident at any step of the oil extraction , refining or transportation process could stain relations as well . 
If we can be sure of one thing in the aftermath of the BP spill , it 's that it wo n't be the last . 
Countries have not used the BP oil spill to stop offshore development : Deepwater production is anticipated to increase by two-thirds within five years , and state-owned oil companies in general are poised to continue their strong growth . 
Strides in renewable energy are n't happening quickly enough to substantially reduce global demand of oil . 
That oil is n't plentiful enough to be extracted as easily anymore , meaning companies are using more and more potentially dangerous methods to get at it . 
As BP has shown , danger can only be averted for so long . 
Thompson-Westra is a research assistant at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington . 
CSIS does not take specific policy positions , and the views expressed are the author 's own . 
Multimedia reports on the struggle for equality around the globe . 
