Not technically , not politically , not environmentally . 
BP 's Macondo well remains dangerous , a threat to gush anew , and very much alive until it is plugged with cement in a bottom-kill that 's still weeks away at best . 
Criminal and civil investigations are going full bore . 
Exploratory drill rigs remain locked out of the deep water as the oil industry tries to prove that it knows what it 's doing . 
And the ecological impact is still playing out as uncounted millions of gallons of oil pollute the Gulf of Mexico . 
But something may have come to an end in the past few days : the sense that nothing would ever go right with this demon well . 
Macondo for the moment is shut in . 
It 's not dead , but neither has it spewed any oil into the gulf since Thursday . 
After a lengthy meeting between government scientists and BP engineers Saturday afternoon , retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen gave BP permission to keep the well sealed for another 24 hours , extending an `` integrity test '' that strangled the well for the first time and kicked the crisis into its endgame . 
That could mean that the well will be reopened Sunday afternoon . 
Allen 's directive appeared to have been crafted to keep all options on the table , but the default position remains that the shut-in procedure will come to an end at some point . 
`` When this test is eventually stopped , we will immediately return to containment '' using the new , tight-fitting cap on the well and surface ships that can capture or flare oil and gas , Allen said . 
The shutting-in of the well was never the primary purpose of the `` 3 ram capping stack '' lowered onto the top of the well Monday night . 
The 75-ton cap , which replaced the loose-fitting `` top hat , '' was conceived as a mechanism to permit the capturing of more oil after it became clear that early flow rate estimates were far too low . 
Along the way , engineers raised the possibility that they could use the valves on the new cap to turn off the well as one might an ordinary faucet . 
Administration officials , including President Obama , have emphasized that a re-opening of the well would not mean a return to the same ugly scene of a billowing gusher . 
But the optics will be unpleasant in the short run . 
Re-opening the well would mean that the oily plume , omnipresent for months on cable TV and Internet feeds from the deep gulf , would return at least temporarily as engineers open the choke valve and let oil and gas vent into the gulf . 
`` If we make the decision to open up the well , there will be a period when oil will go back into the gulf , '' BP senior vice president Kent Wells said Saturday morning . 
What has been called the worst environmental crisis in U.S. history has also been a technological crisis , carrying echoes of Three Mile Island , which rattled the nuclear power industry , and Apollo 13 , which challenged engineers to fix a problem -- moon-bound astronauts in a broken spaceship -- no one had ever faced . 
For 87 days , from April 20 , when the Macondo well blew out and ignited a fireball on the doomed rig Deepwater Horizon , killing 11 workers , until Thursday afternoon , the well defied all plans to throttle it . 
The new cap gave engineers more leverage . 
The well could yet spring a surprise . 
Robotic vehicles are staring at the mud around the blowout preventer and in all directions , looking for new leaks . 
They 're using sonar , acoustic instruments , seismic detectors . 
They 're taking the temperature of the casing ; they 're sampling bubbles coming out of a valve . 
It 's a situation where everyone is hopeful but still checking all the closets and under the beds . 
Officials remain concerned about `` low probability , high consequence '' hazards . 
But Wells said that engineers and scientists are increasingly confident that the well is n't leaking into the geological formations . 
`` There 's no evidence that we do n't have integrity , '' Wells said . 
The pressure in the well was measured Saturday morning at 6,745 pounds per square inch , rising only a couple of pounds per hour and nearing equilibrium . 
That pressure level is ambiguous . 
Scientists had hoped to see pressures above 7,500 psi , or even 8,000 or 9,000 , officials have said , because such high pressures , holding steady , would be clear evidence that the well casing is sound . 
If lower than about 6,000 psi , there could be little doubt that the casing has failed . 
The middle range has created two competing scenarios . 
One is that that there are leaks that have kept the well from pressurizing further . 
The other is that the reservoir is running out of gas -- and oil -- after gushing for so long . 
The protracted nature of the disaster could have partially depleted Macondo , which is the best-case scenario for the pressure test if not the prettiest picture in the broader sense . 
Wells said BP favors this second scenario because of the way the pressures rose steadily , fitting a model that 's consistent with a well that is n't damaged . 
No one has popped champagne or expressed any triumphalism . 
BP engineers and their associates from other oil companies helping out in the BP war room are unlikely to boast of success given the previous setbacks and the initial , fatal disaster itself , and the government will not be presenting the oil company any bouquets . 
The ultimate end will come , officials hope , when a relief well plugs Macondo with mud and then cement . 
The first of two relief wells is getting close and should intercept the well around the end of July , with the bottom-kill taking anywhere from a few days to a few weeks , Wells said . '' 
