What the Financial Market Meltdown Means for You Thoughts , comments , suggestions or criticisms about The Post 's Live Q&A s ? 
Send us an e-mail . 
Friday , September 19 , 2008 ; 1:00 PM Every hour seems to bring a new financial crisis to the fore on Wall Street . 
Certified Financial Planner Barbara A. Warner , president of Warner Financial , Inc. in Bethesda , Md. , was online Friday , September 19 at 1 p.m. ET to discuss guidelines for how to handle your personal finances amidst the turmoil . 
Durham , N.C. : Hi . 
I 'm a bit confused about the security of my mutual funds and stocks I have with my investment bank -LRB- which is not one of the ones going under -- at least yet -RRB- . 
What happens to those funds and stocks if the bank goes under -LRB- none of the funds contain investments in the bank , and none of the stocks are stock in the bank itself -RRB- ? 
Laziness is working for me for once . 
: Several months ago , a generous relative gave me a large some of money and I never got around to putting into my Roth IRA which is very diversified . 
I figure now is a good time to invest . 
Potomac , Md. : Barbara , I 've been putting off getting a financial planner for years now , but after the recent market roller coaster , I feel that it 's finally time . 
However , I 've done little research into what characteristics and qualifications I should be looking for in a planner . 
Could you give me some insight this ? 
Arlington , Va. : Barbara , I recently started a new job that matches the first 5 % of my deposits into my 401k . 
Does that 5 % count against the federal limits -LRB- $ 15K , I believe -RRB- or do the limits only apply to what is actually taken out of my paycheck ? 
Arlington , Va. : Barbara , I guess my question is : where is all of this bail-out money coming from ? 
Are we going to be hit with huge tax increases to fund them ? 
Austin , Texas : How much money should I have in cash ? 
Where should I keep it ? 
Bank or Money Market ? 
Alexandria , Va. : Barbara , I have my savings in a small bank in Michigan , where I am from . 
I 've always felt very secure keeping my funds there , but now I find myself wondering if it 's false security . 
In general , what are the safest institutions for keeping savings ? 
Are smaller banks a bad bet ? 
Mine has locations in three states , all in the Midwest . 
But it 's not a national entity like Bank of America or anything like that . 
Am I being smart or stupid ? 
Arlington , Va. : My husband and I are saving for a house . 
At the moment , we own one condo that is upside down and another one that is not upside down but is also our main residence . 
Ultimately we want to sell them both and put the proceeds -LRB- if there are any -RRB- into our down payment for a bigger place . 
Is the current financial craziness on Wall Street going to translate into crazy high mortgage rate percentages ? 
If so , I fear we may be destined to live in our tiny condo for life . 
Rockville , Va. : I currently hold my cash in an online savings account paying 3 % . 
So why does anyone own a short-term T-bill paying 1-1 .5 % ? 
Potomac , Md. : I became a stay-at-home mom a couple years ago and living on one income was n't really working but we were n't starving . 
I started selling on eBay and pretty much treated it as a garage sale - sold things around my house I no longer needed . 
Well the first year or two I did n't make a lot -LRB- maybe $ 250 -RRB- but I did n't do it consistently either . 
In the past few months I 've been selling every month and have made a considerable sum . 
When do I have to start reporting this income to the IRS ? 
Meaning , a friend told me if you make less than $ 800 a year you do n't have to report it to the IRS . 
Anything over $ 801 you have to report . 
Bowie , Md. : I just found I 'm getting a raise that would put my income over the limit to make full-size -LRB- $ 5000 -RRB- Roth contribution for this year , which I 've already done . 
If I increase my 401k withholdings , are those effectively deducted from modified AGI , to keep me below the threshhold ? 
Anonymous : I have a fair amount of money in mutual funds , but very little in individaul stocks , so I am not too worried about the latest downturns in the stock market , but the actual and possible demise of more banks makes me a bit nervous about bonds held with Citicorp and Wachovia . 
The bonds do n't mature for several years . 
I would n't want to sell when the market is down , and doubt the banks will go belly-up , but , then people with Washington Mutual bonds probably said the same . 
I feel more confident about bonds I have with Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae since they seem okay -- for now . 
Potomac , Md. : Hi , I would like to generate income from my investments and feel uncertain about where to put my money to obtain about a 5 % return , without little risk to principle and no lock-in rules that come with CDs . 
Short-term Treasury bonds seem to be doing the best right now . 
How will these investments be impacted by the ongoing turmoil ? 
Bethesda , Md. : Hi Barbara . 
I switched jobs this year and came away with a $ 23K pension pay-out that I need to roll over into something else . 
I am considering going with a fund from Northwest Mutual but I also currently have an account with T. Rowe Price . 
Is there an advantage to going with one firm over the other ? 
Do they do different things or is it more of a Coke vs. Pepsi choice ? 
I have a Roth IRA with T. Rowe Price presently . 
I also need to decide what to do with my old 401k . 
I can either leave it with my old company , roll it over to my 401k with my new company , or invest it in a stand-alone account with T. Rowe Price or Northwest Mutual . 
Bronx , N.Y. : Hi Barbara . 
This might be a basic Investing 101 question , but I still do n't get it : with all the bad news coming from Wall Street and predictions that we have a ways to go before the economy rebounds , why does n't it make sense to pull all of our money out of stocks and put it into money market funds or savings accounts ? 
Then when the economy rebounds , we invest it again ? 
Just seems like the logical thing to do ! 
Ashburn , Va. : Hello , what would you suggest for an investor in his or her late 30s to do who has $ 100,000 - $ 150,000 parked in CDs , assuming he\/she has a stable job , for long term investment ? 
I have been waiting for more than an year -LRB- since August -RRB- for the right time . 
Rockville , Md. : We are in the midst of a major remodeling at our home and have been caught off guard by how high prices have risen on everything from food to gas to , well , just about everything . 
Are there any good resources for people who want to get some personal financial guidance but ca n't afford to spend even more money to get that advice ? 
Arlington , Va. : Barbara , this might sound strange , but I am really worried about how all of this financial turmoil is going to affect my father . 
He 's 84 years old , lived through the Depression , was a company man for one of the car companies for 36 years , and retired 20 years ago with lots of money in the bank and in stocks . 
He follows the markets religiously and I am worried that this recent turn of events is going to weigh on him to the point that it 'll affect his health . 
Any advice for how to talk with an older person about what 's happening on Wall Street these days ? 
I do n't believe my dad is in any financial trouble , but the fear of being broke\/in debt\/etc . 
has lingered with him since he was a child . 
Bethesda , Md. again : Thanks for answering my question about what to do with my pension and 401K from my last employer . 
Can you tell me what the difference is between a mutual fund and an annuity ? 
Is one a better choice than the other for someone who is mid-thirties and married ? 
Gaithersburg , Md. : I participate in a 401k and my employer matches my contributions up to 3 % . 
Should I contribution a percentage of my income or a dollar amount ? 
Editor 's Note : washingtonpost.com moderators retain editorial control over Discussions and choose the most relevant questions for guests and hosts ; guests and hosts can decline to answer questions . 
washingtonpost.com is not responsible for any content posted by third parties . '' 
The Washington Post editorial staff was not involved in the moderation . 
