In an award-winning journalism career spanning nearly three decades , Glenn Kessler has covered foreign policy , economic policy , the White House , Congress , politics , airline safety and Wall Street . 
He was The Washington Post 's chief State Department reporter for nine years , traveling around the world with three different Secretaries of State . 
Before that , he covered tax and budget policy for The Washington Post and also served as the newspaper 's national business editor . 
More '' FactCheck.org - Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of Pennsylvania PolitiFact - St. Petersburg Times and Congressional Quarterly `` Obama has no background in economics . 
The Post says it 's Franklin Raines , for `` advice on mortgage and housing policy . '' 
Under Raines , Fannie Mae committed `` extensive financial fraud . '' 
Stuck with the bill . '' 
-- McCain video release , September 18 , 2008 . 
An already nasty presidential election campaign is getting nastier . 
The meltdown on Wall Street has touched off frantic attempts by both the McCain and Obama camps to secure political advantage and indulge in guilt by association . 
Over the past 24 hours , both campaigns have issued video press releases -LRB- let 's not call them ads until they actually air somewhere -RRB- attempting to show that the other side 's `` advisers '' are somehow responsible for the crisis . 
The latest McCain attack is particularly dubious . 
The McCain video attempts to link Obama to Franklin Raines , the former CEO of the bankrupt mortgage giant , Fannie Mae , who also happens to be African American . 
It then shows a photograph of an elderly white woman taxpayer who has supposedly been `` stuck with the bill '' as a result of the `` extensive financial fraud '' at Fannie Mae . 
The Obama campaign last night issued a statement by Raines insisting , `` I am not an advisor to Barack Obama , nor have I provided his campaign with advice on housing or economic matters . '' 
Obama spokesman Bill Burton went a little further , telling me in an e-mail that the campaign had `` neither sought nor received '' advice from Raines `` on any matter . '' 
So what evidence does the McCain campaign have for the supposed Obama-Raines connection ? 
It is pretty flimsy , but it is not made up completely out of whole cloth . 
McCain spokesman Brian Rogers points to three items in the Washington Post in July and August . 
It turns out that the three items -LRB- including an editorial -RRB- all rely on the same single conversation , between Raines and a Washington Post business reporter , Anita Huslin , who wrote a profile of the discredited Fannie Mae boss that appeared on July 16 . 
The profile reported that Raines , who retired from Fannie Mae four years ago , had `` taken calls from Barack Obama 's presidential campaign seeking his advice on mortgage and housing policy matters . '' 
Since this has now become a campaign issue , I asked Huslin to provide the exact circumstances of the quote . 
She explained that she was chatting with Raines during the photo shoot , and asked `` if he was engaged at all with the Democrats ' quest for the White House . 
He said that he had gotten a couple of calls from the Obama campaign . 
I asked him about what , and he said ` oh , general housing , economy issues . ' 
-LRB- ` Not mortgage\/foreclosure meltdown or Fannie-specific , ' I asked , and he said ` no. ' -RRB- '' By Raines 's own account , he took a couple of calls from someone on the Obama campaign , and they had some general discussions about economic issues . 
I have asked both Raines and the Obama people for more details on these calls and will let you know if I receive a reply . 
The McCain campaign is clearly exaggerating wildly in attempting to depict Franklin Raines as a close adviser to Obama on `` housing and mortgage policy . '' 
If we are to believe Raines , he did have a couple of telephone conversations with someone in the Obama campaign . 
But that hardly makes him an adviser to the candidate himself -- and certainly not in the way depicted in the McCain video release . 
This morning 's stump speach by McCain asserted that sub prime loans were done by Fannie & Freddie and made no mention of the I-banks -LRB- UBS & Phil Graham -RRB- that are really at the heart of the hosuning meltdown . 
He makes claims of trying to reform Fannie & Freddie and predicted this mess . 
My understanding is that he just wanted to change the agency that oversees the GSEs . 
He is also wanted to reduce the CRA requirements for the banks . 
Choose the ex mortgage mogul to vet your VP . 
And the VP chosen , despite many positives , is way to cozy with sub prime\/credit card lenders and has sponsored pro- foreclosure legislation . 
Really poor judgement by Obama to involve Johnson Posted by : kirk | September 19 , 2008 11:00 AM | Report abuse Trust the McCain campaign to come forth with another lie . 
Was John McCain EVER an honorable man ? 
I ca n't remember now . 
McCain 's camp took direct quotes from the WaPo . 
I wish all you liberal fanatics out there had the guts to call people liars face to face so you can get the punch in the nose you all richly deserve . 
On another point McCain 's saying that if he were President he would fire Cox is just so much noise since , under the law , heads of regulatory commissions -LRB- such as the SEC -RRB- have a fixed term precisely to insulate them from politics so they ca n't be fired , not even by the President . 
If he did n't know that then his trigger-happy , shoot first-think later reactions manifest a dangerous temperament for a president . 
I 'm loosing what little respect I did have for McCain . 
Joe Biden has many positives as you say , and it 's true that nobody 's perfect . 
Nobody can be in political life as long as he has and not have connections . 
Biden is a senator with a long record and a history that people can look through . 
A guy who 's thoughtful , intelligent , experienced and capable of being President if need be . 
Someone who can advise him on a lot of things : foreign relations , the economy , even the banking industry . 
Joe 's got no Presidential ambitions after this campaign , and he is pretty much immune to special interests as VP . 
He 'll be able to give advice without any conflicts of interest . 
A good solid pick for VP . 
By the way , I can make a case that picking Biden benefits Hillary Clinton 's bid for President in 2012 if Obama should lose , or in 2016 if he should win . 
If Obama loses , Clinton does not have the loser label from 2008 . 
She 'll be able to campaign as `` the one you should have picked '' , etc. . 
If Obama wins , two options : Clinton may be added to the ticket in 2012 . 
Biden could step down as he 's getting old and since Obama has 4 years in the White House his experience is less valuable . 
But Clinton may not want to be VP . 
VP 's do n't have a great track record : Bush I was the first sitting VP to be elected President since Martin Van Buren . 
So , if Obama wins he did Clinton a favor by not naming her VP . 
And if he loses , he also did her a favor by not naming her VP . 
He is the new JANUS . 
Implying that Raines is an advisor to Obama himself is misleading . 
My problem with the McCain campaign here is that they do n't need to distort anything . 
All they have to do is mention the Obama campaign called Raines about general housing , economy issues . 
Then bring up Jim Johnson and money received by Obama from the GSEs , and you have enough to hurt Obama on the issue . 
In the paragraph titled `` The Pinocchio Test '' , he refers to Raines as `` Howell Raines '' . 
I think the Fact Checker should check his Facts . 
Howell Raines is the former Executive Editor at the New York Times , and is definitely not Franklin Raines , formerly of Fannie Mae . 
He 's actually not . 
Phil Gramm and Carly Fiorina have been major economic advisers to McCain and Obama . 
McCain 's ad is insidious Cheney-like dishonesty . 
Raines is not an adviser to Obama . 
What a man you are . 
Way to post a comment on a blog . 
Way to generalize a whole group of people that disagree with your view of the world as `` liberal fanatics '' whatever that means . 
The McCain knows that it 's getting crutical now and thier popularity is rapidly declining . 
People just are n't believing them any more . 
Thanks Rick , you are right about Howell . 
I have corrected it . 
Is this what happens when you employ too many Left-wing minorities at your paper who are in the tank for Obama . 
John McCain is a LIAR . 
As Claire McCaskill said this week : There can be no honor without honesty . 
John McCain : Liar in Chief ... or maybe not . 
Check out this video of who will reallly be running things if the $ 100 Million Man gets elected : FINANCIAL TERRORISM A ROOT CAUSE OF WALL STREET MONEY MELTDOWN ? 
Once again , Congress is being asked to rush through emergency legislation which will grant effective control of the economy to the government . 
Officials continue to blame lax lending policies on the part of the mortgage industry for spawning this crisis . 
But is that entirely true ? 
And is there a hidden agenda at work ? 
Shortly after 3 different reports asked him about the F&F mess , his response to all three `` we 'll have to wait and see . '' 
Today he gave a speech after speaking to his economic advisors in Florida , his response `` we 'll have to wait and see . '' 
Which is it Dems , tell me I 'm dying to know , does your candidate mean that HE can afford to wait and see ? 
Because this economic crisis started months ago and he has yet to address it other than to say `` we 'll have to wait and see . '' 
So I ask who can afford to wait and see ? 
If he wants to award `` pinochios '' for this story , then he needs to award them to the rightful owner : his employer , the Washington Post . 
So , Dobbs , you are saying we ca n't believe a thing we read in your paper ? 
He doesnt stand a chance . 
it 's another Obama connection to REZKO style politics , like this one : to NickinVA : bring it . 
a \* hole Posted by : independent | September 19 , 2008 12:25 PM | Report abuse Republicans want less government and more free market as long as they are making lots of money . 
If they are n't making money fast enough or are losing some money , then they are ready for `` government regulation '' -LRB- taxpayers paying for Rich Republicans -RRB- . 
Then when they start making money again they will cry for less government intervention . 
I do n't care whether your dad voted all his life , anyone who votes for a Republican this election is simply a fool . 
I believe it is going to hurt him with independents if he keeps it up . 
No one wants another liar in the whitehouse . 
Btw , someone tell Sarah Palin that Great Falls is in Michigan . 
If you back McCain and defend his obviously discredited claims than that makes you a liar too . 
OK - So Obama did n't go out to lunch or visit Raines ' office - but the fact is that he did advise the BHO campaign on housing and economics - so where 's `` the lie '' ? 
This is less a lie than Obama 's continuous efforts to say McCain = Bush - which is clearly and historically A LIE . 
I know we 're ALL shocked that politicians LIE , now are n't we - especially since Obama has laid false claim to `` a different kind of politics '' and `` change '' ... seems the more things `` change '' , the worse they become ! 
`` Change '' we can obviously do without ! 
The complete absence of anyone for Obama , was stated to be a remarkable statement of shame and fear for the truth about B.O. Apparently , one theme in the content was that the `` organizer in the community '' made no change . 
Is the community still in the same sad shape as the day the organizer showed up ? 
If so , it is a stunning eyeopener about `` hope '' for his ecnomic plan . 
McCain 's camp took direct quotes from the WaPo . 
I wish all you liberal fanatics out there had the guts to call people liars face to face so you can get the punch in the nose you all richly deserve . 
McCain has lied so many times throughout this campaign that it 's sickening . 
He paints Raines as a close advisor to Obama , when that 's totally false . 
He said Obama wants to teach kindergarteners about sex . 
Again , totally false . 
He 's lied about Sarah Palin 's experience , the attendance at his rallies , Palin 's earmark spending , the Bridge to Nowhere , and so on . 
No wonder this week he 's fallen behind in the polls -- because people are seeing his campaign for what it 's really worth . 
Check Gallup 's Web site if you need the facts yourself . 
As of right now , Obama holds a 4 percent lead over McCain . 
Keep digging that hole , Republicans ... Posted by : Jessie in Ohio | September 19 , 2008 12:28 PM | Report abuse I get it . 
We took advice from him , just not today , so it 's all a lie . 
Who wants a lying President just like the one in the White House now . 
McCain has lost the little creditability he had going for him and Palin is even worse ... No way could I ever vote for McCain as I have had him figured out for a long time . 
Time for him to leave the Senate as well ... Posted by : N. Bustamante | September 19 , 2008 12:28 PM | Report abuse Just say No to B.O. Economics 101 should be a requirement for all liberals where they learn supply and demand . 
Communism is not patriotism . 
Bush\/Chenney already have that title . 
But if McSame gets elected nobody knows how far they ' l go . 
He doesnt stand a chance . 
I have totally lost all trust and respect for him . 
And Palin is no better , lies , lies and more lies . 
They want you to believe Franklin Raines isnt tied to Fannie Mae has much has Rev Jeramiah Wright isnt a rascist and Barry isnt a muslim . 
Had he picked Hillary we wouldnt be worrying about how close this race actually is . 
This guy Obama is not who Opera would have you believe he is ... Posted by : Larry Clifton | September 19 , 2008 12:33 PM | Report abuse Wow , watching McCain throw away a life time of achievement makes me a little sad . 
The VC could n't break him in 5 years , but the GOP did it in 5 months . 
even above your own integrity ? 
They want you to believe Franklin Raines isnt tied to Fannie Mae has much has Rev Jeramiah Wright isnt a rascist and Barry isnt a muslim . 
Had he picked Hillary we wouldnt be worrying about how close this race actually is . 
If you have such a problem with the Post , then do n't read it . 
I 'm sure Fox News will be much more satisfying for you . 
I love how conservatives call Obama a Muslim . 
It just makes you look even more ignorant . 
So keep it up and keep digging that hole ! 
I 'll be in Tyson 's corner at 3 . 
Wanna meet up and settle this ??? Posted by : Sam | September 19 , 2008 12:34 PM | Report abuse My daughter will be born in December . 
She will be born into this world in debt , thanks to our current administration 's method of financing their ridiculous war , the government 's willingness to give billions more to huge corporations as a reward for maintaining sloppy business practices , and a system that refuses to properly punish the criminals who commit these crimes as well as those who allow them to be committed . 
I will be voting for Barack Obama , mainly for two reasons : First , he is the only candidate with any sense of calling on those Americans who can afford it , to help begin to pay down this debt . 
I feel that they have benefited the most from our military protecting this country , it 's only right that they should step up now and help in the effort to keep this country strong . 
Yep - they ought to pay a bit more in taxes -LRB- still half of what they would have during Reagan 's era -RRB- than they are currently , since we 're spending a bit more to help them stay rich . 
Second , John McCain and his potential administration obviously feel that the laws of our country apply differently to some citizens , like in the case of Sarah Palin . 
They do n't think they need to follow all the laws , just the ones that benefit them . 
And is n't that kind of how we got in this mess in the first place ? 
The question and answer were clear in context . 
Had Raines taken any questions from the Obama campaign ? 
Yes , he had . 
No one is denying that now , it was correct then and is now . 
Someone reportedly from the Obama campaign had called Raines to ask him questions about the mortgage market . 
It makes a whole lot of sense to , since he was deeply involved in it . 
The McCain claim is that it makes him Obama 's economic advisor , which is pure rubbish . 
The `` straight talk express '' has derailed somewhere along the lines Posted by : robrob | September 19 , 2008 12:35 PM | Report abuse I believe Charlie Rangel is an advisor to Obama as well . 
Obama has some real good advisors does n't he ? 
LOL Posted by : Hank | September 19 , 2008 12:36 PM | Report abuse calm down now Democrats . 
i know you are feeling uncomfortable now that the race is going neck and neck . 
it 's just your subconscious speaking to you and it 's saying President John McCain wins by a landslide . 
McCain 's camp took direct quotes from the WaPo . 
I wish all you liberal fanatics out there had the guts to call people liars face to face so you can get the punch in the nose you all richly deserve . 
I 'd say it to his face or yours . 
You 're entitled to your own opinion , not your own facts . 
Go smoke another joint in your hybrid and pretend that Obama knows what he is doing . 
Point fingers and try to blame everyone else without any proof instead of coming up with any solutions . 
Mccain voted agains fuel economy and it got us record high oil prices . 
Republicans got us into this economic meltdown . 
Tiem for them to shut up and accept the blame not try to point fingers with smoke and mirrors . 
America is finished as a modern economic superpower . 
`` If Congress does not act , American taxpayers will continue to be exposed to the enormous risk that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac pose to the housing market , the overall financial system , and the economy as a whole , '' Mr. McCain warned at the time . 
Obama 's campaign received a bunch of money from Fannie employees at the cap of $ 200 a head , the donation limit . 
Just like he did from the employees of Starbucks , or of McDonalds , or of any other company you can probably name . 
Is the Coffee and Burger conspiracy working with him to rob us of our beans and buns ? 
Check your little facts at the door , Ted . 
take it from a 30 year finance professional . 
Mc Cain `` gets it '' ... big time . . 
he won the election today ... Obama was tied to the credit crisis ... he 's through . 
Tell the Jamie Gorelick , the Crown heiress , the Klutznick heiress and the Pritzker heiress that they did n't get into Harvard because they were smart they got in because daddy was rich . 
The J.A.P. Lake Shore Drive Chicago Mafia just took it in the a - - . 
Tell Johnson & Raines they 'll be hunted down like feral dogs . 
Game , set , match . 
However , since no one else can bring one example of how Sarah Palins education and experience prepares her to be vice president I 'll leave it to the leading Republican Senator on the Senate foreign relations to defend her : Take it away Republican Senator Chuck Hagel : '' `` I do think in a world that is so complicated , so interconnected and so combustible , you really got to have some people in charge that have some sense of the bigger scope of the world ... I think that s just a requirement . 
I think it s a stretch to , in any way , to say that she s got the experience to be president of the United States . 
I think they ought to just be honest about it and stop the nonsense about , ' I look out my window and I see Russia and so therefore I know something about Russia , That kind of thing is insulting to the American people . 
-LRB- she -RRB- doesn t have any foreign policy credentials . 
You get a passport for the first time in your life last year ? 
I mean , I don t know what you can say . 
You can t say anything '' Posted by : COMMON SENSE | September 19 , 2008 12:39 PM | Report abuse McLame would rather lose his principles then lose an election . 
He is truly pathetic , a pale and weak shadow of himself . 
Maverick , more like a gelding ! 
A study by the Wisconsin Advertising Project based at the University of Wisconsin showed that 70 % of team Obama 's ads were negative as compared to 56 % for McCain 's team Posted by : Vijay | September 19 , 2008 12:39 PM | Report abuse calm down now Democrats . 
i know you are feeling uncomfortable now that the race is going neck and neck . 
it 's just your subconscious speaking to you and it 's saying President John McCain wins by a landslide . 
Check the Gallup poll . 
In the past week , Obama has gained almost eight points and has his first significant lead over McCain since he picked Palin . 
Looks like your Palin star is fading fast . 
You conservatives are going to get exactly what you have coming to you ... Posted by : Jessie in Ohio | September 19 , 2008 12:40 PM | Report abuse McCain ad quotes the Style section of the Washington Post ... hahaha I personally do n't see the big deal about asking a former CEO of FNM his opinion on Housing . 
To me , that 's like asking Pete Rose about playing hardnosed baseball . 
Also the comment about leftist minority hiring is extremely insensitive Posted by : tom | September 19 , 2008 12:40 PM | Report abuse It is obvious now everything McCain claims about his POW years is probably either an outright lie or an exaggeration . 
Or has he disavowed his , umm , whiteness ? 
Curious that you point out the black and white skin color of the people in this video . 
Really , I suggest that the woman might be Hispanic . 
Oh , now that would be shocking ! 
If you are so sure to offer the facts , try keeping to RELEVANT facts , too , Skippy . 
I read on a conservative blog earlier that they actually think Obama has orchestrated this economic disaster through Fannie and Freddie . 
On the lenders part , is was giving fat loans to anyone\/everyone to make their bottom line look BIG AND FAT -LRB- plus taking home large bonus checks ! -RRB- . 
The irresponsibility on the lendee 's part , is taking a loan for a brand new house and then having to live paycheck to paycheck and buying everything and anything on credit . 
When responsibility comes knocking -LRB- and it has now breaking down the door -RRB- , there is nothing left , but a mess . 
Now , I ask you , is it government 's business to help those that are irresponsible ? 
As you can see , if government 's hand is involved it will just create another bureaucracy that will take more money from the already broke taxpayer . 
It does not matter what party flag is flown in the front yard , less government and more responsibility by you is what we need . 
McCain surrogate Carly Fiorina emailed Mr. Raines asking him if he advises Obama `` Is that true '' , and Raines replied that to her email saying `` he had never done so '' Raines , through the Obama camp , released this email from Fiorina . 
So the McCain Camp knew it was false and still ran it ? 
Now you have to ask yourself why ... Posted by : Jonze | September 19 , 2008 12:41 PM | Report abuse man if this educational background is fit to lead the country I do n't know what is ? 
Palin attended Wasilla High School in Wasilla , a city -LRB- 9 -RRB- located 29 miles -LRB- 47 km -RRB- north of the city of Anchorage . 
She was the head of the Fellowship of Christian Athletes chapter at the school and the point guard and captain of the school 's girls ' basketball team . 
She helped the team win the Alaska small-school basketball championship in 1982 , hitting a critical free throw in the last seconds of the game , despite having an ankle stress fracture . 
She earned the nickname `` Sarah Barracuda '' because of her intense play ; she was the leader of the team prayer before games . 
-LRB- 10 -RRB- In 1982 , Palin enrolled at Hawaii Pacific College but left after her first semester , transferring in 1983 to North Idaho College and then to the University of Idaho . 
She attended Matanuska-Susitna College in Alaska for one term , returning to the University of Idaho to complete her Bachelor of Science degree in communications-journalism , graduating in 1987 . 
-LRB- 11 -RRB- -LRB- 12 -RRB- In 1984 , Palin won the Miss Wasilla Pageant beauty contest , -LRB- 13 -RRB- -LRB- 14 -RRB- then finished third -LRB- second runner-up -RRB- in the Miss Alaska pageant , -LRB- 15 -RRB- -LRB- 16 -RRB- at which she won a college scholarship and the `` Miss Congeniality '' award . 
-LRB- 17 -RRB- In 1988 , she worked as a sports reporter for KTUU-TV in Anchorage , Alaska , -LRB- 18 -RRB- and for the Mat-Su Valley Frontiersman as a sports reporter . 
-LRB- 19 -RRB- She also helped in her husband s commercial fishing family business . 
-LRB- 20 -RRB- Posted by : COMMON SENSE | September 19 , 2008 12:41 PM | Report abuse HickinVA , well sure that fits . 
Obama and Obama 's team actually gave the decision some considered gravitas - it was n't a roll of the dice , a coin flip or impulsively made the on the day before the announcement -- it was Campaign First all the way for Senator McCain Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 12:42 PM | Report abuse IF YOU ARE POSTING ABOUT MUSLIMS , AYERS , WRIGHT , OR FLAG PINS : YOU ARE AN ASSHAT WHO AVOIDES REAL POLICY FACTS BY PUTTING YOUR HEAD IN THE SAND . 
huh huh is the Post credibility factor is in check . . 
What a liberal trash can . . 
If they could not predict today 's problem with all the resources they had then they better withdraw from this election unless that super republicans are also shameless . 
He 'd get there by taxing current health care benefits . 
The steep rise in taxes would prompt many younger , healthier employees to give up their coverage . 
Left with the least healthy , and thus most expensive workers -- which wrecks any notion of a risk pool -- the current trickle of employers dropping health benefits would become an avalanche . 
The Dallas Morning News cites analysts warning it could `` lead to the death of company-provided health plans . '' 
However , since no one else can bring one example of how Sarah Palins education and experience prepares her to be vice president I 'll leave it to the leading Republican Senator on the Senate foreign relations to defend her : Take it away Republican Senator Chuck Hagel : '' `` I do think in a world that is so complicated , so interconnected and so combustible , you really got to have some people in charge that have some sense of the bigger scope of the world ... I think that s just a requirement . 
I think it s a stretch to , in any way , to say that she s got the experience to be president of the United States . 
I think they ought to just be honest about it and stop the nonsense about , ' I look out my window and I see Russia and so therefore I know something about Russia , That kind of thing is insulting to the American people . 
-LRB- she -RRB- doesn t have any foreign policy credentials . 
You get a passport for the first time in your life last year ? 
I mean , I don t know what you can say . 
You can t say anything '' Posted by : INTELLIGENT REPUBLICAN | September 19 , 2008 12:44 PM | Report abuse James ... I like your comment . 
Why ca n't the entire country be versed in Econ 101 ? 
Do Liberals even know the term `` guns and butter '' ? 
Whatever ... anyway , both sides are getting a bit guilty of crossing the line in not sticking to the issues , and slinging a bit of mud . 
I have to hand it to the liberals , however , that their attacks on the VP candidate on the Repub ticket are strictly adherent to the personal alone . 
They , and the liberal minded media -LRB- and now the liberal minded posse of collge professors who indoctrinate the youth of our country -RRB- need to grow up and move on . 
Obama is tied to Fannie\/Freddie . 
Admit , and move on . 
And cut it out already with calling us more conservative voters `` fools '' , `` idiots '' , `` uneducated '' and `` stupid '' if we vote McCain\/Palin . 
I probably have more degrees on my wall , and licenses as a practicing attorney educated at the nation 's greatest institutions , then most americans ... it does not make me smarter or better . 
But , liberal defensiveness and name calling , just makes you look and sound like whiny children . 
As for the economy - it naturally runs in cycles , with or without governmental intervention - so basic . 
Chart it out over the last 100 years . 
We are in a glut - we are Americans and we will pull through . 
We always have - always will . 
It was high time the gluttony stopped , and now that it has , we are all crying . 
It is time to move on , tighten the belt , and work together , not against each other . 
THAT is what patriotism and being American is all about ... Posted by : christine | September 19 , 2008 12:44 PM | Report abuse So the WaPo is fact-checking its own reporting , blaming McCain for using their own reporting , and throwing in a little race-bait on the side ? 
McCain 's camp took direct quotes from the WaPo . 
You are more than just a member of McCain 's base , after all , you work for the Neocon Republican Pravda on the Potomac , brothers-in-arms with McCain in the promotion of the glorious imperial policy of ever more endless wars . 
Truth be damned , fake ` balance ' above all ! 
... except , of course , when amplifying the latest Republican hissy fit . 
Perhaps with his involvement in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act . 
What a lying sack of crap McCain is turning into . 
Are you a non-partisan journalist or do you have an agenda which holds no place in true reporting ? 
The McCain video states only the truth - that the post stated Raines gave him advice on mortgage and housing policy . 
You state the ad is flimsy , it is n't flimsy at all ! 
It only states what actually happened . 
Maybe in the future your reporters should ask more questions the first time before reporting a story , like in this case . 
If your reporter had gotten the whole truth the first time this was reported , then McCain would be taking things way out of context , but that did n't happen and the McCain video only states what you reported . 
Technically , they did not lie . 
But any rational person would see that the McCain campaign is attempting to make it appear that Obama is in bed with the people who made money off of the collapse of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , and his election would mean more such corruption . 
Do the McCain people really think that is an honest ad ? 
This is from the `` Straight talk express ? '' 
McCain has completely lost any credibility he ever had , as he proves over and over again that he will say anything to get elected . 
I used to think that he was an honorable man . 
I would like to believe that this time , the American electorate will not fall for the Republican swift-boat type tactics . 
But the credit is less than half the present national average for family premiums not counting deductibles , co-pays , doctor 's fees , and the 101 other ways the health care industry finds to extract money out of your pocket . 
The tax credit is also not indexed to inflation , nor does McCain propose to put any limits on how much insurers can charge . 
Look for even more people to buy junk insurance plans with few covered services that are too expensive to ever use . 
Please explain the substantitive reason for including `` who also happens to be African-American '' in this article . 
I guess now we need the fact checkers of the fact checkers providing the unvarnished non-political review of the `` just keeping them honest '' crowd . 
`` The next president of the United States should sign an executive order requiring the Census Bureau to cease and desist from describing any American as uninsured , '' Goodman told the Dallas Morning News . 
They 're really not uninsured , they can always go to the ER for care , said Goodman , ignoring what happens to people 's health when they have to wait to get emergency care . 
Though the McCain camp tried to distance themselves from the comment , it 's standard fare for Republicans ; Goodman was virtually channeling President Bush who used nearly identical words a year ago ... While we 're at it , one blogger recently wrote , `` maybe the way to solve our vexing cancer problem is to just stop calling it cancer . '' 
He also says `` all options '' for Social Security cuts are on the table , including raising the retirement age and cutting benefits . 
And , of course , he was on board with the Bush privatization fiasco . 
Good thing we still have those stable and secure 401k plans . 
Of course , he `` dismissed '' that adviser for calling this a `` mental recession '' and calling us a `` nation of whiners , '' but do n't worry . 
He said he 'd make Mr. Gramm the Treasury Secretary . 
And McCain still has failed CEO Carly Fiorina , best known for nearly killing Hewlett-Packard , to fall back on for advice . 
Even if McCain owns a dozen glass houses , he should n't be throwing stones like this . 
: -LRB- Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 12:47 PM | Report abuse Why does everyone have to be so negative all the time . 
I am a supporter of Obama but I \* like \* McCain also . 
I will be happy with either of them as president . 
I believe they both would do a good job for Americans . 
Neither of them want the country to be in bad shape . 
Neither of them want terrorists or the ecomony to hurt us . 
Things in a campaign always get ugly . 
Both sides are guilty of taking things out of context and sending out misinformation . 
I wish they would n't . 
The WP should be ashamed of itself . 
You guys write articles on 2 instances and say that Raines was advising Obama and McCain takes your quote and puts it in an ad and McCain is the bad guy . 
This press is on a self destruction mission . 
Why did n't you fact-check your own reporter when the two articles came out . 
When John McCain relies on this , the Washington Post revisits its factual reporting , and calls McCain Pinocchio ? 
More than your bias is showing . 
I never got past the Wright stuff . 
I found it appalling and Obama 's defense of Wright as an `` old Uncle ... he ca n't disown . . 
-LRB- until forced to do so for political reasons -RRB- was even more appalling . 
The press had the nerve to hold up winning `` score cards '' as if at an Olympic event praising Obama 's `` Uncle Wright speech '' . 
McCain bases an ad on quotes from the Washington Post . 
Washington Post says McCain is exagerating the connection based on those quotes and decides to `` correct '' their quotes so that their accusation makes sense . 
Oh , I guess it makes sense coming from the DC branch office of the Obama campaign . 
I suspect that in the days of Ben Bradlee and Katherine Graham some of your so called reporters would be looking for jobs for being so blatantly in the tank for Obama , but those days are gond . 
It 's also not communism . 
When capitalistic markets go unregulated , and the polarization of wealth becomes the status quo , there is a need for redistributing that wealth . 
Why should corporations or private entrepreneurs making millions in profit annually get tax cuts ?? Better cuts than the poorest in our society ? 
Where is the logic there ? 
If you want to continue concentrating all of our resources and wealth into a handful of people -LRB- not including yourself -RRB- , then vote for McCain . 
Regardless , have any of you conservatives heard of Sweden ? 
Now there 's one of the strongest economies in the world , and though taxes are extremely high , they provide for the entire population 's education , recreational programs , health care , and other social services . 
Why is this a bad thing ?? The system may be called `` socialism '' but hey , it is working a hell of a lot better than our ` democracy ' is -- which is really a republic -LRB- with only two electable parties -RRB- and has brought about a nation divided . 
Okay , got it , thanks . 
I 'm so sick of people sounding off about this , that , and the other thing -LRB- but never , apparently , even reading the article to which they are responding -RRB- 2 -RRB- disgusted by the lies from the McCain campaign - when will they give it up ?! 3 -RRB- find it interesting that Obama and McCain are talking about the current crisis more than our actual CURRENT president ... he 's like the guy at work who put in his 2-weeks notice , and is just chillin . 
How are you going to explain away the Johnson ad ? 
Just wait until the Goolsbee ad hits . 
It 's open season on Obama and his web of crooks . 
How many Pinocchii did you give the Washington Post ? 
Please read it again . 
And the responsible for the house mortgage problem is right next to McCain as adviser , yes , the same that said Americans are wieners complaining too much about the house mortgage ! 
That 's about the only thing that you can trust McCain for . 
The reporter was trying in vain , more than 4 times , asking him of specifics of any plan from Obama , since the Obama has been criticizing the McCain s plan . 
In every single time , Furman evaded the questions and gave this general synopsis of what s going on -LRB- which even my 5-year-old can tell me -RRB- . 
This is exactly the kind of evasiveness that I ve been hearing from Obama every time he s in the news . 
Don t even try to paint him in the same colors as Bill Clinton during the bygone glorious economy . 
Obama doesn t know squat about economics 101 . 
If Obama is being advised by fools like Furman , no wonder he doesn t know how to give real answers to real questions . 
In the paragraph titled `` The Pinocchio Test '' , he refers to Raines as `` Howell Raines '' . '' 
`` I think the Fact Checker should check his Facts . 
Howell Raines is the former Executive Editor at the New York Times , and is definitely not Franklin Raines , formerly of Fannie Mae . '' 
I usually do n't even bother for that reason ! 
He 's been right for a very long time about the housing market causing problems that have led to the problem we have today -LRB- actually goes back further to the lenders , and then the 1 % rate from greenspan ... credit default swaps ... -RRB- anways ... Obama 's letter to Bernenke was right . 
This is why I hate politics and politicians . 
Nobody tells the truth , it 's all spin . 
Why does the American population not vote ? 
You might have seen an add recently with a bunch of firefighters from Sprint\/Nextel . 
Imagion if people could actually not worry about their own political future and actually do the job the way it should be ... but that 's enough of my rant . 
If McCaine wins this round say goodbye to seeing Hillary EVER getting a shot at the whitehouse . 
Democrats are not very good at choosing winners but they certainly are able to figure out who the losers were from 4 years ago . 
Thats why the winner in 2000 -LRB- the real winner -RRB- never got another nod . 
- I do n't think they 're `` correcting '' their quotes , I think they 're elaborating on their quotes , and beyond that , explaining to us that it came from the STYLE section ... but you can blow it out of proportion however you want to , it 's your choice . 
Of course , many of us differ as to which are legitimate , but that 's a separate issue . 
For all of its decade long decline , the WaPo must still be considered one of them . 
The occasion that prompted McCain s involvement was the release of a 340-page report from the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight that concluded that Fannie Mae had manipulated earnings and violated basic accounting principles . 
It describes an arrogant and unethical corporate culture in which executives were more concerned about their bonuses than meeting the company s housing mission . 
The findings , based on a 27-month investigation and resulting in a $ 400-million fine paid to the government , prompted McCain to join other critics and call for more scrutiny of Fannie and its sibling , Freddie Mac . 
If Congress does not act , American taxpayers will continue to be exposed to the enormous risk that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac pose to the housing market , the overall financial system , and the economy as a whole , McCain declared in a May 26 , 2006 , news release . 
So it s true that McCain spoke out after a widely read report drew attention to chicanery at the firms . 
But the implication in McCain 's remarks is that his remarks in 2006 were in some way a warning about the financial markets disaster that struck in 2008 . 
That strikes us as quite a stretch . 
it only draws more attention to and makes this scandal stink more . 
That Sarah must be a quick learner a Dick Cheney 's knee . 
One thing for certain the culture of secrecy would continue under McCain\/Palin and in many ways it 's becoming so apparent McCain would NOT be the SAME he 'd be WORSE than Bush . 
2008 cycle totals based on data downloaded from the Federal Election Commission on June 30 , 2008 . 
How are the electorate to make informed decisions with so much false information in circulation ? 
You have quoted Comedian Tina Fey , not Sarah Palin . 
How much more of this can we possibly take ? 
HA , good one . 
5 Noses for The comPOST . 
He tried to get the legislation through but oops the Dems blocked it ... Posted by : Todd | September 19 , 2008 12:54 PM | Report abuse Honestly , neither of the canidates economic plan will do diddlely squat about the economy . 
This mess was made by 35 years of Congressional mistakes , and Presidential administrations going back 35 years . 
We 'll be lucky if we can get the debris cleaned up by the time our grandchildren retire . 
I just wish we 'd stop morgaging our children and grandchildren 's future . 
No one is changing anyone 's mind . 
Democrats and Republicans alike will spin every story in their mind to come out with the conclusion they had before they read it . 
Lets vote already , I SO SICK OF IT ALL ! 
I never got over the Wright `` thing '' either . 
For instance , when the news reported that a hurricane was headed for Galveston I delayed my trip to the beach . 
Best advice I ever had . 
You all are trapped in your little worlds of bitterness and dogma for either Conservative or Liberal Agendas . 
Check out www.ontheissues.org also while you all are getting an education , get this Your election is being stolen not just by one political party but by both of them down in Texas . 
That is right , both parties missed the Texas Ballot Deadline and their names should not be on the Ballot in Texas . 
But yet strangely they are , and the Media -LRB- mouthpiece of the Two Parties -RRB- is not even reporting it . 
He is finally being exposed as his true self . 
It 's his totalitarian masters . 
HOW MUCH WEALTH DISTRIBUTION WILL THE WASHINGTON POST BE PROVIDING AND HOW BIG A WHINERS WILL YOU AND YOUR SPONSORS BECOME WHEN YOU 'VE ` AWAKENED ' AND REALIZE IT ? 
I CERTAINLY HOPE THE REST OF YOUR EMPLOYEES HAVE THEIR OWN EYES WIDE OPEN . 
THE PUBLIC IS SMARTER THAN YOU THINK . 
THEY SEE RIGHT THROUGH YOUR BIAS AND WAFFLING AROUND THE REPORTS NO WONDER FOX IS KICKING YOU DOWN AND OUT OF BUSINESS , YOUR NOW A WASTE OF AIR . 
I suppose that makes an adviser in the weakest sense of the word , not in the sense -LRB- devil on Obama 's shoulder , puppetmaster ? -RRB- 
that the ad is implying . 
Anyway , why am I wasting time critiquing the veracity of a political `` ad '' ? 
Do n't we all know by now that they are useless no matter which party produces them . 
Well , I already wrote this , so might as well submit it . 
Why are we behaving like teenagers ? 
Please , lets all get together , look at the big picture , and decide who is the most educated and able to lead this country . 
We are all allowed to have different opinions . 
But accusing each other is not going to help any one . 
Mr. Obama has had dubious associate\/friend after dubious associate\/friend - Aslinsky , Ayers , Wright , Rezko , Gorelick , Raines , Johnson , Daley , Marx , Lenin , Stalin , etc. . 
In any event , Obama is the second largest recipient of campaign contributions from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , and in only four years in Congress . 
Why does n't the Post ask him about this ? 
We need change , not more of the McSame . 
Body count in the last six months ; 292 killed -LRB- murdered -RRB- in Chicago , Sens. Barack Obama & Dick Durbin , Rep. Jesse Jackson Jr. , Gov. Rod Blogojevich , House leader Mike Madigan , Atty. Gen. Lisa Madigan -LRB- daughter of Mike -RRB- , Mayor Richard M. Daley -LRB- son of former Mayor Richard J. Daley -RRB- ... the leadership in Illinois ... all Democrats . 
Chicago is a combat zone . 
Of course they 're all blaming each other . 
Ca n't blame Republicans - they 're are n't any ! 
Illinois state pension fund $ 44 Billion in debt - worst in country . 
Cook County -LRB- Chicago -RRB- sales tax 10.25 % - highest in country . 
Chicago school system one of the worst in country . 
This is the political culture that Obama comes from in Illinois . 
He 's gonna ` fix ' Washington politics ? 
a bill aproved by all but 8 democrats in 1999 , approved by a democrat appointed Sec . 
of Treasury and signed into law by Bill Clinton . . 
But is the sole repsonsibility of a republican . . 
ergo McCain bad ... About as logical as the Washington Post 's fact checker . . 
two months later fact checking a quote from his own paper ... then injecting a little racial bait ... Sad part is . . 
many here are biting on his bait ... Forest Gump 's quote about stupid is as stupid does . . 
rings so true Posted by : joe | September 19 , 2008 12:59 PM | Report abuse Are you kidding me ? 
You call McCain a liar because he depended on you to be accurate ? 
You told lies to make Obama look smart and now you call McCain a liar . 
You should go to McCain hat in hand on your knees in apology for this . 
What I think really happened ... Oh we have to make a story to try to clear our crooked corrupt canidate from his own dishonesty . 
Obama took the most money from Freddie and Fannie but we have to hide the facts from the people because if we just report the truth NO ONE would vote for this crook Obama ! 
So let 's make up something so we can sort of make McCain look bad ... This is dispicable . 
You are doing everyting you can to get the most corrupt politician who has ever run for President elected by making an honorable man who has worn out his life in service to you -- look like a liar . 
There must be a special place in hell for you . 
His supporters are a sorry lot to abide this . 
If the linkage is based on a Post article then clearly it is accurate . 
It is up to the Post to validate their own news and up to the Obama campaign to challenge the Post article - not Mccain . 
Perhaps you should start off all of you Fact Checker articles with a quick fact - The reporter supports Obama and has no claim to impartial or independent journalism . 
Really sweet how the Posts slips in `` who also happens to be African-American . '' 
The Post loves to foster the image that this campaign is all about race - Your real jerks , you know that . 
They are falling farther and farther behind and assume that talking out of both sides of their mouths will help . 
The economic speech by McCain does not jive with his long standing positions and associations , Keating 's shadow and lobbyist peddler . 
His swiftboat attempt is another sign of desperation not to mention his VP Posted by : Desert Panther | September 19 , 2008 12:59 PM | Report abuse The McCain ad stated exactly what the Washington Post had written . 
Blaming him for bad journalism is yet another example of bad journalism . 
lack judgments in character , what it takes , and thought . 
You people should be the ones who get taxed and their homes taken for voting for the destruction of our country . . 
I guess some people understand because your dumb but I dont . 
just chit chat then right ? 
I mean who does n't do that ? 
I know just the other day I called the ex president of coca-cola just to have a word about the weather . 
Come on , why else would Obama 's campaign be contacting Raines if it was n't to talk about mortgages and the like . 
Listen if you want to be fooled thats fine , but at least TRY to not be a complete idiot along the way . 
Pravda 's got nothing on the Post ! 
A vote for McCain is a vote for all the old Neo-Nazi i mean Neo-conservative fat cats who lead us down this road to nowhere for the last 8 years . 
You might as well come up with a new party , cause yours is stained by Bush for the rest of the US 's history . 
We 'll get McCain\/Palin inaugurated on Jan. 20 , ' 09 . 
For the good of the US and the world . 
Obama is just the `` gringo '' version of Venezuela 's Chavez : People 's problems are always the fault of the `` rich '' -LRB- = 250k or more in annual income -RRB- . 
So let 's have our socialist candidate Obama take the U.S. down the road of the former USSR , Cuba and Venezuela . 
We 'd get the Cuban 's `` best medical care in the world '' , if we only could raft our way to Miami . 
He is the new JANUS . 
He was CEO of Fannie Mae from 1991-1998 , how does that matter now ? 
It 's a double entry system . 
I guess that makes me an advisor . 
Where 's my check ? 
`` The Obama campaign last night issued a statement BY RAINES insisting , ' I am not an advisor to Barack Obama , NOR have I provided his campaign with advice on housing or economic matters . ' '' 
-LRB- Emphasis mine . -RRB- 
Apparently the lie was in your post . 
According to the only parties who would know anything about the conversation ... that would be Raines and Obama ... Obama called to ask a few general questions regarding the economy and housing but Raines never advised Obama on these topics . 
We have no idea what they discussed and to say that Obama is in bed with the guy based on the information we have is just irresponsible . 
I kind of find it funny that the same people who think that Palin was completely innocent when she asked a librarian how she would react if Palin requested for a few books to be banned -LRB- and then later tried to fire said librarian after the librarian flat out said no , pulling the termination and restoring the librarian 's job only when residents complained -RRB- also think Obama is the devil in disguise and he 's the reason for the downturn in the economy because he asked Mr. Fannie Mae a couple general questions about his opinion on the economy and housing but yet still continued to ask for more regulation . 
Firstly , I think the lopsided media to blame for this . 
When you see the same negative image perpetuated , people think they have what is a fact about that type of person . 
-LRB- EG : Where a white person during Katrina was searching for food , a black person was looting . -RRB- 
A pervasive stereotypical image that exists from tv and film is that AA men are portrayed as violent , deceiving , shiftless and lazy . 
I think this has done much to instill in the general population an overall fear and wariness . 
John McCain is ABSOLUTELY tapping into this and using this to his advantage . 
I can see by this that he 's not interested in `` Country First '' -- I think he and the people around him are interested poking and stimulating culture wars , country vs. city , black vs. white , male vs female , as long as it gets him the presidency . 
I know he has ambitiously been after the presidency for a long time , but this is not a man I can vote for . 
Some people may see this ad and others he releases as smart politicking , but there 's no way you can convince me that it 's for the good for the spirit of a nation when you use your campaign to rectify flimsy falsehoods that feed into media stereotypes . 
This ad is just one of many cultural attacks that have been waged on Obama , by McCain 's mouth or others , clearly establishing Obama as `` outside '' what I can only assume is a narrow view of an ideal `` Norman Rockwell '' America , and therefore , different and suspect . 
TO hear his campaigners speak , you 'd think they wanted a country with no immigrants , everybody Christian and the women are former beauty queen\/pageant contestants . 
I 'm sure what I described sounds GREAT to some people , but for them I would advise a reality check , there are other people who live here too and that the description of who is American does not adhere to only one interpretation . 
It would either level the playing field , or at least enable an informaed readership . 
As for the rigor of the ` checking ' - asking the principal actors what their role was , and accepting their answers at face value , does not constitute good reporting or good journalism , let alone ` fact checking ' . 
Kind of like `` Which of your testicles would you like to have kicked . . 
McCain is my representative . 
Anyone who thinks they will be better off under McCain is a fool . 
Arizona is a 3rd world state with low income , illegal s taking what few jobs we do have and low pay for all . 
McCain is a lot of hot air who will stoop to the lowest level to be election . 
Just watch his ad s . 
If you buy what he is selling , please give me a call , I have a bridge in Alaska for sale . 
McCain is no different than Bush , lipstick on the same old pig . 
Two means the lies told rank less than real lies ? 
A lie is a lie is a lie so , Washington Post be unequivocal about calling a lie a lie and non of this wishy-washy , I-can-play-all-sides relativism . 
Obama and several dumocraps received huge campaign contributions from these entities . 
McCain received enough where he was on the bottom five , in the five figure range . 
Obama , six figure range . 
I eagerly look forward to your revealing expose of the latest OBAMA ! 
commercial in the Spanish language that : - ties McCain to Rush Limbaugh on the subject of immigration reform - takes two Limbaugh quotations from his radio show CLEARLY out of context - and , just for good measure , uses extremely devisive language on our Hispanic friends . 
Clearly racist and devisive . 
Looking forward to it , Michael . 
They all sound like magpies talking at once to the point where it becomes white noise and unintelligble ... they think saying the word liar over and over will somehow make it true . 
It is comical to see them losing another election as voters realize the message Obama crows is the same crap given by Carter , Mondale , Gore and Kerry . 
The only response they have are fact twisting name callers on blogs and crooked journalists who print the trash Soros & Obama dictate . 
Sad bunch , these liberal socialists . 
So hungry for power they start to believe the old tired ideas of the left and that they have some moral right to win this time . 
Not because of ideas but only because they have lost so many times before . 
This election will be no different . 
Here is a list of excuses you may use this time : 1 . 
The voters were racist 5 . 
Biden -LRB- who decided to let him speak to any voters ? -RRB- 
Cheney -LRB- somehow was in charge of Obama 's losing effort -RRB- 11 . 
God -LRB- for having a say in America 's life -RRB- 12 . 
Carter -LRB- for starting the easy path to home ownership -RRB- 13 . 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac -LRB- which along with the Acorn folks brought you easy financing without qualification and shakedown schemes milking corporate CEOs for money for nothing -RRB- Posted by : prh | September 19 , 2008 1:05 PM | Report abuse I have no respect left for McCain Posted by : CTM | September 19 , 2008 1:05 PM | Report abuse I really used to like and trust McCain . 
I even voted for him in 2000 when he ran against Bush . 
I forgave him for what he did to his first wife and I forgave him for his poor judgement in the Keating Five scandal , because I 've made some mistakes too in my life . 
I was totally ready to get behind him . 
So when I found out that this year it was McCain vs Obama , I felt quite good , thinking that , even though both men are imperfect , they both had a lot of great things to offer the country . 
But lately , I am so disappointed in McCain . 
His dishonesty has gone much further than '' typical campaign hyperbole . '' 
He 's been so nasty and so filled with lies lately . 
What do you all think about this ? 
He has degraded himself again by his outrageous falsehoods about Obama . 
He is counting on the great `` unread '' who will not see the correction of his misstatements . 
This poor country if he and Stalen , I mean Palen get in . 
McCains whole career has not reflected his current position . 
He is a `` deregulator '' and now he dares to try to pin this so thinly on Obama . 
Shame , shame on McCain . 
NickinVA truly shows us `` Liberal fanatics '' how the other side really feels and would act if given the opportunity . 
Perhaps you 'd like to shoot some of the `` liars '' and then try to hide behind the NRA . 
Thanks for showing your true colors and intellectual and emotional maturity . 
Republicans dont help the poor , they dont help the middle class , the help big business manly energy and the Uber-rich ... But you dumb as@@@ fall for it every time . . 
with them saying GOD , I 'm a Patriot , Abortion is wrong . 
And you people flock to them ... morons Posted by : Teddy | September 19 , 2008 1:06 PM | Report abuse I beg pardon : is this the Washington Post chastising McCain for relying on THEIR reporting ? 
For their mischaracterization , HE 'S supposed to get Pinocchio marks ? 
Furthermore , tt seems the standard of `` honorable man '' being used is whether people actually say anything critical of Barack Obama . 
By this standard , Howard Kurtz , the WashPo writer here , and so many others in the press are honorable . 
Indeed : `` For -LRB- Kurtz -RRB- is an honorable man ; So are they all , all honorable men . '' 
-LRB- I 'm pro-McCain , but we need to keep everyone grounded in the world of facts , no matter who you 're voting for . -RRB- 
But what I STRENUOUSLY object to is how you are trying to draw racist connections at the start . 
In this day and age , when we 're trying to overcome racial tensions , you throw gas on the fire . 
Your facts will stand on their own or they will not . 
Do n't put that nastiness out there in addition . 
You 're quick question 's of Huslin that made Millions of the bailout and is helping the Obama campaign ? 
what comes around goes around ... Posted by : bob | September 19 , 2008 1:08 PM | Report abuse I did n't think McCain was racist , but tolerating racist ads seems to qualify him . 
However indirect his responsibility may be , he is fomenting such evil . 
How can McCain use the theme `` Country First '' at his convention ; and still continue to stand under this banner , when he literally ran out and chose a running mate whitout any thought ! 
Did he even rely on the advice of close consultants ? 
This is not putting `` Country First '' ... this is putting ME first , and his follow up behavior continues to exhibit that ! 
They do not have any problem ignoring facts and just make stuff up ... So , hang in there ... In the end , the Right will prevail ... because we are , well , right ... Posted by : redsoxdad | September 19 , 2008 1:08 PM | Report abuse The most insidious thing about this ad is n't its lies -LRB- they can and have been proven false -RRB- . 
It is its subtle racism -LRB- Two evil black men taking advantage of the poor old white woman -RRB- that is aimed right at all those Americans who honestly believe they are n't racist but wo n't vote for Obama because they `` just do n't feel comfortable with him . '' 
Do n't think for a moment that the makers of this spot did n't know what they were doing when they put it together . 
They are very well paid professionals and they make their salaries by knowing exactly what they are doing and the effect it will have on a fearful populous . 
OR they just think painting a picture of two black guys some how harming a little old white lady still works . 
Sadly they may be right and it may work , it was in my live time that blacks got killed for attempting to register people to vote , we have still not matured as a society ! 
It should be obvious that nothing that anyone says on this post will change anyone elses mind who reads it . 
If you support Obama you will continue to support him after you read and or respond to this and the same goes for McCain supporters . 
You are all wasting your time . 
By the way , if we can believe what the campaigns are saying about how much money they are raising , Obama will win in a landslide . 
Do you think that people who are donating to each campaign will not vote ? 
There are far more Democrats than Republicans in this country , and the few Democrats who are still bitter about Hillary will not make much of a difference . 
But wait until the debates get going and we start to focus on issues and the candidate 's intellectual power - Obama 's team will race to a double digit lead by Mid-October . 
Palin 's sex appeal\/conservative nature is wearing off and we 're already 3 points up ... it 's only getting better as we get closer . 
A study by the Wisconsin Advertising Project based at the University of Wisconsin showed that 70 % of team Obama 's ads were negative as compared to 56 % for McCain 's team '' Negative is one thing -LRB- and in truth , pretty vague -RRB- . 
False , or `` Not completely true '' is another . 
Let 's do n't go confusing the two . 
Only 2 minutes y ' all . 
George and company are the big problems here . 
He is probably deleting emails and shredding other documents . 
Every time Dicko leaves the country to go to some other country , a disaster follows ... Georgia , Hurricane Gustov then Hurricane Ike . 
Cheney is cooking the real books . 
Or has he forgot that he was a member of the KEATING 5 Knowing someone and actually trying to obstruct regulation because your wife has holdings in a company are not quite the same . 
McCain may not have a good memeory , but I can assure you that I do and so do many others . 
The internet is a marvelous thing you can google Keating 5 and find out all you want to know . 
See what issues you really want to know about . 
They do not lie about how they voted . 
YOu can babble and fight all you want about who said what and who did what but their records stand and Obama is lacking in all aspects . 
Then you have his charming VP pick telling people who make money or have small businesses to buck up and give their money away . 
Gee would that be to the low lifes on welfare ? 
I had a sister who has never worked a day in her life and her husband maybe a few years totally . 
They got $ 600 back on the stimulas and alls they do is sit home and collect welfare . 
So why would they get money back when they do n't make money ???? So , yeah vote for the idiots who want to give working peoples money away to loosers . 
It 's your choice how you live your life not the governments . 
and so is George Bush and so is McCain , you dont understand because you are lost and have not found God . 
Once you have you will see why Sarah Palin represents change in this country . 
If they told the truth , they 'd be thrown out of office . 
Bush has discredited America 's good name along with McCain 's help . 
If McCain gets elected we are just showing the world once again like in 2004 that we are still naive enough to listen to the Republicans stoop to any level to get into the White House . 
It never ceases to amaze me to hear how snippy and insulting you so-called `` perfect '' conservatives are . 
Explain this awful debt this country 's in by the exorbitant spending by the Republicans and you call that `` conservative '' ?? Good Lord we are even indebted to CHINA !! America needs to get back our integrity we used to have and it sure wo n't be from an over the hill 72 year old with a gun-toting Annie . 
The recent poll shift has McCain scrabling to blame Obama for Fannie and Freedie being ` acquired ' by the Fed . 
In actuality , these are lies !!! McCain and the Repubs deregulation caused this crisis !! Obama has to put that on an endless loop and the research will speak for itself . 
As for CRA , that implies that it was poor and mminorities who caused the mnortgage problem . 
It was n't !! It was solidly middle class Americans who have borne the brunt of mortgage defaults . 
Do n't blame CRA ! 
Blame McCain and Phil Graham , architects of banking deregulation . 
I wish Palin would speak up on this one . 
We 'd see even more soundbites , lies and Rove tactics . 
Republicans dont help the poor , they dont help the middle class , the help big business manly energy and the Uber-rich ... But you dumb as@@@ fall for it every time . . 
with them saying GOD , I 'm a Patriot , Abortion is wrong . 
And you people flock to them ... morons Could n't have been better said Terry . 
A lot of us are also in disbelief ... . 
Anyone who has been cooking for more than a week knows that you do not stick a fork in something BECAUSE it 's done . 
You stick a fork in something to ASCERTAIN if it is done . 
If the juices run clear , it 's done , if you get blood , back in the oven it goes . 
BTW , if urine tests , IQ tests , and literacy tests were mandatory at all polling places , the majority of people posting here would be NOT be voting this November ! 
Why is n't THIS in the news ? 
When such a big deal was made of Gustav by the Republicans and the government is doing hardly anything for the survivors and dead from Ike in the biggest disaster since Katrina . 
The ad focuses on the black Franklin Raines and the damage done to the white person . 
If Franklin Raines had been white , there is no way this ad would have shown his picture , if the ad had even run at all . 
All I ask is do your research . 
I got tired of hearing all the back and fourth garbo so I did my research and found out that Obama in fact does want to teach sex education to 5 year olds . 
The bill was read word for word and there it was . 
But I ask you to research B O for and see for yourself and not just take my word . 
He also supports killing a baby if it lives through the abortion procedure . 
I researched that too . 
That 's just wrong . 
Not to mention other things I found out that is true about him and public knowledge if you just look for it . 
But do n't let me sway you . 
If you find he represents who you feel should be prez . 
then vote for him . 
I sincerley hope your vote is based on reseach . 
You sound intelligent enought to know that though . 
Very curious that Las Vegas has the biggest amount of foreclosures in the country . 
I also want to know Andys personal reasons for resigning shortly before the bank failed Lets hear the real truth about just who is connected to Fannie Mae . . 
I think America is in for a big surprise when they realize McCain is just putting up a smokescreen . 
The mention of the other person ... Thats it ... Thats negative under their theory because they didnt want to get into the relative aspects of it . 
because the mess that Bush leaves him will eventually give him a heart attack and then Palin will take over and after she is done the GOP should dismantle itself in corruption . 
Unfortuanately we will need some new Founding Fathers a new Constitution a new Bill of Rights ya know the basic things that started this country . 
To all you readers who actually depend on the Post for accurate information I have one question . 
Are you DUMB or DUMBER ? 
Nice to see the Washington Post actually admit its reporting ca n't be trusted to be accurate and that it needs to be independently fact checked to be relied upon . 
Kudos to you for admitting your reporting is worthless . 
Or are you in the tank for Obama as well ? 
The nadir of the Washington Post . 
Just when you thought it could n't get any less credible . 
Nice try `` Fact '' Checker . 
Nobody outside the Beltway is buying . 
I 'm appalled at McCain 's false ads . 
If he ca n't promote himself on the merits of his ideas , then I do n't want another President who gets what he wants by deceiving the public , only to have it all come back to haunt us later . 
I 've totally lost my respect for John McCain . 
The thinking no doubt is less than fifty days ? 
Say anything , anything at all to win . 
The racism used in this ad by citing Raines and not Johnson who would be a more credible attack , is repugnant . 
It is in McCain 's name , so the racist label is appropriate . 
I now feel validated in my opinion that the WaPo does n't really care about printing the truth . 
And McCain would win in a landslide . 
Think about it the next time you see a McCain ad . 
Moreover , the Republican party includes a bunch of lying thieves who would sell their grandmother for political gain . 
I did not vote for Bush in either election , so my conscience is clear , but if I have to endure another Republican President , I 'm moving out of the country , and you all can live or die by your `` leader '' Posted by : Ken Pasco | September 19 , 2008 1:18 PM | Report abuse I find it funny and damn right hilarious that McCain\/Palin call themselves `` reformers '' when actually they are all in favor of Bush Politics -LRB- which we all know have failed miserably -RRB- . 
Obama\/Biden at least ar n't catching themselves in their own lies . 
McCain has done nothing to prove that he will do anything different than Bush has yet he attacks Barack Obama with this slader . 
McCain is n't a `` war hero '' either . 
He was a young pilot in vietnam that happened to get shot down over Hanoi and spent 8 years in a POW camp . 
I trust what Obama says anyday over McCain make believe . 
Taxpayer funded election campaigns . 
Right now corporate money makes up large portions of a candidate 's campaign resources . 
That means our elected reps owe favors , not to us , but to them . 
It 's our duty as the people to pay for election campaigns . 
I see the exaggeration but not the lie . 
There are so many points of poisen with Obama I just ca n't trust the guy . 
It 's a Chicago thing . 
There is some `` stuff '' on McCain , but I find an ocean of shaddy connections every time I research Obama . 
On top of that he is a lawyer and I really really ca n't see how he is qualified . 
Reminds me of Carter and I lived in that mess . 
Carter messed up so many things never reported . . 
stealth plains to Panama . 
We ca n't afford another . 
Obama did that already , cowboy . 
You can not fight God ! 
He brought her to McCain to save us from Obama . 
This is what they do BEST . 
Then they try to take the focus off themselves and their `` above the law '' mentalities . 
Say `` No More ! '' 
to McSame Posted by : Real Truth Teller | September 19 , 2008 1:22 PM | Report abuse So lets see , WaPo reports in regards to what Raines advises Obama about and that is `` presidential campaign seeking his advice on mortgage and housing policy matters . '' 
-LRB- by the script provided here the McCain campaign did not mention he advised about fannie mae or the mortgage meltdown -RRB- which is DIRECTLY from the WaPo article which only has Huslin 's byline so its not like someone else wrote it . 
So someone is lying . 
Either Raines lied to Huslin for the article or Huslin is lying now . 
Below is the link to said article Posted by : Zaggs | September 19 , 2008 1:22 PM | Report abuse 3 ... 2 ... 1 ... Now its time to connect the dots and pin McCain to the Keating 5 scandal . 
Let the people who do not remember what John McCain , the great reformer did during those inquiries ! 
The shame he brought on himself . 
The billions of dollars lost . 
The hundreds of thousands he accepted from Charles Keating and the lavish trips to resorts on Keatings private jets ... and still , John McCain has done nothing in all his years in Washington to `` reform '' and regulate the very crooked system he has admonished ! 
News sources are now fact checking their own stories because their candidate of choice is being attacked . 
When did these sources correct their previous stories about Joe Wilson and Valerie Plames lies about the yellow cake and Niger stories and President Bush 's accurate and truthful statements about Saddam Hussein 's attempt to acquire yellow cake uranium ? 
Oh yeah , Bush is a Republican . 
The post should be ashamed of themselves . 
Nobody who is honestly fair in their evaluation of politics , would suggest that the Obama never exaggerates when he feels it would win him points with some voters . 
Must be willing to say you did n't do your job 3 months later when it suits our political agenda . 
Light duty , short hours and high pay . 
Send cover letter and Resume to : Posted by : Help Wanted | September 19 , 2008 1:23 PM | Report abuse JOHN MCCAIN IS A FRIGGIN LIAR AND I WILL SHOUT IT TO EVERYONE I KNOW AND SEE - HE IS A LIAR , A LIAR !!! I WOULD NOT TRUST HIM AS FAR AS I COULD TOSS HIS BUTT . 
A study by the Wisconsin Advertising Project based at the University of Wisconsin showed that 70 % of team Obama 's ads were negative as compared to 56 % for McCain 's team '' Unfortunately not all the facts are in . 
There 's some buzz saying that what the study counted as a `` negative ad '' was one in which they SIMPLY MENTIONED THEIR OPPONENT 'S NAME because the study group could not determine `` the voracity of the claim '' . 
So , in other words , the survey may have simply found that Obama mentioned McCain in his ads 77 % of the time , and McCain mentioned Obama 56 % of the time . 
This has n't hit factcheck.org yet and the University of Wisconsin has n't clarified yet -LRB- I read the 6 page `` report '' and there is literally two sentences in the whole thing , not including the title , that has anything to do with negative ads , and as you can imagine it does n't go into too much detail -RRB- . 
I think I 'll wait until we have more information , thank you . 
It 's our duty to ourselves to fund their campaigns and it would fix all of this . 
A telephone conversation is not the same thing as a staff advisor , which the ad is trying to imply . 
Campaign contributions , patriotism , God , the state of crime in Chicago and punching people in the nose are all just distractions from the subject . 
The McCain campaign distorts and misleads again , and the right hates being called on it . 
Blaming someone else for what Obama did is typical of mindless Obama supporters . 
All those women who are voting McCain\/Palin just because Palin is a woman are idiots and should n't be allowed to vote . 
`` Hey , she has boobs , I have boobs . 
I voted for Hillary but she lost , so I 'm voting for the other boob . '' 
This should be about issues , not race or sex and DEFINATELY not Hear-Say . 
Tired of Obama 's Lies and empty promises . 
I 'm glad , they 're being called out for the kind of people they really are . 
-- an Independent for Obama Posted by : wolf | September 19 , 2008 1:25 PM | Report abuse Boy do the fangs come out during elections . 
I 'm a Republican and it should be obvious why I 'm going with Obama-Biden . 
I 'm just sorry the rest of my Republicans ca n't see it . 
This race is essentailly over . 
It 's just a color . 
It wo n't hurt you I promise . 
The better man for the job ! 
We are willing to even throw our own stories under the bus when it fits our agenda . 
If you want real news buy the Enquirer . 
I 'll give you a clue ... he 's from Illinois . 
Obama received 3 to 4 X 's the campaign contributions from Fannie than McCain . 
Also ask the question ... why was Spitzer -LRB- NY Attorney General -RRB- fired ? 
Answer ... he was getting too close to the bad cats , the greedy B \*\*\* \*\* ds on Wall Street which then led to us tax payers getting raked over the coals . 
Obama inherently was one of them supporting their causes and direction ... at least in the beginning of all this . 
Check the facts rather than reading pointless innuendo and conjecture . 
Then form an intelligent opinion . 
I work hard for my money . 
I pay my taxes every year . 
I would never vote for Obama . 
He is only runing because a group with power want him in office not the people . 
Hillary Clinton , became a senator of new york city out of no where . 
She was put in place because her of party . 
Stand by Bill and we will give you New York . 
Then you can run for president . 
Special interest is runing eveything . 
People open your eyes . 
I will not tell you who to vote for . 
Just open your eyes . 
The Post originally validated the McCain campaign 's present claims concerning the Obama connection to Franklin Raines . 
Now that the report weighs against the Post 's favorite candidate they are trying clumsily to take it all back . 
Both The Washington Post and The NY Times are beginning to look just plain silly in their flagrant pro-Obama bias . 
Tired of Obama 's Lies and empty promises . 
And if McCain was serious about not taking earmarks , this ad would have never been aired . 
If anyone is a liar on this one it is Post 's own `` Anita Huslin '' who was trying to use her Style piece to portray Obama as a canidate with experienced advisors . 
Now when the advisor is discredited we watch the post take pains to rewrite the story ! 
You can not fight God ! 
He brought her to McCain to save us from Obama . '' 
Does the idea of a theocracy bother anyone here but me ? 
His National Housing Policy and direction through Fannie Mae created most of the risky financial instruments and securitized products . 
His goal was to increase home `` ownership '' ; all he did was allow more people to `` live in '' homes , not own them . 
Clinton 's policy warned of the potential risks , but naively believed that warnings were enough to stop a feeding frenzy once it got started . 
The Community Reinvestment Act and laws which prevented `` red lining '' were aimed at ensuring non-discrimination in lending . 
But the net effect was forcing banks to lend to non-creditworthy minorities who are now disproportionately suffering from foreclosures . 
Not only is Raines responsible for not foreseeing this mess , Jamie Gorelick was Vice Chairman of Fannie Mae until 2003 . 
You 'll remember her as the Deputy Attorney General who put up artificial barriers of communication between the FBI and CIA prior to 9\/11 and then , as a member of the 9\/11 Commission , helped exonerate herself of any blame . 
The deeply flawed notion that homeownership is part of the `` American Dream '' got us into this mess . 
Home ownership is a great thing for people who are capable of bearing the financial burden . 
In the past 3 decades , we 've had three housing crises , all caused by the same thing : the federal government encouraging the lending of large amounts of money to people to whom we should n't be lending money . 
That , in turn , provides an incentive for rapacious mortgage selling , overbuilding of housing , and speculative purchases . 
Even in the recent legislation to help stop foreclosures , the democrat Congress was STILL trying to `` increase home ownership . '' 
Some people never get it ! 
The chief blame for this goes to lenders who made risky loans and borrowers who bought houses they could n't afford or rolled the dice on expectations of appreciation or refinancing opportunities . 
Yet the serpent who encouraged them to eat the apple was William Jefferson Clinton and his cronies . 
George Bush deserves blame for lacking the courage to end Clinton 's dangerous policies , but what politician would ever tell people , `` I want fewer people to be able to buy homes . '' 
Everything is part of God 's plan so really all of this economic mess is just part of God 's plan for the rapture and to make Alaska a sanctuary state . 
Jeez you liberals do n't know anything about the world do you . 
Yet , its those making over $ 250k -LRB- it might be 225k , I have to check again , but you get the point -RRB- that will have tax increases . 
As for myself , making 50k\/year , I will get a tax break . 
Anyways this is not the point of what I wanted to post . 
I understand the gullible nature of Americans and that McCain does have a decent chance of winning . 
It saddens me because I know things in this country will NOT get better . 
HOWEVER , if there is light to take out of all this by the democrats : If McCain should win , have confidence that things WILL NOT get better -LRB- lets admit it people , it wo n't -RRB- . 
With that in mind , 2012 would be a landslide win for democrats ; not to mention if McCain REALLY screws up , dont expect a Republican in the white house for 8-16 years after that . 
I ca n't believe things actually have to get worse , before people wake up ? 
Umm they ARE worse . 
But I guess we need more economic collapse and more freedoms removed -LRB- roe v wade , wire tapping , paying for a war that was NOT worth thousands of lives - wheres bin laden anyways ?? , I can go on -RRB- ... Posted by : Eric | September 19 , 2008 1:29 PM | Report abuse `` Obama Florida speech was live on CNN just 20 minutes ago and 40-50 blacks interrupted his talk while holding up signs reading ` BLACKS AGAINST OBAMA ' among several other anti-BHO lines . 
I hardly think that someone actually making up their own mind based on circumstances instead of just voting for the person who shares their skin color is a `` wonder '' . 
I 'm an Obama supporter but if some black people -LRB- or white people , or men , or women , or whatever -RRB- do n't want to vote for him , I do n't have a problem with that . 
It 's a free country ... they can vote for whomever they want . 
I love them strong fighting words in a faceless blog post . 
I bet you feel all big and manly sitting behind your computer screen . 
So I guess I am a `` liberal fanatic '' because I equate spin and exaggeration to lies , which unfortunately comes from both sides of the aisle and seems to be the politicians way of life . 
I find all politicians to be untrustworthy , self-serving liars , but by your standard this makes me `` liberal '' . 
I deserve a punch as you put it , so where can I meet up with you to get my shot to the nose ? 
A word of advice , you start throwing punches do n't be surprised if they punch back - literally and figuratively . 
I wish you `` neocon nut jobs '' had the b@lls to make aggressive insults to our faces instead of on some anonymous blog site . 
Y ' all are just like Karl Rove - a rabid bulldog behind the scenes , but when you pull the curtain back you find a geeky , soft-spoken putz that probably grew up with a daily swirlie and would probably loose a fight to a toddler . 
The morons that voted for george bush 2 times just are simply not allowed to vote . 
You have hurt this country enough . 
You are now doing the very same thing again ... Please I beg of you stop and THINK ! 
Please , Please , I beg of you as whatever you want to call me , Obamabot , elitist , Left , Extreme , I dont care please the country can not take this republican ticket ... Posted by : Mike | September 19 , 2008 1:29 PM | Report abuse Right ewoh24 and you are n't getting paid by the Nobama camp . 
I hope you 're getting at least min wage Posted by : jack | September 19 , 2008 1:30 PM | Report abuse HA ! 
The Post is fact-checking itself two months late , for the sake of Obama ! 
God , this is getting good ! 
People who used to doubt the MSM 's bias no longer do . 
It 's almost over , folks . 
The bad news is the Post is still in business . 
The good news is that they are accelerating their demise by going `` all in '' for Obama . 
Call people liberals the best president we had in recent history is by name Bill Clinton a democrat who left a large surplus to be squandered by GW Bush a conservative . 
1 -RRB- Chis Dodd -LRB- dem -RRB- 2 -RRB- Barack Obama -LRB- dem -RRB- , 3 -RRB- John Kerry -LRB- dem -RRB- . 
Barack , tell us about `` Change '' one more time , Please ! 
You can not fight God ! 
He brought her to McCain to save us from Obama . '' 
You ma'am should not be allowed to vote . 
There is a little article in the constitution about separation of church and state . 
If we voted based on our religious beliefs then we were no better than England -LRB- at the time of seperation -RRB- . 
Go back to your DMV and tell them your a religious nut who should n't be allowed to vote . 
Who are the liars again ? 
Welcome to irrelevancy libs and the post . 
why cant you just leave the Indians out of this ... what did they do to you ... . 
you MUST be a racist ... Posted by : redsoxdad | September 19 , 2008 1:32 PM | Report abuse `` The total listed for Obama is $ 126,349 a tiny fraction of the approximately $ 390 million his campaign has raised , according to the Center for Responsive Politics . 
The list shows McCain has received a total of $ 21,550 from Fannie and Freddie employees . 
The list includes donations of at least $ 200 from those who receive paychecks from Fannie and Freddie . 
It also includes donations from political action committees pooled contributions from employees . 
Obama decided early in his presidential run not to accept PAC contributions , but the Center for Responsive Politics ' list includes all contributions for members of Congress dating back to 1989 including Obama and McCain 's Senate campaigns . 
The New York Times has published a separate list looking at contributions from `` directors , officers , and lobbyists for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac '' for the 2008 campaign cycle . 
That list using figures from the Federal Election Commission shows McCain receiving $ 169,000 , while Obama received only $ 16,000 . '' 
people do NOT change as they become older - they usually become more set in their ways - si I believe if an indepth look is made into his war experiences I think you may find that he actually collaborated with the vietnamese . 
Look at the footage of his release from captivity - he looks remarkably fit - then compare that to POW 's from WW11 - there is NO COMPARISON - McCain is a liar and totally shameless . 
Because the ad implies that Raines is a regular or staff advisor . 
Apparently there was a simple phone call , and his opinion was asked . 
I got an email asking for my opinion on the economy from Obama . 
Does that make me the primary economic advisor to Obama 's campaign ? 
Y ' all are immoral hypocrites to the bone . 
You spew the most outrageously made-up filth , defend it with bravado when called , and claim that there 's some giant `` liberal conspiracy '' to silence you when anyone dares to stand up to bullies like you . 
Well , enough is enough . 
I 'm a liberal , and you conservatives are simply insane liars . 
I 'm not afraid to say it to anyone 's face , because it 's simply the truth . 
John McCain , dishonorable man that he is , made this newest factoid up out of whole cloth -- it 's like the Ayers `` controversy . '' 
You take the most tenuous of possible connections and try to play it into a big deal -LRB- when you are n't just flat-out lying , like with the `` Sarah Palin opposed the bridge to nowhere '' thing or the `` lipstick on a pig '' fauxtroversy -RRB- . 
You 're a liar . 
Your party are liars . 
McCain is a liar . 
Clear enough for you ? 
I would n't trust either one of them with my lunch money . 
Both have been in the pocket of either big business or big oil at one time or another . 
Both have been caught in a lie a time or two . 
Both have flip flopped on major issues a time or two . 
But when it gets down to it since we have no choice , which one do you think will do a better job of running the country and protecting the constitution . 
I am leaning toward Obama when it comes to individual rights , and McCain when it comes to fighting what is sure to be a world conflict in the near future . 
-LRB- In my opinion anyway . -RRB- 
I do n't think either one of them will handle the current financial crisis very well at all . 
I will know which to vote for when I step into the booth , but at this time I still have n't made my final decision . 
Oh by the way , I am a democrat . 
Let 's face it Obama has no idea on how he would handle this . 
Can you imagine him as President , McCain would have the right people there to manage the problem and he would do it with leadership . 
Everyone acts as like the president alone runs this whole show . 
But in truth he or she is a puppet on strings . 
Media runs the show . 
They print or say half truths about each of the parties . 
They listen to who ever will talk . 
It 's all about pride and not what is really best for the country . 
We put so much emphasis on what the papers and news broadcasters say . 
It is very unfortunate that the people we elect have to be more worried about what people say than what they were put in office to accomplish . 
What are we as a country ready for . 
Which party will be able to see thru the bright lights that will be shined on them for the history they made so they can do what is best for America . 
These guys and their parties stand for the same thing ; for the status quo . 
The national debate is a fraud , designed to keep the people distracted in order for those in power to maintain their positions . 
Both parties have been , and will continue selling the American people into bondage , one debased dollar at a time . 
And when the crash finally comes - when the rest of the world discards our worthless dollars out of disgust - we will watch our `` leaders '' interviewed on TV . 
Broadcast live via satellite . 
Wake up , folks . 
These people do not represent you . 
It 's time to let them go . 
and God Bless everyone of you !!! Posted by : Johnny Boy is A Liar | September 19 , 2008 1:34 PM | Report abuse Obama is calling McCain a liar for pointing out the truth that Obama plans to raise Social Security taxes on the Middle Class -- not just those making over $ 250,000 a year as Obamamaniacs falsely claim . 
The current cap is $ 102,000 , and he plans to eliminate that . 
Obama 's a Liar . 
TO FROZEN01 ... Gallup a few days ago : White - Obama 37 % McCain 52 % Black - Obama 93 % McCain 2 % Posted by : Jack The Ripper | September 19 , 2008 1:35 PM | Report abuse Ugh , you people . 
If you want to provide a web link make sure it 's to a news outlet instead of just a blog site . 
While I respect Huffington Post I find it lacking sometimes to the details . 
The current McCain attack comes from the Democrats attack on McCain 's connection to lobbyists provided in the links below : The last one provides external links covering the specifics most of which are not covered in this campaign . 
This whole campaign has turned into an all out mudslinging contest and it would be nice to get some actual facts going on without too much innuendo . 
People need to learn how to speak up and make sure that the conversation is n't filled with rhetoric . 
Doing it civilly allows people the time to provide their argument . 
Unfortunately , I 'm starting to fall back into the notion that we do n't live in a perfect world . 
Calling Republicans morons , saying the Dems are whiners . 
This is so mature . 
You should go into politics . 
Do n't fall into this partisan crap ! -RRB- 
Its the best porn around according to half of this a $ $ backwards country ... Posted by : Teddy | September 19 , 2008 1:36 PM | Report abuse Bullsh \* t ! 
This is a valid criticism of Obama 's LACK OF JUDGMENT . 
Sherman was right about the media - you are traitorous spies and it takes a Liberal-sized ignorance to not know the mainstream media is in the tank for Obama . 
Give up your myth of objectivity and put a little `` D '' after your name . 
Read the polls panic and say what sounds good at the moment forget about a reasoned approach to the real problems . 
Fire someone that alway makes you look presidential . 
This time people are paying attention and know the Republicans dirty tricks . 
It 's not going to work McCain ! 
Obama must have a couple million of them , given that his campaign is driven by the PEOPLE ... All I can say is at least there is something in print defining Obama 's campaign objectives ... Posted by : demonikOhioan | September 19 , 2008 1:37 PM | Report abuse If he becomes president god save us . 
I work hard for my money . 
I pay my taxes every year . 
I would never vote for Obama . 
He is only runing because a group with power want him in office not the people . 
Hillary Clinton , became a senator of new york city out of no where . 
She was put in place because her of party . 
Stand by Bill and we will give you New York . 
Then you can run for president . 
Special interest is runing eveything . 
People open your eyes . 
I will not tell you who to vote for . 
Just open your eyes . '' 
If what you 're insinuating was true , Senator Hillary Clinton would be the Democratic candidate , not Senator Obama . 
I suggest you do a little more research into the Obama tax plan . 
90-95 % of Americans will receive a tax cut under his plan . 
I 'm glad you work hard and pay your taxes , but I fail to see why this would stop you from voting Obama\/Biden . 
Are you fact checking the ad or the Washington Post articles it 's based on ? 
I get a laugh out of the Washington Post with its head up Obamma 's behind making kiss kiss . 
But changing your story like this ? 
If one is to believe the stuff this rag publishes as `` Fact '' , then the WP needs to stay with what they originally investigated and printed . 
Even when it turns out to be an `` inconvenient truth '' against the liberal candidate they so eagerly support . 
This article is WP 's own admission that we should not pay attention to what they publish as `` Fact '' ? 
A fellow Senator 's comment made about Barack Obama 's claim to have plenty of foreign policy experience : `` I m speechless . 
Making an assertion like that belies the facts and the record . 
That is kind of hard to square with his failure to ever have a single policy hearing on the only responsibility he was ever given , chairing the European and NATO subcommittee the foreign relations committee . '' 
- SEN. Hillary Clinton Sarah Palin is just a one week fact-finding trip around the globe from being on equal footing with Barack Obama 's foreign policy experience . 
So , COMMON SENSE , would you like to keep debating the Republican VICE-Presidential nominee 's experience compared to your PRESIDENTIAL nominee 's foreign policy experience ? 
The newspaper is essentially refuting previous reporting that was in THEIR newspaper . 
Here is more proof that the media is not biased . 
When will this newspaper do any research into any area where Obama is `` exaggerating wildly ? '' 
Its the best porn around according to half of this a $ $ backwards country '' ... So true , and they dont even see it ? 
incredible isnt it ... Posted by : steve | September 19 , 2008 1:38 PM | Report abuse Whats really a shame is that the juveniles on both sides are causing all of us to in-fight . 
We are the ones losing no matter who gets elected ... We are the puppets of the millionaires . 
It does n't matter who gets elected ... the politicians never do whats really right for the country . 
There is no mortgage industry failure beyond the fact that no one should EVER have been allowed to borrow more money than they could afford . 
It should have been a law . 
Now they are just going to take from the responsible Americans and give to the irresponsible . . 
again and again , until this country crumbles completely . 
How does his involvement with Obama have any relation to anything besides the mortgage market . 
Raines probably said its going to hell . 
I 'm voting republican because I like oil and do n't mind paying excessive amounts . 
I 'm voting republican because hybrid cars are ugly and do n't go very fast I 'm voting republican because I do n't need affordable health care I 'm voting republican because Iraq really was behind 9\/11 the whole time ! 
Its that gosh darn main stream media that says it was Bin Laden and afghanistan , and I refuse to believe it ! 
I 'm voting republican because I want to to be shipped off to fight in Iran I 'm voting republican because Jesus loves me ... and hates everyone else who is n't American . 
I 'm voting republican because my religion and morals are right ... and if you do n't agree , then you are n't allowed to have your own beliefs . 
I 'm voting republican because science is a bunch of crap ... global warming ? 
please ... I 'm voting republican because I do n't mind breathing contaminated air . 
I 'm voting republican because I want the richest people in the country to get a tax break ... they 'd want the same for me too right ?? I 'm voting republican because I 'm scared of voting for an intelligent man who graduated from harvard ... I 'd rather have a beer with the president ! 
I 'm voting republican because I 'm scared of change . 
Funny , I guess the Washington Post was `` clearly exaggerating '' too when they said the same exact thing . 
The Post has become such a rag that it does n't even take itself seriously . 
Say it is n't so JTRipper . 
All of the archives are one-sided against McCain\/Palin . 
Again in 2005 McCain warned them . 
Yet no action was taken . 
Why should we believe that a Democrat can or will fix any of this mess ? 
They oppose a commission to find the causes because they know the the path will lead back to them . 
As for the national debt you do not lower the debt by raising taxes , you do it by reigning in spending which I have not heard either candidate talk about . 
Neither candidate has a plan to lower the national debt , however it will increase substantially more under an Obama administration . 
and Alla -LRB- oops ! 
I mean God -RRB- Bless everyone of you !!! Posted by : Barack | September 19 , 2008 1:40 PM | Report abuse Ask Mccain about `` The Keating Five '' ... Then ask him how he got away from being brought into a `` court action '' ... Then ask how much money he made in contributions and personally from it all ... Posted by : Jeff London | September 19 , 2008 1:40 PM | Report abuse Ha ha ! 
Now that the WaPo 's words have come back haunt their chosen candidate , they decide to actually fact check themselves . 
So when it was positive for Obama to be connected to Raines , the WaPo went with it without questioning the veracity of the claim . 
Once the claim became problematic for their guy Obama , well , time to fact check ! 
You guys are pathetic . 
To all you readers who actually depend on the Post for accurate information I have one question . 
Are you DUMB or DUMBER ? '' 
Let me guess , Dennis gets all of his political facts from Fox News ? 
Raines is a liar . 
Jim Johnson is a disgraced liar . 
Obama took the 2nd-most contributions from Fannie\/Freddie . 
The Washington Post is a liar . 
Then it edits its own lies . 
Then it makes accusations about McCain being racist . 
Then Obama race-baits Latinos . 
Do n't talk to me about dishonorable . 
The democrats are power hungry , greedy , and will never turn down a free handout . 
They have been bought and paid for 10 times over by the management of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
McCain should not be blaming wall street , rather he should be putting blame on where it belongs , on those people that approved these mortgages that they knew would not be repaid . 
I believe it is going to hurt him with independents if he keeps it up . 
No one wants another liar in the whitehouse . 
Btw , someone tell Sarah Palin that Great Falls is in Michigan . '' 
Great Falls is in Montana , about twenty miles southwest of me . 
If your other statement denigrating McCain is as well-researched , we might have to call you a liar -- but then here we have some real proof now , do n't we ? 
McCain does n't know jack about the economy and he admits . 
We certainly do n't need him as our President . 
Go watch any documentary about John McCain , like the recent ones on MSNBC or CNN . 
They EXONERATE McCain as being involved as a corrupt politician . 
Gallup a few days ago : White - Obama 37 % McCain 52 % Black - Obama 93 % McCain 2 % Posted by : Racist Black Voters ? 
| September 19 , 2008 1:43 PM | Report abuse I should really stop reading the comments here . 
Most of you people make me sick to my stomach and in need of my guitar and a bottle of good ol' Doc Stoli . 
By the way , McCain is an asshat if he thinks that sort of character assassination will fly . 
So I understand their cries of bias vrs common sense . 
Sometimes its hard to make a pile of steaming cr@p into something worthy . . 
But the Republicans have been at this game for years so they should be able to pull it off . 
You have NO objectivity , and react not to facts but only to your emotional , irrational hatred of people who do n't agree with you . 
I realize journalism and a university education is only for us elitist libs , but I 'll try to break it down so that a little man like you understands : The post said that Mr. Raines answered questions from someone in Obama 's CAMPAIGN . 
This could have been , for all we know , a 19-year old college student running the phone banks asking , `` Dude , what 's a subprime mortgage ? '' 
Absolutely , positively NOWHERE does it say that Mr. Raines was a direct advisor for Senator Obama . 
So Senator McCain 's ad is a blatant untruth . 
TO FROZEN01 ... Gallup a few days ago : White - Obama 37 % McCain 52 % Black - Obama 93 % McCain 2 % '' The thought that immediately comes to my mind is : You obviously think this has some kind of importance ... what do YOU think it means ? 
Are you implying that black people would only vote for black people ? 
Is the same true of whites ? 
How about those of mixed race ? 
I do n't think it 's any kind of surprise that black people , a group of Americans that tend to be poor or middle-class , would find Obama 's message inspiring and worthy of their vote . 
Whether or not race is THE only factor I ca n't tell from the tiny bit of information you 've posted . 
I think it would be more telling had the poll been about reasons for their support , rather than just `` who are you voting for '' . 
My previous post was just saying that I do n't find it suprising at all that some black people might not vote for Obama . 
It 's not a shocker , it 's not news-worthy , and frankly , it 's naive to think that it has any kind of larger implication . 
Was the original poster trying to say that because three black men do n't support Obama they MUST know something we do n't and therefore we should agree with him ? 
I do n't know ... the whole argument seems kind of pointless to me . 
Because - hey , it was on the news ! 
McCain is fond of taking risks and making rash judgements . 
American voters need to remember that 9 times out of 10 , a `` Hail Mary '' gambit is closely followed by an `` Oh Sh \* t '' result . 
Thanks for tip , I 'll regard most news from WaPo as dubious from now on . 
Wikipedia also connects Raines with Obama as well , btw . 
Will The `` Fact Checker '' run a Pinocchio test on this statement : `` Palin has more executive experience than Obama . '' 
McCain in 2005 : `` If we do n't do something about Fannie\/Freddie , the economy will be in big trouble . '' 
Obama : `` Present . '' 
No , but there are racist 's on the loose : Gallup a few days ago : White - Obama 37 % McCain 52 % Black - Obama 93 % McCain 2 % Posted by : Jack The Ripper | September 19 , 2008 1:46 PM | Report abuse So the Obama Campaign actually made CALLS to the Rains on financial matters while he was screwing around with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac ? 
REALLY And this article is insinuating John McCain is lying ? 
REALLY I swear this campaign gets more and more like the twilight zone every day where good is bad and bad is good . 
It is like opposite day in high school . 
Not once did the media call out Obama on his add stating Palin wants to see women who get abortions arrested . 
What a crock that was such a pathetic out and out lie it smelled to high heaven . 
When Obama lies or does something unethical we just throw it in the spin cycle and sanitize it because he is the chosen one . 
When McCain links a very obvious , potentially corrupt and destructive connection , he is treated like Pinnochio . 
White and black have not one thing to do with this race , it is whether we want a media backed lawyer with his own spin cycle in the White house fleecing Americans and lying to them about it . 
Folks you have to understand McCain ad targets a specific group of the American society . 
I 'm sure every intelligent Republican knows this ad is really reaching for the truth . 
However , people are not prone to really reading the facts are going to believe it . 
This type of tactic has been the GOP M\/O since Karl Rove hit field with Bush . 
They target folks who only pay attention to sound bits and do n't really follow politics close . 
Personally I would fell insulted because they are basically saying those folks are ignorant . 
Because it behooves me why anyone would want to put a Republican back in Office after the last 7 years this current idiot has put this Country through . 
Methinks we are going to be hearing alot about that in the next week ... and I do n't think it 's going to be good for McPalin . 
Election is a procedure that all candidates try his\/her best to justify him\/herself while slaming on the competent . 
No one is exceptional , NO one . 
At least this time McCain made his comments based on something , something that poped up by media INCLUDES WP . 
No wonder media is losing your credits , they either be far to left like here or far to right like Fox News , and no one evey trys to be moderate and independent . 
Watch the commerical again . 
It never says that Raines is a close advisor . 
And I guess playing the race card is just the icing on top . 
Yeah , Raines is black and so because he 's black and the WaPost tied him to Obama , and then was quoted as such by McCain , then by the wacky logic here , the WaPost is really just racists too . 
That is your logic after all when blasting McCain here , so it should cut both ways . 
The WaPost is clearly the mouthpiece of all things liberal , but this `` fact check '' is any but an attempt to honestly check facts . 
That is a heck of a statement by a `` news '' organization . 
McCain is a big fat hypocrite . 
90-95 % of Americans will receive a tax cut under his plan . '' 
Uh , actually no they wo n't . 
You see , I can say I have a ` plan ' to drive my car to the moon , but that does n't make my plan realistic . 
Obama 's `` plan '' assumes he can nearly double the tax burden on businesses and the wealthiest Americans , without it causing them to change their behavoir ... e.g. , where they choose to build new companies , how they choose to invest their capital , what they spend their money on , etc. . 
If Obama 's plan were really implemented , the capital of the wealthiest Americans ... the very capital that creates jobs and helps drive up the value of retirment investments for small guys like myself ... would flee this country . 
Therefore , the very tax base Obama claims he 'll use to recover all the tax cuts he 's promising to folks like you and me will shrink to where he will then have to RAISE taxes once again and us little people . 
Therefore , Obama 's claims to `` cut taxes for 95 % of Americans '' let 's him get away with a glitzy stump-speech , but it will never happen . 
Ask anyone who 's taken an Economics 101 class . 
Tax policy influences behavior ; Obama pretends it wo n't . 
They are now falling back on the race card which with the class warfare card is getting a little old . 
I 'm 66 and have seen it in one way or another in every election . 
The Democrats social security scare has yet to be played this year but will be as we get closer to the election . 
Two more dems right here for McCain . 
And no I am not a racist and no my wife is not bitter . 
While Fannie and Freddie were working to keep Congress away from their house of cards , Senator Obama was taking their money . 
He got more , in fact , than any other member of Congress , except for the Democratic chairman of the committee that oversees them . '' 
John McCain , at a campaign stop Friday , September 19 , in Green Bay , Wisconsin . 
What are the facts ? 
Find out after the jump . 
Federal law forbids candidates from receiving money directly from companies . 
The nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics tracks donations from employees of various companies . 
The center 's list of contributions from Fannie and Freddie employees places Obama second . 
Ahead of him is Sen. Chris Dodd , Democratic chairman of the Senate Banking Committee . 
The total listed for Obama is $ 126,349 a tiny fraction of the approximately $ 390 million his campaign has raised , according to the Center for Responsive Politics . 
The list shows McCain has received a total of $ 21,550 from Fannie and Freddie employees . 
The list includes donations of at least $ 200 from those who receive paychecks from Fannie and Freddie . 
It also includes donations from political action committees pooled contributions from employees . 
Obama decided early in his presidential run not to accept PAC contributions , but the Center for Responsive Politics ' list includes all contributions for members of Congress dating back to 1989 including Obama and McCain 's Senate campaigns . 
The New York Times has published a separate list looking at contributions from `` directors , officers , and lobbyists for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac '' for the 2008 campaign cycle . 
That list using figures from the Federal Election Commission shows McCain receiving $ 169,000 , while Obama received only $ 16,000 . 
Explaining the difference , the Center for Responsive Politics said on its Web site that it does not include members of the board of directors because they could serve on boards of various companies . 
Their contributions are listed along with other employees of the companies they work for . 
And the center says lobbyists usually represent multiple clients as well , so their contributions are listed under their lobbying firms except in-house lobbyists , who are included in the center 's list . 
The mortgage giants Fannie and Freddie became symbols of the nation 's economic mess and , to critics , of corporate greed after the government recently took them over to bail them out , making donations linked to the company in any way potential political fodder . 
Partially true , but misleading . 
Donations do n't come from companies . 
A list of employee contributions puts Obama second , but a different list including lobbyists and directors shows McCain getting more . 
`` Who advises him ? 
The Post says it 's Franklin Raines , for `` advice on mortgage and housing policy . '' '' 
`` Who advises him ? '' 
implies that Raines is the only or primary source of advice to Obama on mortgage and housing policy . 
More likely , Obama is talking to every person with experience or knowledge about this economic situation . 
I have finally lost all respect for him ... he seems to be conducting a `` No holds barred '' style campaign , that makes him look like a rabid dog . 
Shame on You John , this is not the man I thought you were . 
Even Karl Rove is embarrassed at your behavior . 
If Karl tells you you 're going to far ... you might want to listen to him . 
He knows a thing or 2 about this campaigning stuff . 
It shows who is more racist . 
Is that clear enough ? 
Also , Second only to Senator Dodd , major receipent of Fannie Mae contributions to Congress . 
So while American families have been struggling with their mortgages and face catastrophic economic hardship in no small part because of F+F 's malfeasance , Barack O'Spender has been taking F+F 's money to stuff his pockets . 
If not Raines then who ? 
And what is Obama 's position on all of this except `` Change ? '' 
Enjoy your weekend Rerpublicans and Democrats alike and please remember that we are all more alike than not . 
`` It then shows a photograph of an elderly white woman taxpayer ... '' Posted by : Alex | September 19 , 2008 1:52 PM | Report abuse Black , Racist Democrats wo n't vote for a white guy and girl . 
Your `` fact checking '' leads you back to your own yellow journalistic rag -LRB- the source of your alleged `` facts '' -RRB- . 
You then discredit yourself , and blame the McCain campaign . 
I love how Americans think they know exactly what experience it takes to be president . 
I love how Sarah Palin can defy laws and get protection from the Republican party . 
If I 'm not mistaken ... its NOT Obama that has broken any laws . 
Sarah has n't either . . 
but her and her `` sweetheart '' are in question ! 
That 's just too bad for that ADVOCATE OF CHANGE ! 
But hey ... you 'll believe anything she says wo n't you ? 
She 's going to ride this out until after the election . 
Mark my words . . 
if she gets elected this WILL disappear . 
Interesting is n't it ? 
This is not CHANGE . 
Our children are growing up in a society filled with negative messages , and the leader of the free world does not need to be a bully with a sharp tounge whose main priority is digging up dirt to make him\/herself superior in an election of any kind . 
HEY WASHINGTON , GROW UP !!!!!!!!! Posted by : JoshinNC | September 19 , 2008 1:53 PM | Report abuse Wow , this is amazing ! 
The Washington post says that McCain is lying because he relied on information that the Washington post released . 
How was McCain supposed to know that Washington Post reporters rely on poorly sourced information ? 
From now on we know that the Washington post is not a reliable source , and is actually more akin to the National Enquirer . 
But it used to be a respectable newspaper that issued retractions when they made errors . 
I suppose we now know what a Washington post subscription is worth . 
Thanks for making me feel like my subscription was a total waste of money ! 
You guys really do n't have much respect for your subscribers , do you ? 
I find it ridiculous that people think that a first-term senator that has spent half his term campaigning has the qualifications to be president . 
As far as I know , he has zero executive experience unless I 'm completely missing something . 
Can someone clue me in as to what makes him qualified ? 
If this was n't a popularity contest , and he was being vetted for a CEO position , he would never be chosen . 
Yet fear has risen to the forefront of the McCain campaign and with this video press release -LRB- can I call it an add yet ? -RRB- 
we see a clear effort to stoke the flame of suppressed racist fear in the American people for political points -LRB- understanding perception of imagery , it is clear that this add is presented to be two African American men ruining a nice old white women -RRB- . 
I was hopeful that those days where over , but here it goes again . 
Are we suppose to beleive Obama asked him about a stock tip or something ? 
Which candidate is truthful most often . 
McCain 's campaign is an embarrassment . 
McCain in 2005 : `` If we do n't do something about Fannie\/Freddie , the economy will be in big trouble . '' 
Obama : `` Present . '' '' 
And yet this same source is so pro-BO that it is stumbling over itself to redefine a past article . 
MCCAIN\/PALIN for a better future ! 
She actually is a huge McCain Palin fan . 
The five senators , Alan Cranston -LRB- D-CA -RRB- , Dennis DeConcini -LRB- D-AZ -RRB- , John Glenn -LRB- D-OH -RRB- , John McCain -LRB- R-AZ -RRB- , and Donald W. Riegle -LRB- D-MI -RRB- , were accused of improperly aiding Charles H. Keating , Jr. , chairman of the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association , which was the target of an investigation by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board -LRB- FHLBB -RRB- . 
These two clowns do n't know their butts from a hot rock . 
They are both puppets that answer to their backers and not the voters . 
MCCAIN\/PALIN for a better future ! 
No wonder the newspapers business is failing and I 'm not shedding a tear over it . 
Gallup a few days ago : White - Obama 37 % McCain 52 % Black - Obama 93 % McCain 2 % '' Posted by : Jack The Ripper | September 19 , 2008 1:59 PM | Report abuse So ... have you retracted the original `` wrong '' stories ? 
This is getting really stupid . 
I think you guys have tipped over . 
I hope going all out for Obama was worth the loss of your credibility , which is after all , what you sell . 
The people who made this movie are clearly right-winged and you can see it yourself by looking at some of their other titles . 
So that fact that no one supporting Obama showed up at the viewing , does not surprise me and it should n't surprise anyone else . 
This movie and vile and nothing but propaganda for the neo-cons . 
This old man has lost his limbs and part of brain too and remaining is badly suffered in cancer treatment . 
It would be better , we can leave him alone with pretty Palin to enjoy his last few weeks jumping here and there and entertaining right wing goons . 
By the way , MCcain said that if he lose the election he will retire . 
Hope , he has not kept his savings in Fannei Mae or AIG or Washington Mutual otherwise we will have to bailout him too ... ... . 
`` Not only is there historical precedent for SEC chairs to be removed , the president of the United States always reserves the right to request the resignation of an appointee , and maintain the customary expectation that it will be delivered , '' said McCain spokesperson Tucker Bounds . '' 
For goodness sakes , all four candidates are white ! 
The details you 've now printed about the limitations Raines allegedly put on his calls with Obama -LRB- not Fannie Mae related -RRB- were n't reported until today . 
Meanwhile , on August 28 , your newspaper specifically described Raines as one of Obama 's Fannie Mae advisors . 
If that was wrong , your newspaper 's the one to blame , not the readers who believed you . 
I already knew that the credibility of the MSM was in tatters , but this is the first time I 've seen a newspaper calling somebody a liar because he was dumb enough to believe what the newspaper itself put into print ! 
We are supposed to believe they had enough collective mind power to make up a war and watch and understand the housing market ? 
Yes there are a number of bad republicans but the democrats of today scary me to death . 
These Obama supporters are clueless and do n't care . 
You know , like a 14 year old who knows everything but is totally clueless or just wants it his way and will argue with a wall to sell the point . 
They actually think Obama is going to reduce there taxes . 
There are more taxes then just income tax . 
Too many people believe everything they here , do n't seek out the truth and ca n't see the forest for the trees and the use of logic is nowhere in their reasoning skills . 
The sad fact is there is nothing you can say or do to convince Obama supporters of the simple truth due to their blindness , inability and unwillingness to seek the truth . 
Give them a glass of Koolade , they will drink it . 
What was his connection as part of the Keating Five in 1989 ? 
Oh , that 's right , he was cleared . 
BTW this is how the Re-bum-licans much beloved deregulated free market can bite you in the a $ $ . 
People are naturally greedy and you ca n't trust them to do the right thing . 
Certain industries vital to the national economy and securtity NEED to be regulated . 
The lie is in what the McCain campaign IMPLIES - that Raines is an advisor to the Obama campaign . 
That does not mean Obama never asked his opinion , but he is NOT an advisor to Obama 's campaign . 
EVERYTHING else , from contributions to Obama 's tax plan is simply an attempt to DISTRACT from these facts . 
They play to the mentality of Obama supporters . 
They 're both black , and all white people know that all black people know each other ! 
That 's the proof , right there . 
Now who is `` The Liar '' : Obama will say or do anything to win , it 's not about the country , it 's about HIM and his socialism . 
He is the new JANUS . 
Would she be so popular if she was n't so pretty ? 
I agree with her on the need to teach creationism in the schools , but that 's about all . 
He stepped down way early when questions were raised . 
Mccain still has his capaign run by the major lobbyist of Fannie Mae and Freddi Mac ! 
Mccain campaign criticizes Obama for finger pointing blaming the champion deregulator Mccain , but his campaign is trying to mislead on a loose association ! 
Talk about double stndareds . 
McCain campaign is turning out to be be the worst in history and it is sad to see him degenerating into scumbag . 
I am losing all respect for their judgment as fair and honorable Americans . 
Why ca n't McCain enlist supporters to run a campaign based on anything positive ? 
We always understood McCain to be erratic , but from his recent ad campaigns I finally understand just how weak and dangerous a leader he would actually be . 
If elected , being controlled by such advisors in his administration , I believe our country will be further split apart . 
That 's enough for me to know . 
How much will you save with Obama 's tax plan ? 
This is a lie and the McCain campaign is as dishonarable as a campaign can get . 
Second show me how MY taxes will go up , I make less than 100k a year and have studied Obamas tax plan . 
My taxes , income or otherwise , would n't go up under his plan . 
You probably make over 250k so you have something to worry about . 
Practice what you preach and do your research first . 
This guy Obama is not who Opera would have you believe he is ... Posted by : Larry Clifton | September 19 , 2008 12:33 PM Oh give it a break ! 
This is OLD news - its not stopping anyone from voting for Obama . 
Try to find a new argument . 
I 'll call McCain a lier ... to his face ... I 'm a former Navy SEAL ... and your comment above . . 
about the punch in the face liberals deserve ... Bahaha ... you bible thumping non military serving rich boy republicans ... would be Easy work ... show me a blow hard Repulican and 9 times out of 10 . . 
Medal of Honor -LRB- Navy SEAL -RRB- ... yeah ... punch these guys faces !! Thumper !! Posted by : Brett | September 19 , 2008 2:05 PM | Report abuse Yeah , this is the last card McCain is left to play with . 
Sen. McCain never said that Raines was a close advisor but an advisor . 
Go here to read the truth . 
As a poor young person it 's easy to see why race is always brought up , it 's a smokescreen to make you forget about CLASS . 
Perhaps N. Korea would help out if we hand him to them . 
Well guess what , even if YOUR taxes do n't go up , you can expect to pay MORE for EVERYTHING YOU BUY ! 
Who do you think those rich people are going to pass the expense off to ? 
I would consider this a wise and prudent thing to do in a fact collecting mission to pull all the pieces of a problem together to find a viable solution . 
It is absurd to accuse Obama on this , but why should anyone be suprised ... I am sure it will only get worse . 
Everyone is not voting based on skin color as some of you think . 
We are going to need you all in various positions according to your talent and\/or military training . 
Before they looked like they were just playing dirty , now they just look desperate . 
Oh , and it appears the Republican Administration is a bunch of CORPORATE SOCIALISTS . 
You hear that Republicans ? 
Your party wants to give corporations a HANDOUT for their IRRESPONSIBLE BEHAVIOR . 
I say let the corporations eat their stupid decisions . 
I 'm an independent , self-made person and I 've never needed a government bail-out to survive . 
I thought Republicans were strong believers in working hard for yourself and not expecting the government to give you money ? 
I guess that 's only if you are an American Citizen , not if you are a poor , helpless corporation in need . 
No war but class war ! 
Be careful , Barack . 
These are the dog days . 
How is McCain being a liar or even disingenuous ? 
He used information from THIS PUBLICATION -LRB- WaPo -RRB- that remained undisputed until the negative impact on Obama was discerned . 
Then WaPo retracts the information ? 
Does this paper have any credibility anymore ? 
Where was the use of the word `` alleged '' if these were disputed facts , where was the objection from the Obama campaign between now and the time that the information was originally published ? 
How can a paper retroactively dismiss their own `` facts '' in such a way ? 
I can understand if you see this as a vindication of the Obama campaign , but how is John McCain accused of falsity for an ad that was sourced in information published THREE SEPARATE TIMES by the Washington Post -LRB- and it all being a product of the same conversation does not alter the fact that this information was published , again , THREE SEPARATE TIMES -RRB- . 
How can this pass anyone 's smell test ? 
I can understand people viewing this ad in a partisan manner , but how can anyone interested in a free press ignore what at the very least was a factual rope-a-dope by the Post , if not a craven retraction for the benefit of their chosen candidate . 
Is the publication responsible for the initial and continued dissemination of this information really not the primary culprit , and if so how can that same publication label McCain a liar . 
How does that work ? 
Please someone explain this to me . 
He is more of a hothead than G.W and that is saying something . 
That 's what we need , an angry old war vet that knows nothing about the economy and a former beauty queen and North Idaho College journalism graduate . 
He , Bush admin and majority of Repbulican and Congress and Lobbists and Wall street got plenty to blame themselves for due to their ` laissez fair ' principles and lobbyists collusion . 
If you want to punch `` liberals '' in the face because they disagree with your party 's unfortunate propensity to take the focus off the issues and place it squarely where it can distract us all from how bad things have gotten on the republican watch , then so be it . 
While you guys obsess about other people 's uteruses and other people 's bedrooms , we 'll dedicate ourselves to cleaning up the mess the US has gotten itself into . 
Because pretending the mess is n't there does n't make it go away . 
I think they learned this tactic from Karl Rove . 
This man is proving himself to be first class liar . 
How can you believe anything he says . 
He is grasping for straws to cover up his own lack of qualifications and suitability to be president . 
I think Obama has more integrity , honesty and willingness to do what it takes to bring our country back to decency and fairness . 
The guy is a habitual liar . 
He ca n't help but lie and Obama supports do n't care because the man does not have a leg to stand on anything . 
He is just the only candidate they have and they are stuck with him . 
If this ad is such a lie , the Washington Post must print 3 retractions . 
If not , then shut up or put up . 
Due to my profession I 'm very familiar with the ` ACCOUNTING FRAUD ' committed by Raines at Fannie Mae which cost the company over $ 1 billion in forensic auditing services and a loss of reputation I do not think they will every recover from . 
Raines himself walked off with millions in bonuses which the mortgage company has not been able to get back from him in spite of the fraud he committed . 
He simply said he spent the money . 
Obama 's people should have known these facts and under no circumstances had anything to do with Raines - even ` one itsi bitsi ' little telephone conversation with him . 
Raines belongs in jail . 
Obama 's people failed yet another test in ethics . 
This story deserves no Pinocchios because it has highlighted the complete lack of judgement on the part of Obama 's support staff - who will by the way be using this type of advise if he becomes president . 
It is a nauseating violation of journalistic ethics for the Post to pretend McCain did anyhing wrong . 
It is even MORE nauseating since I have been told by the Post 's own editor that they do not do any fact checking on certain types of articles . 
If they do n't do it , how can they expect others to ? 
It is pretty flimsy '' More distortion , deceit , and desperation from the collapsing McCain campaign . 
Fear and division is all they 've got . 
Fiorina -LRB- failed CEO -RRB- and Graham -LRB- the ` stop whining ' de-regulation king -RRB- ??? Yeah , they 're great advisers . 
At least they 're white . 
bob | September 19 , 2008 2:09 PM | Report abuse '' `` SOUNDS LIKE A RECIPE OF RACISM TO ME ! '' 
Gallup a few days ago : White - Obama 37 % McCain 52 % Black - Obama 93 % McCain 2 % '' Posted by : Jack The Ripper Um , Jack , you do realize they were talking about a MCCAIN ad which portrays two `` evil '' black men stealing tax money from an `` innocent '' little old white lady , right ? 
Frankly , I 'm kind of surprised that they did n't use a little old black lady in the ad . 
Then , they could n't be called racist and it might strike a chord with black Americans . 
But then again , I 'm not a campaign strategist . 
Maybe it 's more worthwhile to scare white people . 
Unfortunately , the truth does n't matter . 
Obama will prudently put the economy first , but this means that anything else he promised will be put on the back burner and most likely not come to fruition . 
Which man will seem more honest and will have tried his best ? 
You are just a GOP lover in sheeps clothing . 
Chris Dodd was given more as he was # 1 . 
The McCain camp took their information from the washington post . 
Just as Willie Horton was an advisor to Michael Dukakis . 
At least Republicans exhibit predictability in their campaign tactics . 
This is OLD news '' Hey cowboy , old news is what makes a man 's reputation . 
Are you too stupis to know that ? 
Well , are you ? 
He had ties to Raines when he thought that would help him win `` economics '' cred ; but now it 's `` Raines who ? '' 
You are just a GOP lover in sheeps clothing . 
Well now I know why everyone considers the Democrat Party to be the party of peace and tolerance . 
I can feel the love ... Posted by : dbw | September 19 , 2008 2:12 PM | Report abuse `` Obama is a lie and everything he saids is twisted . 
He ca n't help but lie and Obama support -LRB- er -RRB- s do n't care because the man does not have a leg to stand on anything . 
He is just the only candidate they have and they are stuck with him . 
Actually , no one is stuck with anyone . 
Americans are free to vote for whoever they want , literally . 
All he has to do is look at a mirror and look over his shoulder at his shadow-advisor , Phil Gramm . 
McCain is an unethical liar willing to place blame anywhere but on himself . 
Let 's take a moment and look at the credentials : Former mayor of a small town -LRB- fine , but with responsibility -RRB- , Currently , the governor of a state , been to the middle east a few times -LRB- at least more than once as an ` unknown ' -RRB- , opposed her own party more than once and won , etc. . 
Now let 's a look at Obama -LRB- and by the way , he is the one running for president -RRB- - except for saying that he was against the IRAQ war while he was still a non-senator , could someone tell me what experience this guy really has ? 
This is quite scary folks . 
God help us if he wins . 
Wait , was there such a day ? 
Also , way to go on mentioning that Raines and Obama are Black and the taxpayer in the commercial is white . 
EVERYthing is a racial issue . 
I do n't even like McCain and do n't plan on voting for him , but you -LRB- whoever wrote this -RRB- are pathetic . 
What an exceptional position ! 
You have just advocated that no one ever trust anything the Post reports ever again -LRB- not that many of us did to begin with -RRB- . 
That is pretty amazing - and giving McCain magical Pinocchio demerits for falling into the fiendish trap of taking something the Post said at face value is doubly astonishing . 
And we should keep both the Dems and the Republicans in Congress . 
And let 's give them big raises . 
And I 'm OK if they tax the crap out of me and give it to all their special interest friends and also use the money to bail out Wall Street AND bail out people losing their homes . 
Both parties are brilliant , if you read all the posts here . 
And the media 's as in bed with them as I 've ever seen . 
The second and fourth estates have got us all so busy fighting with each other that we 're not focused on all the issues that matter . 
Health care for all our citizens is a big problem . 
In the couple of hundred comments here , it shows up three times . 
Terrorism is a real threat - too many unemployed third world people with too many grudges and too much testosterone . 
And our education system is broken - so why do we let it get run by teachers ' unions which have no way to adapt and improve ? 
Finally , rising inequality between the rich and the poor is a real and growing problem that needs to be addressed . 
I voted for Reagan twice . 
And I voted for Clinton twice . 
Get a clue , people . 
There 's a reason why all these elections are a dead heat . 
It says Raines advises Obama . 
Advises just means you 've given advice , which is EXACTLY what WaPo reported and McCain repeated . 
As for the Keating 5 stuff . 
He went to 2 meetings . 
The investigator said he should have been dropped from the probe . 
not to mention one example of the `` McCain Temper '' is a shouting match between McCain and Keating because McCain would n't do what Keating wanted . 
So how many of you talk about Obama 's earmarks to campaign contributors ? 
How about the new one he just released in spanish about Rush L. Where is the fact check on those ad 's ? 
This article seems a bit biased to me ... oh wait I forgot it 's the Washington Post ! 
Then , they could n't be called racist '' Sure , yell racist when you ca n't defend or if you yourself are a racist . 
Thanks for the clarification ! 
His ambiguous statement earlier this week raised questions about whether Mr. McCain intended to direct his remarks at Mr. Zapatero . 
In an interview with Radio Caracol Miami on Tuesday , Mr. McCain spoke only in generalities when asked whether , as president , he would sit down at the White House with Mr. Zapatero , who has clashed with the Bush administration over Iraq . 
I m willing to meet with any leader , Mr. McCain said , who is dedicated to the same principles and philosophy that we are for human rights , democracy and freedom , and I will stand up to those that do not . 
Mr. McCain s comments caused a stir among the press in Spain and did not escape the attention of Mr. Zapatero , who said that Mr. McCain showed the necessary prudence with his remarks . 
Adding to the controversy , Mr. McCain appeared to conflate Mr. Zapatero with the leaders of Latin American countries during the interview . 
I have a clear record of working with leaders in the hemisphere that are friends with us and standing up to those who are not , Mr. McCain said . 
And that s judged on the basis of the importance of our relationship with Latin America and the entire region . 
When the interviewer specified that she was asking about Mr. Zapatero Mr. McCain ceded no ground . 
On Thursday , a McCain adviser , Randy Scheunemann , brushed off questions about whether Mr. McCain meant to strike a more charitable tone toward Mr. Zapatero , saying , There is no doubt Senator McCain knew exactly to whom the question referred . 
Thanks Scheunemann , you are inching McCaint and peeeuuu Palin closer to the edge of the cliff ... Posted by : AlexP1 | September 19 , 2008 2:16 PM | Report abuse So McCain based his ad on stories in your own paper and now you 're claiming he exaggerated . 
Of course , it does n't really matter , because former Fannie Mae CEO James Johnson is certainly an Obama advisor . 
And , Obama has taken over $ 126,000 over the past four years from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to look the other other way while they scammed taxpayers out of billions of dollars . 
The ties between Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and Barack Obama are just one more indication of how shady and untrustworthy Obama is . 
And , how unfit he is to be president . 
If you want 4 years of corruption and arrogance go ahead and elect Obama in November . 
McCain can not fix the problem because he does n't understand the economy and blindly follows the same failed economic policy Bush and the Republican Party have done for the past eight years which is do whatever big business wants . 
You know , it 's about time we had somebody intelligent in the White House - not some `` C '' student -LRB- Bush -RRB- or someone who finished 894th out of 899 at the Naval Academy -LRB- McCain -RRB- . 
You can not seriously deny the Obama\/Raines connection . 
I know is only a coincidence which can be easily explained to the satisfaction of morons on the left - but you might want to take a bit more of an objective look at this . 
What other `` facts '' your paper has wrong ? 
Better yet ; tell us what you got right . 
Otherwise , we would n't want to rely on anything you report . 
P.S. Did you check this `` fact check '' to see if your fact checking is correct ? 
If Obama took that much funding , he 's certainly part of the failure . 
We need to be careful to get the facts straight though . 
One candidate claimed that `` the foundations of our economy are sound '' while his -LRB- now ex - -RRB- campaign strategist claimed that Americans were whining and we are in a `` mental recession '' -LRB- meaning , we 're being drama queens -RRB- . 
The other candidate said over and over again that the banks were in trouble -LRB- anyone who reads the news could have told you that -RRB- and the economy was faltering . 
I do n't think I have to tell you which one said what . 
You all wonder why Rush is so popular . 
It 's not because people agree with him ; it 's because he 's never claimed to be anything but biased . 
As an independent I get so fed up with the media 's liberal bent that I no longer trust it and I certainly do n't follow someone 's political advice because they cut an album or made a movie . 
You folks are so out of touch with middle America it 's incredible . 
I ca n't wait to hear the crying when McCain 's elected and the liberal media try to dissect how Obama was robbed . 
If Obama took that much funding , he 's certainly part of the failure . 
We need to be careful to get the facts straight though . '' 
This implies a willful attempt to mislead the viewer , i.e. lies . 
I think in that one more senior moment , McCain forgot that he already fired Carlie Fiorina only two days ago , so he does n't really have another barbie candidate for that position either . 
Q - how come no one is blaming Alan Greenspan for lowering interest rates to less than a percent and encouraging the massive liquidity bulge that had to correct ? 
Q - since when does anyone is wdc have anything to do with the real economy , i thought the people who work for a living create the jobs ? 
Q - how many illegals crossed the Arizona border since McCain has been Senator ? 
Q - How does any democrat say that Palin does n't have experience when they nominated Q - if the fed gov itself borrows like drunken sailors and ca n't repay its bills , the why are they blaming business for greed ? 
Q - wow - Joe Biden gave $ 3K to charity ? 
and he says he cares for the poor and down-todden ? 
I guess if it is someone else 's money ? 
CEO of what mortgage company ? 
Who has taken the most money from the banks in this election ? 
Why do n't you guys actually do some reporting on Saint Obama who walks on water instead of carrying his water . 
Either that or just appoint him President now so the rest of us do n't have to stand in line on Nov. 4 . 
The media has been shameful in its attacks on Clinton and McCain , all the while letting Obama get by with cheap , empty talk . 
As McCain 's ad came straight from the Post 's article , I think the only Pinocchio noses that need be awarded are to this `` Fact Checker '' who is obviously biased in this instance . 
So the Post is no longer a reliable source ? 
Let the world know ! 
This is laughable ... Posted by : Stephen Shook | September 19 , 2008 2:21 PM | Report abuse The Washington Post gets Four Pinocchios for this Obama-written `` correction '' . 
Is it a fact that the head of his VP team was the former head of Fannie Mae ? 
Those are some CLOSE connections . 
republicans are fresh scented . 
Listen liberals , the evidence is clear , this guys has all the wrong associations , can you not see that ? 
He has a convicted crook , unpatriotic pastor , an ex terrorist and GOD knows who else around him . 
I rather leave the fate of our country to a man who has proven he loves his country and loves LIFE . 
Actually it confirms that nobody knows what Raines ' role is in the Obama campaign . 
It 's been more than two months since that article has come out , and all we have are the words of Raines and the Obama campaign that they are n't in cahoots together . 
Based on the evidence provided , that word is highly suspect . 
how vain Posted by : mrmcmillan | September 19 , 2008 2:22 PM | Report abuse Posted by : PulSamsara | September 19 , 2008 2:22 PM | Report abuse Obama Lied , Born Alive Infants Died . 
All I ask is do your research . 
I got tired of hearing all the back and fourth garbo so I did my research and found out that Obama in fact does want to teach sex education to 5 year olds . 
The bill was read word for word and there it was . 
But I ask you to research B O for and see for yourself and not just take my word lilsis - stop your lies ! 
On a related note , one thing I have admired about Obama watching him these last 19 months is that he refuses to play the victim card . 
The Republicans , while they think of themselves as guns , guts , and glory , are really a party of whiners , and have been since Bush , Sr. took office in ' 88 . 
My husband and I , who voted for Reagan twice , often remark at how whiny Bush , Jr. and all his cabinet members are . 
I could never understand why people thought it would be cool to have `` W '' at a BBQ -- he always seemed like an unintelligent , sniveling , bore to me . 
I 'm astounded at how easily and comfortably he lies and is allowed to lie live on television . 
Should n't there be some standards . 
When our children are caught lying we punish them . 
Surely we can apply the same standards to McCain 's campaign . 
He keeps repeating statements that have been exposed as pure fabrications , yet he continues to say them as if he thinks the public is not paying attention or voters are so stupid that they ca n't connect the dots . 
Well , we are paying attention and I do n't like what I see . 
How could I possibly ever trust this man again ? 
Whatever respect I had for McCain has completely been replaced by utter disbelief and genuine fear . 
As an independent , white woman do I want another four years of a Republican administration ? 
Thanks , but no thanks . 
BOTTOM LINE : Obama is tied perilously close to the brain -LRB- less -RRB- trust that ran Fannie . 
This shows a strong connection between Obama and Raines . 
It is n't true of course , but then again neither is anything McCain is saying about Obama . 
I guess all McCain has now is lies . 
reforms that MAY - not saying would have - have reduced this mess . 
Is it a happy coincidence that Dodd heads the committee that does oversight for this major contributor ? 
Then , they could n't be called racist '' Sure , yell racist when you ca n't defend or if you yourself are a racist . '' 
Please reread my post . 
Do you deny that people think McCain is a racist because he pitted two black men against a little old white lady in his ad ? 
I hope not because I could easily point to other people saying this . 
That was my only point . 
I was merely looking at his ad from a political standpoint because I found it a little amusing what he chose to do when he had other options on the table . 
I would think that it would be better for a candidate to not \* appear \* racist -LRB- since it 's very difficult to determine what is in another 's heart -RRB- , would n't you agree ? 
Palins is a wonderfull woman , she has a great family and her speach at the National Convention was Great . 
but , that does not qualify her for VP . 
Republicans are trying to put her as the most experience woman in Washington `` if you want to talk about woman at politics then you need to mention Mrs. Clinton , Pelosi , etc '' This Country is in the Hole because we depend on other countries for everything . 
What about the labor ? 
we depend on foreign labor to do the jobs that USA Citizens dont want to do . 
What abot the Education . 
We are educating a bunch of lazies . 
I Studied outside USA on Six Grade i had 8 courses including Algebra , phisics and Chemestry , all of them mandatory . 
My son is a Senior at a Connecticut school he has 6 classes . 
PE , Algebra , Social Studies , English , French and Arts . 
I laugh when i see the news saying that our kids are streess at school , THEY ARE STREESS BECAUSE THEY DONT HAVE NOTHING TO DO . 
We need to do big changes and only a join effort will take this country out of the Hole . 
Rome was the most powerfull country in the world and it went down hard . 
If we dont get together the history will repeat again . 
It worked for Hillary not for McCain . 
And yes , the lipstick comment , backfired on Obama . 
He was trying to be cute but got caught so that he can deny it and get mad later for the press . 
Another trick was done my Michelle Obama referring to `` she 's cute '' comment . 
Go ahead treat the voters as if they 're stupid ! 
He apparently has no formal classwork in economics - he does not claim to have any and wo n't release his undergrad transcripts so we must assume they consist of useless gut classes . 
And he certainly did not study economics in law school . 
Bill Clintons pushed through his housing act in 1994 that allowed for paper-thin downpayments , shaky credit and income was n't an issue , and over looking bad payment histories . 
To further this goal of a home loan for everyone , Bill Clinton and the Congress passed a law repealing the Glass Steagall Act to allow investment houses to get into the mortgage business . 
Congress continued to encourage irresponsible lending practices applauding the growth of home ownership for people regardless of credit or income , since those requirements tended to impact too heavily on minorities and the poor . 
Well the goal of `` affordable '' homes has now been met . 
The only problem is that all the money for loans has gone down the drain , along with jobs and property values and retirement funds . 
While many of the irresponsible borrowers are suing saying that they are the victims because they did n't know they would have to really pay for their houses , having bought with no down payment , the rest of us , the taxpayers and people who lived within their means , are stuck holding the bag . 
Makes you wonder how we will pay for all the goodies Obama and the Democrats are promising now . 
Maybe they will repeal the laws of economics altogether and march us all into the promised land of unlimited government . 
Maybe with the problems the libs caused . . 
they 'll cut their spending for a change -LRB- or we can let MCCain do it -RRB- and take a pay cut instead of putting their screw up on us . 
Dems also made out from the lobbies with Dood -LRB- Dem chairman of the banking committee for the last 2 years that should have known what shape banking was in -RRB- receiving the most money from those lobbies and Obama -LRB- your savior -RRB- receiving the 2nd largest amount of money from the Dem lobbies ... in only 2 years hes been in the Senate . 
Libs always only think about the present and how it benefits them and screw the future and the country like with everything they do . 
Seems like a pattern ... come up with some scheme that makes them look good then when it fails if a Republican is in office down the road ... blame him . 
Put a Lib in charge of anything and eventually its gonna hit the fan . 
Back in the eighties , when the Republicans deregulated markets -LRB- like they 've done under Bush Junior -RRB- , it caused a similar meltdown of the economy ... the Savings and Loan Scandal . 
John W McCain was one of The Keating Five who caused it . 
Unlike now ... which will cost American taxpayers TRILLIONS ... that one only cost American taxpayers HUNDREDS OF BILLIONS . 
These Republicans always LOVE deregulation ... then love the taxpayer bailout after they 've wrecked the country . 
They 're SOCIALISTS ON WELFARE . 
You all wonder why Rush is so popular . 
It 's not because people agree with him ; it 's because he 's never claimed to be anything but biased . 
As an independent I get so fed up with the media 's liberal bent that I no longer trust it and I certainly do n't follow someone 's political advice because they cut an album or made a movie . 
You folks are so out of touch with middle America it 's incredible . 
I ca n't wait to hear the crying when McCain 's elected and the liberal media try to dissect how Obama was robbed . 
He 'll be able to give advice without any conflicts of interest . '' 
You do realize he ran for President in 1998 and 2008 -LRB- that 's this year -RRB- , right ? 
How many of his kids are lobbyists ? 
Tough choice made more difficult by the media , none of whom can tell the truth anymore . 
Everything you read is slanted , facts distorted , made up of just omitted . 
Especially today , Americans should be electing an administration , not just a teleprompter president with unknown and unseen advisors who have no accountability to the people . 
Maybe candidates should be called upon to name and place their cabinet nominees on the ticket ? 
There is no trust without transparency . 
He 's inferring that Raines helped Obama formulate policy . 
Anyone who has now seen the level of interaction between the two must realize his campaign is playing you for saps . 
Unfortunately , it looks like he 's right to do so . 
Be careful out there !! Posted by : Obama Spyware | September 19 , 2008 2:26 PM | Report abuse I 'm confused . 
The Washington Post is calling McCain a liar for using their article which is fact-checked . 
I 'm very confused . 
The greed of wall-street will always be there as long as they are permitted to cannibalize the average person . 
The many problems and eventual recovery will be based in on : Jobs , spendable income from the working class by lowering their taxes as proposed and employment stability from the assembly lines to call centers . 
Infusion of cash-flow to critically ill companies will not get America out of this mess . 
Jobs and cash-flow to the middle class will re-build the economy . 
A jobless recovery plan will FAIL despite all the billion to trillions . 
In this article you say Obama says emphatically that they had no contact for advise on any matter and your reporter said they did straight from his mouth . 
And 2 other stories said the same thing and where never questioned until today . 
Are you saying your reporter is lying or is Obamas camp . 
Either way , how is it McCains fault . 
PS he never said close advisor but someone Obama soutght advise from , which is EXACTLY what your paper reported 3 seperate times . 
Wake up everyone , Gloves need to be off , we are allowing a socialist to be railroaded into office by exactly what socialism promises . 
Govt control of everything , including the media . 
Fight Back with all you have , your children will never forgive you if you dont . 
If an ad came out tomorrow stating that according to the washington Post , McCain was Posted by : Bill | September 19 , 2008 2:26 PM | Report abuse Is it a fact that Obama received over $ 500,000 in campaign contributions from Fannie and Freddie lobbyists ? 
Is it a fact that the head of his VP team was the former head of Fannie Mae ? 
Those are some CLOSE connections . 
That is evidence to all LIBERALS , this guy is lying , he does not want to help anyone , just himself !! Posted by : NOE | September 19 , 2008 2:27 PM | Report abuse I m not about to say the Washington Post is not reputable because they publish great news articles . 
In fact , here is an article from Donald Luskin -LRB- advisor to McCain -RRB- called Quit Doling Out That Bad-Economy Line supporting Phil Gramms statement that we ARE in a Mental Recession , and the economy is much better then we the American people are making it out to be . 
This commentary article was published on September 14th , 2008 . 
September 15th , the banking system in our country collapsed . 
Regardless of what party you belong to , open up your eyes for once . 
These people want nothing more than to help themselves . 
The financial cushion they ride on makes it impossible for them to connect with the average American which is apparent from his 3 page blast of people who are worried about our economy . 
It truly terrifies me to think this is how they actually see the world . 
If we ca n't believe what you said then , how can we believe you now ? 
Way to shore up your credibility !! I would say the fact that the Obama campaign did n't dispute the Washington Post report until the association was inconvenient -LRB- now rather than over the summer -RRB- tells the story . 
Did Ms. Huslin not write the words `` seeking his advice on mortgage and housing policy matter '' ? 
If that was not an accurate portrayal of what he said , then why did she use them ? 
Those words were quoted both in a Wash Post editorial and picked up by the McCain campaign . 
Now she does n't stand by them ? 
Is this revisionist history ? 
So yet again , the lobbyists are choking REPUBLICAN CANDIDATE John McCain 's campaign . 
1 -RRB- He does n't know much about the economy . 
He never made it the center of his campaign . 
Instead , he has relied on duds like Phil Gramm -LRB- who called us a nation of whiners , and who authored the infamous Enron Loophole -RRB- and Carly Fiorina -LRB- a disgraced executive with a golden parachure -RRB- . 
Meanwhile , Obama has gone out of his way to pick the brains of people in many sectors of the economy . 
And he has a top-flight U of Chicago economist , Austan Goolsbee . 
And though many Democrats are concerned that Goolsbee is too `` conservative , '' he is absolutely trustworthy . 
It shows a great deal of judgment on Obama 's part to seek this man out . 
And it is a great commendation that Goolsbee would accept the top position in his campaign . 
2 -RRB- McCain himself , until recently , was a vocal supporter of privatizing social security and deregulating Wall Street . 
This is an unavoidable fact , that runs deep through his resume . 
There may have been odd moments , when for some inexplicable reason , McCain has gone to bat against a particular corporation ... but this is the exception . 
-LRB- And given his ideological position for deregulation , you have to wonder if he was just vexed at a particular company or running interference for a particular lobbyist -RRB- . 
3 -RRB- The Keating 5 Scandal , for which Keating was imprisoned , and McCain was formally punished . 
The dude 's smokin pot with Obama again ... Posted by : Jack The Ripper | September 19 , 2008 2:28 PM | Report abuse Obama 's campaign is rich with dollars siphoned off of the American economy by the likes of Raines and Fannie . 
Sorry liberals - your poster boy is n't nearly as clean as he claims to be . 
While McCain was warning of this crisis in 2005 , Obama was turning a profit on it . 
I do n't think you know since they are part of the huge pile of information he wo n't release about himself . 
Beyond the 9.3 trillion dollar debt that you taxpayers and your children have to pay back , and the casualties of your illegal war , the level of your political discourse has descended to partisan name-calling . 
In particular Republican supporters seem unable to comment without some asinine comment on Obama being a Muslim , or all lefties being communists . 
It would be funny if it was n't so pathetic . 
I suppose this should be no surprise as the right has often resorted to aggressive personal attacks and the verisimilitude of patriotism to deflect from their self-serving agenda . 
I sincerely hope America sheds the Neocon parasites that have profited from your hard work as your quality of life declines . 
Tap your feet three times or use a wide stance . 
I have a soft mouth and will treat you with great care . 
Come on , get real . 
If McCain gets two pinnochios , then I give you five -LRB- 5 -RRB- token symbols of a `` reporter with head up his arse '' . 
That 's a five out of five rating btw . 
When it does n't suit his purposes , he backtracks . 
He should be in jail for accounting fraud and for stealing money that ultimately is now coming from the U.S. taxpayer . 
Jim Johnson , indisputably an adviser to Obama is just as bad . 
The fact is the Dem 's were on the campaign contribution take from Fannie and obstructed efforts to reign in these monsters . 
There 's simply no way to spin that and you should check those facts . 
The Post says it 's Franklin Raines . '' 
The Post ACTUALLY said : '' ... that Raines ... had taken calls from Barack Obama 's presidential campaign seeking his advice on mortgage and housing policy matters . '' 
The Post says Raines advised Obama 's campaign . 
Those who can not see the difference should also believe that George W. Bush , a member of the GOP , once shot a man in the face while hunting . 
I must ask why does n't the Chairman of the Banking Committee in the senate receive some of the blame . 
Especially after he received a VIP mortgage from Country Wide . 
The senate and congress can get away with murder and let the candidates and president take the fall . 
Remember the executive branch is only 1\/3 of the government . 
So its easy for the media to concentrate their efforts on them and report the most trivial BS . 
What part of this mess does the other 600 + people who make up the legislative 3rd , have to do with this ? 
I ask the media which is easier to research 4 or 600 people ? 
Seems to me there is safety in numbers . 
Was the Washington Post lying then ? 
Or is the Washington Post lying now ? 
Yep , But as usual the Democrats in congress blocked any action . 
Here 's a quote from Barney Frank commenting on the issue at the time . '' 
These two entities -- Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac -- are not facing any kind of financial crisis , '' said Representative Barney Frank of Massachusetts , the ranking Democrat on the Financial Services Committee . '' 
The more people exaggerate these problems , the more pressure there is on these companies , the less we will see in terms of affordable housing . '' 
keating 5 Posted by : tom | September 19 , 2008 2:30 PM | Report abuse Lefties are communist are n't they ? 
In its zeal to defend Barack Obama from all criticism , the Washington Post is now trying to discredit its own report . 
After this election we wont see him much . 
They 've both lied to the public . 
The only thing to really decide is who do we thing will lie the least . 
Arthur B. Culvahouse Jr. , who headed McCain s vice presidential vetting panel , was a lobbyist for Fannie Mae . 
Mark Buse , a longtime McCain aide , lobbied for Freddie Mac before returning to McCain s Senate staff . 
Alberto R. Cardenas , one of McCain s top fundraisers , has lobbied for Fannie Mae , as have former Montana governor Marc Racicot and tax-cut advocate Grover Norquist . 
Phil Gramm , former National Campaign General Co-Chair and former Texas Senator , used to author McCain 's economic policies , including the ones that said the mortgage crisis was the fault of the consumer , not the lenders . 
Gramm was paid by a Swiss bank to lobby Congress about the U.S. mortgage crisis at the same time he was advising McCain about his economic policy . 
Plus , he was the main force behind the banking deregulations of the 90s . 
According to the article we are all reacting to , SOMEONE from the Obama campaign -LRB- not Obama -RRB- called Raines -LRB- former Fannie CEO -RRB- to ask about ` general housing and economy issues ' . 
It 's likely that the staffer who made the call made hundreds of others to prominent CEOs and former CEOs to gather intel on the economy because that is their job , to take the pulse on the economy from as many experienced people as possible . 
It 's called due diligence , but if you compare this connection to the official paid relationships which McCain has formalized with individuals directly responsible for this particular crisis then its clearly paltry . 
If we went down the list of direct ties that individuals in Congress have to all kinds of economic scions , good ones or suddenly dishonored ones , not one would come out clean . 
Further for McCain does anyone remember Enron , or Charles Keating ? 
I wish we lived in a country where facts did trump opinion , but clearly 45 % of us do n't want to know the facts and I will never understand why . 
Talk about an inability to lead ... what about to think and reason ?!? McCain would most certainly fail a high school English class with this quality of sourcing and citations ! 
First , the facts . 
Obama is taking economic advice from a variety of individuals and has full-time economic advisors -LRB- e.g. , Furman -RRB- that he is relying on much more heavily than Raines . 
A reading of a few more articles on Obama 's economic plans -LRB- and the authors behind them -RRB- would quickly illuminate this fact . 
McCain clearly did n't do his homework or -LRB- more likely -RRB- did n't want to . 
More fundamentally , the poor white lady `` mugged '' by two African-Americans in the advertisement actually should be blaming the GOP , which is predominantly culpable for the current crisis and her woes . 
Republicans ran the Fed -LRB- Greenspan -RRB- when it kept interest rates too low and started the housing bubble to begin with . 
Republicans run the White House that pressured the Fed into keeping them too low after this risk was obvious . 
The Republicans in Congress are also at fault because they resisted regulating the market when reports of predatory lending and other questionable debt-creation schemes became widespread . 
The housing crisis is not a creation of Fannie and Freddie but of greedy market players and lax watchmen at the Fed and Congress and White House . 
So while McCain supporters will go on attacking the Washington Post , we all know that they are merely hiding the fact that even a high school student could figure out that Raines is hardly an advisor to Obama . 
And even if he was , he certainly is n't to blame for the housing crisis . 
That blame rests squarely on Republicans , including McCain , whose policies and positions have festered into the current crisis . 
So which candidate can we infer would be the better leader ? 
The one decrying the lack of regulation -LRB- and whose key advisor has criticized the low interest rates -RRB- ? 
-LRB- McCain -RRB- Or the one who defended the lack of regulation and other policies contributing to the mess , and who does n't understand economics , interest rates , etc. -LRB- by his own admission -RRB- ? 
-LRB- Obama -RRB- The one attuned to the horrible mess that the private markets have created and who thinks government has a role to play ? 
-LRB- Obama -RRB- Or the one who is ignoring the fact that the markets have jumped 800 points on the news of good governance finally interceding , and who thinks that in the midst of the worst financial crisis this side of '29 the most important thing to say about the US economy is that its fundamentals are strong ? 
-LRB- McCain -RRB- I 'd say only an ignoramus would say these facts and policy perspectives support McCain as a strong leader , at least on economic issues . 
And Obama 's bounce in the polls these last few days is proof of it . 
Finally , to the many McCain supporters out there I would say : do yourself a favor , and go learn something about the economy and why we are in the current housing crisis rather than engaging in petty arguments over the quality of a single article at the Washington Post . 
You ca n't vote intelligently on the right leader for America if you are not even informed on what the country 's fundamental problems are , but I 'll give you a hint -- media bias at the Washington Post ai n't even in the top ten ... Posted by : ec | September 19 , 2008 2:31 PM | Report abuse `` Last night at a Scottsdale Arizona theater OBAMA THE HYPE aired to a completely packed house of the curious and on the fence voters . '' 
Errr ... Nobody expects Arizona 's electoral votes to go anywhere except for McCain ... So what difference do you think it makes if a bunch of Republicans in Scottsdale ... vote Republican ? 
- stingy , mean , bigoted , or conservative . 
Just something to think on when you call someone a liberal . 
MCCAIN WILL DO ANYTHING TO FULFIL HIS LIFE 'S AMBITION OF BECOMING PRESIDENT . 
SO MUCH FOR COUNTRY FIRST ! 
The media is shamelessly worshipping Obama , its disgusting how completely biased news rooms have become . 
It is unethical to brain wash the american people into believing this garbage . 
How blind can the public be ? 
Has no one actually listened to the words coming out of his mouth ? 
Every speech is consistenly aimed at ripping into McCain , and that is not to say McCain does return the favor . 
The fact is if you are voting Obama , nothing will change your mind . 
In the same token , if McCain has your vote , no lie from Obama 's lips will change your mind either . 
So this needless , back-biting banter is a waste of time and energy . 
\* One last peice of advise for all you Feminist sticklers -- if you are going to mock Sarah Palin , pick a point and stick with it . 
First she is not experienced enough , because she was `` a mayor of a small town '' . 
The next week she `` ca n't connect with the average american '' -- because her glasses cost $ 300 . 
IF her specs are so expensive then why -LRB- as stated by the company who makes them -RRB- are those exact glasses flying off the shelves . 
Apparently the average american CAN afford them . 
Does n't having that small town background connect her to the `` average american '' and does n't her experience as governor HELP her correct our financial woes ? 
Did you know that she posted the `` check book '' of Alaska for all to see on the web ? 
The truth is not afraid to be examined . 
She wanted the people to have comfort in knowing how their tax dollars are spent . 
Do you think Obama wants everyone to know how many earmarks he has used in the past ? 
The fact is Sarah Palin has a conscience , maybe courage of conviction is outside Obama 's paygrade too . 
All I ask is do your research . 
I got tired of hearing all the back and fourth garbo so I did my research and found out that Obama in fact does want to teach sex education to 5 year olds . 
The bill was read word for word and there it was . 
But I ask you to research B O for and see for yourself and not just take my word lilsis - stop your lies ! 
OK , I did the `` research '' you told me to do , based on the website you provided , and you are totally wrong -LRB- based on your own `` evidence '' -RRB- . 
Obama did NOT vote on a bill that would teach 5 year olds ` comprehensive sex education ' -LRB- unless by comprehensive you mean educating them in the difference between good touches and ` bad touches ' from child molesters -RRB- . 
Perhaps you should learn to read before you undertake any more `` research . '' 
All McCain did was quote the Post . 
I guess the Post was `` exaggerating wildly '' when they wrote these stories . 
I guess the Post is not to be trusted . 
I belong to a church that has a program called OWL , which stands for `` Our Whole Lives '' . 
It 's part of religious ed and has had a decade-long successful run at our church . 
It teaches all children , from Kindergarten to their senior year in high school , age-appropriate , comprehensive sex education . 
The Kindergarteners learn anatomy , and what to do when someone -LRB- stranger or not -RRB- touches you in inappropriate places . 
The curriculum was ramped up as the children progressed through the grades -LRB- much like any other curriculum -RRB- . 
I 've had the pleasure of meeting the graduates of this program . 
They were some of the most well-rounded young men and women I 'd ever met . 
A group of them even tried to get OWL implemented in their own public school because they were so sick of their friends coming to THEM for advice because their friends just were n't getting the education they needed at home or at school . 
Children having to teach other children about sex because their parents and schools failed them . 
If Obama 's plan was anything like OWL , I back it 100 % because I 've seen it in my own community , and it works . 
And it 's their job to know what is happening . 
Two members of Mr. Obama 's political circle , James A. Johnson and Franklin D. Raines , are former chief executives of Fannie Mae . '' '' 
`` Check the Gallup poll . 
In the past week , Obama has gained almost eight points and has his first significant lead over McCain since he picked Palin . 
Looks like your Palin star is fading fast . 
You conservatives are going to get exactly what you have coming to you ... Posted by : Jessie in Ohio | September 19 , 2008 12:40 PM '' JUST make sure that your voting machines are not all-electronic this time around . 
The President of the company that makes those machines , stated in 04 that he was willing to do whatever necessary to ensure a Doobya re-election . 
Remember what the guy with the big mustache once said `` the voters decide nothing . 
those who count the votes decide everything '' and from the looks of things , those who count the votes are still in charge !!! Posted by : Nonny | September 19 , 2008 2:34 PM | Report abuse For 8 years we have been living with the GOP 's `` pro-growth '' economics ... and they have pruned the tree of prosperity down to a stump . 
McCain was on board with this program . 
Economically , McCain is 100 % GOP . 
There 's really not much else to talk about . 
People badmouth regulation and government ... but that 's what launched us from the great depression to the boom of the postwar period . 
This is yet another example of Obama wanting the taxpayer to give up their hard earned money to help banks that , in a lot of cases , have forclosed on their homes . 
Another example of how he plans to get more taxes from the working public . 
He went on to say that they were the `` conscience of Fannie Mae , keeping us on course ... '' Posted by : In His Own Words | September 19 , 2008 2:34 PM | Report abuse You can put lip gloss on Bush and call him McCain , but it 's still Bush ! 
No advice ON ANY MATTER -- Obama 's own spokeman 's quote . 
Presidential campaigns end up in mudslinging because the media will print more of it . 
It is both the Democrats and the Replublicans fault this went down . 
McCain did say 2 years ago that if the gov ' t does n't get involved something bad was going happen and around April 08 ' they did ask Obama what he thought we should do . 
His response was `` I do n't know what is going to happen in 3 months or more . '' 
McCain might not always have the right idea but at least he has an idea . 
He has a starting point . 
When it is all said and done McCain is doing what he thinks is best for Americans after 30 years of experience . 
This guy sufferred tremendously and was ready to die for this country . 
You are trying to tell me he does n't have our countries best interests at heart . 
However , outline the facts - It would seem that Raines took `` calls from Barack Obama 's presidential campaign seeking his advice on mortgage and housing policy matters . '' 
and ... by Raines account he discussed '' , general housing , economy issues '' ... White-wash as you will ... It sounds like advice to me . 
Am I allowed to say `` white-wash '' ? 
But it is a fact that this video clip , through pseudo-subtle messaging , insights racial tension and that is low . 
Am I safe in assuming that his campaign reads the Washington Post ? 
Am I safe in assuming it would have demanded a retraction if Mr. Raine 's quote was inaccurate ? 
So much for the credibility of the Washington Post and the Obama campaign . 
This stuff is n't hard to find . 
Why are people acting like if they ignore the facts , the facts will go away ? 
Both parties are up to their necks in blame for this . 
FMae and FMac are quasi-govt , with poor oversight from Congress and its regulator . 
Efforts were made in 2003 by Shelby\/Bush under a Republican Congress to reform and increase regulatory oversight , and again in 2005 by McCain under a Democratic Congress , failing BOTH times . 
I do n't understand why there is n't a GOOD reporter out there brave enough to lay out the complete story , which is about a concerted and agressive removal of lending standards to increase home ownership in demographics typically less-likely to own homes , begun in the Clinton Administration under the Executive Orders related to Discriminatory and Predatory Lending Practices , supported by Dems and Repubs , and now needing bailout by taxpayers . 
Maybe if it were given stronger oversight , the effort could have worked all the way around . 
Until the complete story is made known , that will likely remain unknown . 
let 's see a schmuck who left his wife and kids after he got back from the war for a cheer leader who want to change a part he is a member of for 20 + years Posted by : independent | September 19 , 2008 2:36 PM | Report abuse As bad as you libs think John McCain is he is still the best choice you have to lead this country . 
There is the pork barrel spending of Obama , has he ever said any thing about stopping it . 
NO Has he ever crossed over the aisle to work with republicans . 
He has so much more knowledge about everything than Obama . 
Palin is a LIAR . 
Bush is a LIAR . 
REPUBLICANS are the ones responsible for the entire mess we are in . 
De-regulation has opened up the markets to thieves and traitors . 
They have STOLEN our pensions , our retirement savings , our homes , and our kids futures . 
Now we -LRB- TAXPAYERS -RRB- are having our money stolen AGAIN to bail them out . 
This money did n't DISAPPEAR into thin air . 
REPUBLICANS like John McCain and his ECONOMIC ADVISOR Phil Gramm have been working toward this for YEARS . 
They have used their lawyers and lack of integrity to find any loophole imaginable and started funneling money out of it . 
These thieving ba $ tards knew exactly what they were doing and continue to do . 
This is all a ruse !! WAKE UP ! 
Now they have convinced you that YOUR tax money is the only way to solve the crisis . 
Looting and plundering all the way ! 
And 50 % of the country apparently is too stupid to realize that the REPUBLICANS ARE THE ONES RESPONSIBLE . 
They keep shoveling the lies about Obama and you just keep eating it up . 
Now McCain is calling for more REGULATION ?! WHAT ?! Mr. De-Regulation himself KNOWS that the policies and philosophies that his party has embraced and enforced are on a swift track to destroy the country . 
The man has more mansions than he can count and now he wants to protect you ? 
Keep eating it , sheep . 
It 'll be the death of ya ! 
Please wake up before it is TOO LATE . 
I knew even she could kick my a \*\* , if I meet her for real , so I decided to post it here . . 
I am such a pus \* y. . 
lol Posted by : NickinVA | September 19 , 2008 2:37 PM | Report abuse How come I have n't seen anything on McCain 's involvement in the `` Keaton 5 '' scandal ? 
Here 's Another | September 19 , 2008 2:38 PM | Report abuse You can put lipstick on a donkey , but it 's still a jackass . 
You know what you better hope that change does n't come with the messiah because if it does this guy will make the great depression , begin all over again Posted by : the messiah | September 19 , 2008 2:38 PM | Report abuse Like millions of other Americans , I am sick and tired of the brash partisanship on both sides so evident on this page . 
We fight each other and put partisan blinders on , not seeing that the world is changing fast but that we are not . 
Will we ever grow up as a country or will we be just like Rome in the final days of empire ... too wrapped in our own silliness to see the real sorry state of affairs in our country . 
This post may attract hate and ire but you will just prove my point ! 
If I wanted to call anyone a racist , why on Earth would I whisper it ? 
Reported something that until now was n't a big issue - but now it 's a lie ? 
But technically NOT a lie ... just not the truth . 
this gives me a migraine . 
I searched the net on this one - WOW . 
Amazing how many articles from times now past have reported on Raines and Johnson but have now ` disappeared ' . 
-LRB- Thank god for cached pages -RRB- . 
Obama 's a crook and now we know . 
This is just another nail in the coffin of his ` messiah ' image . 
Even I ca n't ignore the lies and waste of Bush or , sadly , the lies now being told every day by McCain -LRB- a man I campaigned for in 2000 -RRB- . 
Palin is a joke . 
Look around people , this country is in trouble . 
It 'll be a sad day for me , but I 'm voting a straight Dem ticket in November . 
Bubba Tex -LRB- yup , in THAT Texas -RRB- Posted by : Bubba Tex | September 19 , 2008 2:39 PM | Report abuse Was n't McCain one of the Keating Five ? 
The money you save in tax cuts is going to be much less than the money you lose to inflation . 
Because Bush has spent so much money on the war in Iraq ... the value of our dollar is falling . 
This hurts our savings . 
It hurts our assets . 
And it raises the cost of living . 
Tax increases , budget cuts , and responsible spending will restore the strength of the dollar . 
So , while you might pay a higher tax rate , each dollar you keep will be worth more in real terms . 
The GOP might cut taxes on paper , but with the rate of inflation and the devaluation of homes , they have managed to tax us more than any Democrat ever has . 
And what is it with these people who keep insisting on calling him GOD , Messiah etc. ? 
I thought you should n't take the lords name in vain ... Posted by : independent | September 19 , 2008 2:41 PM | Report abuse This is an obvious attempt to play the race card by the McCain campaign . 
Showing a dark photo of Obama , juxtaposed with a dark photo of Raines , sends the signal that these two guys must be close . 
After all , they 're both Black . 
McCain 's just trying to play upon racial fears . 
If two phone calls constitute being an `` adviser , '' then Obama may have thousands of them worldwide , as well as McCain . 
McCain has a bigger problem : He needs to answer the question why , with his involvement with the Keating 5 and the S&L scandal , which is essentially the same crisis -LRB- wealthy folks running away with the people 's money and getting the government to bail them out -RRB- , why did he not see this coming ? 
Did n't he learn anything at all from the fiasco he was associated with in the 1980s ? 
No advice ON ANY MATTER -- Obama 's own spokeman 's quote . 
Presidential campaigns end up in mudslinging because the media will print more of it . 
She explained that she was chatting with Raines during the photo shoot , and asked `` if he was engaged at all with the Democrats ' quest for the White House . 
He said that he had gotten a couple of calls from the Obama campaign . 
I asked him about what , and he said ` oh , general housing , economy issues . ' 
Obama 's camp is saying they never sought advice but Raines is saying he got a couple phones calls and gave general info . 
These 2 need to get together and get their stories straight . 
Too much media coverage . 
What 's new ??? Posted by : Zzzzzzzzzz ... | September 19 , 2008 2:41 PM | Report abuse God forbid McCain use the Washington Post as his source for factual reporting . 
What was he thinking ? 
Are you seriously saying that the following statement constitutes `` wild exaggeration ? '' 
`` Who advises him ? 
The Post says it 's Franklin Raines , for ` advice on mortgage and housing policy . ' '' 
Remember it was Bush\/McCain deregulating like there was no tomorrow that caused this mess . 
Who are you trying to fool ! 
In the current crisis , their biggest backers have been Democrats such as Senate Banking Committee Chairman Christopher J. Dodd -LRB- Conn. -RRB- and House Financial Services Committee Chairman Barney Frank -LRB- Mass. -RRB- . 
Two members of Mr. Obama 's political circle , James A. Johnson and Franklin D. Raines , are former chief executives of Fannie Mae . '' 
Get some speed limits signs on that road , and fast . 
And yes , tax some of the enormous profits -LRB- sorry , the dangerous road analogy only goes so far -RRB- that some people got to help , if only a smidgeon , pay for it . 
The blame game is just a cheap shot at this point . 
Could you at least try a little objectivity ? 
Instead of just being in the tank for Obama ? 
Used to be you liberal `` journalists '' at least tried to hide who you were rooting for . 
McCain 's camp took direct quotes from the WaPo . 
I wish all you liberal fanatics out there had the guts to call people liars face to face so you can get the punch in the nose you all richly deserve . 
TO NICK THE DICK - 1 -RRB- If you can not see the lie you are intellectiually dishonest . 
in other words you actually LIE to yourself . 
2 -RRB- You probably watch FAUX news and think of yourself as propelry informed . 
3 -RRB- It does not take a fanatic to call MCCain a liar . 
It takes a fanatic to denie that he is . 
It looks like YOU are the RIGHT WING FANATIC NUT . 
4 -RRB- Punch in the nose ? 
You obviously share MCcains petulant temper . 
5 -RRB- Please do not assasanate Obama whn he wins in November , you freak . 
In fact , the bailout is saving banks , which do n't want houses , they want liquid capital . 
-LRB- It never mentions the fact that he is African-American , by the way . -RRB- 
In that light , I BELIEVED the Washington Post 's report that Raines had been advising Obama 's campaign . 
Now I see that I was the victim of shoddy reporting by the Washington Post . 
It used to be that a political candidate could reasonably rely on a story in the Washington Post . 
Not any more , I guess . 
I 'm writing the ombudsman on this one , gang . 
This is unprintably poor ! 
My President partner is such an idiot , I ca n't believe he beat me out for the Top of the Ticket . 
If I do n't hold his hand every day he 's going to continue to stick his # 12 in his idiot mouth . 
57 States , Irans no threat , 10,000 people died in Kansas storm , Freaking DUHH !! He claims he 's tired making those mistakes . 
GOd HELP us if we win this and he EVER gets Tired . 
Obama should be charged with Treason . 
McCain\/Palin a nice new fresh breath of air . 
Palin is awesome the way she easily talks and responds , `` Brevity is the essence of wit '' , unlike the long winded Obama and Biden . 
Example -LRB- if not provided in a print medium -RRB- : `` I wish all you liberal fanatics get the punch in the nose you all richly deserve . '' 
Sounds like a libelous threat , to me ! 
>> Connie , where is the lying ? 
McCain 's camp took direct quotes from the WaPo . 
I wish all you liberal fanatics out there had the guts to call people liars face to face so you can get the punch in the nose you all richly deserve . 
Just because the information presented meets our criteria for what we want to believe , does not mean the information is accurate . 
BTW , the Washington Post is owned by Rupert Murdoch , who also owns Fox News . 
Hardly a bastion of liberalism . 
It takes a whole new level of chutzpah for you to accuse McCain for using information you chose not to fact-check in the first place . 
Big dollars for a green horn Senator . 
It would be fine to let Obama , the Man-Child , the Empty Suit , have a go at running the country for four years IF it were a game and there were NO consequences . 
But it is not a game , and instead of running the country , Obama would be ruining the country . 
I was initially lukewarm about McCain , but he is clearly the rational and realistic of the two people running . 
AND he is NOT in someone 's pockets . 
The McCain people are looking for little zingers , to try to score points , while the whole economy is sinking . 
They do not care about their own candidate 's record . 
They do not care that GOP policies have hurt the economy . 
They are unconcerned that our vast foreign held debt is more strategically dangerous than a dozen bin Ladens . 
All they care about is winning the popularity contest . 
They do n't care that their candidate has staffed his campaign with a failed CEO and a disgraced politician who thinks the economic meltdown is imaginary . 
That 's where McCain gets his advice from ... the guy who created the Enron loophole ... and the gal who ran HP into a ditch ! 
But none of that matters ... you just want to win an election . 
Whatever happened to `` Country First '' ? 
Is it true that he was 4th from the bottom of his class ? 
Is it true that he was so inept that he was repeatedly kept on the ground in Vietnam and was only allowed to fly after his dad forced his superiors to allow it ? 
Is it true that on his 3rd mission he crashed into his own aircraft carrier and killed 135 people ? 
Is it true that he was n't shot down over Vietnam but simply crashed because of his own idiocy ? 
Is it true that McCain was known as `` the Songbird '' because he would say anything to save his own ass ? 
I guess we will never know because McCain WILL NOT release the full record . 
An elderly white woman left holding the bag after the big bad black man -LRB- Raines -RRB- mismanaged Fannie Mae into a crisis . 
This ad is not really about the mortgage crisis . 
There is a very specific reason that the repugnant repugnicans chose a little , old white lady to play the ` victim ' in this ad . 
Two black men and a little old white lady . 
THAT is the subconcious aim of this dishonorable drivel from Grampy Insane in McMembrane and Caribou Barbie . 
When the hell is the GOP gonna concede and start calling themselves the WSP ? 
Those knuckleheads in VA actually had the audacity to pick George ` Macaca ' Allen to be featured at a VA GOP minority outreach . 
Unbelievable and completely tone deaf ! 
Decide who has a better plan to deal with the economic crisis : Posted by : bts | September 19 , 2008 2:49 PM | Report abuse Everyone that keeps bringing up Keating 5 ... you stupid liberals are eating up your liberal media . 
He was cleared as not being involved with that . 
Please do some research before making stupid comments . 
Perhaps if he lays down and points his nose to the sky it can continue to grow though he would of course ned to time the moon coming by nightly so as not to have it hit that . 
Desperation and now the economy is killing his campaign right in from of himself . 
Too bad John should have stayed who you were supposed to be instead of selling you sold to Schmidt , Davis and Rove the three amigos of lie . 
US Army 82nd Airborne | September 19 , 2008 2:49 PM | Report abuse NickinVA , Your aggressive attitude is sadly typical of conservatives in this country . 
We have our current president to thank for the divisiveness you demonstrate here . 
Be aware of that as you read the comments that follow . 
But I do n't like him being pushed by his campaign to indorse ad that are not true . 
Common sense tells that bunch of his ads are lies , inaccurate , and unsupported with facts . 
This man is risky . 
Without thinking will jump into an issue of no relevance just to say something bad against his opponent . 
Voters are not stupid . 
You could n't become chief of surgery after 143 days of experience of being a surgeon . 
You could n't get a job as a teacher and be the superintendent after 143 days of experience . 
You could n't join the military and become a colonel after a 143 days of experience . 
You could n't get a job as a reporter and become the nightly news anchor after 143 days of experience . 
` From the time Barack Obama was sworn in as a United State Senator , to the time he announced he was forming a Presidential exploratory committee , he logged 143 days of experience in the Senate . 
That 's how many days the Senate was actually in session and working . 
After 143 days of work experience , Obama believed he was ready to be Commander In Chief , Leader of the Free World ... 143 days . 
We all have to start somewhere . 
The Senate is a good start , but after 143 days , that 's all it is - a start . 
AND , strangely , a large sector of the American public is okay with this and campaigning for him . 
We would n't accept this in our own line of work , yet some are okay with this for the President of the United States of America ? 
Come on folks , we are not voting for the next American Idol ! 
If you do n't agree with me I 'll punch you in the mouth . 
Hey dude , come November you 'll get your punch in the mouth when America tells you they are sick of Republican rule . 
Who put us where we are today ? 
Look in the mirror and you will see who put us where we are , and then do us all a favor and punch yourself in the face . 
Two of the articles mentioned above should be fact checked , not the McCain `` ad '' . 
Newspapers are not doing real reporting anymore , they 're just regurgitating `` stuff '' from unchecked sources and then printing it . 
You paper 's reputation entices people to quote it . 
Then after it 's quoted , you tell us to check our facts . 
I am not an expert on who the various econ advisors are , so , after doing a google search , and checking out wiki , and the various official Boards , I have now learned a lot about all these advisors , for both McCain and Obama . 
I have a little advice for McCain , a man I did previously cast my vote for ... While I may not know a lot about econ advisors , after living for 65 years , I do know that I do not like to be mis-advised myself . 
I know what a lie is , and how lies are dressed up to `` appear '' harmless . 
But lies are not harmless , their affect is to rob one of their `` right mind . '' 
Sorry , Sen McCain , unless you reform your own campaign immediately , complete with apologies for each and every lie and falshood , and set the record straight , you will not recieve my vote again . 
Harry Reid , Barack Hussein Obama , Charles Rangel , Jeremiah Wright and Fannie-Mae-Raines sleeping in one lump waterbed that will bust and flood the country with pent-up communism . 
I do n't think so ... but thanks anyway ... Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 2:51 PM | Report abuse The McCain campaign is clearly exaggerating wildly in attempting to depict Franklin Raines as a close adviser to Obama on `` housing and mortgage policy . '' 
They do this by quoting The Washington Post . 
Lately , I 've come to agree with the idea that the Post is no longer a credible source , particularly regarding politics , and for ` fact-checking ' without liberal shading . 
I must admit , however , the Post has gained a certain amount of prestige among the large papers mainly because the NY Times has been so much worse in this regard . 
This election has really brought one issue up front , and it is a problem for those of liberal stripes as well , and that is that under the guise of `` just reporting the facts '' the non-editorial content of newspapers and News network is increasingly biased . 
Are ethics and honest reporting less important than a favored political outcome ? 
According to the American Press , yes . 
Never mind that all their charges are false , which they really appear to be . 
It works , and the campaign and reporters echo and quote each other to amplify the point . 
Some journalists are even willing to attack their own credibility to do it , as the Washington Post does in . . 
-LRB- this article -RRB- . '' 
National Review If Obama camp had disagreed with the earlier WP report , they would have stopped it back in July . 
The ad does not say Raines is a `` close '' advisor . 
If the advisor must be a `` close '' advisor for the ad to be true , then who are Obama 's `` close '' economic advisors ? 
If you X the number of people in the good old USA 330,000,000 by $ 200,000 you will see the amount we owe . 
We just , make our intrest payment to them each month . 
How can the gov keep borrowing to support war and a bunch of greedy banks . 
They ca n't lose as long as they have the tax payers to bail them out . 
Wish I was a banker or Haliburton stock . 
O yeah Haliburten has over 100,000 employes in the middle east at $ 15,000 each per month . 
I know because my son is one . 
I will vote for Obama only because I know he can not mess things up any more than it already is . 
McCain can like he did 20 years ago when was one of the 5 who bankruped the saveings and loan corp. . 
He almost got kicked out of office and should have been . 
Poor democrats , is he the best you have . 
No wonder you keep losing the election . 
Personally I think women deserve equal rights , pay , and the right to choose what they will do with their body . 
So for the Palin\/McCain administration whom want to end abortion ... Does n't anyone see this as steps backwards and not progressive movements forward . 
I 'm not saying everyone go out and be irresponsible and have a bunch of unwanted , unplanned children and just decide to say - `` oh well , I 'll get an abortion '' ... That too me is n't right . 
But Palin\/McCain is against abortion even in rape and incest situations . 
How about the fact that Palin\/McCain say that Obama\/Biden will raise the taxes . 
That is false and a fabrication and stretch of the truth . 
Obama will raise the taxes on the rich , who I believe deserve to be taxed . 
Why should I pay more taxes than Matt Damon , Donald Trump , or Paris Hilton ? 
Why should the dying middle class pay more taxes while the rich get breaks ? 
Bush 's failed policies gave breaks to the rich and where was his so called `` trickle down effect '' ... did you see it ? 
I just saw raised prices in gas , failing housing markets , and so forth . 
Did Palin\/McCain vote with Bush on any of those tax increases ? 
If so ... why do you want leaders that will keep us in the same situation . 
How can we afford to give big companies and the rich tax breaks ? 
The middle class and the poor ca n't get us out of the deficit alone now ... So taxing us more is n't gonna help ... No more breaks for the rich and the corporations . 
Give the breaks to the people who have to go to work for the rich people and the corporations . 
Give the laborers the breaks they need and you will see a country that is willing to spend more and put their money into investments . 
I do n't have money to invest anymore because of all the rising prices . 
My money is out the door and I know it 's the same for a lot of other people in this country . 
How about we all act like adults and look at the ISSUES . 
How about we all look at a PRESIDENT WHO WILL GET US WHERE WE NEED TO BE . 
It is my opinion but McCain\/Palin has yet to show me anything different from the Republicans that are in office now . 
I have yet to see this so called MAVRICK . 
How does McCain reach across party lines ? 
He only reaches to those who agree with him like Liberman . 
I 've yet to see any politician reach across party lines in the true act to get this country back on its feet . 
Why did n't it happen in the past 8 years . 
Who was getting rich while we all suffered ? 
Why are all these corporations lining their pockets while we have to scrounge for change and choose whether we fill the gas or feed our children . 
ANSWER THOSE QUESTIONS FOR ME . 
UNTIL THEN ... OBAMA HAS MY VOTE . 
No wonder there is high idiot traffic today . 
I thought maybe there was some kind of program to help the willfully `` special . '' 
Nope ... just some digital brownshirts ... huffing Limbaugh 's gaseous emanations breathing them into the discussion . 
Think of it as a faith-based initiative to help conservative cretins . 
Hea also taks BIG about military service , but he claimed he was pressured into the military by his family , and never wanted to serve . 
If you want to vote for him , please leave the country before November 4th . 
Thanks Posted by : George | September 19 , 2008 2:55 PM | Report abuse McCain connecting Obama to Raines is more accurate than saying McCain is just like Bush . 
They are in the same party but that 's where the similarities end . 
It turns out that the three items -LRB- including an editorial -RRB- '' Added as an afterthought ... '' . 
there was an editorial involved '' also . 
Then it is implied that the editorial derived from comments in the Style section . 
So , the editorial was fake -LRB- ? -RRB- 
or the WPost always writes it 's editorials from -LRB- supposedly -RRB- trivial or untrue little items ? 
You 're failure to do so shows that you are still PROPAGANDIZING for the mammon-worhipping moral degenerates whose unbridled GREED is the cause of the DESTRUCTION of our financial system . 
I guess it 's too much to ask that you examine the CENTRAL ROLE of McCains PRIMARY ECONOMMIC ADVISOR , Phil Gramm , in the ideological idiocy that led to this disaster instead of this distortion of the record . 
Why did n't Anita Huslin initially quote him as advising only on ` oh , general housing , economy issues . ' 
Seems to me like the liberall press is using the quotes when it is good for them and then denying the same quotes when they come back to bite them . 
They usully do n't fine innocent people . 
John jad the beer money supporting him . 
I have no idea who the man running for the Republican party . 
When you find the real McCain tell him all those people who remembered a principaled person are voting for Obama . 
Choosing Palin highlights his poor judgment . 
He buckled to the party so he 's certainly no maverick . 
Lets remember he 's been in Washington 26 years . 
Who 's he going to reform ? 
He never pushed regulation and our country and children will suffer from the cowarded POW . 
He 's just a shell of the man I admired . 
When you get a minute go to this website and read some facts that can be checked . 
-LRB- WaPo -RRB- Posted by : Mike | September 19 , 2008 2:57 PM | Report abuse Here are some other fresh ideas from the skinny Obama clan : - He is embarrassed of Americans because we only speak one language . 
- His wife said American is a mean country . 
- His wife then said after 44 years of her life she was proud of America for the 1st time . 
- He goes overseas to speak in front of the Germans but ca n't see the troops . 
- Does n't think he needs to wear a flag pin but then starts wearing one a week later . 
-LRB- Stick to your beliefs if you truely believe that way -RRB- - Does n't put his hand on his heart during the National Anthem because thats what grampa told him he did n't need to but then starts doing it after people complain . 
-LRB- Again stand by what you supposedly believe -RRB- - Is friends with Aires -LRB- a terrorist -RRB- and Wright -LRB- a racist -RRB- . 
\* This guy is a true American . 
I can see why people are so excited to have this great American lead our country . 
\* Every bullet point is a FACT !! Posted by : Dan | September 19 , 2008 2:57 PM | Report abuse But that means , WAPO , that you , too , wildly exaggerated the connection between Obama and Raines since McCain used your paper as his source . 
It takes a whole new level of chutzpah for you to accuse McCain of using the incorrect information you chose to print several times without fact checking it . 
The least you could do is apologize . 
He states blatant lies , even in spanish . 
There is little doubt that he has been involved in fannie mae and was one of the biggest senatorial recipients of their money -LRB- along with Dodd -RRB- . 
A quote that was not retracted ? 
Can someone please explain how that 's lying ? 
Are the Dems now admitting that the Washington Post ca n't be trusted ? 
And people are posting that McCain is being dishonorable ????? Simply amazing . 
But hey , most of you still claim Palin lied about killing the `` Bridge to Nowhere '' , when clearly she did not lie at all . 
She DID kill it , regardless of whether she supported it originally or not . 
I also notice that there 's no mention of the Johnson connection or Obama 's being the second-largest recipient of cash from Fannie\/Freddie , BOTH OF WHICH ARE 100 % TRUE ! 
Perhaps you should rename it ObamaSpinMachine . 
Not that anyone should be surprised at this point . 
- His wife said American is a mean country . 
- His wife then said after 44 years of her life she was proud of America for the 1st time . 
- He goes overseas to speak in front of the Germans but ca n't see the troops . 
- Does n't think he needs to wear a flag pin but then starts wearing one a week later . 
-LRB- Stick to your beliefs if you truely believe that way -RRB- - Does n't put his hand on his heart during the National Anthem because thats what grampa told him he did n't need to but then starts doing it after people complain . 
-LRB- Again stand by what you supposedly believe -RRB- - Is friends with Aires -LRB- a terrorist -RRB- and Wright -LRB- a racist -RRB- . 
\* This guy is a true American . 
I can see why people are so excited to have this great American lead our country . 
\* Every bullet point is a FACT !! Posted by : Dan | September 19 , 2008 2:59 PM | Report abuse `` How does one respond to this ?! The Washington Post says that John McCain is not completely true with his ad ... BECAUSE HE RELIED ON THE WASHINGTON POST !!! Should you guys just shut the paper down now ? '' 
WapO has hit the nail on the head . 
I think both sides are in bed with causing this crisis , heavily . 
The media is shamelessly worshipping Obama , its disgusting how completely biased news rooms have become . 
It is unethical to brain wash the american people into believing this garbage . 
How blind can the public be ? 
Has no one actually listened to the words coming out of his mouth ? 
Every speech is consistenly aimed at ripping into McCain , and that is not to say McCain does return the favor . 
The fact is if you are voting Obama , nothing will change your mind . 
In the same token , if McCain has your vote , no lie from Obama 's lips will change your mind either . 
So this needless , back-biting banter is a waste of time and energy . 
\* One last peice of advise for all you Feminist sticklers -- if you are going to mock Sarah Palin , pick a point and stick with it . 
First she is not experienced enough , because she was `` a mayor of a small town '' . 
The next week she `` ca n't connect with the average american '' -- because her glasses cost $ 300 . 
IF her specs are so expensive then why -LRB- as stated by the company who makes them -RRB- are those exact glasses flying off the shelves . 
Apparently the average american CAN afford them . 
Does n't having that small town background connect her to the `` average american '' and does n't her experience as governor HELP her correct our financial woes ? 
Did you know that she posted the `` check book '' of Alaska for all to see on the web ? 
The truth is not afraid to be examined . 
She wanted the people to have comfort in knowing how their tax dollars are spent . 
Do you think Obama wants everyone to know how many earmarks he has used in the past ? 
The fact is Sarah Palin has a conscience , maybe courage of conviction is outside Obama 's paygrade too . 
You need to learn to research your candidate before jumping on the bandwagon . 
Jim Johnson of Fannie Mae fame DID work on the VP vetting committee until he resigned due to a mess with Countrywide . 
Raines -LRB- once agian of Fannie Mae fame -RRB- made this comment in an interview - why would Obama 's people call him for economic advice when they have Buffet you ask ?? Me too . 
But that 's what he says - so either Raines lied or Obama 's people . 
I 've got a hunch - just a hunch - that it 's probably Obama 's - would n't look good to ask the ex-CEO of a failed company how to help the economy . 
Obviously he would n't know , ha ha . 
So let 's face it , Obama 's just a crook . 
Just another do nothing , say what you wanna hear politician - it 's par for the course and typical . 
The only difference between him and what 's already in Washington is that the ones in Washington are n't claiming to be saviors who are going to save the masses from Big Bad Wolf , Bush . 
Pelosi might be but I tend to block out the Wicked Witch of West . 
Here 's a couple things I think are `` patriotic '' , Joe : - Finding more than $ 900 in your bank account that you can give to local charities when you make more than $ 300,000 per year . 
- Saying `` yes '' when your country calls and asks you to serve in the military , instead of taking 5 deferrments for `` asthma '' after being a star athlete . 
That 's what I think is `` patriotic '' ... but that 's just me . 
Obama will not be able to pay for his universal health care or tax cuts . 
So our debt will keep on rising if Obama is elected . 
They do n't understand that it is a tax . 
It drags down the value of our savings and our assets . 
And even though salaries are flat and our savings are worth less , we will have to pay that debt off . 
We 're being taxed ... and we do n't even know it . 
Though both dems & reps have had their issues , the McCain campaign has been particularly egregious with their claims\/lies . 
It would almost be comical if it were n't so serious . 
How can a person make their minds up on real issues when some ads are full of lies ? 
Gee , no wonder your paper has become a joke . 
You have two entities acting stupidly : 1 . 
Homeowners taking out loans which they should have never taken . 
Banks giving out loans that they should have never given ... and you see . . 
the free market took care of both of them . 
`` Two members of Mr. Obama 's political circle , James A. Johnson and Franklin D. Raines , are former chief executives of Fannie Mae . '' 
Washington Post , August 28 , 2008 ; Page A18 Was the Post wrong on August 28 ? 
If so , it should issue an apology to the McCain campaign for sloppy reporting and also for portraying him as having exaggerated when in fact , he was relying upon statements from the Post . 
In support of `` The Anointed One '' , there is no LIE we will not tell , no facts we will not twist or distort . 
Decades ago , we began our process of eliminating the following qualities in our staff , as they stood in the way of our ongoing efforts to totally corrupt the journalistic field . 
These qualities are : Character , Decency , Dignity , Ethics , Honor , Integrity , Moral and Personal Responsibility , Trust . 
We let our work stand for our success in this direction as we continually ignore the negatives about `` Our Anointed One '' and create LIES and distorted or twisted facts to smear those of the Republican , Conservative or Christian followings . 
For those living in fantasy world , we began a thorough investigation of `` The Anointed One '' almost immediate following the '04 dnc convention . 
If you believe for an instant that all of the negative information that has been dug out concerning `` The Anointed One '' was not known by the wapo and other members of the MSM , may I direct you to another dose of your favorite drugs . 
We knew these facts and many more that as of yet we have managed to keep hidden from the American people . 
Just as we have done with the recent revelation of `` The Anointed One 's '' efforts in Iraq to convince the Iraqi Government to DELAY the withdrawal of US troops until the Nov. election had passed . 
Assuming he 'd win -LRB- GOD forbid -RRB- , he would then be able to claim the responsibility of the decision to begin immediate withdrawals . 
Americans can only make the right decision about candidates when the media provides and HONEST and OPEN reporting of the facts related to the candidates . 
Failing to report facts known to us is called as LYING and are we ever good at this . 
Distorting or twisting the facts to present our political view point is also called LYING , again our forte . 
So , dear readers , if you want and honest election , FORGET IT , we determine what are the facts and in what manner you will receive them . 
As a member of the MSM , we control the vast majority of the news outlets and thus what we determine to be `` the news '' . 
If it is pro-Republican , Conservative or Christian , it WILL BE distorted to ensure that you see the most obnoxious version possible . 
MSM - Satan is our hero , our guide and we follow obligingly . 
We need to accept some responsibility people ! 
If YOU ca n't trust your own authors maybe that is why newspapers are dropping like flies ! 
When you get vetted , you need to tell someone every single skeleton in the closet . 
A lot of information . 
Johnson 's done that job for the Dems a number of times . 
By picking him to do it again , Obama basically ensured these secrets were kept to a very tight circle : the Johnson and the person speaking . 
It 's being considerate to the potential veeps , especially any who would n't get the job . 
Does n't sound especially underhanded , does it ? 
The U.S. is socialist socialized capitalism . 
Just who is bailing out Bear Stearns , AIG , Fannnie Mae , etc ? 
It 's the government . 
Who financed the highway system back in the 50 's , the internet via military research , the original dna\/genome research ? 
Who pays military contractors hundreds of billions a year ? 
And , who is loathe to help out millions of americans losing or at risk of losing their homes ? 
The rich interests in this country are basically pigs at the trough feeding off the country 's wealth . 
Chavez for U.S. President ! 
Way to go - great job keeping a bullseye on your backs . 
Believe me , we enjoy taking those shots very much , you deserve every hit . 
McCain 's a scumbag who married a scumbag . 
He 's not in the politics to make a difference , he 's in it to make money , and keep his friends making money , at the expense of great majority of the nation -LRB- 90 % ^ -RRB- . 
The republican ideology is so incredibly flawed in design , that anybody who ever thought that a government of the people should be run by a party that 's so completely NOT for the people , deserves another label entirely -LRB- i 'll let you punks figure that one out -RRB- . 
Your problem is , you 're obsessed with it . 
You shake the foundations of the country and just keep on shaking . 
If a democratic pres ' does n't step in after a few years , the damage dealt will crack that foundation , scarring the nation for a damned long time . 
But you do n't give a damn . 
You 'll ride the country into the ground if you can make your wads of cash . 
You ai n't takin ' it with you when you die , that 's for damned sure . 
And you can cling to religion all you want - it 's clear you ca n't interpret it for jack -- . 
Creating viscious lies to discredit Obama 's campaign , while every single ad McCain has put out there can be torn to ribbons with absurdities ; lies , slander , even flip-flopping . 
Face the facts , you ca n't keep it up . 
The republicans at the top know it , but they 're going to gun for it anyway . 
Smaller partners will bite the dust as the economy collapses , and the big dogs will start to eat other big dogs . 
You think your party has your back , but security has never been their objective - self preservation has and always will be priority . 
You 've learned nothing . 
Excuse me , but Bush 's ENTIRE campaign team is running John McCain 's election efforts . 
This is why he flip-flops everyday . 
Since we are talking about taking money from lobbyists , how much has John McCain received from Big Oil ? 
And he certainly will get more should he win the election . 
He has 7 of the top lobbyists in Washington as part of his campaign . 
Now , Repug , tell me that is a lie ! 
How anyone in their right mind can support this doddering , stumbling old man is beyond me . 
I am tired of being embarrassed by my leaders in this country . 
Why do Republicans try to make intelligence a bad thing ???? Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 3:06 PM | Report abuse ExCain is Va -- how many ex Republicans can there be ? 
If one reads comments online from all the `` ex '' Republicans , one would have to believe that everyone had been Republican . 
Might sound important but no one buys it ! 
If he was my daughters husband I would seriously be worried for my daughter . 
I would n't let my kids hang with someone like him . 
These are people we stay away from and all of you creaming in your pants over him . 
You should all be ashamed . 
This is not someone I want my kids to look up to . 
If his name was Barrack Hussain Obama as it is but he was olive skinned , would you still be voting for him ??? Obama is not the man to be president . 
This has become a joke . 
This is not about two great men running for office . 
Yes McCain is old but Obama is not president material . 
I do n't pretend that I will convince you people but please , it 's not the issues ... Look at the person that Obama is and where he comes from and who he hangs with . 
His story is not an impressive one to me . 
The impressive ones are the ones who are the single mothers who have 3 kids and work everyday to make a better life for their children and put them in school and keep them safe and are out there on the streets trying to keep their neighborhoods safe by standing up to the gangs everyday . 
That is the southside of Chicago today ... that is where the heroes are today that is not where Obama is today . 
Obama has left his flooded city , he is not even from here so he does n't understand . 
He has adopted this city only as a stepping stone for he own sake and step on us he did . 
Please I will not argue with you but I will beg of you ... those first few lines at the beginning of this post say alot about Obama and that is all I need to say no. . 
Democrat or Republican ... should n't matter , we are all Americans and at a time like this we should be voting for the person , the team that we can give us a better tomorrow and to me there is only one choice ... McCain\/Palin !!! Posted by : Libraman | September 19 , 2008 3:06 PM | Report abuse Anything coming from Fox is very bias , do not believe much if it has anything to do with the Democratic party . 
Hannity has vow to take down Obama . 
What they need to do is investigate Palin , with her lies and ideas . 
All she has to say is that she can see Russia from Alaska Posted by : leomich | September 19 , 2008 3:07 PM | Report abuse I love all these references to `` communism '' that McCain supporter\/Republicans still throw around . 
It is a kind of quaint , nostalgic nod to cold war terror , but hey ! 
I thought your boy Reagan `` defeated '' Communism ! 
And how come none of you seem to mind the US being owned almost lock , stock and barrel by Communist China ? 
Did you happen to notice that Corporatist Capitalism is the biggest elephant in the room now ? 
Squashing anything that gets in it 's way ? 
You people are living in a dream world . 
Next McCain will be using the KKK in his ads . 
McCain like Cheney are morally bankrupt . 
Palin is Bush in drag . 
-LRB- Universal health care is why Toyota has opened up plants in Canada rather than Michigan -RRB- . 
Get the people back on their feet . 
Get the kids educated . 
Keep the citizens healthy . 
Preserve real estate values by keeping families in them . 
And rebuild the economy . 
Then , as economic growth takes hold , use the increased revenues to pay down the debt . 
New Deal type programs demand sacrifices from citizens , but offer benefits , too . 
I do n't see why we should n't improve the quality of life in the US . 
We partied with the deregulators ... and we see where it has gotten us . 
Time to try something different . 
It implies that it is sort-of true , allowing most people to assume that it is just the normal back and forth . 
McCain 's video press release substantially misrepresents the facts . 
Is this the level of scrutiny that we should employ when we hear attacks against McCain ? 
You thin that John McCain has run an honorable campaign ? 
That he has stuck to the truth . 
Or more to the point . 
Do you really even care . 
Do you just want to see someone get `` punched in the nose '' . 
What is with the conservative blood lust ? 
The unrelenting anger and need for sophomoric `` our team can beat up your team '' rah rah . 
Really if this is the best you can do . 
Come talk to me . 
I 've great some really great real estate I 'm sure I 'll be able to sell you . 
- Once a Life time Republican - but no more . 
Was in not your paper in the way it portrayed Raines connection to the Obama camp ? 
I think the Fact Checker earns itself a Pinocchio . 
Maybe we should just have a running total of all the lies and exaggerations from both sides . 
The one with the `` best '' or `` most '' could be declared the wiener . 
At least until they finish having the rest of us make up their losses . 
Who is left to tax ? 
I hate Obama and all of you are jealous Posted by : another mindless burp | September 19 , 2008 3:10 PM | Report abuse We all will get what we deserve . 
Just you wait and see . 
The Dems did n't seem to mind her ... and HER husband ... Posted by : Lee | September 19 , 2008 3:10 PM | Report abuse `` o let me get this straight - the Washington Post is now accusing McCain of basically lying because he 's relying on a direct quote from ... The Washington Post itself ? 
A quote that was not retracted ? 
`` Can someone please explain how that 's lying ? '' 
No , they ca n't . 
Instead they wave their hands and try to change the subject . 
Curse the Web , anyway - it makes it hard for the Ministry of Truth to retroactively change history . 
So you asked O for more info and you 'll get back to us \* if \* he replies ? 
Until this retard issues a statement saying that he lied to the Post , he 's an advisor . 
What about taking Carly Fiorina 's comments about leading a company , which she CLEARLY made about ALL THE CANDIDATES being unqualified to run a company -- and , furthermore , that this was not even necessarily a requirement for the presidency -- and implying that she instead ONLY said MCCAIN AND PALIN were unqualified to run a company ? 
Oh , and how about that GROSS DISTORTION of Rush Limbaugh 's words in a Spanish language campaign ad to make the radio show host seem like a bigot ? 
I just love the way you hypocrites in this foul , foul business known as the mainstream news media LIE , LIE , LIE and ROOT , ROOT , ROOT for your boy , Obama . 
When the Fourth Estate aligns with a particular political ideology , and then spews dogma and lies in that ideology 's name , well , folks , we ... Posted by : brent | September 19 , 2008 3:11 PM | Report abuse One thing we can demise from all of the comments here ; Our elected leaders are ALL influenced by lobbyists and others along with their own self interests . 
It is a shame to all of them and on us for allowing this to happen . 
Bring Term limites to all Nationally elected positions and real reform will come , but wait , would n't congress have to vote on that ? 
Like that will ever happen ... Posted by : Robert | September 19 , 2008 3:12 PM | Report abuse That John McCain -LRB- Joker -RRB- and Sarah Palin -LRB- Riddler -RRB- tell lie after lie . 
McCain will always tell us lies if he is president . 
Barack Obama tries to stay on the issues by McCain keeps using military lying tactics to throw him off . 
Barack get back on track and win the presidency . 
Too bad you ca n't be bothered to fact check your OWN articles . 
The McCain campaign based their advertisement on reports coming from THIS news paper . 
Where were your fact checkers and Obama protectors when those stories ran ? 
Oh that 's right ... Fannie Mae had yet to have her complete melt down . 
Now that Obama 's lack of judgment once again has become apparent , legions of Obama toadies are scouring the internet throwing massive hissy fits and trying to delete any mention of Raines , which you were all pretty damned proud of just a couple of months ago . 
Yet , Todd Palin the first dude can ignore the subpeona to testify in a case that was supposed to have Palin 's full cooperation . 
First Rove claimed that he could ignore his subpeona because he had executive privledge . 
Well , why can Todd Palin ignore his . 
Can anyone not Republican ignore a subpeona . 
I am frankly beginning to wonder if this whole country run by Republicans is corrupt . 
They stole the 2000 election . 
Most of the country does n't know what went on in my state of Florida . 
I know many Democrats who could n't vote because their voter registration cards were lost . 
The ballots that should have been recounted were n't because the Republicans brought in a bunch of people from New York to riot in Miami all done under the supervision of Jim Baker . 
Now they are using outright lies against Obama , stopping everything from coming out about the Palins , making sure Sarah Palin does no significant tv interviews that will show her lack of ability to be a heartbeat away from the presidency . 
What will they do next ? 
If you are a Democrat , you need to do everything in your power to make sure you are allowed to vote in this election . 
They have already started more of their handiwork by trying to say that anyone whose house was foreclosed on can not vote because they have to way of checking their address . 
They are also using smear tactics in Florida by calling up Jewish senior citizens and telling them that Obama supports Hamas . 
Can nothing stop them ? 
When do they have to start abiding by the law ? 
They are just too small minded to see the magnitude of what is happening here . 
All they can talk about is `` communism '' this and `` secret muslim '' that . 
None of these people are serious . 
They can not comprehend the stakes of this economic crisis . 
They are just carrying water for a cynical campaign . 
They think , just because their dad has always been able to keep a roof over their head , they can score cheap points for their candidate . 
Well , the economy is in serious trouble . 
Your dad could lose his job . 
If you have a job , you might lose it , too . 
And then where will you be ? 
If you are lucky enough to have a savings account or assets to sell , they are n't worth as much as they used to be . 
This is not a joke . 
Republicans pride themselves on being smart about money ... well now it 's time to show the world how smart you really are . 
Stop talking trash about Obama ... and look at what your party has done in 8 years . 
Look at the campaign McCain has built . 
Look at what his plans are . 
And ask yourself if it is a good idea . 
so what and who is he today ? 
One day he 's against something , the next day for it . 
This week he flopped around like a panic-stricken fish and yo-yo ` ed on so many things my head hurts . 
What does this guy stand for except appeasing everyone to get elected . 
John McCain is a sell-out . 
For those commenters unaware of what astroturfing is it 's a method of spreading false information mastered by Obama 's campaign manager , David Axelrod . 
When you see comments that begin by saying `` I 've been a lifelong republican '' or `` I 'm a Christian '' and then state that he\/she will be voting for Obama and conveniently lists Obama 's talking points , you 're reading an astroturfer who 's trying to convince you that republicans and Christians are voting for Obama . 
The media does this as well by interviewing supposed lifelong republicans , who , if the media did their research , would learn have been lifelong democrats -LRB- mMost of the time these individuals can be found at opensecrets.org as donators to democrat campaigns -RRB- . 
Watch your letters to the editor in local and national papers for astroturfing so you know who to ignore and how much the campaign is trying to influence the election with lies . 
He got more money from Freddie and Fannie then anyone else other then Dodd of CT According to open secrets : All Recipients of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Campaign Contributions , 1989-2008 Name Office State Party Grand Total Total from Obama , Barack S IL D $ 126,349 $ 6,000 $ 120,349 Kerry , John S MA D $ 111,000 $ 2,000 $ 109,000 FROM THE WASHINGTON POST , July 16 , 2008 : `` In the four years since he stepped down as Fannie Mae s chief executive under the shadow of a $ 6.3 billion accounting scandal , Franklin D. Raines has been quietly constructing a new life for himself . 
He has shaved eight points off his golf handicap , taken a corner office in Steve Case s D.C. conglomeration of finance , entertainment and health-care companies and more recently , taken calls from Barack Obama s presidential campaign seeking his advice on mortgage and housing policy matters . '' 
So were you lying then or are you lying now ? 
Look at these comments ! 
What happened to `` United we stand , divided we fall '' Posted by : Eric | September 19 , 2008 3:16 PM | Report abuse Is n't that special ... JIM JOHNSON AI N'T CHOPPED LIVER ... WHY DOES N'T THE POST PUT HIM IN THIS ARTICAL AS WELL ??? Posted by : bill blount | September 19 , 2008 3:16 PM | Report abuse `` What about `` Mrs. Heinz '' ? 
The Dems did n't seem to mind her ... and HER husband ... Posted by : Lee | September 19 , 2008 3:10 PM '' It 's because typically it 's the Repubs that are accusing others of `` elitism '' to try and drive a wedge between the voters Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 3:17 PM | Report abuse Doesnt matter how true it is or how false it is Cleetus Q. Nascar and Bob J. Budweiser will eat this up . 
Plus it 's a black guy and a black guy `` taking the white man 's money ? '' 
Call McCain dishonorable all you want . 
Doesnt matter ignorant poor white peopel couldnt careless how dishonorable he is . 
THey 'll eat this up like chocolate cake . 
Even if it is a bunch of BS . 
Anything negiotive about a black person is automatically true in their eyes . 
That 's crazy , everyone knows that the only reliable place to get political quotes is by watching `` Project Runway '' ! 
Sure is getting crowded down there . 
If the Federal Reserve can buy any private company -LRB- and they have unlimited money via the printing press -RRB- , why only buy businesses in trouble ? 
Why not buy healthy companies too ? 
Why not buy Microsoft for instance ? 
Who could compete with a buyer who has unlimited money ? 
Dear friends , socialism has arrived . 
The government is now embarking of ownership of anything they choose . 
Is n't that fairly close to socialism . 
The very party that was supposed to free business from government is the very party that will become the owners . 
It shows who is more racist . 
Is that clear enough ? 
No it just says to me that there are not as many rich black folks out there as there are white . 
Sorry but could not resist this one . 
Enough with the name calling and `` nya nya '' stuff . 
Be adult enough to review FOR YOURSELF each candidate 's policies and beliefs and let THAT be your voting guide . 
Think for yourself , gang , this is n't a popularity contest in high school ; it 's YOUR COUNTRY on the world stage . 
-LRB- OK , I 'm off the soapbox now ... -RRB- Posted by : Average Joe | September 19 , 2008 3:23 PM | Report abuse Look this is just another Rove playbook play . 
If you know your candidate is in trouble in a certain area , you do n't ever defend the record , instead you attack the opposition . 
In 2000 and 2004 Rove knew that Bush 's military record was far from clean , so instead of comming up with a defense , they attacked , McCain 's , Gore 's and Kerry 's military record . 
Of course all three of these guys had dramatically better records than Bush , but by the end of the smear campaign a lot of people actually thought Bush was the hero . 
McCain 's campaign knows that McCain is very weak on the economy . 
McCain has been quoted in the past as saying himself that he is weak on economic issues . 
In addition McCain is still incredibly supporting the standard Republican economic stance of deficit spending and low taxes for the richest Americans -LRB- he has to get the big contibutors to give to the DNC -RRB- , so he knows his own record and policies wo n't stand up to scrutiny . 
So what the Rove playbook says is attack the other guy for some slight detail -LRB- in this case a phone call from someone to Raines -RRB- that has nothing to do with the issue , but gets people saying , `` well they both have connections to this economic mess '' . 
I am glad that there are finally some news agencies that are actually looking into the truth of these ads . 
The best voter is the one who is well informed and has no preconcieved notions . 
Is this correct or not ? 
The stakes are too high . 
And McCain 's record is just too bad on this issue . 
I 'm in Michigan . 
In a strong `` red '' district . 
People are swinging to Obama , big-time . 
Maybe in some other year people would be persuaded by some fluff about who eats moosemeat ... But this year people are looking at their future and their children 's future ... really America 's future . 
And if that is where you are voting from , Obama 's got this one in the bag . 
Have more faith in America . 
YOU ARE REPORTING ON THE WRONG STORY !!! Posted by : Joyce | September 19 , 2008 3:24 PM | Report abuse All of this stuff about Fannie and Freddie ! 
The fault lies with Barnie Frank and Chris Dodd . 
Barnie because he was instrumental in getting home loans made to people who could in no way afford them . 
And Dodd because he -LRB- as chair of the banking committee -RRB- was responsible for oversight . 
He was n't doing his job . 
Come on , Dems have been in charge for 2 years and all this s __ t has happened on thier watch . 
Talk about a do nothing bunch . 
Any `` polarization '' you see on your monitor is under the exclusive control of Barack Hussein Obama , Jr. and David Axelrod . 
There is nothing in Obama 's resume to fall back on . 
No glowing recommendations from past associates or friends . 
Nothing in the historical record . 
The net result is that Obama and his underlings and the drive by media are reduced to branding anyone NOT voting for him to be a racist . 
What delicious irony coming from the man who dares to be audacious . 
I 'm a Patriot because I believe in what this country stands for -LRB- not becauses I pay more taxes Biden -RRB- ... Obama is a Socialist who would destroy this country by playing `` Robin Hood '' ; unfortunately he wants to give Tax Relief to 95 % of Americans ... that must mean the anyone who works and pays taxes is rich -LRB- not a Patriot Biden , they just make enough to pay taxes -RRB- because over 40 % of Americans do n't pay taxes ! 
Can you spell redistribution of wealth ? 
Obama 's Robin Hood motto should be `` One for All and All for Themselves '' . 
With that said , I 'll leave you wiith something we all should be able to agree on ... `` Term Limits , Term Limits , Term Limits !!! '' If the legislature ca n't figure out how to steal enough in 8 - 12 years then they 're too stupid to be there . 
Also , it would allow us to get away from the 100 staffers that each Congressman has and the 200 staffers that each Senator have ; can you spell `` earmarks '' ? 
| September 19 , 2008 3:26 PM | Report abuse McCain is a damn liar , plain and simple . 
Right back at you NickinVA , you hypocrite . 
We 're all NOT face to face here and the facts are presented quite negatively at McCain 's slanted-talk . 
Oh , this is so much fun you all squirm as you try and salvage your presidential candidate 's campaign while savaging your own credibility . 
For those lefties that wish to have tips on how to promote Barack Obama when you get in their faces : Let s make American great again vote for John McCain and Sarah Palin ! 
Always a sign of higher intelligence . 
`` 1 -RRB- If you can not see the lie you are intellectiually dishonest . 
in other words you actually LIE to yourself . '' 
Translation : The WaPo is guilty as charged ; therefore I will wave my hands and slander you . 
`` 2 -RRB- You probably watch FAUX news and think of yourself as propelry informed . '' 
Translation : Again , I have no facts so I 'll smear you again -LRB- and the numerous misspellings just prove my superiority -RRB- . 
`` 3 -RRB- It does not take a fanatic to call MCCain a liar . 
It takes a fanatic to denie that he is . 
It looks like YOU are the RIGHT WING FANATIC NUT . '' 
`` 4 -RRB- Punch in the nose ? 
You obviously share MCcains petulant temper . '' 
Which is , of course , a lie . 
`` 5 -RRB- Please do not assasanate Obama whn he wins in November , you freak . '' 
Translation : GregCA has gone off the deep end ! 
Hey , WaPo : Your posting terms of service , below , clearly state that `` User reviews and comments that include profanity or personal attacks or other inappropriate comments or material will be removed from the site . '' 
Why does GregCA get a pass , hmm ? 
Our SOP is to say that everything uttered by a republican is a lie . 
Of course , we ignore Obama and the DNC . 
Funny , do you realize how busy we 'd be if we even began fact checking Obama ? 
Anyway , If our mission is to undercut republican credibility , this comes dangerously close to undermining our credibility . 
Sure , you came out by attacking McCain 's ad a `` dubious . '' 
And yes , I know that most readers who do what we want them to do will stop reading there . 
It 's also good reinforcement meat for our fellow cultists . 
But then , as I read further , it seems a thinking person could construe that The Post as being dishonest and intellectually vapid . 
It almost is as if we , self appointedly neutral Obama worshippers , are lying vacuous peddlers of disinformation . 
Someone might even ask whether we were wrong then or wrong now . 
In order for us to maintain our Earthly right to manipulate the thoughts of the weak and confused , please just stick to attacking McCain and leave us out of it . 
Yours in Obama Comrade , Bye . 
Because if you 're speaking olden times terms , then this country is nothing like what they envisioned . 
The Republicans have taken this country from a powerful nation to a borderline 3rd world country . 
Oh , and playing the earmark card is just rediculous , since McCain even took them . 
$ 24.3 million to be exact . 
Communism is not patriotism . 
I just find it completely comical that someone that has such a firm grasp of economics 101 does n't understand that the government has taken control or more companies in the last few days than during the entire 8 years that a democratic was in office . 
The greater sidenote is -- YOU 'LL BE PAYING FOR IT YOU MORON . 
So , before you start having to pay for EVIL communist things like free healtcare , you 'll have to happily pay for large Mortgage companies that have tried their hardest to destroy the very fabric of the economy so they could receive their quarterly bonuses . 
Before you tell others to take a class in economics , you should have actually attended your class . 
Or read a book maybe . 
Or just grown a brain cell . 
Whoever you vote for , Democrat or Republican , this tired communist argument has got to go away . 
Guess what , we 're all communists now thanks to George W. Live with it . 
No one seems to be calling the Post for not checking their facts ... If anyone here is a liar its not McCain . 
you are about 1000 % overstated on the treasury notes that China holds and if you understood basic accounting you would understand that we hold the assets from these transactions . 
halliburton does n't even have 50,000 employees in operations . 
how could they have 100,000 in one spot when they are in about 70 different theaters right now ? 
| September 19 , 2008 3:33 PM | Report abuse If all else fails quote the fashion section . 
and move your arms up and down Posted by : fool me once my bad | September 19 , 2008 3:33 PM | Report abuse Why do Republicans Hate America ? 
This makes sense as the high-paid management are looking for tax breaks that will benefit them -LRB- earning $ 250k + -RRB- . 
The rest of Fannie Mae 's staff are looking to support a candidate that will help large segments of the U.S. population . 
But thanks for playing . 
Who is really the liar ? 
Lots of mud slinging going on . 
Obama tells as many if not more lies than McCain . 
I just note that the McCain campaign takes the high road . 
Why should he demean himself to be as low as Obama ? 
Why do n't the liberals get out of mud puddles and start actually looking `` realisitically '' at the real issues . '' 
Who said that Bush is the first VP since Van Buren ? 
Harry Truman was the VP to Franklin D. Roosevelt . 
Richard Nixon was Eisenhower 's VP . 
Teddy Roosevelt after McKinley 's death in 1901-1909 . 
Lynden B. Johnson ran for one more term after Kennedy 's death . 
The point is this get your facts straight before you start spouting off , pure garbage . 
How many of you screaming at each other , actually gather your facts from your own research ? 
Just skimming through a few of them , it is obvious you are gathering from the inept news media , insane and dumb bloggers and googling at the campaign ads . 
Joe Biden and every other democratic senator voted against it . 
Actually , McCain did not vote for Gramm-Leach-Bliley -LRB- GLB -RRB- , he was on the campaign trail at the time of the vote , so we will never know his position . 
Joe Biden did vote for GLB , as did Harry Ried , who is also out claiming that GLB is the heart of the problem . 
Leach , the L in GLB , is an advisor to the Obama campaign . 
In any case GLB passed 90-8 in the Senate on 11\/4\/1999 , the House passed it 362-57 , Bill Clinton signed it into law . 
If GLB has anything to do with today s problems , a lot of it follows Barry . 
How in the hell or why in the hell would you choose someone to be your President simply because you think they are `` honorable '' -LRB- which McCain is not -RRB- , that you 'd enjoy having a beer with , that being a POW somehow prepares one to be POTUS !!! Idiots ... and that 's being kind because I know a lot of you are simply racist but too cowardly to just come on out and say so ! 
You are a fool if you can look at Obama and McCain and would think that McCain would be better for our country . 
The man is literally senile ... listen to him folks ! 
Stop with the `` home team '' bullshyt and step to the plate as an American . 
Whether you all of a sudden think having an Ivy league education and being articulate and smart is somehow undesirable , it would be a god awful shame if this country 's citizenry would allow such a `` gift '' to pass through our hands in this time of need simply because some of y ' all ca n't get over your `` sickness '' ! 
And what 's even more astonishing ... is that it always seem to be the folks who have the least in common with republican economic policies who seem to always vote for them ! 
Seems like as long as the repubs stroke the `` anti '' flames it makes some of y ' all feel good ... while you wallow in your undereducated , isolated , bitter , religously zealot poverty . 
Fools !! Posted by : KNIGHTVISION | September 19 , 2008 3:35 PM | Report abuse So , the ad is dubious because it relied on The Washington Post . 
This reminds me of the line from Animal House where the guy whose car was totaled was told , `` You F 'd up . 
You trusted us '' Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 3:36 PM | Report abuse To those above arguing that Obama is Number Two on the Fannie\/Freddie Contribution Recipient List , again here are the facts , not ` some one told me so it must be true ' . 
By The Associated Press 10 hours ago Highest congressional career totals for contributions from PACs tied to Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae : House Minority Whip Roy Blunt , R-Mo . 
Sen. Robert Bennett , R-Utah , Senate Banking , Housing and Rep. Spencer Bachus , of Alabama , House Financial Services Committee , senior Republican , $ 70,500 . 
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , D-Nev . 
House Minority Leader John Boehner , R-Ohio , $ 60,500 . 
Sen. Christopher Dodd , D-Conn . 
, chairman of Senate Banking , Housing and Urban Affairs Committee , $ 48,500 . 
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif . 
Rep. Barney Frank , D-Mass . 
, chairman of the House Financial Services Committee , $ 30,500 . 
Fannie Mae 's PAC total contributions to congressional races this election cycle through June : House : Democrats , $ 275,950 ; Republicans , $ 257,850 . 
Senate : Democrats , $ 82,500 ; Republicans $ 83,500 . 
The companies ' lobbying expenses in first half of this year : $ 7.4 million . 
-LRB- Source : The Center for Responsive Politics , with Federal Election Commission records . -RRB- 
Where is Obama # 2 on that list ? 
If you have a point , prove it , otherwise it 's an unfounded rumor or in this case a smear . 
I 'm not saying Des did n't take money , but if they were both dating Fannie and Freddie I think the Republicans must be better kissers ` cos they got way more bling bling . 
And the problem is , you 're not going to take this correction in any useful educational sense , you 're just going to get mad because your rumor was debunked and I 'll bet later this evening over a whiskey with your other undereducated solid American friends you 'll repeat twenty more inaccurate facts and feel like you 're a learned political observer . 
I 'd like to see all of you wonderful people take the immigration test on American politics . 
Be nice to see how many would pass , I 'm guessing very few . 
Country first , eh ? 
Everything damaging is a `` lie '' which will be accompanied by a chorus of ` dismayed ' republicans who ` ca n't believe ' how far McCain has ` fallen ' . 
Then wait for the relevant MSM hack to catch the blatant telegraph and spin accordingly . 
So never mind the SB99 never mentions predators , and does teach explicit sex ed to kindergarteners , never mind Jim Johnson , or Raines , or Gorelick , -LRB- who RAN , not lobbied , Fannie\/Freddie -RRB- or the massive earmarks , or the massive donations , or Dowd 's countrywide loans , or Rangel 's taxes , or Pelosi 's anti drilling investments , or Ried 's land deals , or the spending increases that easily surpassed the profligate republicans that put the GOP in this position , or the `` incorporating '' of earmarks that appear nowhere in Congressional bills to circumvent the President 's executive order to not fund pork , or the fact that the Mortgage Backed Securities floated by Fannie & Freddie 's Clinton era appointees to rake in HUGE bonuses of 18-25Million per year REALLY ARE THE CAUSE OF THIS MESS THAT IS ALREADY 2X the ENTIRE 6 year cost of the Iraq war , because mentioning those inconvenient truths would be just `` more of the same '' . 
Dems out in full force today . 
And to NickinVA , if your purpose was to get as many respones to your post as possible , well played sir . 
McCain 's camp took direct quotes from the WaPo . 
I wish all you liberal fanatics out there had the guts to call people liars face to face so you can get the punch in the nose you all richly deserve Wow tough talk for a guy sitting behind a keyboard . 
LIAR Posted by : Gabe | September 19 , 2008 3:37 PM | Report abuse `` I personally do n't see the big deal about asking a former CEO of FNM his opinion on Housing . 
To me , that 's like asking Pete Rose about playing hardnosed baseball . '' 
Actually I think it is more like asking Pete Rose about gambling on baseball , since Obama was being paid by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
So , I assume the Post will be retracting those articles any minute now ? 
Almost all of Obama 's contributions came from individual employees and not political action committees . '' 
Truth is out the window . 
Lies , slander , and name calling are all these sheep have left . 
They are so desperate they will say anything no matter how ridiculous . 
If all true Americans vote in November Obama will win in a landslide . 
| September 19 , 2008 3:39 PM | Report abuse I love it . 
Watching live astroturfers from the Obama campaign post before my eyes . 
Check out `` blip '' and `` captbilly . '' 
The Obamatrons are even scared of message boards . 
Let 's look at some facts about the platforms . 
For example , let 's look at how amazingly similar O-Biden 's platform is to Jimmy Carter 's policies . 
They are virtually the same . 
Does anybody remember the days of Jimmy Carter ??? Posted by : JimInMinnesota | September 19 , 2008 3:40 PM | Report abuse `` I love it . 
Watching live astroturfers from the Obama campaign post before my eyes . 
Check out `` blip '' and `` captbilly . '' 
The Obamatrons are even scared of message boards . '' 
Oh I am all sorts of confused with this one . 
The real FACTs are obvious when you look at the many Lobbyists directly working on Mcsames campaign . 
Take a good look at Phil Gramm -LRB- nation of whiners -RRB- chief economic adviser , Carly Fiorina who received one of those big Golden parachutes -LRB- $ 21 million -RRB- upon being fired from Hewlett Packard & the list goes on & on . . 
many of the advisers & lobbyists who have been a big part of the Bush administration ... McCain voted again & again to DE-REGULATE government control over banks & businesses which is a large part of what has gotten us into the mess . 
When you take a long careful look at his campaign advisers realize these are the people who have invested in John Mcsame & they will be the new faces in Washington playing the same game as we have seen the last 8 years . 
McCain has been deceitful in his campaign propaganda & irresponsible in the judgment he has used . 
His policy 's are no different than those of Bush . 
We can not afford 4 more years of this kind of insanity ! 
OBAMA & BIDEN FOR THE REAL CHANGE AMERICA NEEDS !! Posted by : nomore mcsame | September 19 , 2008 3:40 PM | Report abuse `` Enough is enough . 
Let 's look at some facts about the platforms . 
For example , let 's look at how amazingly similar O-Biden 's platform is to Jimmy Carter 's policies . 
They are virtually the same . 
Does anybody remember the days of Jimmy Carter ??? '' And McCain 's looks exactly like Bush 's . 
So what is your point ? 
Either way we lose ? 
Obama has some real good advisors does n't he ? 
LOL ha ha , why because he 's ... black ? 
Rangle is a Clinton supporter and NOT an Obama advisor ... but nice try Posted by : tinat | September 19 , 2008 3:42 PM | Report abuse Hey SAM - must you see conspiracies -LRB- astroturfers -RRB- everywhere ? 
This is a free country and people can change their minds without having their integrity questioned or being linked to some massive conspiracy . 
And btw I wo n't be voting for Obama either if that 's any consolation . 
Rev Wright comes to mind . 
Who will be next ? 
As for pointing out that Raines is black ; it 's funny how the democrats are the ones who always seem to see race . 
If Obama wins it will be because of racism ... I mean 95 % of backs are voting for him that 's racist right ? 
You people need to wake up and stop believing everything that gets printed by this despicable pseudo ` news ' organization . 
You 've been brainwashed to believe that Obama is the best thing since sliced bread and you 're gonna get burnt . 
I 'm here to tell you ... I had a direct email conversation with the brother of the sister who is a close advisor to Obama and he says Obama was in fact being advised by Franklin Raines . 
So what do you think of that ? 
BAM , issue solved . 
Now let 's get serious . 
Bush tried to reform the now failing FM&FM in 2003 . 
Who shot that down ? 
Correct lib scum living in a 500 sq ft apartment in downtown SF and blaming everyone else for their problems cause they ca n't get a ` good paying ' job ! 
Oh , and the reason you ca n't get a ` good paying job ' ... try taking some of the piercings out freak ! 
Moving on ... who said this in 2003 ... `` These two entities Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are not facing any kind of financial crisis , the more people exaggerate these problems , the more pressure there is on these companies , the less we will see in terms of affordable housing . '' 
Come on ... I know you know this one ... think ... squint it might help ... YES , you got it ! 
In fact it was Sen. Barney Frank . 
Now this one is really easy ... who sponsored the Federal Housing Enterprise Regulatory Reform Act of 2005 ? 
I 'm so disappointed in you ... no it was not Barack ... it was in fact Sen. John McCain . 
I 'm so going to enjoy this victory in November , far more then the last two . 
It will be so sweet to see another POS Subaru driving around with the Gore ... and the Kerry ... and the Obama bumper stickers fading away in the sun , the same sun I 'll be basking in . 
| September 19 , 2008 3:46 PM | Report abuse How can the Washington Post use the word FACT in anything they print . 
They are masters of distortion and lies . 
There true leanings are so blantly obvious that they should and probably will go out of business . 
can I say `` white stuff '' The reason that you do n't hear about it was that 4 of the 5 were democrats ... and the three that were actually convicted were ... democrats ... McCain was exonerated Posted by : Not Impressed | September 19 , 2008 3:47 PM | Report abuse Too bad McCain is a LIAR and a HYPOCRITE . 
Karl Rove chose Sarah Palin over the wishes of John McCain . 
McCain wanted Kaine or Lieberman . 
McCain met Palin exactly ONE TIME before he announced her as the running mate . 
Rove will still be running the show on Pennsylvania Ave and you idiots think McCain is some kind of hero . 
He 's a freaking PUPPET for the neo-cons who have screwed this country in the first place ! 
America goes down the toilet and the republican party just keeps flushing . 
I ca n't wait till November . 
I call people who have had failures and successes . 
In no way do I consider them advisors . 
And in no way does picking up the phone to have a conversation form an association . 
I consider it prudent for me to gather information from a variety of sources . 
It 's up to me to determine how I am going to use it . 
There is a lot of emotion running with this election , but we have to be smart enough to cut through the crap and the hype ... we , the voting public , have had a heavy hand in creating this system . 
They are pandering to us . 
WE are the ones who can change this . 
I 'm glad the Obama campaign is reaching out to a wide variety of people to gather information . 
Raines may be a crook , but it does n't mean he ca n't provide useful information . 
Maybe it 's how NOT to do things ! 
Whoever gets into the Whitehouse must go beyond the inner circle for policy and decision making . 
Look at the pain W and Cheney and their small group have caused America ! 
Let 's stop slinging mud and hold people accountable for reason . 
What was McCain thinking ? 
I mean , if he had used a reputable source like the Weekly World News or something , run with it . 
But to trust the Washington Post ? 
The paper who works at too low a level of facts to be useful as an informational source ? 
The record tells us different . 
Obama received more campaign contributions from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , between 1989 and 2008 , than every other federal lawmaker except committee chairman Democrat Christopher Dodd . 
And Obama outstripped the others after only having been in the Senate for three years . 
Based on Federal Election Commission filings , Obama received more contributions than 353 of the 354 lawmakers . 
Then there is Obama s other unsettling tie to the mortgage crisis . 
Obama s Chicago sugar mommy is Penny Pritzger . 
She is finance chairman of Obama s campaign . 
Pritzger s Superior Bank collapsed in 2001 , the largest failure in a decade . 
She was an owner , a president of Superior for five years , and , according to the Chicago Sun Times , active in leadership while on the bank s holding company . 
In February , 2008 , Asian Week analyzed Superior s failure . 
`` The -LRB- sub-prime -RRB- financial engineering that created the Wall Street meltdown was developed by the Pritzkers and Ernst and Young , working with Merrill Lynch to sell bonds securitized by sub-prime mortgages , '' according to Timothy J. Anderson , a whistle-blower on financial and bank fraud , and reported by Asian Week . 
`` The sub-prime mortgages , '' Anderson said , `` were provided to Merrill Lynch , by a nation-wide Pritzker origination system , using Superior as the cash cow , with many millions in FDIC insured deposits . 
Superior s owners were to sub-prime lending , what Michael Milken was to junk bonds . '' 
Other seeds to the mortgage crisis hark back to when then President Bill Clinton super-charged the Community Redevelopment Act , a Carter law to encourage minority home ownership . 
That social engineering and greed helped set up the current train wreck . 
At Fannie Mae , Clinton cronies Franklin Raines and Jamie Gorelick lined their pockets with some $ 175 million and Fannie Mae was fined $ 400 million for SEC and other violations . 
To quote the Investor s Business Daily , `` Market failure ? 
Once again , this crisis has government fingerprints all over it . '' 
Obama s careful parsing of words would have us overlook the evidence and overlook that Jim Johnson , another Fannie Mae former president during Clinton s term , was an Obama economic adviser and , for a time , led Obama s potential vice presidential search team . 
Leave it to Obama to lash out at the free market with his silver tongue in an effort to distract Posted by : pret | September 19 , 2008 3:49 PM | Report abuse I do n't normally believe your partisan coverage , but never did I think you would now be telling everyone not to believe it either . 
How could McCain be considered ` dishonest ' by your own newspaper simply by quoting you ? 
Seems that the fact checking should be done prior to publication - not after the ` facts ' become inconvenient to ` your ' candidate . 
Yes , McCain and Bush are supply-side economic freaks . 
I 'm one myself , and I believe that trickle-down economics does work . 
Bush could n't help that banks and greed drove people to borrow more money than they could afford ... and they have now crippled the economy . 
Or are you too young to know what it was like when we had to cancel school activities because we did n't have enough energy to heat schools and other public buildings . 
If we do n't support the job-creating industries in our country by offering tax incentives , and if we tax those people who are in a position to create jobs and prosperity for low income workers , then we wo n't have jobs , we wo n't have prosperity , and low income people who might get a tax break wo n't have any credit available to them to buy homes or other necessities -LRB- e.g. college , etc. -RRB- . 
Liberals need to get their heads out of the sand and recognize that low taxes equal more jobs . 
And do n't come back and argue that we have 6.1 % unemployment right now . 
Remember when we 16 % interest rates and double digit inflation ... ? 
That was , once again , the result of Jimmy Carters -LRB- and O-Biden 's -RRB- policies . 
The Post taking the McCain camp to task for quoting accurately from . . 
So is what you printed in July wrong , or is Huslin 's current memory the correct version ? 
If it 's the former , why was n't this fact-checked back then ? 
Is the truth only important when it becomes politically uncomfortable ? 
If it 's the latter , how on earth can your readers believe you ? 
Why is Huslin 's recollection now more accurate than when she originally wrote the story ? 
Either way , the entity that comes out looking worst in this is the Post . 
The record tells us different . 
Obama received more campaign contributions from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , between 1989 and 2008 , than every other federal lawmaker except committee chairman Democrat Christopher Dodd . 
And Obama outstripped the others after only having been in the Senate for three years . 
Based on Federal Election Commission filings , Obama received more contributions than 353 of the 354 lawmakers . 
Then there is Obama s other unsettling tie to the mortgage crisis . 
Obama s Chicago sugar mommy is Penny Pritzger . 
She is finance chairman of Obama s campaign . 
Pritzger s Superior Bank collapsed in 2001 , the largest failure in a decade . 
She was an owner , a president of Superior for five years , and , according to the Chicago Sun Times , active in leadership while on the bank s holding company . 
In February , 2008 , Asian Week analyzed Superior s failure . 
`` The -LRB- sub-prime -RRB- financial engineering that created the Wall Street meltdown was developed by the Pritzkers and Ernst and Young , working with Merrill Lynch to sell bonds securitized by sub-prime mortgages , '' according to Timothy J. Anderson , a whistle-blower on financial and bank fraud , and reported by Asian Week . 
`` The sub-prime mortgages , '' Anderson said , `` were provided to Merrill Lynch , by a nation-wide Pritzker origination system , using Superior as the cash cow , with many millions in FDIC insured deposits . 
Superior s owners were to sub-prime lending , what Michael Milken was to junk bonds . '' 
Other seeds to the mortgage crisis hark back to when then President Bill Clinton super-charged the Community Redevelopment Act , a Carter law to encourage minority home ownership . 
That social engineering and greed helped set up the current train wreck . 
At Fannie Mae , Clinton cronies Franklin Raines and Jamie Gorelick lined their pockets with some $ 175 million and Fannie Mae was fined $ 400 million for SEC and other violations . 
To quote the Investor s Business Daily , `` Market failure ? 
Once again , this crisis has government fingerprints all over it . '' 
Obama s careful parsing of words would have us overlook the evidence and overlook that Jim Johnson , another Fannie Mae former president during Clinton s term , was an Obama economic adviser and , for a time , led Obama s potential vice presidential search team . 
Leave it to Obama to lash out at the free market with his silver tongue in an effort to distract Posted by : pret1 | September 19 , 2008 3:50 PM | Report abuse `` the 23 % who support Bush have invaded this board with their lies and desperate smears . '' 
That is his approval rating , not the number of conservatives left in the U.S. Using your logic There are only 18 % of Democrats left because of Congressional approval . 
Keep living in your fantasy world , but come November reality is going to catch up with you . 
Well , there 's a nice picture of McCain practically sucking Bush 's nipple , so if they 're not equal , one of them gets his sustenance from the other . 
Did this guy ever have principles or has he just fooled everyone till now ? 
Wall Street crooks want to privatize Social Security . 
Another great idea by John `` Ass Maverick '' McCain How do you know when a republican is telling a lie ? 
Everything they say is a lie . 
| September 19 , 2008 3:53 PM | Report abuse I wanted to draw your attention to this important petition that I recently signed : Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 3:53 PM | Report abuse `` I will NOT go negative in this campaign ! '' 
He keeps changing his responses and speeches everyday to try to match Obama , but ends up contradicting himself . 
And after the Spain fiasco , I 'm starting to seriously worry about his health . 
I mean really , do you honestly see Palin as ready to assume the mantle ? 
I think she 'd destroy this country . 
I think McCain may be developing Alzheimers -LRB- I 'm not trying to bash him , but the signs are starting to show -RRB- and if the Repubs run him all the way , they can easily drop him after the election due to it . 
It is almost as if they are exploiting him just to win , and that 's just sick . 
Like Obama was the second largest recipient of PAC money from Fannie Mae . 
Chris Dodd , the HEAD of the Bankng Committee was first . 
They both took over $ 125,000 each ! 
Additionally , the CEO of Fannie Mae was head of a committee to find Obama a Vice Presudent . 
Post - `` and that 's the news . 
But do n't quote us '' This is a sad commentary on journalistic ethics and the Wash Post . 
Have the reporter and editors who approved the initial , inaccurate article been fired ? 
Another distraction on the field of battle is not appropriate . 
We face a clear and present danger and absurd irrelevant distortions are the best he can offer ? 
If that 's his idea of shaping the future , then he should keep it to himself because We the People do n't need it . 
I do n't want my children to inherit these problems or the mentality of corruption expressed in McCain 's delayed responses . 
Now back to the race card . 
Have n't we had enough portrayals of black men as threats to white elderly women ? 
The implication is blatantly racist but monumentally expressive of his lack of African American imagery projected in his campaign . 
How do you explain such an advertisement to an elementary school child who only sees the images and emotions as they are presented on the screen . 
This is fear breeding and racial stereotyping of the most poisonous kind . 
Yet if he can keep us divided he can continue to tell different stories at the same time to different groups when we need to be united during our time of trouble . 
PLEASE STOP THE EXPLOITATION AND FEAR MAKING . 
THE WORLD IS WATCHING !!! Posted by : EatenALIVE | September 19 , 2008 3:55 PM | Report abuse HOW CAN YOU CLAIM McCAIN 'S AD IS A LIE WHEN THIS VERY ARTICLE PROVES THE STATEMENTS ARE TRUE ??? I quote , `` I asked Huslin to provide the exact circumstances of the quote . 
She explained that she was chatting with Raines during the photo shoot , and asked `` if he was engaged at all with the Democrats ' quest for the White House . 
He said that he had gotten a couple of calls from the Obama campaign . 
I asked him about what , and he said ` oh , general housing , economy issues . ' '' 
How dumb do you think we are ? 
I certainly have lost so much of it during the last 1 - 2 years . 
In case you have n't noticed we 've been circling the drain and the repubs want to keep flushing . 
Did you see AC360 the other night and how much Obama lied about the lobbiest ! 
I hate right wing and left wing extremeist !! Look at the facts for what they really are not just what you half way here from some liberal or overly conservative few point !! Posted by : Rhonda | September 19 , 2008 3:57 PM | Report abuse Xander : Astroturfing is a tactic used by Axelrod 's firm . 
It 's phoney grass roots support for a position or candidate placed into public discourse . 
The idea is to sway public opinion with commentary that appears to come from a member of the public rather than the campaign . 
Then , you get friendly reporters to write something like : `` Even die hard Republicans and independents are disgusted by McCain 's tactics . '' 
Good way to fool the dupes . 
That 's why Axelrod uses it . 
And who exactly vetted Palin ? 
Because I 'm still waiting for an answer to that one . 
So until I get one , the answer must be no one . 
We knew that already though . 
Showing blacks as the screwups and this old white women paying for it . 
I see what their playing hehe . 
And after all that sexist hoopla geez . 
This is going to be a dirty election !!!! Posted by : Hmmm | September 19 , 2008 4:00 PM | Report abuse Obama is gooing to get somked in the debats ! 
It 's phoney grass roots support for a position or candidate placed into public discourse . 
The idea is to sway public opinion with commentary that appears to come from a member of the public rather than the campaign . 
Then , you get friendly reporters to write something like : `` Even die hard Republicans and independents are disgusted by McCain 's tactics . '' 
Good way to fool the dupes . 
That 's why Axelrod uses it . '' 
Ah , thanks for clarifying . 
But is n't this exactly what McCain is doing as well when he tells people `` I 'm a champion for automakers '' and things of that sort ? 
I mean contrary to that statement , his record speaks differently . 
Obama will have a huge mess to clean up . 
Sadly , I think too many Americans ARE too young to remember the 1970s , the gas rationing , the stagflation , and especially the mortgage interest rates which actually climbed to over 20 % at one point . 
One of the first casualties of a potential Obama presidency , along with a likely Democratic congressional majority , will be consumers who belong to racial minorities . 
They tend to be lower-income , and the relaxed credit of the last few years helped a lot of them become homeowners . 
I wonder how Mr Obama is going to react when he sees his policies disproportionately having a negative impact on African-Americans and Latinos . 
It wo n't be pretty . 
Lying is standard character for Democrats . 
A search for his contributions turns up only $ 1,000 for Sen Obama and $ 3,000 for Harry Reid . 
Both are small compared to the $ 10,000 given to all the PAC 's , especially the FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE -LRB- FANNIE MAE PAC -RRB- . 
I did not see a whole lot of GOP groups getting money from Dr. Raines . 
And , yes , by golly , it did ! 
The linked July 16 Post article says that Raines `` has ... taken calls from Barack Obama 's presidential campaign seeking his advice on mortgage and housing policy matters , '' fer crissakes . 
Today Raines denies that he gave any such advice to the Obama campaign , so you give McCain two pinocchios . 
Is that really fair ? 
Why should n't McCain & co. have trusted a report in the Post based on the reporter 's interview with Raines that Raines had n't -LRB- yet -RRB- contradicted ? 
And how do you know Raines was telling the truth when he denied having given advice ? 
Are we to believe that he refused to give advice to Obama 's people when they asked him for it ? 
Or are we to believe that your reporter got it wrong when she wrote that the Obama campaign called him for advice ? 
You misrepresent what the ad actually said in order to flesh out your foregone conclusion that McCain is untrustworthy , and in the process you undermine your own reporting . 
Ha ha ha ha . 
Well , if Obama says `` liar '' it must be true . 
Start telling the truth if you have hopes of winning this election . 
In other words , do something a little different . 
You BOTH are getting too predicatable and it 's crushing even your most ardent supporters to death . 
The American people are supersaturated with deception . 
Reality lies in our mailboxes every afternoon so please cut it out . 
The other best option is that both of you just be honest to yourselves and resign . 
Believe me we will understand given the circumstances BUT JUST STOP THE LIES !!!!!!!!!!!! Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 4:03 PM | Report abuse I 'm glad to see that the Washington Post is giving the Obama campaign it 's money 's worth in negative spin . 
Good value is honest hard work . 
Is somebody pulling Jim Crowe definitions that anybody that 's 1\/8 black or more is 100 % black ? 
Now the Post is saying McCain is being misleading because he trusted reporting from the Post ? 
Should I believe anything the Post writes ? 
All he does is point fingers at others . 
If you say something about him , you are racist . 
If he become president , even God can not save this country . 
This man has no honor and he would do anything to win ! 
John McCain is dangerous for American ! 
I wonder if he know the Washington Post gave him 2 Pinocchio for the Advice Ad . 
By the way , my stomach had the jitters for days . 
It just clammed down after I heard for Barack economy outline . 
Tough luck there , but what on earth makes you think there is any integrity in trying to go back to the original reporter and get them to soften the blow after the fact ? 
YOU printed it , the McCain campaign quoted it , and now you 're upset that you might have have further helped Hussein lose the already lost election . 
This is absurd mock journalism . 
What 's McCain really trying to say ? 
As I 've said here , I 'm quite well off and socialism is not on my agenda nor on any Democrat 's I know . 
I suspect the real issue was revealed in the study reported in yesterday 's news : conservatives tend to startle easier than others . 
Republicans seem to feel threatened when thinking outside of the box . 
But about socialism : Bush took his eye off the ball to settle an old score with Iraq and that war is costing us $ 10 billion a month . 
I opposed that boondoggle but I 'm paying for it ; sounds like socialism . 
The Republicans took care of their corporate buddies by de-regulating everything they could and gave them enough rope to hang themselves . 
Now we taxpayers are bailing out those big corporations ; sounds like socialism . 
So instead of pointing at the Democrats and accusing us of something that is n't going to happen , maybe you should look at who IS bringing us socialism here and now . 
The Post 's quote is not contested . 
The lie is in what the McCain campaign IMPLIES - that Raines is an advisor to the Obama campaign . 
`` Who advises him ? 
The Post says it 's Franklin Raines . '' 
He advises him all the time ? 
Or was there just a phone call once ? 
That does not mean Obama never asked his opinion , but he is NOT an advisor to Obama 's campaign . 
EVERYTHING else , from contributions to Obama 's tax plan to race is simply an attempt to DISTRACT from these facts . 
McCain is distorting a quote to imply something not true . 
Stop acting like it 's a surprise , he 's been caught lying all through this campaign . 
With McCain you will get window-dressing and no real change -LRB- he has already shown this propensity on another level by choosing Miss Congeniality . 
Also he was the cental politician in the S&L Scandal that cost taxpayers $ 250 Billion -RRB- . 
McCain will cater to the conservative free-marketeers who spilt the milk and are now letting someone else -LRB- taxpayers -RRB- clean it up . 
I for one would rather see MY MONEY go for welfare for indigents rather than to bailout shady lenders -LRB- as an aside , Lehman Bros paid their CEO Richard Fuld 45 MILLION last year to run that company into the ground -RRB- . 
The Republican Party , through their abdication of leadership on so many fronts these past thirty years , are deserving of no more chances . 
No one can win in the race game . 
Nothing is good enough . 
It 's just an excuse for people to complain about something . 
The moves have not only been effective , but also calming to the markets . 
And thus the markets have made an orderly retreat to lower levels . 
In spite of the real estate melt down , the political season and the credit crunch , there has been no recession . 
It is very scary to libertarians like me , but the conservatorship of Fannie and Freddie goes back to the man on the ten dollar bill Hamilton , creator of the central bank . 
Many consider him the premier American economic genius who understood the configuration of the most powerful economy on earth and capitalism itself . 
He was ahead of his time . 
A powerful Fed making mitigating moves would have his approval . 
Fannie and Freddie have deteriorated into hybrid semi bureaucracies with many closets needing cleaning . 
Clinton crony appointees mishandled and ruined the agency with reckless and mercenary management . 
They scored millions for themselves and as the piper shows up to be paid , they can be found as advisors to Obama campaign . 
I would counsel them that the loss of innovation is the curse of bureaucracy . 
The engine of incentive and the hunger for innovation is lost within taxpayer supported establishment . 
It breeds things like tenure , seniority and mediocrity and most importantly irresponsibility . 
The sub prime debacle simply brought that weakness to a head . 
Fannie and Freddie were so bureaucratized ; they could not go below their current rates . 
No matter how low fed rates went , mortgages were anchored to the cost of bureaucratic waste and big-time commissions for management . 
Fannie and Freddie were sapped of competitive capability by government secured complacency . 
Sub prime loans were sub prime for a reason . 
They were made with liberal lending rules that succumbed to the needs of real estate over-development . 
For their troubles , sub prime lenders got a great deal more interest for taking that risk . 
We can say that they have already received their due . 
Irresponsible rhetoric of an impending Great Depression aside , there has been only one month -LRB- December 07 -RRB- of contraction . 
Though the first had a small expansion the last quarter shows a robust 3.3 % growth and an unemployment rate that for the last six years has been consistently lower than the last four decades . 
Too bad for the big tax and spenders , the tax cuts must be given credit for the economy s strength in meeting these headwinds . 
Now is not the time for big tax and spending suggested by candidate Obama . 
I would argue there is never a time . 
But the political season has descended into politically correct hyperbole like ; Everyone is suffering and we are descending into a Great Depression . 
has alarmed everyone and destroyed public confidence . 
Still , while the sub prime debacle reverberates all over the world , the American economy retains strong fundamentals . 
There is historically low unemployment , interest rates and last year s inflation rate is not excessive compared to recent history . 
But consumer confidence has been driven into the ground by politics . 
But confidence is really the only thing this market needs to meet the challenges brought on by excesses of overdevelopment and risky mortgages . 
I also take issue with the term bailout . 
Considering the exact term bailout , the rhetoric is hyperbolic . 
A Resolution Trust Fund has its assets backed by real estate which is exceeded only by gold as collateral . 
The real value of property investing is in its intrinsic value . 
And it is real , it regains its value when it is put back on line as housing for either buyers or renters . 
If these homes are not allowed to become derelict , investors would do well to back a privatized Resolution Trust Fund that has a competent property management component to put the property back online . 
This is a job for a real estate manager of the highest caliber . 
We must remember that unless fraud is proven and people are prosecuted for misleading borrowers , the unqualified and defaulted buyer are the specific party that breeched the contract by failing to make payments . 
In many cases buyers received that privilege without down payment and without a good credit report . 
These buyers lived in a house they could not afford . 
And they walked away when they could not make the usury interest rate payments ... Duh ? 
But the most important question is why were taxpayers guaranteeing such instruments ? 
Fannie and Freddie are partly private businesses , just like any bureaucracy , Fannie and Freddie descended into complacency . 
Instead of responsibility in buying sub prime mortgages there were agreements padded with winking eyes that every bureaucratic administrator knows about . 
By the time it was disclosed that sub prime mortgages were risky , it was too late . 
But being outside the competition makes one rusty and feeling secure . 
In the bureaucracy one hand washes the other that has grease for the palm . 
Well , the party is over . 
For those who could not afford sub prime loans , the foreclosed , they will have to claim bankruptcy if necessary ; then if they want their own home they must get to work rebuilding their credit and building a real down payment . 
But for now they are a perfect rental market -LRB- perhaps lease purchasers -RRB- for the Resolution Trust Fund . 
That will create affordable housing from existing housing , not from over development . 
Pretty funny ... that means we should n't trust your analysis , either . 
: -RRB- Posted by : malclave | September 19 , 2008 4:09 PM | Report abuse The only thing less honest than a politician is a wing-nut supporting a politician by making statements that he\/she is not certain about . 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- A graduate of Columbia University and Harvard Law School , where he served as president of the Harvard Law Review , Obama worked as a community organizer and practiced as a civil rights attorney before serving in the Illinois Senate from 1997 to 2004 . 
He taught constitutional law at the University of Chicago Law School from 1992 to 2004 . 
Following an unsuccessful bid for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives in 2000 , he announced his campaign for the U.S. Senate in January 2003 . 
After a primary victory in March 2004 , Obama delivered the keynote address at the Democratic National Convention in July 2004 . 
He was elected to the Senate in November 2004 with 70 % of the vote . 
As a member of the Democratic minority in the 109th Congress , he helped create legislation to control conventional weapons and to promote greater public accountability in the use of federal funds . 
He also made official trips to Eastern Europe , the Middle East , and Africa . 
During the 110th Congress , he helped create legislation regarding lobbying and electoral fraud , climate change , nuclear terrorism , and care for returned U.S. military personnel . 
After announcing his presidential campaign in February 2007 , Obama emphasized withdrawing American troops from Iraq , energy independence , decreasing the influence of lobbyists , and promoting universal health care as top national priorities . 
You are aware , probably , that Barack Obama lost his bearings recently and said that he was going to campaign in all 57 states . 
And most everybody chalked it up to , ` Well , he 's tired . ' 
You know , this is a Dan Quayle moment . 
I mean , Dan Quayle goes out there and misspells ` potato , ' and we still hear jokes about it . 
Barack Obama says he 's gonna go out and campaign in 57 states ! 
He was just tired , you know , it 's been such a long campaign , he 's been so many places , he probably thinks there are 57 states . 
Well , there is a printout from a web site called the International And here is how the second paragraph of an article on that website begins . 
` Every year from 1999 to 2005 the organization of the Islamic conference representing the 57 Islamic states presented a resolution to the United Nations Commission on human rights called commbating . ' 
Obama said he 's going to campaign in 57 states , and it turns out that there There are 57 Islamic states ! 
So did Obama just lose his bearings , or was this a more telling slip , ladies Posted by : rn4601 | September 19 , 2008 4:11 PM | Report abuse You 're kidding , right ? 
You ca n't have it both ways , but you 're going to have it both ways anyway , right , WaPo ? 
- Yea , right ! 
Trusting the Post to do this is like trusting the wolf to guard the chickens . 
Note for `` bedgar '' - -LRB- Keating 5 comment -RRB- It was McCain and Democrat DeConcini who were only told they `` used poor judgement '' - nothing more than that when the verdicts were in . 
Midway , it mentions the Community Reinvestment Act -LRB- CRA -RRB- , which forced banks to make loans to poor credit risks . 
In the mid-1990s -LRB- CRA regulation -RRB- allowed for the first time the securitization of CRA-regulated loans containing subprime mortgages . 
The changes came as radical housing rights groups led by ACORN lobbied for such loans . 
ACORN at the time was represented by a young public-interest lawyer in Chicago by the name of Barack Obama . 
Thus , Obama is uniquely positioned to lead us out of the current financial mess . 
He apparently facilitated it in the first place . 
The record tells us different . 
Obama received more campaign contributions from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , between 1989 and 2008 , than every other federal lawmaker except committee chairman Democrat Christopher Dodd . 
And Obama outstripped the others after only having been in the Senate for three years . 
Based on Federal Election Commission filings , Obama received more contributions than 353 of the 354 lawmakers . 
Then there is Obama s other unsettling tie to the mortgage crisis . 
Obama s Chicago sugar mommy is Penny Pritzger . 
She is finance chairman of Obama s campaign . 
Pritzger s Superior Bank collapsed in 2001 , the largest failure in a decade . 
She was an owner , a president of Superior for five years , and , according to the Chicago Sun Times , active in leadership while on the bank s holding company . 
In February , 2008 , Asian Week analyzed Superior s failure . 
`` The -LRB- sub-prime -RRB- financial engineering that created the Wall Street meltdown was developed by the Pritzkers and Ernst and Young , working with Merrill Lynch to sell bonds securitized by sub-prime mortgages , '' according to Timothy J. Anderson , a whistle-blower on financial and bank fraud , and reported by Asian Week . 
`` The sub-prime mortgages , '' Anderson said , `` were provided to Merrill Lynch , by a nation-wide Pritzker origination system , using Superior as the cash cow , with many millions in FDIC insured deposits . 
Superior s owners were to sub-prime lending , what Michael Milken was to junk bonds . '' 
Other seeds to the mortgage crisis hark back to when then President Bill Clinton super-charged the Community Redevelopment Act , a Carter law to encourage minority home ownership . 
That social engineering and greed helped set up the current train wreck . 
At Fannie Mae , Clinton cronies Franklin Raines and Jamie Gorelick lined their pockets with some $ 175 million and Fannie Mae was fined $ 400 million for SEC and other violations . 
To quote the Investor s Business Daily , `` Market failure ? 
Once again , this crisis has government fingerprints all over it . '' 
Obama s careful parsing of words would have us overlook the evidence and overlook that Jim Johnson , another Fannie Mae former president during Clinton s term , was an Obama economic adviser and , for a time , led Obama s potential vice presidential search team . 
Leave it to Obama to lash out at the free market with his silver tongue in an effort to distract Posted by : suma | September 19 , 2008 4:13 PM | Report abuse All the idiots screaming about `` Socialism '' should pay attention to their republican president . 
Bush just nationalized TRILLIONS of DOLLARS in corporate debt . 
The largest since the Great depression . 
Who is to blame ? 
Keep drinking the KoolAid , republicans ! 
America circles the drain and republicans want to keep flushing . 
Figure it out , and draw your own conclusion . 
B. Hussein Obama could not balance his own checkbook , so watch out if he steals the election and becomes your President ; McCain would put the right personnel in place to manage the problem and with leadership . 
Is your mom also your cousin and your dad your uncle ? 
Inbred trash !! Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 4:15 PM | Report abuse The Washington Post admits its own reporting can not be trusted ; hilarious . 
I choose to believe the WaPo was right and that Franklin Raines was telling the truth when he said the Obama campaign called him for advice on the housing markets . 
Why would he lie when it did not yet matter politically ? 
Democrats and their media puppets only start lying when their power is threatened . 
If you ca n't prove your point with the straight truth -LRB- not the twisted truth or straight lie -RRB- then your point has no value . 
Why on earth would any American want a leader that will lie to the people ? 
Americans are very smart -LRB- republicans , democrats and others -RRB- . 
Forget party lines and the red & blue junk . 
We are Americans and we need our next leader to lead from the bottom up . 
How can you be a true American and really think John McCain is the right pick for this country `` right now '' . 
Maybe he would have been the pick 4\/8 years ago over Bush -LRB- heck i would 've been a better pick in that case -RRB- but as it stands , SMART PEOPLE OF AMERICA , please wake up and see that divide is not healthy . 
Division has been the evil of America for many years and we have a chance now to show our true selves . 
Bush in no way represented me nor any American I know . 
I will not support any party unless anyone knows of a party called `` makes sense '' ? 
The only reason why my vote goes to Obama is because ... for the world and our nation it just `` makes sense '' . 
Which political party is steeped into Fannie and Freddie ? 
Which Party kept stopping strict regulations being imposed on Fannie and Freddie ? 
Which party received hundreds of thousands in contributions over the years from Fannie and Freddie ? 
Which canidate had nothing to say about this crisis for a couple days while it was happening ? 
Which party 's canidate was losing control of the election over the past few weeks ? 
Do n't you think this is quite telling that this is happening just 46 days before the election ? 
John Mccain warned of this happening over 5 years ago when he tried to point it out to our government . 
It was ignored , and two years ago he warned again of the corruption going on with the heads of Fannie and Freddie . 
But guess who 's party voted down 4 times that no investigation should happen with Fannie and Freddie ? 
This is n't hard to figure out where it started and why the trickel down affect has happened . 
Do n't be fooled , the far left who is run by Pelosi would stoop to doing anything to win in Nov. . 
I 'll bet the congress will have this matter completely settled by the weekend , simply because they do n't want an investigation launched and the sad truth to come out about low the hikacked Democrat Party has sunk so low . 
| September 19 , 2008 4:16 PM | Report abuse so mr\/mrs not impressed ... those dem 's that were convicted are n't running for president are they ? 
As a Christian , It truly concerns me that so many other Christians are still falling for Republican manipulation tactics . 
Please consider everything carefully before you vote in November . 
This is a very interesting read concerning McCain 's choice of Palin from an unusual and surprising religious perspective . 
I highly recommend checking it out - and send it to those you think need to hear it : Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 4:16 PM | Report abuse NickinVA states he will give you the `` punch in the nose you all richly deserve '' It 's a direct quote from his own posting directly overhead . 
Because we all know that posts taken out of context are ALWAYS accurate . 
So if any of you in VA wish to have the police give him a call for threatening you , I have the number . 
And if you are wondering how we got into this financial mess ? 
It 's this type of thinking that allowed the GOP to destroy our country for $ 300 a vote , and turn it into The Socialist Republic of America in only eight years . 
This why our country is all screw up . 
MCCain , is a deperate man running for president , just full of lies . 
Is ` nt lies what got us in the war in Iraq . 
what happen to the straight shooter MCCain . 
The Boy turn into a liar like the republican party , just look at Bush and Cheney . 
Plans and ideas -LRB- Read political BS -RRB- give no indication of future actions ... the better indicator is past actions and general character demonstrated over decades . 
Shady past associations speak to both actions and character though McCain is not without spot . 
McCain has been guilty in times past of associating with liberal democrats or fellow RINOS -LRB- IE non conservatives -RRB- and a long time ago he even stood up against communists . 
Oh , and about that voting 90 % of the time with GWB ... I only wish it were true . 
It 's the same as voting for the color of your skin , it 's no different then voting for your race etc. . . 
Launch it get rid of it and let 's get back to what the country was based on and lets get something done !!!! Besides blaming one side or the other get you conservative and liberal prejudice out of the way and look at what each candidate has done and vote for the person that will do the most make it right . . 
it 's simple PEOPLE ... Posted by : get rid of the parties | September 19 , 2008 4:18 PM | Report abuse The truth is neither canadate is to blame for this mess . 
You have two entities acting stupidly : 1 . 
Homeowners taking out loans which they should have never taken . 
Banks giving out loans that they should have never given . 
Then why is the bailout money going to banks and insurance companies dumba $ $ ? 
Why did n't the Obama Campaign complain when the article with reference to Raines in July ? 
It was n't a hot issue then . 
The McCain Camp has highlighted it now ... it matters !! Posted by : kt | September 19 , 2008 4:19 PM | Report abuse So this is a racist ad ? 
93 % of Blacks are voting for the Obama campaign and we credit them with making a thoughtful informed descision . 
But take an add that speaks of 1 multi-millionaire black running for President receiving advise from another multi-millionaire black , throw in an old white woman and wallah - RACISM at its worst . 
Was the Eiffel Tower in the background ? 
The nature of politics is this crucible between half-truths and scathing attacks from partisans . 
When those parties who hold themselves out as neutrals start picking out the one-liners that they are going to go to work `` fact-checking , '' we encounter the initial problem - that is , that to chose this statement as suspect has an element of partisanship in it already . 
When the fact-checking then cites that there was conversations and advice requested from this guy and an article reporting on these conversations occured , BUT the relationship is only really just this little teenie tiny relationship , so McCain is a liar ... then we get the second problem . 
To reach such a conclusion is dishonest . 
How does this reporter know that this is the extent of the relationship ? 
Because the FannyMay Exec . 
Because Obama 's campaign -LRB- in the midst of the financial meltdown -RRB- told him so ? 
Where was the investigation and the digging to consider if there were other connections ? 
To reach the conclusion that McCain is a liar makes many , many assumptions - politically biased assumptions . 
And so , again , I am frustrated not in the reporting itself , but in that the reporting holds itself out as neutral , unbiased , and `` fact '' based - which it clearly is not . 
I ca n't vote for McCain . 
His lies are too transparent . 
He also pays over $ 200,000 a year alone for house `` servants '' . 
Yep , he knows all about our troubles . 
This group is so blinded by a side they 've taken it 's like it has become a battle of religions . 
Did n't Chris Rock teach you anything in Dogma ? 
It 's better to have a `` good idea , idea 's can change '' . 
Beliefs are a different thing altogether . 
Have a good idea . 
How many of you actually read the various plans for both candidates and then researched their record to make an informed decision without the media 's help ? 
I 'd bet slim to none . 
So , who does an ex-POW gotta nominate for VP to get three or four pinocchios around here ? 
I do n't know about Truman but Nixon was n't a VP when he was elected POTUS , and Roosevelt and Johnson were promoted to POTUS by death , not by election . 
For you republicans that means she wanted to break away from the USA . 
If that 's not a traitor , I do n't know what is . 
I know that 25 years ago the Republicans were salavating over `` Reganomics '' and this was widely taught at business schools as a `` good thing . '' 
Of course it was , Gramm-Rudman , Kelsey-Gramm acts all worked to deregulate the banking , S&L 's , and investment firms so they could all dabble in financial tools for clients . 
The problem is that that after 25 years the learning curve for these organizations has apparently been lost on the greed of getting cheap loans and providing loans to those who definately should not have had loans . 
There has to be a revocation of the Gramm series of laws and get the banks back in the banking business , get rid of the S&L 's and put the Investment firms back into the investment firm business . 
This will be a bitter pill for them to swallow , since they will have to stick to their own areas of expertise , but it 's in the best interest for the nation . 
My advice is not to let any of the loan companies off the hook , they ca n't file bankrupcy , their directors ca n't take away large or any golden parachutes and the consumer will not be allowed to simply go into receivership . 
The loans should be extended to 40 and even 50 years , drop points on the loans to the breakeven point and require those who got these bad loans to pay for their misadventures . 
We teach nothing but irresponsibility when we let the lenders get off this easy . 
We the American taxpayer should not be paying for those who lived the high-life while the rest of us could not afford a home because we were responsible adults . 
Do right-wing blog trolls get paid ? 
I can do that . 
Where do I apply : '' ... Listen up , all you liberal extremists . 
McCain says Obama is a front man for Freddie and Fannie Raines , the real culprits in the financial crisis . 
And you 're a bunch of commies if you say otherwise , 'cause John 's a red-white-and-blue Republican , and they always shoot straight and tell the truth without Swiftboating . 
God bless America . '' 
Where do I send the bill ? 
I think this was before GHW Bush & after Martin Van Buren Posted by : Jim | September 19 , 2008 4:25 PM | Report abuse `` Palin was a member of an Alaskan secessionist group . 
For you republicans that means she wanted to break away from the USA . 
I may be an Obama supporter , but lies are lies . 
She was never a member of the AIP . 
She has been a registered Republican since 1983 . 
Her husband was a member of the party , but left after she entered into politics . 
The water is clean and good because some tree-hugging liberal fought for minimum water-quality standards . 
With his first swallow of coffee , he takes his daily medication . 
His medications are safe to take because some stupid commie liberal fought to insure their safety and that they work as advertised . 
All but $ 10 of Joe 's medications are paid for by his employer 's medical plan because some liberal union workers fought their employers for paid medical insurance - now Joe gets it too . 
He prepares his morning breakfast , bacon and eggs . 
Joe 's bacon is safe to eat because some girly-man liberal fought for laws to regulate the meat packing industry . 
In the morning shower , Joe reaches for his shampoo . 
His bottle is properly labeled with each ingredient and its amount in the total contents because some crybaby liberal fought for his right to know what he was putting on his body and how much it contained . 
Joe dresses , walks outside and takes a deep breath . 
the air he breathes is clean because some environmentalist wacko liberal fought for laws to stop industries from polluting our air . 
He walks to the subway station for his government-subsidized ride to work . 
It saves him considerable money in parking and transportation fees because some fancy-pants liberal fought for affordable public transportation , which gives everyone the opportunity to be a contributor . 
Joe begins his work day . 
He has a good job with excellent pay , medical benefits , retirement , paid holidays and vacation because some lazy liberal union members fought and died for these working standards . 
Joe 's employer pays these standards because Joe 's employer does n't want his employees to call the union . 
If Joe is hurt on the job or becomes unemployed , he 'll get a worker compensation or unemployment check because some stupid liberal did n't think he should lose his home because of his temporary misfortune . 
Its noontime and Joe needs to make a bank deposit so the can pay some bills . 
Joe 's deposit is federally insured by the FSLIC because some godless liberal wanted to protect Joe 's money from unscrupulous bankers who ruined the banking system before the GreatDepression . 
Joe has to pay his Fannie Mae-underwritten mortgage and his below-market federal student loan because some elitist liberal decided that Joe and the government would be better off if he was educated and earned more money over his lifetime . 
After work this evening , Joe plans to visit his father at his farm home in the country . 
He gets in his car for the drive . 
His car is among the safest in the world because some America-hating liberal fought for car safety standards . 
He arrives at his boyhood home . 
His was the third generation to live in the house financed by Farmers ' Home Administration because bankers did n't want to make rural loans . 
The house did n't have electricity until some big-government liberal stuck his nose where it did n't belong and demanded rural electrification . 
Joe is happy to see his father , who is now retired and lives on Social Security and a union pension because some wine-drinking , cheese-eating liberal made sure he could take care of himself so Joe would n't have to . 
Joe gets back in his car for the ride home , and turns on a radio talk show . 
The radio host keeps saying that liberals are bad and conservatives are good . 
He does n't mention that the beloved Republicans have fought against every protection and benefit Joe enjoys throughout his day . 
Joe agrees : `` We do n't need those big-government liberals ruining our lives ! 
After all , I 'm a self-made man who believes everyone should take care of themselves , just like I have . '' 
A newspaper said Palin had an affair with her husband 's business partner and lied about it . 
A newspaper said that Palin 's baby : Trig , is actually her daughter 's baby . 
A newspaper said that McCain committed tax evasion to avoid paying taxes on two of his properties and lied about it . 
I guess this is the sort of stuff that Obama should be running in his commercials . 
If any person in the media says it it must be true huh ? 
After reading all of these comments , I see that only the nit-wits defend Posted by : Nick in WI | September 19 , 2008 4:27 PM | Report abuse Reply to : rtfanning | September 19 , 2008 12:38 PM You said - `` Get a clue . . 
take it from a 30 year finance professional ... '' So , as a `` finance professional '' , did you see this meltdown coming and move your money accordingly , or does your `` finance professionalism '' consist of having attended a tax preparation course ! 
McCain , you wildly exaggerated because you sourced - The Washington Post ??????? Posted by : John Hansen | September 19 , 2008 4:28 PM | Report abuse Can anyone say Keating Five ? 
John McCain vacationed numerous times at Charles Keating 's luxurious estate in the Bahamas , rode around on Keating 's private jet free of charge . 
Cindy invested millions in Keating 's real estate ventures - and then when it became apparent that Keating 's Lincoln Savings and Loan was going to be charged by the SEC with fraud , McCain intervened with four other , on the take Senators , to stall the investigation . 
He said , '' I showed poor judgment . '' 
That was an understatement . 
People lost their life 's savings and the United States was out 2.5 billion dollars . 
Keating went to jail for five years . 
John Mccain remained in the Senate . 
The old goat has no honor or integrity , and he is losing what memory he ever had . 
Time for him to retire to whichever of his wife 's `` homes , '' that he is able to remember she owns . 
McGoo , the moose hunter and her `` dude , '' must end this lying charade before they bring our country down . 
Why insert race into this story ? 
If Obama is elected do we get a racial under-current for 4 years , or do we with McCain ? 
How do we make it just stop ? 
You are exactly correct . 
Pfft , you know if McCain loses , then Cindy is divorcing his wrinkled butt . 
She 's 18 years younger than him and they signed a prenup . 
I doubt she 'll stick around . 
It amazes me how you guys carry little or no objectivity `` Seventy-seven percent of the Illinois to your suppor for a candidate . 
Please show the world that your democracy is worthy of emulating . 
Your blogs , newscast , TV comentators , News Castors are all cheapening the high ideals I have of the American people and the world view I have of you as champion of democracy . 
You people are displaying a great degree of bitterness , hate , grudge , racism , sexism , interalia ... The cansidates lie the you the supporter comes to a blog to lie to defend your candidate . 
Look at this quote relative to what was posted on this blog before by ` VIJAY ' Seventy-seven percent of the Illinois Democrat 's commercials were negative during the week after the Republican National Convention , compared with 56 percent of the spots run by McCain . 
Ken Goldstein , who directed the study by the Wisconsin Advertising Project , based at the University of Wisconsin , says the pattern was a reversal from earlier months , in which McCain 's advertising was consistently more negative than Obama 's In the end a country will get the leader it desreves . 
We need to hold those who stalled , delayed , and killed attempts to reform Fannie and Freddie ACCOUNTABLE . 
John McCain , 2005 , Congressional Record : `` I join as a cosponsor of the Federal Housing Enterprise Regulatory Reform Act of 2005 , S. 190 , to underscore my support for quick passage of GSE regulatory reform legislation . 
If Congress does not act , American taxpayers will continue to be exposed to the enormous risk that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac pose to the housing market , the overall financial system , and the economy as a whole . 
I urge my colleagues to support swift action on this GSE reform legislation . '' 
Bill Blocked by democrats . 
When opposing Fannie Mae reofrm in 2003 , here was another democrat -LRB- from the New York Times , 9\/11\/2003 -RRB- : '' These two entities Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are not facing any kind of financial crisis , said Representative Barney Frank of Massachusetts , the ranking Democrat on the Financial Services Committee . 
The more people exaggerate these problems , the more pressure there is on these companies , the less we will see in terms of affordable housing . 
The WaPo says that Franklin Raines claimed to have taken calls from the Obama campaign on economic and housing issues . 
If he answered them it makes him an advisor . 
Did McCain say he was in the inner circle ? 
If so say where . 
Most people who consume Obama 's `` chocolate '' wait for a bowl and a spoon . 
Journalists are busy slurping it up at the source . 
I do n't want to sound like thye little boy in The Emperor 's New Clothes but guys I got news for you . 
It is s \*\* t. Posted by : aloysius1 | September 19 , 2008 4:31 PM | Report abuse Hey NickinVA Im calling you a liar and Ill tell you to your face and then again when your face is stuck to a piece of my pretty Brooklyn street . 
Your bad policies and bad leadership have turned America into the thing we most hated . 
You let the terrorists win . 
You bankrupted our country , destroyed out educational system , and you took our childrens freedom ... . 
for $ 300.00 !! Go ahead and vote for McCain . 
What difference can it make now . 
You already killed us . 
Six years of Republican rule . 
Two more years of Repubican deadlock in Congress . 
Eight years of uncontrolled spending on things 80 % of America never wanted . 
Policies 70 % of America opposed . 
McCain and Palen still out there trying to force us into what they want instead of representing what we want . 
GOP should be in jail for treason . 
The Alaska governor was absolutely correct when she opined that `` community organizer '' is not a job . 
Mr. Obama is a product of the Chicago political machine , known universally to be totally corrupt since the days of Mayor Daley - - the first Mayor Daley . 
Nothing has changed since in the Chicago political machine . 
Governor Palin has executive experience and decision-making ability and will make a more than competent vice president . 
Obama talks about reform and all the changes he wants to make yet he would not know good policy or reform if it walked up and bit him in the ass . 
I firmly believe that Mr. Obama is trying to change this race into a referendum on racial politics . 
Black America is supporting Mr. Obama based solely on race from what I can glean by talking to people and reading editorials written by the black community . 
Oprah wants to choose our next president and in throwing her support behind Mr. Obama seems to be confident that she has done so ; I look forward to disappointing her . 
Governor Palin and Senator McCain are the obvious choice due to their experience in government and in the private sector . 
The smear campaign is too obvious to fool anyone although the democrats apparently think that they are fooling all of us . 
Sarah Palin is an American patriot . 
John McCain is also an American patriot who has served this country faithfully for nearly 50 years . 
I will take his age over Obama 's arrogance and sense of entitlement all day any day and twice on Sunday . 
It is a testament to the dumbing down of America that Obama is even nominated , and a sad commentary on the condition of our public schools . 
The children of America have become unbelievably stupid in the past generation . 
They have become illiterate in literature , mathematics , science and biology . 
It 's a sad day for the world when the ingenuity of America has been lost to incompetent teachers , poor curriculum and video games . 
In America , incompetent teachers are allowed to continue to teach with no oversight and no way to remove them from the classroom . 
This is a disgrace and disservice to our children , the same children who have grown up to be Obama 's supporters because they 're too ignorant to grasp the concept of economics that wo n't work and promises that no one can keep . 
We need to go down the right path and we need good leadership to take us there . 
We wo n't be getting that from senator Obama , empty rhetoric is all this affirmative action product has to offer -- a talking head that is empty . 
Obama could make it as a lawyer in a high powered law firm even though he has a Harvard law degree . 
His Princeton and Harvard educated wife could n't make it as a lawyer either so she went to work for welfare hospital that he funnels money to in order to justify her $ 300,000 a year salary . 
Her job pays $ 48,000 to anyone whose husband is not a sitting U.S. senator so there can be only one reason she is so massively overpaid -- can anyone say kickback ? 
Liberal mainstream media continues to cover up and worship Obama as if he were the second coming of Christ . 
He slipped up and admitted to being a Muslim during an interview and the so called journalist corrected him with what he should have said . 
It 's just another example of how badly the liberal mainstream media , of whom Oprah is their goddess , wants Obama to be our president . 
I ca n't think of anything that would be a bigger disaster for America than President Obama . 
Is the McCain ad correct or not ? 
You begin by saying the evidence is flimsy and then you proceed to confirm that the statements in the ad are technically correct in the two points included below . 
So why the need to go back to Ms. Huslin for clarification on what has already been printed ? 
What facts are actually being checked here , the McCain ad or Ms. Huslin 's story ? 
The Post is a better paper than this . 
Brian Rogers points to three items in the Washington Post in July and August . 
It turns out that the three items -LRB- including an editorial -RRB- ... 2 . 
Anita Huslin , who wrote ... that Raines , ... `` taken calls from Barack Obama 's presidential campaign seeking his advice on mortgage and housing policy matters . '' 
The Alaska governor was absolutely correct when she opined that `` community organizer '' is not a job . 
Mr. Obama is a product of the Chicago political machine , known universally to be totally corrupt since the days of Mayor Daley - - the first Mayor Daley . 
Nothing has changed since in the Chicago political machine . 
Governor Palin has executive experience and decision-making ability and will make a more than competent vice president . 
Obama talks about reform and all the changes he wants to make yet he would not know good policy or reform if it walked up and bit him in the ass . 
I firmly believe that Mr. Obama is trying to change this race into a referendum on racial politics . 
Black America is supporting Mr. Obama based solely on race from what I can glean by talking to people and reading editorials written by the black community . 
Oprah wants to choose our next president and in throwing her support behind Mr. Obama seems to be confident that she has done so ; I look forward to disappointing her . 
Governor Palin and Senator McCain are the obvious choice due to their experience in government and in the private sector . 
The smear campaign is too obvious to fool anyone although the democrats apparently think that they are fooling all of us . 
Sarah Palin is an American patriot . 
John McCain is also an American patriot who has served this country faithfully for nearly 50 years . 
I will take his age over Obama 's arrogance and sense of entitlement all day any day and twice on Sunday . 
It is a testament to the dumbing down of America that Obama is even nominated , and a sad commentary on the condition of our public schools . 
The children of America have become unbelievably stupid in the past generation . 
They have become illiterate in literature , mathematics , science and biology . 
It 's a sad day for the world when the ingenuity of America has been lost to incompetent teachers , poor curriculum and video games . 
In America , incompetent teachers are allowed to continue to teach with no oversight and no way to remove them from the classroom . 
This is a disgrace and disservice to our children , the same children who have grown up to be Obama 's supporters because they 're too ignorant to grasp the concept of economics that wo n't work and promises that no one can keep . 
We need to go down the right path and we need good leadership to take us there . 
We wo n't be getting that from senator Obama , empty rhetoric is all this affirmative action product has to offer -- a talking head that is empty . 
Obama could make it as a lawyer in a high powered law firm even though he has a Harvard law degree . 
His Princeton and Harvard educated wife could n't make it as a lawyer either so she went to work for welfare hospital that he funnels money to in order to justify her $ 300,000 a year salary . 
Her job pays $ 48,000 to anyone whose husband is not a sitting U.S. senator so there can be only one reason she is so massively overpaid -- can anyone say kickback ? 
Liberal mainstream media continues to cover up and worship Obama as if he were the second coming of Christ . 
He slipped up and admitted to being a Muslim during an interview and the so called journalist corrected him with what he should have said . 
It 's just another example of how badly the liberal mainstream media , of whom Oprah is their goddess , wants Obama to be our president . 
I ca n't think of anything that would be a bigger disaster for America than President Obama . 
This is why I have no doubt in my mind that McCain will win the election hands down . 
Honor Courage and Commitment . 
Those words and the meaning they convey stays with a Navy officer for life . 
It appears he left them when he checked out of the Hilton : - -LRB- It is a dishonor for him to wear a Navy hat anymore . 
Until recently Obama was ACORN 's attorney . 
Acorn is the largest extremist group in the US with approximately 350,000 members . 
While ACORN does a number of good things for their members , one of their goals is the overthrow of the US government through massive election fraud . 
Acorn has been implicated in election fraud in 15 states since 2004 and are currently under investigation in Michigan , Colorado , Ohio , and Missouri . 
The Obama campaign has hired them for $ 800,000 to handle voter registration in the swing states . 
They say what we know Is just what they teach us ; And we 're so ignorant 'Cause every time they can reach us Through political strategy They keep us hungry And when you gonna get some food Your brother got to be your enemy . 
In the future perhaps they 'll take the Post with a grain of salt like the rest of us do . 
Can you '' I can . 
It 's this old guy who has the beginning stages of Alzheimers . 
His name is John McCain . 
He basically wants to drive this country further into the ground than it already is . 
For those of you who are supporting McCain and this whole Fannie Mae crap , you may want to take a minute to read this . 
Appearing on CNN s American Morning on Sept. 16 , 2008 , McCain sought to blame much of the crisis on Wall Street greed and inept or corrupt government regulators . 
Ask any American citizen who has been the victim of a bureaucrat or a bureaucracy , McCain said . 
I said two years ago that the Fannie and Freddie thing was a very serious problem and we had to work on it . 
And I have always opposed greed of Wall Street and I know how we can fix this . 
McCain echoed his remarks later in the day during a speech in Tampa , saying , Two years ago , I warned the administration and the Congress that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac needed to be fixed . 
It turns out , the problem was even bigger . 
They waited too long , and now we have a housing crisis , three bailouts with taxpayers money , and a financial crisis . 
In both appearances , McCain was referring to his 2006 decision to sign on to a Republican-led regulatory overhaul of the mortgage-financing firms , which both went through multibillion-dollar accounting scandals earlier in the decade . 
The occasion that prompted McCain s involvement was the release of a 340-page report from the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight that concluded that Fannie Mae had manipulated earnings and violated basic accounting principles . 
It describes an arrogant and unethical corporate culture in which executives were more concerned about their bonuses than meeting the company s housing mission . 
The findings , based on a 27-month investigation and resulting in a $ 400-million fine paid to the government , prompted McCain to join other critics and call for more scrutiny of Fannie and its sibling , Freddie Mac . 
If Congress does not act , American taxpayers will continue to be exposed to the enormous risk that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac pose to the housing market , the overall financial system , and the economy as a whole , McCain declared in a May 26 , 2006 , news release . 
So it s true that McCain spoke out after a widely read report drew attention to chicanery at the firms . 
But the implication in McCain 's remarks is that his remarks in 2006 were in some way a warning about the financial markets disaster that struck in 2008 . 
That strikes us as quite a stretch . 
McCain received $ 21,500 from lobbyist for Fannie Mae over 20 years . 
That is not something I like to see . 
But what about Obama ? 
He received $ 126,349 over less than four years ! 
McCain received an average of a little more than $ 1,000 per year . 
Obama received a little more than $ 31,500 per year and he is a junior Senator in his first term ? 
Here are the top three recipients of Fannie Mae money since 1989 : There are eight Republicans in the top 20 recipients - McCain is not one of them . 
Of the other Democrats in the top 20 we find : On top of this , John McCain was a cosponsor of the FEDERAL HOUSING ENTERPRISE REGULATORY REFORM ACT OF 2005 . 
His comments of May 25 , 2006 in support of this act may be found in the Congressional Record . 
One point from his remarks needs to be emphasized : `` If Congress does not act , American taxpayers will continue to be exposed to the enormous risk that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac pose to the housing market , the overall financial system , and the economy as a whole . '' 
Given this - how amazing is it that Obama is trying to blame McCain for today 's economic crisis ? 
He was one of the few who tried to raise an alarm - three years ago ! 
A reasonable person would view these facts as particularly damning for Obama ... Posted by : Glenn | September 19 , 2008 4:35 PM | Report abuse Posted by : James | September 19 , 2008 12:29 PM -- `` Economics 101 should be a requirement for all liberals where they learn supply and demand . 
Communism is not patriotism . '' 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------- Sir , you are an idiot . 
McCain did author a bill to control FM and the Democrats killed it . 
If FM\/FM had refused to back the sub prime paper the lenders would n't have made the loans . 
Obama took much more from FM\/FM in a much shorter period of time . 
FACT If the media stuck to the facts and got out of the opinion business we might actually get some news . 
So much for straight talk . 
- His wife said American is a mean country . 
- His wife then said after 44 years of her life she was proud of America for the 1st time . 
- He goes overseas to speak in front of the Germans but ca n't see the troops . 
- Does n't think he needs to wear a flag pin but then starts wearing one a week later . 
-LRB- Stick to your beliefs if you truely believe that way -RRB- - Does n't put his hand on his heart during the National Anthem because thats what grampa told him he did n't need to but then starts doing it after people complain . 
-LRB- Again stand by what you supposedly believe -RRB- - Is friends with Aires -LRB- a terrorist -RRB- and Wright -LRB- a racist -RRB- . 
\* This guy is a true American . 
I can see why people are so excited to have this great American lead our country . 
\* Every bullet point is a FACT !! Posted by : Dan | September 19 , 2008 2:59 PM Give it up Dan , not all of us received our ` How to Embrace Fascism ' handbooks in the mail . 
And every time I point it out to a wing nut , they always answer that everything THEY benefit from personally is the proper place of the government . 
Anything anyone else benefits from that does n't affect them personally is nanny government . 
The reporting in Post is heavily tilted to Obama favorably . 
When does the Keating Five card get to be played ? 
Go off on tangents but this is the only direct correlation of McCain 's position then , exonerated but never proved not guilty , to his position now . 
It is a banking issue that perhaps Obama is not as experienced about but McCain should rightfully be asked about his judgement then and how that judgement impacts on all further decisions he has made , primarily his irresponsible choice for vice president if no other reason than her lack of experience and lack political engagement in what is going on in the world . 
It 's hard to look in the mirror everyday for all of us at one time or another , but McCain should take a serious look and decide which McCain is currently running for president and which McCain , if he wins , will be the commander in chief of this country . 
OLD are te financial institutes that do ` nt work . 
OLD is McCain therefore he can not copy like he did Change . 
Because he is OLD and never can play the NEW guy . 
Amaricans shoud admid that their capitalism and democracy -LRB- the OLD -RRB- should change . 
That 's a hard thing for OLD people and figter pilots that build america . 
But building it does n't give the right to bring america down by repeating old dreams . 
They just want something for nothing , like the bums holding the `` I 'll work for food , '' signs . 
Liberals here , like Middle-Eastern men , think they need a dictator to tell them when to wipe their nose . 
America is wobling thanks to the `` I will work for Food ... NOT '' mentality of liberals . 
They wiil follow Obama and Wright , his @ -RRB- YEAR MENTOR to the gates of what ever they believe or do n't believe in . 
I 'll never vote for another Democrat . 
That 's all that I can say ... Posted by : Mark | September 19 , 2008 4:38 PM | Report abuse Posted by : Chris | September 19 , 2008 4:38 PM | Report abuse Obama shoud use OLD versus NEW instead of change . 
OLD are te financial institutes that do ` nt work . 
OLD is McCain therefore he can not copy like he did Change . 
Because he is OLD and never can play the NEW guy . 
Amaricans shoud admid that their capitalism and democracy -LRB- the OLD -RRB- should change . 
That 's a hard thing for OLD people and figter pilots that build america . 
But building it does n't give the right to bring america down by repeating old dreams . 
Does n't anyone remember the Keating Five scandal ?!? There 's one candidate who 's had close ties to banks his entire career , and his name does n't start with an O. Posted by : Sarah O | September 19 , 2008 4:38 PM | Report abuse The irony here is that the only way to claim McCain is n't lying is to defend the integrity of the very newspaper that they claimed was biased , dishonest , and unreliable . 
It makes me grin just a little . 
Sorry , but someone had to say it . 
All this hate does nothing for anyone , except a decrepit few who thrive on it . 
Want to make a real difference ? 
Here 's how : Where has the middle ground gone ? 
It sure seems devastated by `` salt the earth '' tactics of each sides failed scorched earth policies . 
-LRB- And no I do n't care who started it . -RRB- 
The future of the U.S. -LRB- and in general all humanity if ya ask me -RRB- lies in the successes of our past . 
Do it now of suffer the consequences . 
Join me , in respecting everyone 's opinion even when I do n't agree with it . 
Even when I might think it is a bit short sighted , or even downright goofy . 
Now to my opinion on this article : `` The McCain campaign is clearly exaggerating wildly in attempting to depict Franklin Raines as a close adviser to Obama on `` housing and mortgage policy . '' '' 
This entire sentence is itself an exaggeration . 
`` Exaggerating widly '' ? 
C'mon give me a break . 
Re-read the McCain ad . 
Having read the profile any sensible person could deduce from Mr. Raines ' statement that he is\/was a advising O'bama in the area of his expertise . 
The reader is left to imagine to what extent . 
If the reporter did n't intend that , she should have contextualized the statement within her original article . 
We 'll call many of these loans `` sub-prime '' . 
Media ignores the connection . 
Under the guise of expanded home ownership opportunity , Fannie Mae , run by former Clinton cabinet member , Franklin Raines , gets heavily into guaranteeing subprime loans . 
Fannie Mae is a big donor to Obama . 
Obama rakes in more donations from Wall Street than any candidate in history . 
Loans get under-written that have no chance of being paid back . 
Frank Raines collects $ 20 million severence , despite $ 6 billion accounting scandal . 
All the while , Democrat Barney Frank protects his patrons at Fannie Mae from reasonable controls , including legislation that McCain sponsored in 2005 . 
U.S. taxpayers bail out Fannie Mae , Wall Street , `` subprime '' borrowers , etc. . 
None of this matters , of course . 
It 's George Bush 's fault . 
Just like cloudy days and light beer are George Bush 's fault . 
Is nobody paying attention ? 
Mr. McCain you are wrong . 
Still he can vote present , yes or No does not mean . 
After Treasury and Fedral Reserve plan , will you veto it or take another month to presnt their plan by the time five more banks gone . 
One more thing he further says that Fed should help the main street also . 
So far Obama camp does not understand that without Wall Street there will be no Main Street . 
Will Obama 's Govt . 
will provide jobs to all without Wall street . 
Yes there is only one way he can do it , let create a Sovit Uninon style Govt . 
He raked in nearly 4 Mil last year and bought himself a Million dollar house from a crooked real estate dealer . 
Just like the average joe in America . 
but let 's overlook that . 
Then he spent the past 20 years of his life in the church of a racist American hating pastor , but fortunately for him , did n't hear Wright utter one racist or slanderous thing . 
Ok ... It was cool when he was hangin ' with Billy Ayers talkin ' about blowin ' up the USA , snortin ' some Coke , whatever . 
But you stupid libs will overlook these and many other associations that this pathetic loser has had in his life . 
Couple that with a complete lack of experience and 100 + ` Present '' votes while in the senate and you have a real winner . 
Hey , I 'd like to be the president of Microsoft . 
I do n't have any experience but why should that be held against me ? 
Please remember to vote for a genuine individual , then American People would truly benefit . 
What you do Not know about Obama could Hurt you . 
AND WHY JOE BIDEN LIED THAT HIS WIFE WAS KILLED BY A '' DRUNK '' DRIVER ? 
WHAT WAS THE MOTIVE FOR LYING THAT THE DRIVER WAS DRUNK ? 
McCain '' s choice of Palin proves McCain to be very smart and keen . 
The world may prefer Obama because it would be easier for them to deal with In-Experienced Obama . 
Do we need Ethnic\/Race Quota in US government ? 
I suppose that one has to earn the privilege . 
Does Obama deserve that ! 
Please keep Obama as Senator Here in Illinois ; How could you guarantee that Obama would be a good president ? 
Please Keep Senator Obama here for the state of Illinois . 
Thanks How could you guarantee that Obama would be a good president ? 
Thanks Dear People , when you think that you could not achieve some tasks or multiple tasks , please do Not think that nobody else could achieve since people are different , there are way smarter people out there and Sarah Palin are among them . 
Please do research in quantum , metaphysics about that truth . 
Obama could be Senator , at the best ! 
Please vote for President McCain and Vice President Sarah Palin . 
God Bless America Forever . 
Katie Couric , we trust that you are as keen and smart as Tim Russert -- We must pray as if everything depended on God and work as if everything depended upon us . 
He received $ 126,349 over less than four years ! '' 
From what I 've read , that 's from the employees , as individuals , not from lobbyists . 
The more you spew your hatred the more you help McCain . 
The Obama hate machine keeps on rollin ' ... destroy all in it 's path ... keep those radical friends happy -LRB- Ayers , Rezko , Wright , ACORN -RRB- hie your past and definately hide your true position on everything . . 
Why take a position . . 
just VOTE PRESENT . . 
I think in true OBAMA fashion all Democrats should VOTE present during the election . . 
it 's what OBAMA would do given a tough choice . 
He 's not war hero as he was simply a pilot who did n't complete his objective and became a POW , nothing heroic about that ! 
The old coot is senile , poor health and fairly stupid as the world can see by his lack of intelligence when he make accusations on topics he knows nothing about ! 
There is NO WAY IN HE11 McShame\/Putin will ever be in the Oval Office ! 
Who wants a lying President just like the one in the White House now '' Ever hear the name Bill Clinton ? 
He 's your guy AND the first black president so that makes it OK does n't it ? 
It is really silly to use this as an attack point . 
What 's the implied suggestion , that Washington to be completely disconnected from financial markets ? 
I think Obama 's attack on McCain 's advisers is as ill concieved as McCain 's attack on Obama 's -LRB- although , in this respect McCain is certainly more guilty than Obama -RRB- What is more important to point out is that it is the Republican party 's mythological belief in the benefits of de-regulatory policies coupled with an idealized and unrealistic conception of the `` Free Market '' that has gotten us into this mess . 
However , it is questionable , to my mind , whether they actually believe this drivel or are just cynical puppets of business interests . 
McCain 's sudden embrace of regulatory reform , at the very last moment when the economy is teetering over the abyss , is the most self serving and cynical political ploy I have ever seen . 
Make no mistake , if Republicans have their way we will see regulatory band-aids rather than full reform , and I imagine that in no less than 4 years we will be seeing bills aimed at poking holes in whatever new regulations arise from our current precarious situation . 
EVERYTHING in your post was either incorrect , racist , or mind-numbingly un-informed . 
An example : `` He slipped up and admitted to being a Muslim during an interview '' WHERE IS YOUR PROOF , LIAR ? 
Where do you freaks come up with this ? 
Do you honestly think that Obama will , after taking the oath on his Koran , suddenly say `` HAHA ! 
I tricked you ! '' ? 
Go back to Mayberry , you racist hick . 
Blacks will vote for Blacks ... look at the record ... its the `` OJ factor '' . 
There is a credit crunch , but exactly where is the economic crisis ? 
Obama will redistribute your income ... to someone less deserving ... . 
that 's the crisis . 
Obama knows zero about economics . 
He has been the lead senator initiating de-regulation after de-regulation - as in what got us where we are now . 
So can I actually believe what your reporters write anymore ? 
A right wing conservative bible thumper ? 
Bring on ANY Republican in office right now , I will call them LIARS to their face any day . 
Rezko , Wright , Ayers and ACORN are great mentors and friends to have ... Obama has all of them . 
We have nothing to worry about with him as President ... Iran is a small country and posses no threat to us or to Israel ... Their leader -LRB- Hitler 2 -RRB- wants nothing more than to destroy ever Jewish person on the face of the earth . . 
and everyone who disagrees with him . 
I think he just needs a BIG HUG . 
`` Usens dumb republicans '' can at least read and understand that what Obama stand for is not America . 
Read his book , he even states that if he is elected president and things really get bad in Iran etc , that he will side with the Musslims . 
Does that not bother anyone . 
How can we put anyone in office that can say that . 
Please read his own book and then ask yourself if you want to be in his control . 
Remember the musslims hate Americans and want to cut off our heads . 
I used to think the Washington Post was a rather biased news source , now I know it is ! 
One thing you forgot to do , and I think this is truly incumbent upon you , is you did not tell ALL of us who have read your work that we were supposed to wear our Obama glasses when we read any one of your 3 mentions of Obama and Raines being connected . 
That way if any questions came up later we would be able to overlook it easily , and if by some miracle the connection became a benefit we would see it as gold . 
You have successfully completely demolished the little shred of credibility you had left in one fell swoop . 
For the first time in thirty years , I will be voting for a democrat . 
It 's the republican parties fault that our economy is such a mess right now . 
VERY INTELLIGENT HERE HUH PEEPS ? 
John McCain may not remember his role -LRB- KEATING FIVE -RRB- but a bunch of us here in Arizona sure do ... Posted by : gdw | September 19 , 2008 4:47 PM | Report abuse How funny since Mcbush has 20 guys from Fannie Mae working for him Posted by : jay | September 19 , 2008 4:47 PM | Report abuse rn4601 : `` if he is elected president and things really get bad in Iran etc , that he will side with the Musslims . 
Does that not bother anyone . 
How can we put anyone in office that can say that . 
Please read his own book and then ask yourself if you want to be in his control . 
Remember the musslims hate Americans and want to cut off our heads . '' 
i know you are feeling uncomfortable now that the race is going neck and neck . 
it 's just your subconscious speaking to you and it 's saying President Barack Obama wins by a landslide . 
Does that not bother anyone . 
How can we put anyone in office that can say that . 
Please read his own book and then ask yourself if you want to be in his control . 
Remember the musslims hate Americans and want to cut off our heads . 
He is not `` black '' he is biracial . 
He is not `` African American '' since his African family was not forced into slave ships , and sold into bondage . 
African American is an ethnic group , not a skin color . 
He is Caucasian American and his father was from Africa . 
He did not want Hillary Clinton on the ticket with him because he wanted to be the only pereson `` making history '' as a `` black '' American . 
He won the Illinois Senate seat because his opponent was Alan Keyes . 
He accepted primary campaign votes he did not get in Michigan , where he was not on the ballot . 
I take it you have never served or been on a mission . 
As a radical left wing nut I am sure you hate the military . 
Too bad for you that you are not bright enough to realize that without people like McCain protecting `` your rights '' that you might live in a country where you can say the things you do . 
I can see why Obama is your man . . 
when the times get tough . . 
or hang with known terrorists and racists or convicts . 
Perhaps do a few lines of coke while your at it ! 
both Obama and McCain have been exaggerating everything they can ; it 's unbelievable the stuff Obama 's camp exaggerates concerning Sarah Palin ... I love the way Mr. Dobbs down plays the calls to Raines and how they were just `` general discussions '' ... rriiiiggghhhtt . 
McCain went so far as to plant questions on state officials meant to embarrass Rose Mofford , then acting Governor , because she couldn t possibly know the answers . 
McCain hired a professional camera crew to secretly film Mofford s testimony in hopes it could damage her in a recall election . 
When McCain took a lunch break during the testimony and told good friend Pat Murphy , then editor of the Arizona Republic , about his scheme to embarrass Mofford and throw her out of office , Murphy was stunned and asked why McCain would stoop so low . 
McCain replied , I ll embarrass a Democrat any time I get the chance . 
Murphy said that was the beginning of the end of his friendship and respect for John McCain . 
Murphy s not alone , Silverman points out many Arizona citizens who lost all respect for McCain once they saw his real side . 
This is a long , in-depth article , with many examples of what makes McCain a corrupt man who shouldn t be allowed near a political office , nevermind running for - or serving in one . 
If you plan on voting in November , set aside a few minutes and read Silverman s scathing article . '' 
Go smoke another joint in your hybrid and pretend that Obama knows what he is doing . '' 
Ok , first of all , I do n't smoke pot or do any other illegal drugs , and few of my liberal friends do , either . 
At any rate , drug use is n't a partisan issue ! 
I assure you there are conservatives who have used illegal drugs -LRB- our current President , for instance -RRB- . 
I 'd drive a hybrid , but my hatchback gets pretty good mileage and cost about $ 10k less . 
That 's something for you SUV drivers to think about next time you pay $ 100 to fill your tank 's tank . 
To NickinVA : if you think your party affiliation or opinions justify violent threats , all I can say is you just be ready to get your \* ss kicked when you decide to throw that first punch . 
For the first time in thirty years , I will be voting for a republican . 
It 's the democratic parties ' fault that our economy is such a mess right now . 
Last night it was Franklin Raines -LRB- a critique that the New Republic had to concede was accurate , despite Team Obama just about insisting they had never heard of the guy -RRB- . 
Today it 's Jim Johnson . 
I 'm sure we 'll get ads on the donations , soon . 
BARACK OBAMA : It would be unacceptable for executives of these institutions to earn a windfall . 
ANNCR : ... Is not what he does . 
Meet Jim Johnson , former Fannie Mae CEO . 
Fannie cooked the books and Johnson made millions . 
Then Obama asked him to pick his VP . 
And raise thousands for his campaign . 
JOHN MCCAIN : I 'm John McCain and I approve this message . 
I wonder if the Obama campaign recycles their tired refrain , `` this is n't the Jim Johnson I knew . '' 
The American people do n't need you ! 
Obama has solutions that will work for the American people , the working class , the people who made your wealth possible . 
We do n't need more wealthy dirt bags hoarding all our tax money and extorting our Treasury dollars for their own personal gain . 
lol Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 4:53 PM | Report abuse `` The McCain video attempts to link Obama to Franklin Raines , the former CEO of the bankrupt mortgage giant , Fannie Mae , who also happens to be African American . '' 
If your playing the Race Card , at least get it right . 
Who is the African American that Franklin Raines also happens to be ? 
It sure as heck ca n't be Obama ; he 's mostly caucasian , and then Arab . 
She is a bright woman with a great future but she would be way over her head if anything ever happened to JM . 
McCain made this choice based purely on politics . 
I can accept that politics play a role but not the whole choice . 
I thought McCain was an honest straight guy but the past several months have revealed him to be anything but . 
His campaign is more based on lies and distortions than any candidate I have watched in my 53 years . 
Initially I was skeptical about Obama but I have become impressed with his higher degree of integrity . 
And , after this crazy week on Wall Street , et al , I see that he does know what he is talking about . 
Obama will get my vote . 
Did you see AC360 the other night and how much Obama lied about the lobbiest ! 
I hate right wing and left wing extremeist ! '' 
Does `` lobbiest '' mean the most lobby of them all ? 
What are `` extremeist '' ? 
I do n't think you need to blame others for your mental problems ; your foot seems to be on the accelerator . 
let not those men be the ladder mccain climbs to satiate his meglomania who thinks this flunky -LRB- 3 from the bottom in a class of 560 -RRB- would have graduated , let alone got into the NA if his daddy and grand pa were n't admirals ? 
You remember savings and loans , do n't you ? 
`` I 'm John McCain , and I approve this lie '' Posted by : Another Voter | September 19 , 2008 4:56 PM | Report abuse the Musslims want to cut off our heads BECAUSE OF OLD WHITE MEN . 
Young Black Men die everyday because of OLD WHITE MEN . 
You want to blame anyone for the state of the world OLD WHITE MEN . 
After all that You will elect another one . 
Please look at obama when his teleprompter goes out . 
Oh , this is so much fun you all squirm as you try and salvage your presidential candidate 's campaign while savaging your own credibility . 
IF OBAMA WAS N'T SUCH A GENTLEMAN HIS ADS WOULD BE TRASHING MCCAIN FOR HIS KEATING 5 -LRB- S&L CRISIS -RRB- INVOLVEMENT - MCCAIN ESCAPED PROSECUTION - BUT STILL ACCEPTED MANY JUNKETS ON BEHALF OF THE EVIL MR KEATING WHO WE TAXPAYERS WERE FORCED TO BAIL OUT TO THE TUNE OF HUNDREDS OF BILLIONS OF DOLLAR IN THE 80S . 
WAS N'T MCCAIN SUPPORTING DEREGULATION ALL ALONG - THE PROCESS THAT GOT US INTO THIS MESS AGAIN . 
EGADS - LIES AND MORE LIES - MAKES ME JUST SICK - Posted by : dick | September 19 , 2008 4:58 PM | Report abuse I read in this book about the undercover story of Obama 's involvement with a Black Theology sect , which he has recently condemned to cover up his unpopular beliefs -LRB- Revenge on White people -RRB- , but for years he was a big member , I read that the pastor Rev. Jeremiah Wright actually supported this Black Socialist Mortgage Loan Firms , such as Fannie Mae . 
Bush let them go to crumbles , asked Kanye West . 
If you study the facts , you will find the McCain Ad is not off the mark , rather you will even find more dark dirt on Barack Hussein Obama and his Black Communist sect . 
If you ask where you should start , I recommend the shocking book called `` Communicatio in Sacris '' , which you can get at Barnes & Noble : Please look at obama when his teleprompter goes out . 
I `` was '' an Obama supporter but I have changed my mind - \* His selection of Biden bothers me . 
He 's not very bright and his daily gaffe machine proves that he is in way over his head . 
Obama should have gone with Hillary , but Obama made this choice based purely on politics . 
I can accept that politics play a role but not the whole choice . 
I thought Obama was an honest straight guy but the past several months have revealed him to be anything but . 
His campaign is more based on lies and distortions than any candidate I have watched in my 43 years . 
Initially I was skeptical about McCain but I have become impressed with his higher degree of integrity . 
And , after this crazy week on Wall Street , et al , I see that he does know what he is talking about . 
McCain will get my vote . 
Obaaaama has been given the royal treatment just to keep things close . 
When the media unleashes the torrent of `` bad stuff '' surround him there will be NO putting these horses back into the barn ! 
You can not fight God ! 
He brought her to McCain to save us from Obama . '' 
If God wants Sara Palin in the White House then I guess no one needs to vote for her . 
In the Washington Post ? 
Come on , Fact Checker , ca n't you see the utter hypocrisy of discrediting your own paper to further go into the tank for Obama ? 
I 'll be glad to tell you like I have told many others who get behind McCain . 
You are liars and thieves . 
You have taken this country down the toilet and it 's time to take it back . 
McCain is a liar . 
Palin is a lie he told . 
He is a sell out and will say or do anything to get into the White House before he croaks . 
Now if that makes you want to punch me in the nose , great . 
You just might get away with it , too . 
But that does n't make McCain less of a liar . 
And if I ever had the oportunity to call McCain a liar to his face , that will be the first thing that comes out . 
Maybe he 'll have someone less than 72 years old around to give me that richly deserved punch . 
He 'd have to reach upwards more than his little broke arms will let him I am sure . 
Here 's their conclusion ... `` The McCain campaign is clearly exaggerating wildly in attempting to depict Franklin Raines as a close adviser to Obama on `` housing and mortgage policy . '' 
The advert does not state any of this . 
Watch it ; it 's at top the of article . 
Do not take their word for what it says . 
Here is what the ad says -LRB- view it for yourself -RRB- ... `` Who advises Obama ? 
The `` New York Post '' says it 's Raines ... '' There is no exageration as this is precisely true . 
You even confirm this ! 
You can make things up all you want , but the facts are there . 
You even point them out . 
Further , there are plenty of other things in this article that bring into question Fact Checker 's credibilty -LRB- notice there is no name attributed to this article -RRB- such as this quote : `` So what evidence does the McCain campaign have for the supposed Obama-Raines connection ? 
It is pretty flimsy , ... '' It 's your publication , and you call it flimsy !!! Editiorial or not , your publication put it in print . 
Once again , the Post , like 90 % of the rest of the media outlets in this country look like morons . 
Folks , I am not kidding you when I tell you that journalism has officially died in this country . 
Time to get dirt boys -LRB- and girl -RRB- . 
Obama will not last through this . 
Defecate or wind my watch . 
Voting Present is not not what we need . 
AH AH AH AH OK . 
My guess is that it will be those who cant pay for their health care because they 've max ` ed their credit cards and bought houses that they couldnt make payments on . 
I expect that in a heated campaign season . 
But a liar with experience is better than a liar that thinks suave is better than substance . 
Maybe The Post should try actually reporting some news , maybe something with a bit of credibility behind it -LRB- not just a little chat that and off the cuff comments that `` were not reported '' when the connections were first stated -- which , by the way , Obama NEVER corrected until now -RRB- . 
Even the Canadians can do it ! 
They interviewed the son of probably Obama 's most offensive to Americans `` supposed '' connections - Saul Alinsky . 
Alinsky was a self proclaimed communist , wrote Rules for Radicals , and was a self confessed `` community agitator '' which would `` rub raw '' the wounds of the lower and middle class neighborhoods he worked in . 
Obama has repeatedly said he was not strongly linked with Alinsky or his ideals . 
Alinsky 's own son says otherwise . 
You ca n't take anything Obama says about anyone he is connected to as truth . 
Furthermore , does it not bother anyone that he shunned Lindsay Lohan as a Hollywood fundraiser , but he himself -LRB- by his own admission -RRB- used to be cracked out and promiscuous ? 
I 'll give you a clue ... he 's from Illinois . 
Obama received 3 to 4 X 's the campaign contributions from Fannie than McCain . '' 
McCain has received $ 169,000 from Freddie and Fannie executives during the 2008 campaign ALONE according to the Federal Election Commission . 
McCain 's campaign believed what they read in the Post . 
Are we to blame the McCain campaign for the Post 's misreporting of a relevant fact ? 
The only lie here is the Washington Post 's attempt to call McCain a liar . 
As usual , when somebody calls `` foul '' on what McCain 's ads say , it 's the person calling `` foul '' who 's mistaken . 
As a supporter and resident of Arizona , I can tell you he is not the same man . 
He used to represent the best of the Republican party ... now , sadly , he has lowered himself to the level of the mud loving NEO Cons . 
He has reversed his stance on so many major issues that it is hard to keep track anymore . 
This campaign is one of desperation on McCain 's part , and I for one fully endorse Obama . 
I could not bear another term under an un-intelligent and un-inspiring president . 
You Obama haters need to look at the facts , climb up out of the mud , and try to clearly think through the issues . 
The abortion issue is a non-starter anymore , the Repubs have used it to get out the vote - yet they have done nothing to reverse Roe V Wade even though they had the Executive , Legislative , AND Judicial branches solidly for years . 
Go smoke another joint in your hybrid and pretend that Obama knows what he is doing . '' 
Very nice !!! You 're a model citizen . 
This liberal does not drive a hybrid , does n't drink or smoke dope . 
This liberal -LRB- and proud of it -RRB- has a family that is stuggling as so many others are to make ends meet . 
We ca n't blame everything that happens on Bush -LRB- except the terrible war we are in and a complete lack of accountability for anything he is responsible for -RRB- and we ca n't expect that our candidates are going be anywhere near perfect . 
In this world , you do n't get to be a Senator without shaking some pretty dirty hands . 
That means all of them . 
So , we have to pick someone . 
For me , that means picking someone who can win . 
I am voting for Obama because he has inspired me to be more than I am and to try harder to take responsibility for myself and my family -LRB- my mom , my sisters etc. -RRB- . 
His message is that we all have to pitch in and try and make a difference in this world . 
His words remind me of JFK and his brother Bobby . 
They were not perfect in any way , but they inspired a whole generation of people to see beyond themselves . 
They inspired Obama to be what he is and that 's okay in my book . 
Is n't that the job of the Obama camp ? 
Whos side are you on here Post ? 
How about reporting on the news instead of trying to make news . 
After all that is what a news entity is supposed to do ... Posted by : J | September 19 , 2008 5:05 PM | Report abuse I would like to relaly know what is the truth about everything in Obamas involvement with Saul Alinsky William Ayers , Reverand Wright Farakahn and the march and most of all who is Tony Rezko and what are the various ways he was involved with Obama I want to know what companies Michelle Obamas is on the Board of Directors and if there is any link to Obamss district . 
I read these angry , insulting posts of one person against another simply because of a differing point of view . 
At least one half , but probably more of the voters in this county are going to feel as though they are stuck with a ticket that does not represent them . 
I know that I will once again have to either hold my nose or write in a more suitable candidate . 
I , for one , would love to see the energy that we use to put mediocre people in as leaders of our country on ensuring that the nation is run in a way to benefit us all . 
We need to remember that we are the nation that is America - it is US . 
Yet we do not know how to unite to ensure that these elected officials work OUR will . 
The erosion of our nation is our own fault , caused by allowing a pitiful few more power than they should have and for our failure to insist on personal and professional accountability . 
We truly have no one but ourselves to blame . 
Yes , we need change - but not the change offered by either ticket . 
if mccain is the best we have to offer , we are doomed Posted by : republican for obama | September 19 , 2008 5:07 PM | Report abuse Speaking of the Kennedys . . 
Anyone remember Chappaquidick ??? How did those Kennedys get all their money anyway ? 
McCain knew ... Gallup a few days ago : White - Obama 37 % McCain 52 % Black - Obama 93 % McCain 2 % '' `` The thought that immediately comes to my mind is : You obviously think this has some kind of importance ... what do YOU think it means ? '' 
It shows who is more racist . 
Is that clear enough ? 
Could there be any other reason why so many people of African descent would vote for a democrat ... ? 
These men believe that anyone who pays taxes is rich . 
That is not true . 
There are many lower medium class who pay taxes . 
I have worked hard for every dollar I have earned . 
It is my money , for me to spend as I see fit . 
Obama and Biden want to spend as much of my money as they can . 
They think it is their right to spend my money . 
They think that they can spend my money more wisely then I can . 
If it was up to them they would spend all of my money for me . 
I am a patriot and a veteran , I have served my community and State for over 26 years . 
I have paid my taxes . 
When I retired the I took a partial lump sum payment because my take home pay was about to drop by a thousand dollars . 
So the IRS raped me for $ 8000 in extra taxes and penalties to pay for $ 38,000 of retirement funds . 
If Obama and Biden get to the oval office they will raise taxes . 
They say they are only going to tax the rich and companies . 
But I tell you that if you buy gasoline , food or clothes you will be the person paying the taxes in the end . 
Senator John McCain warned of the problems with the mortgage market in 2005 . 
He cosponsored a bill to improve oversight of Freddie MAC and Fannie MAE . 
It was stopped by Democrats & good old boy GOP types . 
and he again urged the senate in may of 2006 to pass a bill with some regulation on the management of Freddie and Fannie . . 
Google it its their . 
for got the # of the bill ... Posted by : akela | September 19 , 2008 5:08 PM | Report abuse Yeah , but the whole reason for F\/F M\/M is as a governmental entity to work in the housing markets backed by Governmental fiat , how fair is that ? 
Who can compete with subsidies ? 
And FM\/FM are made into stock ? 
and are traded in the stock market ? 
and FmFm executives are paid bonuses relative to the price of FmFm stock values ? 
I want you to look into THAT fraud , cause they then take those low cost loans and bundle them and then sell them on the open bubble market which magically increased their value along with all the other realestate and suddenly , their value zoomed up and the execs got HUGE pay-offs -LRB- Jamie Gorellic got millions -RRB- just from the bundling actions ... I say that anything government backed must stay in the government books and not be resold nor bundled nor should ever FMFM be made into public offering stock , its owned by the government , and should stay that way until the govs can get out of that business . 
I think now it would have been cheaper for the Federal Government to just grant citizens a housing allowance - -LRB- sliding towards socialism -RRB- the problem is NO ONE IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ANYTHING when groups get too big . 
More then 5\/1 One manager to five underlings . 
Gads , what a MAJOR MESS ! 
We talk about the economy , housing crisis and the war . 
I guess that makes me an advisor to Obama on those issues . 
The Democrats just can not face the facts . 
Their boy has some very shady friends past and present . 
He will lose because the American public will eventually see him for what he truly is . 
A user of the people around him . 
It must be the Obama Kool Aid he keeps giving to the dumb followers . 
Put away the hate and invective ; stop the fearmongering ; wake up and smell the coffee . 
The economy is circling the drain and all this administration can do is offer band-aid fixes to get past the election . 
The war is grinding through a generation of dedicated patriots and leaving a debt that will last two or more generations . 
Another great American city lies in ruins waiting for hurricane relief that keeps on not happening . 
The constitution is locked away as our privacy and our honor are debased by Bush and Cheney . 
McCain is clueless , faithless and not to be trusted . 
He can only offer more of same . 
We can not risk four more years of this . 
Obama is our true hope of restoring American greatness . 
With McCain we all lose - and we lose big . 
What this has to do with Obama 10 years later is quite a stretch indeed . 
Additionally , Obama campaign people asking Franklin Raines mortgage questions , when you 're the largest mortgage guarantor in the United States , means what exactly ? 
You 're seeking the advice of someone who may know what they are talking about ? 
I fail to see the tie here . 
To say that either of these men were or are advisers or have ties to the Obama campaign in some nefarious manner is a stretch is an understatement . 
The McCain camp has to be kidding with this crap . 
Good lord , will someone shut him the hell up already ? 
The Bay of Pigs ? 
Obama profited second most from Fannie Mae behind Chris Dodd . 
The Democrats blocked in the US Senate any reforms of Fannie Mae and Freddie mack during the Bush presidency and Clintons . 
The Wall street journal WARNED about these 2 Govt Giants Dozens of times . 
The Democrats set these up to offer loans to people with lower down payments encouraged in the Clinton years by Barney frank and his comrades . 
These 2 Govt lenders have Democratic fingerprints All Over Them and the Media is not reporting it . 
BTW ... Bush acted responsibly this week while the Democrats left town . 
Dick Cheney has NEVER done anything illegal that I know of and neither has GW Bush ! 
Obama being protected by the entire media in the greatest of Nations has NOT 1 new idea for this Countries troubles . 
He doesnt sound presidential and in fact shows why he is the Least qualified candidate in US Modern history . 
If you want even bigger government as if thats possible and much more regulations as if thats possible and Higher Taxes for everyone who pays Taxes ... then you vote for Obama . 
Oh , this is so much fun watching you all squirm as you try and salvage your presidential candidate 's campaign while savaging your own credibility . 
Alan Greenspan and the Fed had no idea there was sub-prime lending going on . 
Congress had no idea they through their legislation mandated Lenders make loans they otherwise would not . 
They both had no idea Fannie and Freddie joined in on the sub-prime frenzy . 
Greenspan bet the whole ecomony on the real estate binge and we lost . 
Now he provides commentary and no one addresses his accountability . 
The Fed and the Congress have all the oversight they need . 
They , Democrats and Republicans , AND ALAN GREENSPAN did n't want to . 
They were to busy touting more homeownership in America than ever before . 
For years he wrote a weekly intelligence update that was extremely interesting and well structured and informed . 
He consults -LRB- ed -RRB- with several mega corporations on global trends and the future , etc. . 
I think he is in semi-retirement now . 
He is a true patriot with a no-nonsense approach to everything . 
He is also a somewhat well known mountain climber and adventurer . 
Written by Dr. Jack Wheeler The O-man , Barack Hussein Obama , is an eloquently tailored empty suit . 
No resume , no accomplishments , no experience , no original ideas , no understanding of how the economy works , no understanding of how the world works , no balls , nothing but abstract empty rhetoric devoid of real substance . 
He has no real identity . 
He is half-white , which he rejects . 
The rest of him is mostly Arab , which he hides but is disclosed by his non-African Arabic surname and his Arabic first and middle names as a way to triply proclaim his Arabic parentage to people in Kenya . 
Only a small part of him is African Black from his Luo grandmother , which he pretends he is exclusively . 
What he is n't , not a genetic drop of , is ` African-American , ' the descendant of enslaved Africans brought to America chained in slave ships . 
He has n't a single ancestor who was a slave . 
Instead , his Arab ancestors were slave owners . 
Slave-trading was the main Arab business in East Africa for centuries until the British ended it . 
Let that sink in : Obama is not the descendant of slaves , he is the descendant of slave owners . 
Thus he makes the perfect Liberal Messiah . 
It 's something Hillary does n't understand - how some complete neophyte came out of the blue and stole the Dem nomination from her . 
Obamamania is beyond politics and reason . 
It is a true religious cult , whose adherents reject Christianity yet still believe in Original Sin , transferring it from the evil of being human to the evil of being white . 
Thus Obama has become the white liberals ' Christ , offering absolution from the Sin of Being White . 
There is no reason or logic behind it , no faults or flaws of his can diminish it , no arguments Hillary could make of any kind can be effective against it . 
The absurdity of Hypocrisy Clothed In Human Flesh being their Savior is all the more cause for liberals to worship him : Credo quia absurdum , I believe it because it is absurd . 
Thank heavens that the voting majority of Americans remain Christian and are in no desperate need of a phony savior . 
His candidacy is ridiculous and should not be taken seriously by any thinking American . 
Pass this on to every thinking American you know ! 
I love a paper calling its own -LRB- repeated -RRB- reporting `` flimsy . '' 
However , a wise candidate will surround his\/herself with knowledgable persons . 
It 's the lying and deceit of the McCain\/Palin campaign that makes it more like the 4th Bush term . 
Why keep stalling the inquiry of Palin 's decisions in Alaska if there is nothing to hide . 
And what 's the purpose of keeping her sequestered from the media unless they 're afraid of a gaff . 
Sounds like more Bush tactics to me ! ! 
Blacks will vote for Blacks ... look at the record ... its the `` OJ factor '' . 
There is a credit crunch , but exactly where is the economic crisis ? 
Obama will redistribute your income ... to someone less deserving ... . 
that 's the crisis . 
Obama knows zero about economics . 
Right !? Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 5:15 PM | Report abuse You can wrap that Obama fish in the Washington Post , but he still stinks . 
John McCain is a lying , corrupt old man . 
Hey , do I need to give you all the facts regarding the `` Keating Five '' debacle . 
McCain and four other Senators got on a plane in D. C , flew to a bank regulators office in San Fran , and pressured the guy for five hours over the investigation into Charles Keating . 
McCains wife had half a million clams tied up in a shopping mall with Keating ! 
Do I need to remind you that The United States Senate investigated John McCain and that he was rebuked by the Congress of the United States for trying to pressure a ... hey , get this ... a BANK REGULATOR ! 
The guy is a crook . 
does getting information from an expert on loans and the home industry like Raines really a bad thing ? 
I think it is really silly to be arguing about something so insignificant . 
Let 's talk about the Issues , how are both of these candidates going to help the middle class in this mess ? 
Obama seems to take an analytical approach , which in my opinion is smarter because he is n't president and does n't have a huge staff to help him with the sense of urgency that Bush has . 
McCain on the other hand , has taken several approaches on this matter , which makes him seem flimsy and unknowing of what to do if he were president . 
Now Republicans please do n't tell me , that McCain 's plan would help us now , because the tax cuts he wants to keep would hurt this economy and this government horribly , Obama at least says he is raising taxes , and raising taxes on those that have put this country in Economic turmoil , and if they get the positives of a good economy , they need to be able to deal with and accept the losses and pay their taxes when they mess up , and when the Economy is bad . 
Him & Bush eat out of the same bowl !! Posted by : SadAmerican | September 19 , 2008 5:16 PM | Report abuse Blacks who wo n't vote for McCain and would n't vote for Clinton are clearly racist and sexist . 
and because of thier greed we have to pay for it how is that fair ' oh yea it 's patriotic acording to joe biden . 
But I did find Sarah Palin supported succession from the U.S. . 
She and her husband just 3 months ago , were ready to give up U.S. citizenship . 
Her husband is a member of AIP . 
According to the AIP Web site founder of the party , Joe Volger said , `` I 'm an Alaskan , not an American . 
I 've got no use for America or her damned institutions . '' 
Do n't believe it ? 
Here is her address at this Party 's 2008 Convention ! 
Obama 's scandals are TODAY . 
So , you should have said the Ad they ran was correct but they screwed up by trusting a Post reporter . 
As we apparently all did and continue to do on a daily basis . 
Quoting a Washington Post business reporter is `` nasty ? '' 
Wow , thanks for telling us your paper is disreputable and not to be believed or relied upon . 
Perhaps the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Campaign Contributions listed on the website of the nonpartisan Center for Responsive politics is more substantial evidence . 
How dare McCain believe what he reads in the Washington Post ? 
I love a paper calling its own -LRB- repeated -RRB- reporting `` flimsy . '' 
My source for this is Bwahahaha 's comment at 5:13 on September 19 , 2008 on this thread . 
If you do n't feel it 's accurate to say that McCain traded the nomination for sex , your beef is with Bwahahaha . 
The head of Fannie called the congressional black caucus Fannie 's closest relatives ! 
The Obama Ads running in Spanish about MCCain and Limbaugh and proven delibrate LIES designed to stir up Race HATE knowing all the while it is a lie ! 
Tell me something ... Is this who you really want to lead the USA ? 
Someone who would stoop to this level ? 
I understand you Liberals\/Democrats feel passionately about your ideas however wrong but this AD alone if you think fairly about it is reason enough for you to vote Republican this time . 
Obama does Not have the Temperment and is down right Dangerous ! 
He also said these people should n't get a severance , and that 's HUGE in business . 
It 's about the economy , which is basically what keep the COUNTRY in shape , not the classes . 
Obama is juggling with smarts and grace . 
Quite the man , will be quite the president . 
Of course NOT thinking throught things seems to be a key pre-req for a republican to run for president . 
Running a country and economics by 3x5 cards ... now that is what we need more of . 
Take them away and he is lost on the stump and looking to his unqualified VP to lead him back to the cards and his thoughts . 
Early soft signs of alzheimer 's . 
Maybe there is a connection that has nothing to do with ethnicity . 
If you really believe that just because the add shows the `` black '' bank president as the antagonist and the `` white '' lady as the person wronged that maybe he was just making the point that many American 's are now stuck with bills they ca n't pay because a bank went under . 
You know , if I have to vote for Obama just because if I do n't I will be called racist that is unfair . 
What about the indentured servants of the early 1800s , or what about my father who is 1\/4 Mexican but was denied a job because he was to Caucasian . 
Race is n't important . 
Yeah , what happened was horrible , but if we have to keep atoning for it America is n't going to get anywhere . 
So if you are just playing the minority card , remember the 1\/8 Mexican Mormon girl who just wants race in general left out of the presidential race . 
They are both people are n't they ? 
The GOP has almost always cut funding that the middle and lower classes have benefitted from . 
The GOP uses faith , abortion , and the false American dream of one day attaing enough wealth to be independently rich to propagandize those who are neither educated or exposed to the world enough to realize that love , peace , and community count for much more than all the wealth and religion in the world . 
If being liberal is so terrible because we believe in peace , love , and helping our fellow men - then why do conservatives blindly follow the teachings of a long-haired , bearded man who spoke of those very same ideas as though they were the most important for the human race . 
Obama may not be perfect , but the system is so corrupted and flawed that Change is better than what we 've been subjected to the past 8 years . 
Vote for Change because anything is better than the same . 
McCain represents the status quo : can there be any denial of this ? 
Then readers are left to review both and determine the ` facts ' . 
This story is a great example , the fact checker finds that one candidate lied by quoting its own paper correctly , but with malicious intent ? 
When editorial narratives shape the front page content and placement it really is a sad day for the newspaper industry and independents like myself . 
bush was a pagen coke sniffing , draft dodging alcoholic and you believed him ? 
he 's killed x00 ,000 iraqis with his follie , 4000 + Americans and recessed our Country 20 years ... then again , your standards are low Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 5:25 PM | Report abuse The mother of all POST ! 
The Real Culprits In This Meltdown `` Big Government : Barack Obama and Democrats blame the historic financial turmoil on the market . 
But if it 's dysfunctional , Democrats during the Clinton years are a prime reason for it . '' 
Absolutely no aid but declaring martial law for each state or country hard hit by the shift which translates into giving up our guns for protection and a police state . 
The slow response from the government surrounding Hurricane Katrina was their attempt to declare martial law in New Orleans and ` take over ' the state . 
Harmful thoughts was their primary focus . 
If the Republicans ca n't declare martial law by their wish of a next terrorist attack -LRB- terror-wish -RRB- they will certainly declare martial law after the pole shift . 
This I worry greatly . 
Humans , primarily in the unconcious has the desire to support the dark agenda and feel that an experienced , stubborn , and violent candidate is ` suitable ' for the job because they feel this is what defines politicians and needs a bully to feel safe from threats from other countries . 
People are forgetting that Republicans also consider citizens to be terrorists as well . 
Many McCain voters thinks that they would be safe from a McCain administration and yet this is actually the exact opposite in reality of their intention . 
Bush Administration would n't have proposed deadly chemtrails nor the deadly viruses like the West Nile virus and the Ebola virus where the source was from a field office of the CIA . 
They were were all intended secretly against the human species by the Bush Administration\/Republican secret agenda . 
I 'm looking forward to aiding many after the pole shift and hopefully many will too . 
REPUBLICANS HAVE A PLAN TO KILL ANY REMAINING HUMANS IN THE AFTERLIFE OR POLESHIFT SO FOR YOUR OWN SAKE DO N'T VOTE FOR A REPUBLICAN THIS NOVEMBER BECAUSE POLE SHIFT IS POSSIBLE DURING THE NEXT PRESIDENTS TENURE . 
AND HAVE YOU GUYS WONDER WHY REPUBLICANS BUSH AND NOW MCCAIN WANTING TO CONTINUE AND EXPAND THE SPYING PROGRAM ? 
TO SAVE US FROM TERRORITS ? 
I DID N'T THINK SO BUT TO TAKE CONTROL IN THE AFTERLIFE AND LOOK TO REMOVE ANYONE THREATENING THEM WHICH INCLUDES THE U.S. CITIZENS . 
REPUBLICANS BELIEVE THAT U.S. CITIZENS ARE THE TERRORISTS AND THAT THE TERRORISTS THE MAJORITY OF U.S. CITIZENS BELIEVE IN ARE ACTUALLY BENEFITING THE REPUBLICAN PARTY , THUS REPUBLICANS ARE A FRIEND TO TERRORISTS WHICH MEANS ONLY ONE THING . 
YOU ARE CONSIDERED A TERRORIST TO THEM BECAUSE THEY SAY YOU WOULD INTERFERE WITH THEM AFTER THE POLESHIFT REGARDLESS OF WHETHER YOU ARE A REPUBLICAN OR A DEMOCRAT MATTERS NOT . 
WHICH IS WHY THEY ARE CONTINUTING TO EXPAND THE SPYING PROGRAM TO MAKE SURE THEY KEEP AN EYE ON ANY POTENTIAL THREATS ON U.S. SOIL WHICH INCLUDES THE U.S. CITIZENS . 
I 'LL BET YOU ANYTHING THAT A REPUBLICAN CONTROLLED WHITE HOUSE OR CONGRESS DURING AND AFTER THE POLESHIFT ASSURES YOUR DEATH AND THESE COWARDS GOING TO THEIR BUNKERS WHILE ALL OF YOU SUFFER FROM STARVATION OR FROM DEHYDRATION . 
OBAMA DOES N'T EVEN KNOW THE COMING POLE SHIFT , HE JUST HEARD RUMORS AND I 'M SURE THAT HE HAS NO PLANS TO BETTER HIMSELF AFTER THE POLE SHIFT BUT TO ONLY AID AND ASSIST THOSE IN NEED . 
MCCAIN KNOWS OF THE COMING POLE SHIFT AND THIS MEANS TROUBLE . 
ITS FUNNY HOW SOME PEOPLE ARE VOTING FOR MCCAIN THIS NOVEMBER BUT THEN THEY INTEND YOUR DEATH AFTER THE POLE SHIFT FOR THOSE REMAINING THAT STILL SURVIVED . 
I HAVE A FAMILY WITH 5 KIDS AND I FEEL LIKE I WILL BE IN DANGER EVEN IF I SURVIVE THE POLE SHIFT BECAUSE OF THE REPUBLICANS AND THEIR SPYING PROGRAM . 
I ACTUALLY HAD A DREAM ABOUT THIS EXACT EVENT LAST NIGHT POTENTIALLY HAPPENING . 
THIS IS NO ACCIDENT AND IT FELT SO REAL . 
I WAS ALSO SHOWN JOHN MCCAIN AND PALIN TOGETHER TALKING ABOUT HOW TO CONTROL THE HUMAN POPULATION AND HOW TO WEED THEM OUT THROUGH VARIOUS DISEASES . 
FOR MY FAMILY AND YOUR FAMILY 'S SAKE DO N'T VOTE FOR THESE TWO FACE IDIOTS . 
OBAMA IN MY DREAM WAS SHOWN AS A COMPASSIONATE MAN WHO LOOKED TO AID THOSE IN TROUBLE . 
THIS IS NO LIE . . 
AND IM NOT SAYING THIS JUST BECAUSE I LIKE ONE CANDIDATE OVER THE OTHER . 
IT WAS ACTUALLY SHOWN TO ME IN MY DREAM . 
HAS ANY OF YOU HAD SIMILAR EXPERIENCES LIKE THIS IN THEIR DREAMS ? 
However , a wise candidate will surround his\/herself with knowledgable persons . 
It 's the lying and deceit of the McCain\/Palin campaign that makes it more like the 4th Bush term . 
Why keep stalling the inquiry of Palin 's decisions in Alaska if there is nothing to hide . 
And what 's the purpose of keeping her sequestered from the media unless they 're afraid of a gaff . 
Sounds like more Bush tactics to me ! ! 
Anyone remember Chappaquiddick ??? How did those Kennedys get all their money anyway ? '' 
Yes , most of know about Chappaquiddick . 
Blah , blah , woof woof . 
The Kennedys got their money because dear old dad was a bootlegger and was perhaps corrupt . 
There was obviously some trickle down there , but I believe Ted has paid for what he did with an abundance hard work as an extremely effective public servant . 
In his situation , I could n't have asked for better . 
However , I was n't talking about Ted , I was talking about the ability of some people to inspire others to look beyond themselves . 
We so desperately need that right now and McCain just does n't cut it . 
The only thing he inspires in me is dread . 
As another leftest Liberal ... you are threatening the future and security of America ALL to gain power . 
Hillary would have been a much better candidate ! 
Mccain may be a plain vanilla choice but he has core values and swears that he will cut some Pork spending ... Our enemies WANT Obama to win ... what does that tell you ? 
It has 7 Subcommittees , which together oversee for the vast range of issues under its jurisdiction . 
These issues range from communications , highways , aviation , rail , shipping , transportation security , merchant marine , the Coast Guard , oceans , fisheries , climate change , disasters , science , space , interstate commerce , tourism , consumer issues , economic development , technology , competitiveness , product safety and insurance . 
Senator McCain served as Chairman of the Committee from 1997 to 2001 and 2003 to 2005 . 
He is currently the Ranking Member . 
The Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 established the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation -LRB- FDIC -RRB- in the United States and included banking reforms , some of which were designed to control speculation . 
Some provisions such as Regulation Q that allowed the Federal Reserve to regulate interest rates in savings accounts were repealed by the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980 . 
Provisions that prohibit a bank holding company from owning other financial companies were repealed on November 12 , 1999 by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act signed by President Bill Clinton . 
The bill that ultimately repealed the Act was introduced in the Senate by Phil Gramm -LRB- R-TX -RRB- and in the House of Representatives by James Leach -LRB- R-IA -RRB- in 1999 . 
The bills were passed by a 54-44 vote along party lines with Republican support in the Senate and by a 343-86 vote in the House of Representatives Nov 4 , 1999 : After passing both the Senate and House the bill was moved to a conference committee to work out the differences between the Senate and House versions . 
The final bill resolving the differences was passed in the Senate 90-8-1 and in the House : 362-57-15 . 
This veto proof legislation was signed into law by President Bill Clinton on November 12 , 1999 . 
The argument for preserving Glass-Steagall -LRB- as written in 1987 -RRB- : 1 . 
Conflicts of interest characterize the granting of credit lending and the use of credit investing by the same entity , which led to abuses that originally produced the Act 2 . 
Depository institutions possess enormous financial power , by virtue of their control of other people s money ; its extent must be limited to ensure soundness and competition in the market for funds , whether loans or investments . 
Securities activities can be risky , leading to enormous losses . 
Such losses could threaten the integrity of deposits . 
In turn , the Government insures deposits and could be required to pay large sums if depository institutions were to collapse as the result of securities losses . 
Depository institutions are supposed to be managed to limit risk . 
Their managers thus may not be conditioned to operate prudently in more speculative securities businesses . 
An example is the crash of real estate investment trusts sponsored by bank holding companies -LRB- in the 1970s and 1980s -RRB- . 
The repeal enabled commercial lenders such as Citigroup , the largest U.S. bank by assets , to underwrite and trade instruments such as mortgage-backed securities and collateralized debt obligations and establish so-called structured investment vehicles , or SIVs , that bought those securities . 
Citigroup played a major part in the repeal . 
Then called Citicorp , the company merged with Travelers Insurance company the year before using loopholes in Glass-Steagall that allowed for temporary exemptions . 
With lobbying led by Roger Levy , the `` finance , insurance and real estate industries together are regularly the largest campaign contributors and biggest spenders on lobbying of all business sectors -LRB- in 1999 -RRB- . 
They laid out more than $ 200 million for lobbying in 1998 , according to the Center for Responsive Politics ... '' These industries succeeded in their two decades long effort to repeal the act . 
The banking industry had been seeking the repeal of Glass-Steagall since at least the 1980 's . 
In 1987 the Congressional Research Service prepared a report which explored the case for preserving Glass-Steagall and the case against preserving the act . 
Who was in control of both houses in 1999 -LRB- Senate and the House -RRB- ? 
Who pushed for the repeal ? 
Then-Senator Phil Gramm , McCain 's campaign adviser on Finance . 
Where was Senator McCain 10 years ago when his buddy Phil Gramm repealed this act , which caused the financial chaos we 're seeing today ? 
In his words -LRB- and I quote -RRB- : `` Asleep at the switch . '' 
Go ahead , McCain , try to blame others for your failures to lead during a pivotal , critical time in finance in the U.S. . 
It wo n't work because it does n't pass the snff test . 
John McCain is a lying , corrupt old man . 
Hey , do I need to give you all the facts regarding the `` Keating Five '' debacle . 
McCain and four other Senators got on a plane in D. C , flew to a bank regulators office in San Fran , and pressured the guy for five hours over the investigation into Charles Keating . 
McCains wife had half a million clams tied up in a shopping mall with Keating ! 
Do I need to remind you that The United States Senate investigated John McCain and that he was rebuked by the Congress of the United States for trying to pressure a ... hey , get this ... a BANK REGULATOR ! 
The guy is a crook . 
Bob Bennett said as much at the time . 
And you claim to be offended at guilt by association . 
Please give me a break . 
It hardly deserves to be called a movement when it wishes for a static unchanging society that clings fearfully to the already established status quo . 
They read some wingnut blogs or listen to Rush and regurgitate propaganda where they are told to . 
And then they accuse Obama of `` astroturfing '' and call his supporters `` brownshirts '' . 
You fit well with your party : You commit the sin and crucify everyone else for it . 
It 's like Jesus , only backwards . 
It 's the pattern . 
You mimic your heroes . 
Look at Thurmond , Foley , Haggard , Craig , Dreier , Bennett , Limbaugh , Bush , and , now , sadly , McCain and Palin . 
The Post says it 's Franklin Raines , for `` advice on mortgage and housing policy . '' 
OK , Let 's Fact Check it . 
`` he -LRB- Raines -RRB- has ... more recently , taken calls from Barack Obama 's presidential campaign seeking his advice on mortgage and housing policy matters . '' 
Who has asked Raines for advice ? 
According to the Post , Obama 's Presidential campaign has asked Raines for advice . 
And what does the McCain 's ad say ? 
The ad says : `` Who advises him ? 
The Post says it 's Franklin Raines , for `` advice on mortgage and housing policy . '' 
Thus the statement from the ad is TRUE . 
And McCain gets 2 pinnochios . 
Well , I give Fact Checker 10 Buffoons \* . 
\* Each Buffoon is worth 10 pinnochios . 
If it has ever been reported in the Washington Post as hurting Obama , we must revisited and rewrite it . 
Very Orwellian if you ask me . 
Absolutely no aid but declaring martial law for each state or country hard hit by the shift which translates into giving up our guns for protection and a police state . 
The slow response from the government surrounding Hurricane Katrina was their attempt to declare martial law in New Orleans and ` take over ' the state . 
Harmful thoughts was their primary focus . 
If the Republicans ca n't declare martial law by their wish of a next terrorist attack -LRB- terror-wish -RRB- they will certainly declare martial law after the pole shift . 
This I worry greatly . 
Humans , primarily in the unconcious has the desire to support the dark agenda and feel that an experienced , stubborn , and violent candidate is ` suitable ' for the job because they feel this is what defines politicians and needs a bully to feel safe from threats from other countries . 
People are forgetting that Republicans also consider citizens to be terrorists as well . 
Many McCain voters thinks that they would be safe from a McCain administration and yet this is actually the exact opposite in reality of their intention . 
Bush Administration would n't have proposed deadly chemtrails nor the deadly viruses like the West Nile virus and the Ebola virus where the source was from a field office of the CIA . 
They were were all intended secretly against the human species by the Bush Administration\/Republican secret agenda . 
I 'm looking forward to aiding many after the pole shift and hopefully many will too . 
REPUBLICANS HAVE A PLAN TO KILL ANY REMAINING HUMANS IN THE AFTERLIFE OR POLESHIFT SO FOR YOUR OWN SAKE DO N'T VOTE FOR A REPUBLICAN THIS NOVEMBER BECAUSE POLE SHIFT IS POSSIBLE DURING THE NEXT PRESIDENTS TENURE . 
AND HAVE YOU GUYS WONDER WHY REPUBLICANS BUSH AND NOW MCCAIN WANTING TO CONTINUE AND EXPAND THE SPYING PROGRAM ? 
TO SAVE US FROM TERRORITS ? 
I DID N'T THINK SO BUT TO TAKE CONTROL IN THE AFTERLIFE AND LOOK TO REMOVE ANYONE THREATENING THEM WHICH INCLUDES THE U.S. CITIZENS . 
REPUBLICANS BELIEVE THAT U.S. CITIZENS ARE THE TERRORISTS AND THAT THE TERRORISTS THE MAJORITY OF U.S. CITIZENS BELIEVE IN ARE ACTUALLY BENEFITING THE REPUBLICAN PARTY , THUS REPUBLICANS ARE A FRIEND TO TERRORISTS WHICH MEANS ONLY ONE THING . 
YOU ARE CONSIDERED A TERRORIST TO THEM BECAUSE THEY SAY YOU WOULD INTERFERE WITH THEM AFTER THE POLESHIFT REGARDLESS OF WHETHER YOU ARE A REPUBLICAN OR A DEMOCRAT MATTERS NOT . 
WHICH IS WHY THEY ARE CONTINUTING TO EXPAND THE SPYING PROGRAM TO MAKE SURE THEY KEEP AN EYE ON ANY POTENTIAL THREATS ON U.S. SOIL WHICH INCLUDES THE U.S. CITIZENS . 
I 'LL BET YOU ANYTHING THAT A REPUBLICAN CONTROLLED WHITE HOUSE OR CONGRESS DURING AND AFTER THE POLESHIFT ASSURES YOUR DEATH AND THESE COWARDS GOING TO THEIR BUNKERS WHILE ALL OF YOU SUFFER FROM STARVATION OR FROM DEHYDRATION . 
OBAMA DOES N'T EVEN KNOW THE COMING POLE SHIFT , HE JUST HEARD RUMORS AND I 'M SURE THAT HE HAS NO PLANS TO BETTER HIMSELF AFTER THE POLE SHIFT BUT TO ONLY AID AND ASSIST THOSE IN NEED . 
MCCAIN KNOWS OF THE COMING POLE SHIFT AND THIS MEANS TROUBLE . 
ITS FUNNY HOW SOME PEOPLE ARE VOTING FOR MCCAIN THIS NOVEMBER BUT THEN THEY INTEND YOUR DEATH AFTER THE POLE SHIFT FOR THOSE REMAINING THAT STILL SURVIVED . 
I HAVE A FAMILY WITH 5 KIDS AND I FEEL LIKE I WILL BE IN DANGER EVEN IF I SURVIVE THE POLE SHIFT BECAUSE OF THE REPUBLICANS AND THEIR SPYING PROGRAM . 
I ACTUALLY HAD A DREAM ABOUT THIS EXACT EVENT LAST NIGHT POTENTIALLY HAPPENING . 
THIS IS NO ACCIDENT AND IT FELT SO REAL . 
I WAS ALSO SHOWN JOHN MCCAIN AND PALIN TOGETHER TALKING ABOUT HOW TO CONTROL THE HUMAN POPULATION AND HOW TO WEED THEM OUT THROUGH VARIOUS DISEASES . 
FOR MY FAMILY AND YOUR FAMILY 'S SAKE DO N'T VOTE FOR THESE TWO FACE IDIOTS . 
OBAMA IN MY DREAM WAS SHOWN AS A COMPASSIONATE MAN WHO LOOKED TO AID THOSE IN TROUBLE . 
THIS IS NO LIE . . 
AND IM NOT SAYING THIS JUST BECAUSE I LIKE ONE CANDIDATE OVER THE OTHER . 
IT WAS ACTUALLY SHOWN TO ME IN MY DREAM . 
HAS ANY OF YOU HAD SIMILAR EXPERIENCES LIKE THIS IN THEIR DREAMS ? 
Quite the man , will be quite the president . '' 
It 's stunning that so many Americans mistake doing nothing , suggesting nothing , and proposing nothing with `` smarts and grace . '' 
Obviously , Obama is taking a lesson from Pelosi and Reid handbook , who just last week requested Democratic committee chairman to `` dumb down '' the work of their committees if Obama 's elected so that he can ease into a job that 's too difficult for him . 
And now , not having a clue what 's going on or what to do about it , they 're going home ! 
As another leftest Liberal ... you are threatening the future and security of America ALL to gain power . 
Hillary would have been a much better candidate ! 
Mccain may be a plain vanilla choice but he has core values and swears that he will cut some Pork spending ... Our enemies WANT Obama to win ... what does that tell you ? 
Funny that how McCain gets his contributions from PACs and lobbyists ? 
Obama does n't take any money from PACs . 
It strange that I did n't see McCain making the same kind of pledge . 
Maybe its because McCain is a corrupt , deceptive , unprincipled , and honor-less liar ? 
The five senators , Alan Cranston -LRB- D-CA -RRB- , Dennis DeConcini -LRB- D-AZ -RRB- , John Glenn -LRB- D-OH -RRB- , John McCain -LRB- R-AZ -RRB- , and Donald W. Riegle -LRB- D-MI -RRB- , were accused of improperly aiding Charles H. Keating , Jr. , chairman of the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association , which was the target of an investigation by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board -LRB- FHLBB -RRB- . 
The U.S. Savings and Loan crisis of the 1980s and 1990s was the failure of 747 savings and loan associations -LRB- S&Ls -RRB- in the United States . 
The ultimate cost of the crisis is estimated to have totaled around $ 160.1 billion , about $ 124.6 billion of which was directly paid for by the U.S. taxpayer . 
McCain and Keating had become personal friends following their initial contacts in 1981 , and McCain was the closest socially to Keating of the five senators . 
Like DeConcini , McCain considered Keating a constituent as he lived in Arizona . 
Between 1982 and 1987 , McCain had received $ 112,000 in political contributions from Keating and his associates . 
In addition , McCain 's wife Cindy McCain and her father Jim Hensley had invested $ 359,100 in a Keating shopping center in April 1986 , a year before McCain met with the regulators . 
McCain , his family , and their baby-sitter had made nine trips at Keating 's expense , sometimes aboard Keating 's jet . 
Three of the trips were made during vacations to Keating 's opulent Bahamas retreat at Cat Cay . 
McCain did not pay Keating -LRB- in the amount of $ 13,433 -RRB- for some of the trips until years after they were taken , when he learned that Keating was in trouble over Lincoln . 
He sung like a bird once he was granted immunity and agreed to testify against Charles Keating to save his own ass . 
Only then was he cleared of any wrongdoing , as was his deal . 
Not one but TWO major financial screw-ups of epic magnitude under John McCain 's watch tells me we should let this guy have control of the Presidency , after the ineptitude of the sitting President in every affair , but especially financial , when he looked the other way in enforcing financial regulations so that markets could ` do their thing ' with minimal to no interference . 
To hell with that ! 
And to hell with John McCain ! 
Are there still people who do n't realize this ? 
Why would you such a thing ? 
Are you Joe McCarthy in disguise or have you been drinking the coolaide again ? 
What has Obama really done -LRB- and stick to the facts please -RRB- that would make him anti-American ? 
I come from Indiana -LRB- a state that has one respected Republican senator , Richard Lugar , and one equally respected Democratic senator , Evan Bayh -RRB- . 
As a voter , I was rather surprised that the Democrats chose two extremely liberal candidates , Obama and H. Clinton . 
In all fairness , a more moderate Democratic candidate would not be having the difficulties faced by the current candidate . 
Before you start jumping on me and calling me `` a Bible thumping conservative '' -LRB- to use one bloggers langauge -RRB- , I am not particularly elated with the way my party has governed over the past 8 years , though I will say right now that I do n't think Bush has done a horrible job either when you think about the clamor that was raised after 9\/11 . 
Did he rush in ? 
Yes , because we as a nation would have been equally as frustrated as we are now if he had not . 
However , once you move in , you can not run out just because things are not easy . 
All of this aside , a moderate voice is needed in the White House . 
We need someone that will manage our commitments overseas , not try to `` hug '' them away nor `` blast '' them away . 
We need someone who will focus on our economy and returning our manufacturing base so we can rebuild our middle class -LRB- which is what made this country strong -RRB- . 
Then we can focus on rebuilding our economy : the housing industry , the tax increases\/decreases , social security , and our currency . 
We also need someone that will focus on education -LRB- I went to public school , a private university , and am currently in a public law school -RRB- . 
I am lucky but many have not had the drive , commitment , nor encouragement that they need to be successful . 
I would encourage us as voters to raise our voices as one to our candidates of choice , whether Obama or McCain , and ask them to act as the true voice of the PEOPLE . 
We know what we need , we collectively are intelligent individuals whether Democrat or Republican . 
It is time for us to stop throwing disdainful slanders at each other and join together to begin to create solutions for our current difficulties and make this nation , OUR NATION , GREAT again . 
Admit , and move on . 
And cut it out already with calling us more conservative voters `` fools '' , `` idiots '' , `` uneducated '' and `` stupid '' if we vote McCain\/Palin . 
I probably have more degrees on my wall , and licenses as a practicing attorney educated at the nation 's greatest institutions , then most americans . '' 
You take at face value the claim that Obama is tied to F\/F without any empirical evidence . 
I recommend that you relinquish your credentials from the American Bar Associations . 
You are unfit to to practice law any client . 
You are n't `` idiots '' , `` uneducated '' and `` stupid '' you are just blinded by your dogmatism . 
According to the Obama campaign , Raines was lying but the WaPo must have failed to fact-check its original story to catch Raines ' lie . 
Way to spread lies to hurt Obama WaPo ! 
Your pro-Hillary bias is showing . 
center , talks with former Federal Reserve Board Chairman Paul Volcker , left , and former Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin , Friday , Sept. 19 , 2008 , in Coral Gables , Fla. , during a meeting with his top economic advisers . 
-LRB- AP Photo\/Chris Carlson -RRB- -LRB- Chris Carlson - AP -RRB- that 's who he met with TODAY ... but everyone commentting on the media supporting him so much ... i guess that 's true if you like facts ... keep on playing the Palin pitty card ... really , that 's all you have got on this ticket ... pathetic ... let 's talk qualifications ... oh , ya , you stay as far away from that as possible ... OPEN YOU FREAKING EYES STAUNCHIES Posted by : ash | September 19 , 2008 5:41 PM | Report abuse To NickinVA - and I wish all you right wingers had THE GUTS to ever punch me in the nose ! 
I have NO PROBLEM saying a thing to anyone 's face . 
Oh and remember something called ` Enron ' - we have yet to -LRB- nor will we ever -RRB- know ALL the deception behind that fiasco either . 
This is a typical political smear campaign and it happens EVERY SINGLE ELECTION TIME regardless of the party involved . 
Wake up and smell the coffee ! 
People with high IQ 's are voting Obama . 
Senator John McCain warned of the problems with the mortgage market in 2005 . 
He cosponsored a bill to improve oversight of Freddie MAC and Fannie MAE . 
It was stopped by Democrats & good old boy GOP types . 
and he again urged the senate in may of 2006 to pass a bill with some regulation on the management of Freddie and Fannie . . 
Google it its their . 
for got the # of the bill ... '' The failed bill you are alluding to was the Federal Housing Enterprise Regulatory Reform Act of 2005 , S. 190 and was supported by the people running both Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae . 
Another one of the unacceptable parts of the bill ... `` Excludes the Federal Home Loan Banks from certain securities reporting requirements '' . 
Although Hagel 's original plan contained some good points , by the time bill was submitted it had obvious flaws that would have made the situation today even worse . 
Probably not , but you definitely have an ego bigger than most Americans . 
For years he wrote a weekly intelligence update that was extremely interesting and well structured and informed . 
He consults -LRB- ed -RRB- with several mega corporations on global trends and the future , etc. . 
I think he is in semi-retirement now . 
He is a true patriot with a no-nonsense approach to everything . 
He is also a somewhat well known mountain climber and adventurer . 
Written by Dr. Jack Wheeler The O-man , Barack Hussein Obama , is an eloquently tailored empty suit . 
No resume , no accomplishments , no experience , no original ideas , no understanding of how the economy works , no understanding of how the world works , no balls , nothing but abstract empty rhetoric devoid of real substance . 
He has no real identity . 
He is half-white , which he rejects . 
The rest of him is mostly Arab , which he hides but is disclosed by his non-African Arabic surname and his Arabic first and middle names as a way to triply proclaim his Arabic parentage to people in Kenya . 
Only a small part of him is African Black from his Luo grandmother , which he pretends he is exclusively . 
What he is n't , not a genetic drop of , is ` African-American , ' the descendant of enslaved Africans brought to America chained in slave ships . 
He has n't a single ancestor who was a slave . 
Instead , his Arab ancestors were slave owners . 
Slave-trading was the main Arab business in East Africa for centuries until the British ended it . 
Let that sink in : Obama is not the descendant of slaves , he is the descendant of slave owners . 
Thus he makes the perfect Liberal Messiah . 
It 's something Hillary does n't understand - how some complete neophyte came out of the blue and stole the Dem nomination from her . 
Obamamania is beyond politics and reason . 
It is a true religious cult , whose adherents reject Christianity yet still believe in Original Sin , transferring it from the evil of being human to the evil of being white . 
Thus Obama has become the white liberals ' Christ , offering absolution from the Sin of Being White . 
There is no reason or logic behind it , no faults or flaws of his can diminish it , no arguments Hillary could make of any kind can be effective against it . 
The absurdity of Hypocrisy Clothed In Human Flesh being their Savior is all the more cause for liberals to worship him : Credo quia absurdum , I believe it because it is absurd . 
Thank heavens that the voting majority of Americans remain Christian and are in no desperate need of a phony savior . 
His candidacy is ridiculous and should not be taken seriously by any thinking American . 
Pass this on to every thinking American you know ! 
I am a mountain climber and have never heard of this Dr. Jack Wheeler . 
And to say that he is brilliant certainly requires an desperate need to believe in something despite the glaring lack of evidence . 
Yet another McCain ad chock full of blatant lies ? 
The guy was n't even an advisor to Obama at all . 
McCain should be held accountable for this . 
The ads he 's been running make Rove look clean by comparison . 
In the past week , Obama has gained almost eight points and has his first significant lead over McCain since he picked Palin . 
Looks like your Palin star is fading fast . 
You conservatives are going to get exactly what you have coming to you ... What would that be Jessie ? 
What exactly do Conservatives have coming to them ? 
Inquiring minds would love to know . 
My guess is Rush Limbaugh . 
The WFPC claims that the `` evidence is flimsy '' of a Raines\/Obama connection despite the fact that the evidence comes from three separate stories in the Washington Post . 
This is an admission that the Washington Post publishes inaccurate information -LRB- no shock to anyone outside of the liberal fever swamps -RRB- . 
How many other inaccuracies have there been in their coverage of this race ? 
Secondly , even if the Washington Post reports were incorrect , there is a Raines\/Obama connection . 
They are both Democrats . 
Democrats have run Fannie Mae , profited much more than Republicans from its political contributions , and Raines , Gorelick , Johnson etc. profited from the commission of fraud . 
Fannie Mae is yet another example of something government has no business being involved with . 
It is another example of an expensive government enterprise that has failed . 
Fannie Mae is n't even necessary anymore . 
There are more than enough privae entities providing liquidity to the mortgage markets . 
The so called McCain connection with Fannie Mae is laughable . 
None of those people ran Fannie MAE and none of them committed the fraud that Raines , Gorelick , Johnson and the rest of the Democrats did . 
Finally , to Karen Tumulty at Newsweek -LRB- owned by the Wash. . 
Post -RRB- and all the other geniuses on the left side of the political spectrum , calling people racists for not supporting Obama is going to do nothing more than drive more people away from Obama . 
It is not only a despicable and false charge , it is an ironic one as well . 
The fact is that Obama derives most of his support because of his race . 
The true racists are his white followers who are busy patting themselves on the back for supporting this black man with no experience and his threadbare policy prescription of raise taxes and more government programs . 
The first thing out of every network news anchor 's mouth after Obama 's speech at the DNC was what a historic night it was that an African American had received the nomination for president . 
They did n't have anything to say about the actual substance of his policy suggestions -LRB- although I 'll cut them some slack because he has been so vague and contradictory -RRB- . 
Just that he represented hope and change and he is black which makes me really tolerant and sophisticated . 
There is nothing exceptional about Obama and he has accomplished precisely one thing in his life , his own self promotion . 
His detractors on the other hand are at least showing him the respect at looking at the content of his character and it is lacking . 
Karen Tumulty and her liberal fellow travelers are bigots . 
Race baiting is going to backfire . 
Even in this polarized era , McCain will win the popular vote by at least 5 % and it will be an electoral landslide . 
Then Karen and her liberal friends can spend the next 4 years slandering McCain with false allegations like they have with Bush . 
The GOP has almost always cut funding that the middle and lower classes have benefitted from . 
The GOP uses faith , abortion , and the false American dream of one day attaing enough wealth to be independently rich to propagandize those who are neither educated or exposed to the world enough to realize that love , peace , and community count for much more than all the wealth and religion in the world . 
If being liberal is so terrible because we believe in peace , love , and helping our fellow men - then why do conservatives blindly follow the teachings of a long-haired , bearded man who spoke of those very same ideas as though they were the most important for the human race . 
Obama may not be perfect , but the system is so corrupted and flawed that Change is better than what we 've been subjected to the past 8 years . 
Vote for Change because anything is better than the same . 
McCain represents the status quo : can there be any denial of this ? 
You are free to do so . 
Why are you insisting on the federal government doing what you say you want and are willing to do ? 
No it 's McCain first and country dead last . 
If you want a `` bought '' man with dozens of lobbyists instructing him on everything he says or does , vote for him . 
If elected we will soon find ourselves attacking Iran which will surely be followed by a retaliation from China or Russia towards us . 
McCain and his Jesus freak Palin would like armageddon sooner rather than later . 
McCain is an old man with dementia . 
Palin is just insane . 
Anybody who instructs people to `` pray '' for a gas pipeline and speaks in tongues should be in an institution . 
What exactly do Conservatives have coming to them ? 
News Flash : Everyone knows that the WaPo has no credibility . 
But that does not mean they are not Liberoid Liars . 
Raines is a crook and he is attached to Obama along with Jim Johnson . 
What exactly do Conservatives have coming to them ? '' 
A humiliating loss in Novemeber . 
Franklin Raines -LRB- formerly of the Bill Clinton entourage -RRB- absconded with $ 100,000,000 of our money under the guise of a well deserved bonus for a job well done while working for Fannie Mae . 
I guess the job was not all that well done . 
Will Raines give back his bonus ? 
Also , he brought Jaime Gorelick -LRB- another Bill Clinton hack -RRB- into the fold and gave her approximatley $ 23,000,000 in bonuses osbensibly for a `` job well done '' . 
Bill Clinton has his hands all over this financial failure . 
Unfortunately , with the New York Times carry water for the Left , this whole chapter will be swept under the rug . 
As to why I am not voting for O'Bama , he is an idiot , well trained by the likes of Acorn , Bill Ayers , Saul Alynsky , Rev. Wright , and his lovely wife Michelle . 
It has nothing to do with race . 
Bill Clinton is an idiot and so is Barry O'Bama . 
During this campaign the media has propagated libelous information with as much gusto as the Obama campaign itself . 
News Flash : Everyone knows that the WaPo has no credibility . 
But that does not mean they are not Liberoid Liars . 
Raines is a crook and he is attached to Obama along with Jim Johnson . '' 
Take a deep breath and relax . 
You 're not smart enough . 
You should continue with Rush , Hannity , and Fox News . 
Today , while he was smearing Obama with the above mentioned lie , McCain claimed credit for a bill he co-sponsored in 2005 that would have changed the oversight structure for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
Here is the text of his endorsement of this Bill in the senate back in 2005 : Mr. President , this week Fannie Mae 's regulator reported that the company 's quarterly reports of profit growth over the past few years were `` illusions deliberately and systematically created '' by the company 's senior management , which resulted in a $ 10.6 billion accounting scandal . 
The Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight 's report goes on to say that Fannie Mae employees deliberately and intentionally manipulated financial reports to hit earnings targets in order to trigger bonuses for senior executives . 
In the case of Franklin Raines , Fannie Mae 's former chief executive officer , OFHEO 's report shows that over half of Mr. Raines ' compensation for the 6 years through 2003 was directly tied to meeting earnings targets . 
The report of financial misconduct at Fannie Mae echoes the deeply troubling $ 5 billion profit restatement at Freddie Mac . 
The OFHEO report also states that Fannie Mae used its political power to lobby Congress in an effort to interfere with the regulator 's examination of the company 's accounting problems . 
This report comes some weeks after Freddie Mac paid a record $ 3.8 million fine in a settlement with the Federal Election Commission and restated lobbying disclosure reports from 2004 to 2005 . 
These are entities that have demonstrated over and over again that they are deeply in need of reform . 
For years I have been concerned about the regulatory structure that governs Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac -- known as Government-sponsored entities or GSEs -- and the sheer magnitude of these companies and the role they play in the housing market . 
OFHEO 's report this week does nothing to ease these concerns . 
In fact , the report does quite the contrary . 
OFHEO 's report solidifies my view that the GSEs need to be reformed without delay . 
I join as a cosponsor of the Federal Housing Enterprise Regulatory Reform Act of 2005 , S. 190 , to underscore my support for quick passage of GSE regulatory reform legislation . 
If Congress does not act , American taxpayers will continue to be exposed to the enormous risk that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac pose to the housing market , the overall financial system , and the economy as a whole . 
I urge my colleagues to support swift action on this GSE reform legislation . 
Here 's what happened to that bill -LRB- under the Republican Congress -RRB- : Quick InfoS . 
190 -LRB- 109th -RRB- : Federal Housing Enterprise Regulatory Reform Act of 2005 Last Action : Committee on Banking , Housing , and Urban Affairs . 
Ordered to be reported with an amendment in the nature of a substitute favorably . 
Status : Dead Posted by : ted in pdx | September 19 , 2008 5:49 PM | Report abuse Republicans were in charge of congress in 2005 . 
They could have passed the housing reform bill , it was out of the Democrats hands . 
This is just another example of the Repubs tryin to put the blame for their failure on someone else . 
McCain also supported Bob Ney 's Predatory Lending Act of 2003 . 
This repealed state protections against predatory lending , which subprime lenders deemed `` inefficient '' . 
These were regulations that stopped lenders from advertising one rate then jacking up the rate after a year or two , or regulations that stopped lenders from charging you a gigantic fee to refinance out of a mortgage that you ca n't afford . 
Crazily inefficient things like that . 
This sort of deregulation is what caused this crisis . 
The five senators , Alan Cranston -LRB- D-CA -RRB- , Dennis DeConcini -LRB- D-AZ -RRB- , John Glenn -LRB- D-OH -RRB- , John McCain -LRB- R-AZ -RRB- , and Donald W. Riegle -LRB- D-MI -RRB- , were accused of improperly aiding Charles H. Keating , Jr. , chairman of the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association , which was the target of an investigation by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board -LRB- FHLBB -RRB- . 
The U.S. Savings and Loan crisis of the 1980s and 1990s was the failure of 747 savings and loan associations -LRB- S&Ls -RRB- in the United States . 
The ultimate cost of the crisis is estimated to have totaled around $ 160.1 billion , about $ 124.6 billion of which was directly paid for by the U.S. taxpayer . 
McCain and Keating had become personal friends following their initial contacts in 1981 , and McCain was the closest socially to Keating of the five senators . 
Like DeConcini , McCain considered Keating a constituent as he lived in Arizona . 
Between 1982 and 1987 , McCain had received $ 112,000 in political contributions from Keating and his associates . 
In addition , McCain 's wife Cindy McCain and her father Jim Hensley had invested $ 359,100 in a Keating shopping center in April 1986 , a year before McCain met with the regulators . 
McCain , his family , and their baby-sitter had made nine trips at Keating 's expense , sometimes aboard Keating 's jet . 
Three of the trips were made during vacations to Keating 's opulent Bahamas retreat at Cat Cay . 
McCain did not pay Keating -LRB- in the amount of $ 13,433 -RRB- for some of the trips until years after they were taken , when he learned that Keating was in trouble over Lincoln . 
He sung like a bird once he was granted immunity and agreed to testify against Charles Keating to save his own ass . 
Only then was he cleared of any wrongdoing , as was his deal . 
Not one but TWO major financial screw-ups of epic magnitude under John McCain 's watch tells me we should let this guy have control of the Presidency , after the ineptitude of the sitting President in every affair , but especially financial , when he looked the other way in enforcing financial regulations so that markets could ` do their thing ' with minimal to no interference . 
To hell with that ! 
And to hell with John McCain ! 
He was the loan Republican and the Democrats insisted on his inclusion . 
Have you been watching Olbermann again ? 
The ads he 's been running make Rove look clean by comparison . 
He 's led us to believe he 's standing on the sidelines , even taking the time to point out when McCain gets out of hand and then we McCain focused on the issues the next day . 
If there is an anti-christ , then Rove is it . 
He 's a very scary man . 
you have aliberal reporter supposedly doing fact checks on what the truthis . 
you have so many of these supposed fact checkers on tv and print now and people need to check out the fact checkers to see what there true intent is Posted by : jim | September 19 , 2008 5:51 PM | Report abuse I want somebody who was tortured for 51\/2 years to have the keys to our nukes . 
Hard to think anybody would be stupid enough to consider voting for this senile , old psycho . 
I do not understand . 
Did n't Clinton appoint Raines ? 
Did n't Raines make about 90 million dollars ? 
Clinton was such a poor president . 
First he essentially ignored terrorism , and now we find he undermined Fannia Mae by loading it up with his lackeys . 
Its interesting that Obama is number 2 on the list of people who benefited from the corruption . 
It also appears that he funneled money to his friends back in Chicago -LRB- Rezco -RRB- . 
In Congress , He either misses the vote or votes `` present '' on almost all controversal votes . 
He must think we 're stupid . 
In final , I want Obama why . 
it appears that the original story that McCain quoted was in the Business section not the Style . . 
I guess the Fact Checker to have a Fact Checker ... Posted by : Mark | September 19 , 2008 5:52 PM | Report abuse Let 's see . 
The Washington Post Fact Checker states that : `` The profile -LRB- in the Washington Post -RRB- reported that Raines , who retired from Fannie Mae four years ago , had ` taken calls from Barack Obama 's presidential campaign seeking his advice on mortgage and housing policy matters . ' '' 
It reports that this appeared in `` three items -LRB- including an editorial -RRB- . '' 
It is the Post itself , repeating the claim about Raines and the Obama campaign three times , that is the source for this McCain ad . 
There is no indication in the Post that the number of calls to Raines was limited to `` a couple '' as Raines and Fact Checker now assert . 
In short , there is no evidence that the McCain campaign lied or that their inference about Raines was unwarranted or unreasonable , given the Post articles . 
If anyone deserves the Pinocchios it is the Post for sloppy journalism . 
For Fact Checker to even hint that the McCain campaign was distorting here is just more media advocacy for Obama . 
The words ring true whether they were issued by Dr. Jack Wheeler or any one else . 
Regardless of who posted the words , they make more sense than most of the liberal rantings posted on this site . 
This proves that yoBamma has devious connections ... he 's half black\/white ... and so is Michael ! 
Coincidence ??? Posted by : Tom in Orlando | September 19 , 2008 5:58 PM | Report abuse Raines is a crook and he is attached to Obama along with Jim Johnson . 
Can you say that McCain is cleaner ? 
All the facts point to no , no , no. . 
There are no clean politicians . 
That 's why we have to vote based on what is important to us . 
What is important to you ? 
Family , paying bills , keeping your house -LRB- if you 're lucky enough to have one -RRB- ? 
Having a job where you feel productive and are valued for what you do ? 
If all that is true , then are n't so different after all . 
The words ring true whether they were issued by Dr. Jack Wheeler or any one else . 
Regardless of who posted the words , they make more sense than most of the liberal rantings posted on this site . 
You 're absolutely right . 
Those words DO ring true from a right-wing conservative perspective . 
I would n't argue with that . 
And ALL those comments posted from the liberal perspective are certainly `` rantings '' . 
All I need to do to agree wholly with what you have to say Anonymous is to blind myself with religious fervor . 
The fact that Barack Obama is not a descendant of an African-American does not mean he is n't African-American himself . 
He 's spent most of his life in the United States and is likely to be measured by any racist in the United States with the same stick as any other person with the same skin color . 
My Urban Sociology professor is a first generation american from Kenya and has experienced the same type of racism as someone who is ` African-American ' . 
I work in the ER and see it all the time . 
Read your papers and see the balck on black crime . 
When I said they want to cut off our heads , I wasnt refering to any coler I was referring to AMERICANS Posted by : rn4601 | September 19 , 2008 6:03 PM | Report abuse Young black men die everyday because they are killing each other . 
I work in the ER and see it all the time . 
Read your papers and see the balck on black crime . 
When I said they want to cut off our heads , I wasnt refering to any coler I was referring to AMERICANS Posted by : rn4601 | September 19 , 2008 6:03 PM | Report abuse Young black men die everyday because they are killing each other . 
I work in the ER and see it all the time . 
Read your papers and see the balck on black crime . 
When I said they want to cut off our heads , I wasnt refering to any coler I was referring to AMERICANS Posted by : rn4601 | September 19 , 2008 6:03 PM | Report abuse he wrote an article also saying mccain collaborated with the enemy and was called on it by mitt romney ... it is true too ? 
Time to get dirt boys -LRB- and girl -RRB- . 
Obama will not last through this . 
This proves that yoBamma has devious connections ... he 's half black\/white ... and so is Michael ! 
Coincidence ??? Posted by : PleaseChange | September 19 , 2008 6:03 PM | Report abuse No one is even mentioning the Jackson Five connection here . 
This proves that yoBamma has devious connections ... he 's half black\/white ... and so is Michael ! 
Coincidence ??? Posted by : PleaseChange | September 19 , 2008 6:03 PM | Report abuse Interesting ... a Washington Post editorial on August 28 , 2008 notes that `` Two members of Mr. Obama 's political circle , James A. Johnson and Franklin D. Raines , are former chief executives of Fannie Mae . '' 
It 's one thing for the Post to discredit it 's Style section , but also it 's own Editorials ? 
Let 's face it , the Post is in the tank for Obama . 
The Post was losing customers galore before this , it 's just a matter of time before they are extinct . 
Although maybe an Obama administration will bail them out ? 
Subsidize them , perhaps , as their mouthpiece . 
He 'll do anything to become president , including try to trick poor little Ms. Falin into thinking she 's going to be more than the Oval Office Coffee Girl ... at 72 years old , he needs to go sit in a rocking chair and shut up and let Little Miss Coffee Girl do the work !! Posted by : lsav1 | September 19 , 2008 6:03 PM | Report abuse Okay , so that 's what John McCain did in his role as the Maverick , the guy who is n't afraid to challenge his own party when necessary . 
-LRB- see previous post re : his Senate Bill -RRB- Now he 's claiming he 's been trying to clean up this mess for a long time , and using this Bill as proof . 
Well I have a question for you Senator : Why did you let it drop in July of 2005 ? 
If you 'd pursued it , if you had insisted that the bill be brought to a vote , it might have passed , and the issues you raised about fraud at F&F might have made it onto the public radar . 
Remember , John McCain was not a freshman Senator newly arrived in Washington back in 2005 . 
If he was outraged by the abuses at Freddie & Fannie , he could have gone public with these same accusations , and demanded that the Bush administration respond . 
That 's the sort of thing that Mavericks who put principle above politics do . 
On the other hand , politicians who want to say they are one thing to the voters , but protect their inside connections at the same time , do things like sponsor legislation that makes it sound like they 're working for reform , while silently allowing it to fail . 
BTW , while Senator McCain was proposing his legislation -LRB- to be used later as a marker of sorts -RRB- , the freshman Senator from Illinois proposed legislation to tighten up the laws relating to mortgage lending , and require greater disclosure of questionable practices by all of the various professional specialties which get involved in a mortgage transaction . 
The Banking Industry did n't want any of that , so Obama 's Feb-2006 bill -LRB- ` STOP FRAUD ' -RRB- failed . 
He re-introduced a new and more comprehensive version of the bill in April of 2007 , and this one contained specific language which would have , had it been enacted , addressed several of the most obvious issues leading to the meltdown . 
It required lenders to prove that they had properly verified the creditworthiness of the borrower , including their ability to manage future payments 7-10 years out . 
Obama was unable to get his bill to a vote , -LRB- just like the first one -RRB- , but he had already decided how he was going to get around the good-ol-boy network inside the Congress , he ran for President . 
It 's unbelievable how many Obama supporters there are on here . 
What are the bases of Obama 's popularity ? 
Key word popularity , not support . 
The media has served this man on a plater ! 
What is it that he has done that is so credible ? 
Yes , I get that he inspires , I get that he offers change -LRB- enter magic wand -RRB- , I get that he 's good looking , I get that he had a mother in Kansas ... Now what ? 
He 's so busy trying to be everything to everybody but really stands for nothing . 
Let me back up these statements by saying I was a huge Obama fan before it was the cool thing to do . 
Way before he announced his candidacy . 
I was intrigued by his words and his ability to articulate them . 
That was three years ago . 
Do your selves a favor and dig a little deeper and find out the truth behind this man . 
Listen to the likes of Glenn Beck , and conservative talk radio . 
I was raised on welfare and ate government supplied foods all through child hood , and my entire family several generations back are die hard democrats . 
I was the first one to step up and change the direction of my future . 
That is what this country was founded on . 
People ... you and me , getting off our asses and taking control over our own future and not standing by looking for a hand out . 
Keep an open mind over the next 45 days during the debates . 
You will find that the smoke and mirrors will be revealed with out the prompters guiding Obama 's every word . 
Put your ignorant party committed minds aside , and think for a change . 
Remember , the president is here to serve us as our employee not as our god . 
The bottom line is , judge a man by his own ability to make good judgement calls not by experience -LRB- or lack there of -RRB- not by his ability to speak well in public , but by who he chooses to surround himself with . 
There are to many bad judgement calls in that category by Barrack Obama . 
Think before you vote ! 
This proves that yoBamma has devious connections ... he 's half black\/white ... and so is Michael ! 
Coincidence ??? Posted by : Tom in Orlando | September 19 , 2008 5:58 PM No. . 
Michael Jackson is not half black\/white . 
He used to be half black\/white and now he is just white . 
Now take off that white sheet and show us your face ! 
That is not true . 
There are many lower medium class who pay taxes . 
I have worked hard for every dollar I have earned . 
It is my money , for me to spend as I see fit . 
Obama and Biden want to spend as much of my money as they can . 
They think it is their right to spend my money . '' 
MightyEagle says , `` Put away the hate and invective ; stop the fearmongering ; wake up and smell the coffee . 
The economy is circling the drain and all this administration can do is offer band-aid fixes to get past the election . 
The war is grinding through a generation of dedicated patriots and leaving a debt that will last two or more generations . 
Another great American city lies in ruins waiting for hurricane relief that keeps on not happening . 
The constitution is locked away as our privacy and our honor are debased by Bush and Cheney . 
McCain is clueless , faithless and not to be trusted . 
He can only offer more of same . 
We can not risk four more years of this . 
Obama is our true hope of restoring American greatness . 
With McCain we all lose - and we lose big . '' 
First , Obama -LRB- the copy of his mentor that he denies was his mentor , but his mentor 's son swears it and proves it in an article with the Canada Free Press -RRB- wants to eventually take everything from anyone with anything and give it to those they have brainwashed with a victimization mentality . 
Saul Alinsky himself wrote that in order to successfully get a country to turn to communism , you must work within the government , rub raw the injustices people feel have been done against them so all they do is focus on them and then offer yourself as the one true hope . 
Fact , life has spots where it might be a little tough to make do , but you know what ? 
If you have worked for what you have , you by all means should be able to keep it !!! I am married , have 2 young kids , I am a type 1 diabetic and my husband makes less than $ 45K a year . 
I stay home with the kids . 
We give 10 % of my husband 's gross pay to our church , we put money away in a 401k , we pay for our health insurance and prescriptions . 
We pay our mortgage on time , when we signed an attorney was present and asked numerous times if we had any questions and if we understood that if we did not pay , we would lose the house . 
We will own our home in a couple of years , outright ... no more payments to a bank . 
We do n't owe on our car , we do n't owe on credit cards , we do n't have student loans . 
We do n't feel like we are choosing between food and gas , even in this economy . 
IF WE CAN DO IT , ANYONE CAN ! 
My husband gets bonuses each year , and ridiculous taxes are taken out ! 
Now , we are in a situation where the taxes we pay are going to pay the mortgages of people who , many of which , did not have proper collateral , income , etc. . . 
to pay in the first place . 
Many were already deep into debt because of poor decisions THEY have made . 
And now we have a candidate who is showing himself to be the one true hope ... hmm ... I 'll take my chances with a man that believes any American can be anything they want to be . 
Obama will take this country down the tubes and after he is done he will sell it to foreigners , if he has n't already . 
RIP THOSE IGNORANT LIBS . 
The U.S. exists today in a world that is largely hostile to our style of democracy . 
I contend that our worst enemies appear to be terrorism and greed , and that those two elements are allies in the attempt to de-stabilize and ultimately destroy the American form of democracy - terrorism from the outside , and greed from the inside . 
It seems that the terrorists are getting exactly what they wanted from us - our own self-destruction . 
They overtly attacked us on 911 , hoping to evoke a response I believe -RRB- . 
We responded in kind in Afganistan and Iraq . 
I further believe that they knew they could not win a war of arms , but could start the bleeding . 
How many dollars have we spent and for what gain ? 
The best the terrorists could hope for is the destruction of the American economy . 
Are we self-destructing under our own greed and misapplied policies ? 
I think that experience in management and decision-making on the global scale is a key element to be considered in selecting the next president . 
Unfortunately , none of the candidates have that experience in their resumes . 
They would like us to think they did , but ... Posted by : Deke in MN | September 19 , 2008 6:08 PM | Report abuse Will the real `` Anonymous '' please stand up because I think there is more than one of you . 
If not , then perhaps you have a multiple personality problem . 
Why not do something different ; write in the name on your ballots that you think will bring about the most change . 
Get away from the two yahoos that have been served up in front of us as window dressing by their parties . 
Most of the people running our country started at the local level ; Right ? 
Why not change it . 
Don t be scared . 
It s YOUR vote and YOUR ballot . 
Quite whining and really make a change . 
This is why I have no doubt in my mind that McCain will win the election hands down . 
It has a real sickening ring to it ; does n't it ? 
I 've switched sides . 
Thanks to the WP . 
RIP THOSE IGNORANT LIBS Posted by : Katee | September 19 , 2008 6:07 PM Posted by : PleaseChange | September 19 , 2008 6:11 PM | Report abuse palin said baby jesus rode dinosaurs to eden she 's the ` it ' girl , obama is old news ... you folks need to get your heads outta your arses ... vote obama , put County first ... do n't hand it over to a freaked out old fart and a gun totin ' jesus freak Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 6:12 PM | Report abuse Love your post . 
Keep spreading the word to the victim thinkers out there . 
, is what is important to you . 
I do not see how adding a trillion dollars of new spending helps . 
Sara Palin and her family is the only `` normal '' people in this race . 
I would argue that with her approval rating in Alaska and her record of actual accomplishment of fighting corruption , That the McCain-Palin ticket has a better chance of enacting change in Washington . 
I do not believe that Obama can raise taxes on the rich . 
It is a lie that has never occured in the U.S. . 
It is standard Liberal Fare . 
But 7 of 10 of the wealthiest members of Congress are Democrats , and I am absolutely convinced that they will hide their money in loop holes -LRB- like always -RRB- . 
Its rediculas to think that the Kennedy 's , the Reeds , Hollywood , and the Pelosia 's will pay more taxes . 
Every Government program always ends up costing at least 2x more than cited , usually more . 
And for those of you for socialized , rationed healthcare ; do you really want the U.S. Government holding your medical records . 
He 's as corrupt as they come . 
Obama has no close women advisors except his wife and Valerie Jarret -LRB- who `` earned '' millions of federal dollars managing low-income housing projects in Obama 's Chicago district while the projects themselves fell into such ruin they were ultimately deemed uninhabitable -RRB- . 
The women in Obama 's Senate office are fewer in number than the men , and they make less money . 
-LRB- Interestingly , the reverse is the case in John McCain 's office . -RRB- 
Obama has been known to refer to women journalists as `` sweetie , '' promising to answer questions `` if they 're good . '' 
Obama called the grandmother who raised him a `` typical white woman '' and stated that , despite her being the most positive influence in his life , he would n't marry a woman like his mother - BECAUSE SHE WAS WHITE . 
Obama has repeatedly disparaged McCain as `` old '' -LRB- a protected class under the ADEA -RRB- and pointed with derision to his inability to use a computer keyboard as a result of permanent injuries he suffered as a POW -LRB- another protected class , this time under the ADA -RRB- . 
His campaign also excluded women wearing jihibs from a photo opportunity -LRB- required by their religion -RRB- . 
So basically , the Democratic candidate is someone who discriminates against Americans on the basis of their gender , their race , their age , their physical health , and their religion on a fairly regular basis . 
-LRB- And we have n't yet gotten to the gun-toting , religion-clinging Americans who bowl . -RRB- 
For those of you too young to remember , THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY USED TO VIGOROUSLY OPPOSE DISCRIMINATION . 
Obama rejected campaign finance reform provisions that many believe are the only way to ensure a level playing field amont For those of you too young to remember , THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY USED TO VIGOROUSLY SUPPORT CAMPAIGN FINANCE REFORM . 
Obama told supporters during the primary his position with respect to NAFTA . 
A close aide , however , was simultaneously telling the prime minister of Canada that he should n't pay any attention to what Obama was telling Americans , as he was just saying that to get elected . 
For those of you too young to remember , THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY USED TO SUPPORT U.S. LABOR . 
The Obama campaign routinely threatens journalists and others who write articles disparaging of him with lawsuits . 
For those of you too young to remember , THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY USED TO FIGHT AGAINST CENSORSHIP . 
In a dramatic switch , Obama supports now supports FISA , which allows the government to secretly eavesdrop on Americans For those of you too young to remember , THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY USED FIGHT FOR THE PRIVACY AND CIVIL LIBERTIES of citizens . 
Because of the Communist\/Marxist leanings of his grandparents , parents , and his teenage mentor , Frank Marshall Davis , it 's been suggested that Obama 's a Marxist - and maybe a switch from capitalism to communism is , indeed , the unidentified `` change '' he 's promising . 
I do n't know what he is . 
But he 's no a Democrat . 
It 's unbelievable how many Obama supporters there are on here . 
What are the bases of Obama 's popularity ? 
Key word popularity , not support . 
The media has served this man on a plater ! 
What is it that he has done that is so credible ? 
Yes , I get that he inspires , I get that he offers change -LRB- enter magic wand -RRB- , I get that he 's good looking , I get that he had a mother in Kansas ... Now what ? 
He 's so busy trying to be everything to everybody but really stands for nothing . 
Let me back up these statements by saying I was a huge Obama fan before it was the cool thing to do . 
Way before he announced his candidacy . 
I was intrigued by his words and his ability to articulate them . 
That was three years ago . 
Do your selves a favor and dig a little deeper and find out the truth behind this man . 
Listen to the likes of Glenn Beck , and conservative talk radio . 
I was raised on welfare and ate government supplied foods all through child hood , and my entire family several generations back are die hard democrats . 
I was the first one to step up and change the direction of my future . 
That is what this country was founded on . 
People ... you and me , getting off our asses and taking control over our own future and not standing by looking for a hand out . 
Keep an open mind over the next 45 days during the debates . 
You will find that the smoke and mirrors will be revealed with out the prompters guiding Obama 's every word . 
Put your ignorant party committed minds aside , and think for a change . 
Remember , the president is here to serve us as our employee not as our god . 
The bottom line is , judge a man by his own ability to make good judgement calls not by experience -LRB- or lack there of -RRB- not by his ability to speak well in public , but by who he chooses to surround himself with . 
There are to many bad judgement calls in that category by Barrack Obama . 
Think before you vote ! 
Good point `` Thinker '' : all of us liberals are voting for Obama because of what the media tells us . 
For us its just a populatrity contest . 
Liberals who do n't blindly believe in the reasons for the Universe just want to vote for whoever the `` liberal '' media tells us to . 
We just want to smoke pot at rock concerts . 
Vote for who your Bible tells you to and remember : Republicans have never wanted Change - GOP has stood for the STATUS QUO in every issue except Roe vs. Wade . 
A good man witout any experience could be a better president than a man steeped in the ignorant help-yourself-not-eachother philosophies of the Republican party . 
Who would Jesus vote for ? 
A man whose killed with bombs ? 
I thought we were n't supposed to kill . 
Jesus wants peace , man ! 
I do n't think David Axelrod and MoveOn.org will be able to save him now ; just seven weeks away from Election 08 . 
Key word popularity , not support . '' 
No one calls me to ask who I am voting for . 
WHERE IS MY PHONE CALL ? 
I do not understand . 
Did n't Clinton appoint Raines ? 
Did n't Raines make about 90 million dollars ? 
Clinton was such a poor president . 
First he essentially ignored terrorism , and now we find he undermined Fannia Mae by loading it up with his lackeys . 
Its interesting that Obama is number 2 on the list of people who benefited from the corruption . 
It also appears that he funneled money to his friends back in Chicago -LRB- Rezco -RRB- . 
In Congress , He either misses the vote or votes `` present '' on almost all controversal votes . 
He must think we 're stupid . 
In final , I want Obama why . 
If working , paying your bills etc. . . 
, is what is important to you . 
I do not see how adding a trillion dollars of new spending helps . 
Sara Palin and her family is the only `` normal '' people in this race . 
I would argue that with her approval rating in Alaska and her record of actual accomplishment of fighting corruption , That the McCain-Palin ticket has a better chance of enacting change in Washington . 
I do not believe that Obama can raise taxes on the rich . 
It is a lie that has never occured in the U.S. . 
It is standard Liberal Fare . 
But 7 of 10 of the wealthiest members of Congress are Democrats , and I am absolutely convinced that they will hide their money in loop holes -LRB- like always -RRB- . 
Its rediculas to think that the Kennedy 's , the Reeds , Hollywood , and the Pelosia 's will pay more taxes . 
Every Government program always ends up costing at least 2x more than cited , usually more . 
And for those of you for socialized , rationed healthcare ; do you really want the U.S. Government holding your medical records . 
Read his book -- he talks frequently about Mr. Wright 's racist rants ... ` and then it clicked ' ... Posted by : Apollo | September 19 , 2008 6:24 PM | Report abuse Dear People Who Have Been Misled by the Democratic Ideology : Obama 's not going to `` change '' anything . 
He 's as corrupt as they come . 
Obama has no close women advisors except his wife and Valerie Jarret -LRB- who `` earned '' millions of federal dollars managing low-income housing projects in Obama 's Chicago district while the projects themselves fell into such ruin they were ultimately deemed uninhabitable -RRB- . 
The women in Obama 's Senate office are fewer in number than the men , and they make less money . 
-LRB- Interestingly , the reverse is the case in John McCain 's office . -RRB- 
Obama has been known to refer to women journalists as `` sweetie , '' promising to answer questions `` if they 're good . '' 
Obama called the grandmother who raised him a `` typical white woman '' and stated that , despite her being the most positive influence in his life , he would n't marry a woman like his mother - BECAUSE SHE WAS WHITE . 
Obama has repeatedly disparaged McCain as `` old '' -LRB- a protected class under the ADEA -RRB- and pointed with derision to his inability to use a computer keyboard as a result of permanent injuries he suffered as a POW -LRB- another protected class , this time under the ADA -RRB- . 
His campaign also excluded women wearing jihibs from a photo opportunity -LRB- required by their religion -RRB- . 
So basically , the Democratic candidate is someone who discriminates against Americans on the basis of their gender , their race , their age , their physical health , and their religion on a fairly regular basis . 
-LRB- And we have n't yet gotten to the gun-toting , religion-clinging Americans who bowl . -RRB- 
For those of you too young to remember , THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY USED TO VIGOROUSLY OPPOSE DISCRIMINATION . 
Obama rejected campaign finance reform provisions that many believe are the only way to ensure a level playing field amont For those of you too young to remember , THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY USED TO VIGOROUSLY SUPPORT CAMPAIGN FINANCE REFORM . 
Obama told supporters during the primary his position with respect to NAFTA . 
A close aide , however , was simultaneously telling the prime minister of Canada that he should n't pay any attention to what Obama was telling Americans , as he was just saying that to get elected . 
For those of you too young to remember , THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY USED TO SUPPORT U.S. LABOR . 
The Obama campaign routinely threatens journalists and others who write articles disparaging of him with lawsuits . 
For those of you too young to remember , THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY USED TO FIGHT AGAINST CENSORSHIP . 
In a dramatic switch , Obama supports now supports FISA , which allows the government to secretly eavesdrop on Americans For those of you too young to remember , THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY USED FIGHT FOR THE PRIVACY AND CIVIL LIBERTIES of citizens . 
Because of the Communist\/Marxist leanings of his grandparents , parents , and his teenage mentor , Frank Marshall Davis , it 's been suggested that Obama 's a Marxist - and maybe a switch from capitalism to communism is , indeed , the unidentified `` change '' he 's promising . 
I do n't know what he is . 
But he 's no a Democrat . 
Doing away with the wealthy 1 % who victimize the rest of the world does n't seem so bad to me . 
Giving everyone the chance for a great education does n't seem so bad to me . 
Giving everyone a medical care does n't seem so bad to me . 
Getting rid of special interest groups and large corporations which run the small businesses out of business does n't seem so bad to me . 
Canada , Sweden , the UK , Germany , Norway , Switzerland , Finland , the Netherlands , Denmark , and Italy are all socialist economies and I do n't see the war-mongering , imperialistic , freedom-reducing , fasco-religious regimes there that I am subjected to here in the `` Greatest Nation '' on Earth . 
Marxism could be a great change ! 
Tom : Oh , oh , I know this one . 
That 's right , I heard it on Rush Limbaugh , right ? 
Again : NEITHER SIDE IS INNOCENT OF THIS BS and there 's nothing we can do about it . 
I guess one option is to write in Hillary or whoever ... maybe Mikey Mouse on your ballot . 
You people are so gullible . 
He 's cried wolf too many times and has lost all credibility . 
I never said all of you liberals are voting for Obama because the media told you so . 
Try being considerate before you vomit words onto your post . 
There are alot of lost individuals out there that are looking to `` win the lottery '' with their vote . 
People that do n't take the time to figure out what policies are true to them . 
Which is why I said dig deeper . 
I do n't attend church and I 'm not a die hard republican . 
Good look with the stress you put on yourself by being so far left that you do a 180 . 
You people are so gullible . 
Anonymous : where are you getting this BS ? 
Definition of insane -LRB- or at least one -RRB- : When one keeps repeating same behavior over and over again , expecting different results . 
I 'm out of here because I 'm going insane . 
If your asking me , I have no idea who Jerome Corsi is and of course I know who the Swiftboat guys are , but I live in Tallahassee , Fla and I am a Graduate school student at FSU . 
that advocates armed insurrection to seperate AK from the Union ... the group she was a member of also renounce their US citizenship ... she should be tried for these offenses ... I guess her and mccain have something in common , they both sold out their country ... Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 6:32 PM | Report abuse Posted by : Thinker | September 19 , 2008 6:32 PM | Report abuse Based on this article , Obama can do no wrong . 
Well , guess what . 
They found the person who hacked into Gov. Palin 's personal email . 
It 's the son of a Democrat State Legislator from Tennessee . 
The Democrat Legislator is also an Obama operative . 
The Democrat 's son is currently being investigated by the FBI and Secret Service . 
You can find the article in knoxnews.com . 
Nowhere in the Washington Post , NY Times or LA Times do you see an article about `` Hackergate '' . 
The Associated Press , a leftist news outlet , refused to cooperate with the FBI and Secret Service . 
I wonder why all these extreme leftist publications and news outlets are refusing to publish anything about this news item ? 
Is it because they 're trying to protect Obama ? 
Any news about `` Troopergate '' is published , whether or not the information is true . 
Liberal Democrats are self righteous enough to believe that none of their kind can be involved in any felony . 
It 's only Republicans who are felons . 
I hope that dad and son end up in prison for illegally hacking into Gov. Palin 's personal email for along time . 
Obama said he would return to Chicago style politics . 
`` Hackergate '' is only the tip of the iceberg . 
No need to worry about that now ; Obama could n't stop shooting himself himself in the foot ... for nineteen months . 
Just remember the words of the prophet Obama , `` Huh , huh , uh ... yeah ... '' Posted by : OIFVetsForMcCain | September 19 , 2008 6:33 PM | Report abuse Moral , Rational and Liberal said : `` If being liberal is so terrible because we believe in peace , love , and helping our fellow men - then why do conservatives blindly follow the teachings of a long-haired , bearded man who spoke of those very same ideas as though they were the most important for the human race . '' 
The irony of this statement is jaw-dropping . 
Well , guess what ? 
They found the person who hacked into Gov. Palin 's personal email . 
It 's the son of a Democrat State Legislator from Tennessee . 
The Democrat Legislator is also an Obama operative . 
The Democrat 's son is currently being investigated by the FBI and Secret Service . 
You can find the article in knoxnews.com . 
Nowhere in the Washington Post , NY Times or LA Times do you see an article about `` Hackergate '' . 
The Associated Press , a leftist news outlet , refused to cooperate with the FBI and Secret Service . 
I wonder why all these extreme leftist publications and news outlets are refusing to publish anything about this news item ? 
Is it because they 're trying to protect Obama ? 
Any news about `` Troopergate '' is published , whether or not the information is true . 
Liberal Democrats are self righteous enough to believe that none of their kind can be involved in any felony . 
It 's only Republicans who are felons . 
I hope that dad and son end up in prison for illegally hacking into Gov. Palin 's personal email for along time . 
Obama said he would return to Chicago style politics . 
`` Hackergate '' is only the tip of the iceberg . 
The McCain makes it sound like Raines \* is \* an advisor , and a key one . 
-LRB- `` Shocking ! '' -RRB- 
So it 's obviously , directly misleading , yet you give it only two Pinnochios ? 
I never said all of you liberals are voting for Obama because the media told you so . 
Try being considerate before you vomit words onto your post . 
There are alot of lost individuals out there that are looking to `` win the lottery '' with their vote . 
People that do n't take the time to figure out what policies are true to them . 
Which is why I said dig deeper . 
I do n't attend church and I 'm not a die hard republican . 
Good look with the stress you put on yourself by being so far left that you do a 180 . 
Then exactly what did you say ? 
I just reread your earlier post and although that was n't explicitly the words you wrote in your post it surely was the implicit meaning of the words you wrote in your post . 
Basically you said people supprt Obama because he is popular and because the media allegedly likes him , but that we should look more closely and then decide to vite Republican . 
So , I do n't see how I misunderstood you . 
I do n't smoke pot , and I 'm a liberal because I believe in peace , love , community , and individual freedom . 
Why are you a Republican ? 
Because you want to be rich ? 
Tom : Oh , oh , I know this one . 
That 's right , I heard it on Rush Limbaugh , right ? 
Again : NEITHER SIDE IS INNOCENT OF THIS BS and there 's nothing we can do about it . 
I guess one option is to write in Hillary or whoever ... maybe Mikey Mouse on your ballot . 
I go to something called the Cogressional record . 
Have you heard of it ? 
Obama 's record is so thin that if it was ice a misquito would fall through . 
The whole concept of liberal vs. conservative is an anachronism . 
We have two groups in this country : the people that own the capital , and the people who do the grunt work for them . 
And let me clue you in : the people that own the capital are n't visiting these forums and arguing with the rest of us . 
So you folks who are -LRB- like me -RRB- members of the Republican party , are not only grunts -LRB- like the rest of us -RRB- you -LRB- we -RRB- are also the stooges they need to have around for appearances sake . 
-LRB- And yes , the Democratic party contains the same two groups : the owners , and them that are owned . -RRB- 
What is it they most want ? 
They want us to keep fighting amongst each other , and continue to believe that we 're engaged in a struggle between the common man and an elite upper-class , and that the Dems are fighting for the common man , and the Republicans are the elite . 
In fact , we 're just the people who have no power , and they 're the ones that do . 
The problem is , now that we have the Internet , anyone who wants to can dig into this stuff and with a little critical thinking , uncover little nuggets of truth . 
And when you accumulate enough of those nuggets , you start to become a threat to them who are in control , because you start to see the whole corrupt picture more clearly . 
I make a point of reading any post that sounds like it may have some factual basis , even if the person holds a generally opposing view . 
If they 've got a link to some outside evidence , I follow it and read that too . 
And I try to make sure that whatever I say , I can back up with some sort of objective source . 
That makes me more objective , and the more our comments are based on factual realities , the more likely we are to arrive at some common ground . 
They found the person who hacked into Gov. Palin 's personal email . 
It 's the son of a Democrat State Legislator from Tennessee . 
The Democrat Legislator is also an Obama operative . 
The Democrat 's son is currently being investigated by the FBI and Secret Service . 
You can find the article in knoxnews.com . 
Nowhere in the Washington Post , NY Times or LA Times do you see an article about `` Hackergate '' . 
The Associated Press , a leftist news outlet , refused to cooperate with the FBI and Secret Service . 
I wonder why all these extreme leftist publications and news outlets are refusing to publish anything about this news item ? 
Is it because they 're trying to protect Obama ? 
Any news about `` Troopergate '' is published , whether or not the information is true . 
Liberal Democrats are self righteous enough to believe that none of their kind can be involved in any felony . 
It 's only Republicans who are felons . 
I hope that dad and son end up in prison for illegally hacking into Gov. Palin 's personal email for along time . 
Obama said he would return to Chicago style politics . 
`` Hackergate '' is only the tip of the iceberg . 
I am in my early forties and as long as I can remember , which goes back to Nixon , the elections have all been the same ; you either vote Republican if you want to blow things up or you vote Democrat if you just want to lay there and take it . 
I don t want to blow anything up not do I want to just lay there and take it . 
A ticket of Condolezza -LRB- sp -RRB- Rice and Warren Buffet would be good . 
She appears to have the ability to talk across boundaries and get people to listen . 
That would be the foreign affairs part of the ticket . 
Warren Buffet could take care of the domestic side of the house . 
He s not in debt , like Fannie and Freddy , ECT . 
The irony of this statement is jaw-dropping . 
Is n't `` Moral ... '' right ? 
The irony is what is so great about this statement , right ? 
Illinois schools are in such disarray , the children walked out . 
Obama 's Annenburg Project -LRB- which he worked on with Bill Ayres -RRB- is a recognized to have failed . 
And according to the principal at the school in Kenya named after Obama , `` Senator Obama has not honored the promises he gave me when we met in 2006 and in his earlier letter to the school . 
He has not given us even one shilling . '' 
Giving everyone medical care ? 
Do n't bet the farm . 
The health care plan Obama 's proposing will cost participants over $ 12,000 annually . 
To the working poor in this country , that 's not a `` gift '' - that 's food , clothing and shelter . 
Getting rid of special interest groups and large corporations ? 
Obama 's largest donor is Goldman Sachs -LRB- one of the two remaining Wall Street investment banks -RRB- . 
An elite group of multimillionaire supporters recently raised over $ 9 million in a single night , listening to Barbra Streisand . 
A man of the people ? 
Feeling as you do , I strongly suggest you vote for Ralph Nader . 
With so many options , why do n't you move to one of these fabulous countries ? 
Oh , then you would n't have anything to complain about ... Posted by : Thinker | September 19 , 2008 6:45 PM | Report abuse Posted by : PleaseChange | September 19 , 2008 5:46 PM I dont believe in Karma any more than I believe in luck . 
McCain\/Palin in 2008 and if all goes as promised 2012 . 
With so many options , why do n't you move to one of these fabulous countries ? 
Oh , then you would n't have anything to complain about ... Posted by : Thinker | September 19 , 2008 6:45 PM Because immigration to these countries is so sought for that their immigrationlaws have become even more rigid than ours . 
And I love this land where I was born and raised and would love this country if it stood for what it supposed to stand for . 
Illinois schools are in such disarray , the children walked out . 
Obama 's Annenburg Project -LRB- which he worked on with Bill Ayres -RRB- is a recognized to have failed . 
And according to the principal at the school in Kenya named after Obama , `` Senator Obama has not honored the promises he gave me when we met in 2006 and in his earlier letter to the school . 
He has not given us even one shilling . '' 
Giving everyone medical care ? 
Do n't bet the farm . 
The health care plan Obama 's proposing will cost participants over $ 12,000 annually . 
To the working poor in this country , that 's not a `` gift '' - that 's food , clothing and shelter . 
Getting rid of special interest groups and large corporations ? 
Obama 's largest donor is Goldman Sachs -LRB- one of the two remaining Wall Street investment banks -RRB- . 
An elite group of multimillionaire supporters recently raised over $ 9 million in a single night , listening to Barbra Streisand . 
A man of the people ? 
Feeling as you do , I strongly suggest you vote for Ralph Nader . 
I have two words for you - PHIL GRAMM . 
He is McCain 's senior economic advisor . 
You know ... we 're in a mental recession ... we 're a `` nation of whiners '' - that 's McCain 's guy and also the guy who basically got us into this mess to begin with . 
Well , leftist Democrats guess what ? 
They found the person who hacked into Gov. Palin 's personal email . 
It 's the son of a Democrat State Legislator from Tennessee . 
The Democrat Legislator is also an Obama operative . 
The Democrat 's son is currently being investigated by the FBI and Secret Service . 
You can find the article in knoxnews.com . 
Nowhere in the Washington Post , NY Times or LA Times do you see an article about `` Hackergate '' . 
The Associated Press , a leftist news outlet , refused to cooperate with the FBI and Secret Service . 
I wonder why all these extreme leftist publications and news outlets are refusing to publish anything about this news item ? 
Is it because they 're trying to protect Obama ? 
Any news about `` Troopergate '' is published , whether or not the information is true . 
Liberal Democrats are self righteous enough to believe that none of their kind can be involved in any felony . 
It 's only Republicans who are felons . 
I hope that dad and son end up in prison for illegally hacking into Gov. Palin 's personal email for along time . 
Obama said he would return to Chicago style politics . 
`` Hackergate '' is only the tip of the iceberg . 
The Vietnam War was before my time . 
I would have been among the first veterans to acknowledge Kerry 's courage in battle even if he did n't earn all of his awards and later tried to discredit his fellow veterans in a televised Congressional subcommittee hearing after his service . 
I would have to Google Jeromi Corsi to know who he is . 
If my on-line name implied that I am part of a veterans ' organization out to snub Obama , I 'm not . 
I 'm just one of countless veterans determined to suppoert the best candidate for president and commander-in-chief in a dangerous time . 
Unfortunately none of those people are running . 
I feel it 's a disservice to oneself to vote for the lesser of two evils . 
Voting based on what you believe in is ideal . 
Party or policy trumps person . 
But what happens when one of the two evils is so unfit to run the country ? 
Obama does not take advice from Raines . 
Appreciate the Fact Checker put the Washington Post should also tell McCain to pull to ad since it misrepresents the Washington post and the ad itself is another lie from McCain . 
The first hit is to an article - in the Huffington Post - entitled `` Obama Weakened Nuclear Safety Bill After And , while you 're there , be sure to check out the post from Petwagger , who writes : `` I live in Illinois , Senator Obama 's home state . 
I live with 3 nuclear power plants within a 25 mile radius , a high level waste storage facility , a nuclear laundry and a possible site for a reprocessing plant for spent nuclear fuel under the Global Nuclear Energy Patnership . 
For those of us who live in this area , we have legitimate concerns about health and the environment . 
We have repeatedly asked Senator Obama to come listen to our concerns , and his office staff has excused themselves and the Senator with excuses that we can not comprehend . 
We are asking ourselves several questions : How could the Senator not have time to listen to us , but time was allocated so that the bill that did not pass , could have the language changed with input from the nuclear power plant owners and the nuclear regulators ? 
How is it that a presidential candidate from the state with the largest number of nuclear power plants in the U.S. can not or will not meet wtih those from the communities that share their environment with the power plants ? 
We would like our voice to be heard . 
We would like that voice to have come from the Senator from Illinois who is running for President . '' 
Kind of brings to mind that old saying - your money or your life . 
As for your dissertation of the repeal of the Glass-Steagall act and its replacement by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley act , you have left out a few facts . 
Fact , before the repeal of Glass-Steagall , in 1997 then President Clinton rallied democrats to push through a bill that loosened lending standards to minorities and lower income families -LRB- the bill was ultimately passed because some republicans defected from party lines and voted in its favor -RRB- . 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley was a bill sponsored by republicans Gramm and Bliley , Leach was a DEMOCRAT . 
The bill was signed by a democratic president , who after signing the act made a statement that any further legislation that might add any restrictions to loan practices concerning those with insufficient assets or income would not be signed by him . 
So it seems you must be working for The Post , as your post was a little , uhm , one sided . 
This whole thing is a culmination of sins of both sides . 
The correct balance of restriction was never reached , because of both sides , and now we have a mess . 
However , McCain did sponsor a bill in 2005 to bring more restriction and made a statement in 2006 on the impending danger Fannie and Freddie imposed on the housing market . 
Obama , however , has not brought a bill to address the issue one iota , and in fact voted against legislation that would tighten the rules of some of the practices that brought the financial market to its knees ... a large oversight for a Messiah . 
You people are so gullible . 
Absolutely no aid but declaring martial law for each state or country hard hit by the shift which translates into giving up our guns for protection and a police state . 
The slow response from the government surrounding Hurricane Katrina was their attempt to declare martial law in New Orleans and ` take over ' the state . 
Harmful thoughts was their primary focus . 
If the Republicans ca n't declare martial law by their wish of a next terrorist attack -LRB- terror-wish -RRB- they will certainly declare martial law after the pole shift . 
This I worry greatly . 
Humans , primarily in the unconcious has the desire to support the dark agenda and feel that an experienced , stubborn , and violent candidate is ` suitable ' for the job because they feel this is what defines politicians and needs a bully to feel safe from threats from other countries . 
People are forgetting that Republicans also consider citizens to be terrorists as well . 
Many McCain voters thinks that they would be safe from a McCain administration and yet this is actually the exact opposite in reality of their intention . 
Bush Administration would n't have proposed deadly chemtrails nor the deadly viruses like the West Nile virus and the Ebola virus where the source was from a field office of the CIA . 
They were were all intended secretly against the human species by the Bush Administration\/Republican secret agenda . 
I 'm looking forward to aiding many after the pole shift and hopefully many will too . 
REPUBLICANS HAVE A PLAN TO KILL ANY REMAINING HUMANS IN THE AFTERLIFE OR POLESHIFT SO FOR YOUR OWN SAKE DO N'T VOTE FOR A REPUBLICAN THIS NOVEMBER BECAUSE POLE SHIFT IS POSSIBLE DURING THE NEXT PRESIDENTS TENURE . 
AND HAVE YOU GUYS WONDER WHY REPUBLICANS BUSH AND NOW MCCAIN WANTING TO CONTINUE AND EXPAND THE SPYING PROGRAM ? 
TO SAVE US FROM TERRORITS ? 
I DID N'T THINK SO BUT TO TAKE CONTROL IN THE AFTERLIFE AND LOOK TO REMOVE ANYONE THREATENING THEM WHICH INCLUDES THE U.S. CITIZENS . 
REPUBLICANS BELIEVE THAT U.S. CITIZENS ARE THE TERRORISTS AND THAT THE TERRORISTS THE MAJORITY OF U.S. CITIZENS BELIEVE IN ARE ACTUALLY BENEFITING THE REPUBLICAN PARTY , THUS REPUBLICANS ARE A FRIEND TO TERRORISTS WHICH MEANS ONLY ONE THING . 
YOU ARE CONSIDERED A TERRORIST TO THEM BECAUSE THEY SAY YOU WOULD INTERFERE WITH THEM AFTER THE POLESHIFT REGARDLESS OF WHETHER YOU ARE A REPUBLICAN OR A DEMOCRAT MATTERS NOT . 
WHICH IS WHY THEY ARE CONTINUTING TO EXPAND THE SPYING PROGRAM TO MAKE SURE THEY KEEP AN EYE ON ANY POTENTIAL THREATS ON U.S. SOIL WHICH INCLUDES THE U.S. CITIZENS . 
I 'LL BET YOU ANYTHING THAT A REPUBLICAN CONTROLLED WHITE HOUSE OR CONGRESS DURING AND AFTER THE POLESHIFT ASSURES YOUR DEATH AND THESE COWARDS GOING TO THEIR BUNKERS WHILE ALL OF YOU SUFFER FROM STARVATION OR FROM DEHYDRATION . 
OBAMA DOES N'T EVEN KNOW THE COMING POLE SHIFT , HE JUST HEARD RUMORS AND I 'M SURE THAT HE HAS NO PLANS TO BETTER HIMSELF AFTER THE POLE SHIFT BUT TO ONLY AID AND ASSIST THOSE IN NEED . 
MCCAIN KNOWS OF THE COMING POLE SHIFT AND THIS MEANS TROUBLE . 
ITS FUNNY HOW SOME PEOPLE ARE VOTING FOR MCCAIN THIS NOVEMBER BUT THEN THEY INTEND YOUR DEATH AFTER THE POLE SHIFT FOR THOSE REMAINING THAT STILL SURVIVED . 
I HAVE A FAMILY WITH 5 KIDS AND I FEEL LIKE I WILL BE IN DANGER EVEN IF I SURVIVE THE POLE SHIFT BECAUSE OF THE REPUBLICANS AND THEIR SPYING PROGRAM . 
I ACTUALLY HAD A DREAM ABOUT THIS EXACT EVENT LAST NIGHT POTENTIALLY HAPPENING . 
THIS IS NO ACCIDENT AND IT FELT SO REAL . 
I WAS ALSO SHOWN JOHN MCCAIN AND PALIN TOGETHER TALKING ABOUT HOW TO CONTROL THE HUMAN POPULATION AND HOW TO WEED THEM OUT THROUGH VARIOUS DISEASES . 
FOR MY FAMILY AND YOUR FAMILY 'S SAKE DO N'T VOTE FOR THESE TWO FACE IDIOTS . 
OBAMA IN MY DREAM WAS SHOWN AS A COMPASSIONATE MAN WHO LOOKED TO AID THOSE IN TROUBLE . 
THIS IS NO LIE . . 
AND IM NOT SAYING THIS JUST BECAUSE I LIKE ONE CANDIDATE OVER THE OTHER . 
IT WAS ACTUALLY SHOWN TO ME IN MY DREAM . 
HAS ANY OF YOU HAD SIMILAR EXPERIENCES LIKE THIS IN THEIR DREAMS ? 
McCain runs an ad that says Raines has advised Obama on these issues quoting the Post . 
Now the post says that the Obama - Raines connection is pretty flimsy and even recontacts Raines who now says he has never advised the Obama Campaign ... Pretty clear Raines has changed his story at the request of the Obama campaign after it became apparent this was going to be bad for Obama . 
Have YOU read the book ? 
YOU GET 5 Pinnochio 's !!!! Some posters here are not really for McCain - they are just anti-Obama , and facts here are few and far between . 
Wny not post these vile lies about Obama on something besides the FactChecker ? 
Testifying before the US Congress Committee on Oversight and Government Reform on 22 May , Mary Ugone , deputy inspector general of accounts in the Pentagon said that an audit of $ 8.2 billion spending related to the Iraq war showed that $ 7.8 billion had been improperly spent . 
Over 180,000 payments , mostly since the war started in 2003 , were made by the defense department to contractors for everything from bottled water to vehicles to transportation services . 
In her testimony , Ugone also revealed that $ 135 million were given to forces from three countries UK , South Korea and Poland to facilitate their participation in the war . 
This is the first time that the US has officially admitted paying its allies in the so-called Coalition of the Willing that invaded Iraq in March 2003 . 
`` There is something very wrong when our wounded troops have to fill out forms in triplicate for meal money while billions of dollars in cash are handed out in Iraq with no accountability , '' he said . 
In an earlier report released in November 2007 , the Inspector General had concluded that the Defense Department could n't properly account for over $ 5 billion in taxpayer funds spent in support of the Iraq Security Forces . 
It said that thousands of weapons , including assault rifles , machine guns , and rocket-propelled grenade launchers were unaccounted for , and millions of dollars had been squandered on construction projects that did not exist . 
I was an ET Nuke , and I served on subs from 1980 to 1992 . 
I just returned to school . 
Marxism has been tried and was a miserable failure , as 30 + million died in purges alone in Russia . 
I worked with a Russian -LRB- Armen -RRB- who used to laugh\/cry about how utterly corrupt Marxism\/Communism is . 
Human nature means that someone has to be in charge ; inevitably this leads to corruption . 
He also used to ask , `` If I work harder than others , why am I not rewarded for my offorts ? '' 
Marxism\/communism could never answer this question accept in plattitudes . 
Plattitudes wear thin after 30 , 40 , 50 years . 
So everyone became lazy . 
Wrong on that score ! 
Fannie and Freddie are 75 % of the market and they have been calling the tune . 
Politicians , particularly Dems , but some Rep. too , have been placating them for too long . 
This is the result . 
The melt down all relates to mortgage backed bonds and ultimately bad loans or fraudulent loans made and then tucked into the bonds which were then sliced and diced in the financial markets . 
Lots of other systemic problems like poor accounting standards and bankrupt regulatory philosophy -LRB- Yes Alan G. , greed is bad and needs a grown up regulator to hold it in check ; ca n't rely on the other little piggies to do so . -RRB- 
Still all of this came undone because Fannie and Freddie took any old garbage and packaged it up as highest credit quality gold . 
What exactly do Conservatives have coming to them ? '' 
A humiliating loss in Novemeber . 
I 'm not in it for the party I 'm in it for the country and what I believe is best for it . 
If Obama wins and Im right about him . 
THAT will be humiliating . 
McCain\/Palin 2008 and if all goes as promised 2012 . 
he attacked the mother of one , called her a troublemaker for wanting to know what happened to her son ... Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 7:12 PM | Report abuse obama has degrees from columbia and harvard ... poli sci\/law ... I would say he 's had more education in economics -LRB- not to mention cognative ability and comprehension capabilitites -RRB- than a pilot who crashes a lot and a bimbo with an BA ? 
in tv journalism ... Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 7:17 PM | Report abuse Its his fault Says McSame Blame Blame Blame the rookie senator you are an old out of touch Elmer Fudd McSame where is that pesky rabbit ? 
He left an injured wife for a rich skank and now ogles his veep like a lion ogles a piece of meat . 
McCain plays the POW card like a cheating poker player . 
He panders to the women by picking an unqualified governor because she is a woman -LRB- he could have pick Kay Bailey Hutchenson but she has a brain -RRB- . 
Remember the Keating Five ? 
Yeah , McCain peddling at his best . 
Now he wants to call someone dishonorable ?? Please ! 
Look in the mirror , Senator McCain and you 'll see dishonorable and despicable . 
Hiding one 's identity akin to lying . 
Rich people will become Patriotic once they pay higher taxes . 
Under Obama 's economic plan Biden said people will be able to buy toasters . 
Heck under Castro 's economic plan people got free rice cookers . 
Do everyone a favor and do n't go to the polls if that is the only reason you will be voting for him . 
All I have heard him talk about is change . 
Every time I listen to the man I feel like I am back in church ! 
Donate , donate , donate ! 
I think I know what is coming if he makes it into Office . 
Donate , donate , donate ! 
Demobrats are the biggest liars on the planet ! 
Many of those buying homes had inadequate or insecure cash flow with which to make their mortgage payments . 
Foreclosure were the result . 
Conclusion : do-gooder liberals sometimes cause more harm than good . 
Beware the junior senator from Illinois with his -LRB- false -RRB- promise of tax cuts for 95 percent of the population . 
If you believe him , then I have a bridge in Brooklyn to sell you . 
Auchi 's the man who gave Tony Rezko the money to buy the lot next to the mansion the Obamas wanted to purchase . 
At the time , Auchi was already convicted of corruption in France . 
The FBI believes that Mr. Auchi was Saddam Hussein 's money launderer . 
And let 's not forget Aiham Alsammarae . 
According to World Net Daily , `` Sen. Barack Obama 's office engaged in six months of negotiations with a company controlled by convicted criminal Tony Rezko to lobby the U.S. government to push through a nixed $ 50 million contact to train Iraqi security personnel at a site in Chicago . 
The contract was awarded to Rezko 's company while Aiham Alsammarae , a long-time , close Rezko friend and a contributor to Obama 's campaign , served as Iraq 's U.S.-appointed electricity minister , the senator 's office confirms ... Alsammarae later was arrested by Iraqi authorities for bilking the coalition government out of some $ 650 million . '' 
But then again , I 'm sure EVERYBODY has a friend who can obtain $ 1 million from a convicted international money launderer so that - along with a VIP `` superjumbo '' mortgage - you can buy the house of your dreams . 
And , in return , all you have to do is help them get a contract with somebody who , it 's later discovered , is stealing $ 650 million provided by the U.S. taxpayer 's to the coalition government in Iraq . 
And not the fact that the known liar Raines may not be lying to protect his buddy ? 
And or the fact that the Obama team now want to distance themselves from any Fannie Mae connection ? 
Or the fact that the other Fannie Mae CEO James Johnson is also working for Obama ? 
I notice that whenver you idiots at the post claim you are fact-checking it turns out that you are just campaining for your beloved Obama and run to his rescue . 
I notice that you repeat the Obama camp talking points almost word for word . 
And not just this time , but MOST of the times , you do this . 
You are not fact-checkers , you are lap-doggers , as in Obama lap-dogs . 
The Bush administration , however , has elevated this to a whole new level by included non-elected employees of the government . 
Now this new found right of government employees is being extended to people running for office and thier spouces . 
Where does it end ? 
As far as I am concerned , we should follow her husband , Todd , and start working for seccession and the complete unravelling of the US . 
We need a new world order and one that does not include the U.S. Via Republic of California , of Texas , or Alaska and the AIP . 
Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin 's husband has refused to testify in the investigation of his wife 's alleged abuse of power , effectively sidetracking the probe until after Election Day . 
Ignoring a legislative subpoena is punishable by a fine up to $ 500 and up to six months in jail under Alaska law . 
But courts are reluctant to intervene and the Legislature is not scheduled to convene until January . 
It is illegal in the State of Alaska to fail to comply with legislative subpoenas . 
But Todd Palin has announced he will do exactly that which the law prohibits for one simple reason -- because nothing can be done about it until after the election , and even then , it 's unlikely much will be done to punish him for breaking the law . 
Sarah Palin has similarly ordered all of her aides to refuse to comply with these subpoenas even though doing so is illegal , because she , too , doubts there will be consequences for this illegal behavior There is no doubt that the Legislature has the right to investigate and that these Subpoenaas are lawfully issued . 
Before Palin was selected as McCain 's running mate , virtually everyone in Alaska agreed that the Legislature could and should investigate these allegations . 
From The Anchorage Daily News , July 29 , 2008 : `` The governor has said all along that she will fully cooperate with an investigation and her staff will cooperate as well , '' -LRB- Palin spokeswoman Sharon -RRB- Leighow said ... Supporters as well as detractors of the Republican governor generally agreed the legislative investigation is needed into the circumstances leading up to Monegan 's dismissal . 
Sen. Gene Therriault of North Pole , leader of the small Republican Senate minority that generally has backed Palin 's policies , said he expects the governor will cooperate , and if she 's cleared , the investigation could strengthen her ... Senate President Lyda Green , a Wasilla Republican and member of the Legislative Council , said the investigation is `` absolutely '' needed . 
In August , Palin even praised herself for only suspending , rather than firing , one of her top aides who demanded -- in a recorded telephone call -- that the Police Commissioner fire her ex-brother-in-law by making this argument : '' ` While he is a state employee the governor can direct him to cooperate with -LRB- the Legislature 's investigator -RRB- , fulfilling her pledge that the administration will cooperate fully with the investigation , ' -LRB- Palin spokesman -RRB- McAllister said . '' 
But now , Gov. Palin has embraced core GOP `` principles '' -- political officials can unilaterally exempt themselves from the rule of law and the people , who are powerless to learn what their political leaders have done . 
That , of course , has been the guiding principle of the Bush administration -- as one Bush official after the next has simply refused to comply with Congressional subpoenas as part of investigations into serious allegations of lawbreaking and other wrongdoing -- and the McCain campaign and the Palins are leaving no doubt that they are full-fledged believers in these corrupt and lawless prerogatives . 
This sort of lawless arrogance does n't merely insulate political officials from any accountability , though it does do that . 
It also destroys the crux of representative democracy . 
The ability of a legislature to investigate what the Executive Branch is doing is n't some ancillary Congressional function , but is as important -- arguably more so -- than the legislative power to enact laws . 
It 's how the people ensure that Executive Branch officials are accountable and are required to adhere to the law . 
The informing function of Congress should be preferred even to its legislative function . 
That compliance by political officials with legislative subpoenas is a linchpin of how our government was designed to function was explained quite clearly long ago by the Supreme Court in its 1927 decision in McGrain v. Daugherty : We are of opinion that the power of inquiry -- with process to enforce it -- is an essential and appropriate auxiliary to the legislative function . 
It was so regarded and employed in American Legislatures before the Constitution was framed and ratified . 
All this was true before and when the Constitution was framed and adopted . 
In that period the power of inquiry , with enforcing process , was regarded and employed as a necessary and appropriate attribute of the power to legislate-indeed , was treated as inhering in it . 
These are the vital safeguards , the core democratic functions , which the Bush administration and now the McCain\/Palin campaign are flagrantly subverting . 
I have read Obama 's tax plan , no where in it does it have the words `` Tax Cut '' . 
What it does is give rebate checks , which we already have seen with the Bush administration , and they are only garanteed the first year . 
This is a direct quote for a Washington Post editorial on 8\/28\/08 . 
We could have a criminal president like Obama . 
By Obama Posted by : Anonymous | September 19 , 2008 7:59 PM | Report abuse `` McCain admits he does n't understand the economy . 
It 's Carly Fiorina , the failed CEO of HP . 
Under Fiorina , HP stock prices plunged 50 percent and 20,000 people were layed off -LRB- abcnews -RRB- . 
Stuck with the bill as Fiorina walked away with $ 45 million , including a $ 21.4 million severance package when she was dismissed by Hewlett Packard in 2005 -LRB- abcnews -RRB- . '' 
-- The ad Obama should run in response , supporting imagery to include photos of McCain 's 7 houses and Fiorina 's house -LRB- i 'm guessing mansion -RRB- , followed by photos of layed off Wall Street employees walking out with their office-in-a-box . 
The Democrates used it to fight the Vietnam War which they did n't have the guts to win . 
So 50,000 plus young men died for nothing . 
They stole are retirement fund to fight for nothing . 
We paid a war sur tax also . 
LBJ was a weak President . 
Jimmy Carter a good man but a very weak President . 
I voted for him and wanted my vote back . 
Double diget intrest rates no gasoline no energy bill . 
Just more taxes as in windfall tax on Oil Compaines which they did not pay . 
The royalty owners paid them . 
More dumb Taxes from Dumb Lawmakers . 
Iran takes 68 American 's hostage . 
Carter is laughing stock of the world leaders as they drag our Soldiers DEAD BODIES through the streets of Iran . 
When Ronald Ragan became president they let our people go because they know he would turn their Country into dust . 
Bil Clinton a weak president . 
World Trade Center truck bombed by Muslims . 
He sent troops to help Mogodishu and did n't give the commanders the equitment they aks for such as tanks to control the sniper 's and crowd control . 
Their again the Muslims draged our DEAD SOLDIERS BODIES thru the streets as the whole world watch and laugh at our weak President . 
Now with four dollar gasoline the do nothing DEMOCRAT control Congress sits on their butts and do nothing but point fingers at the Republicans blamming them when for years still no energy bill . 
They the Democrat 's try to take credit for the strong ecomany of the Clinton years but there was a Republican Congress that passed smart legistation to cut taxes and revive the ecomany . 
Now they go on vaction while we struggle to fill our tanks with gasoline and put food on the table . 
The no drill Demos do n't care about us and they lie lie and blame others for their failures . 
If we start a off shore and land drilling program it will mean thousands of new high paying jobs . 
Steel Steel Steel folks required to drill and build new Drilling Rigs . 
We will need both land and offshore rigs built . 
Will need new piplines built for oil and Natural Gas didtebution . 
This requires more steel . 
And this people is were the jobs are at . 
Natural Gas is Gods gift to us . 
We have not utilize this resource to it 's fullest . 
The products made from natural gas are alcohol , plastics hydergon and many others . 
A very clean burnning fuel with two thousand years of it in reserves on the planet . 
It 's stupid to not develop this resource . 
Again Congress fails again . 
Cars could have been running on compressed Natural Gas for years but no action for this cheap clean burning fuel . 
No air polluantion folks . 
Cut it by 90 % in our big cities . 
So why should I vote Democrat . 
My vote is on VACATION when it comes to the special intrest Democrat 's and the Republicans too . 
They all need to be fired . 
McCain is the real deal for change not Obama . 
Country frist -LCB- the people -RCB- Rudy Wallesch a one time Democrat Posted by : Rudy Wallesch | September 19 , 2008 8:08 PM | Report abuse Gee more lies from the Posted by : elmer fudd | September 19 , 2008 8:08 PM | Report abuse A lame attempt at misdirection . 
The ONLY issue here is the $ 120 million bribe Obama took to force regulators to look the other way . 
The longed your post , the less chance ANYONE is going to read it . 
But they 'll never know , cuz they 'll never read it . 
Supposedly McCain 's latest lies were based on something he read -LRB- or mis-read -RRB- in the Washington Post . 
The fact that McCain is a liar is more relevant to this election than attacking the Washington Post . 
Go back to Rush Limbaugh -- he 's a tasty manure source for brainless flies . 
Listen McCain losers , you can put lip-stick on Richard Nixon and call it John McCain , but it still smells like pig . 
Same goes for the 2008 version of Spiro Agnew , i.e. Sarah Palin . 
He was once hailed as a honorable man . 
Today , he will sell his soul for a tupens to win the election . 
This is the man who once boasted that he would rather lose the election than lose a war . 
But one thing for sure , this `` mud '' wo n't stick on Obama as all other lies the McCain campaign has generated so far . 
Sen McCain confers with Sec Paulson and then repeats it as if he thought of it . 
Sen Obama confers with respected economists then decides his course -LRB- s -RRB- of action . 
Sen McCain is much more attached to Pres Bush than he would like you to believe . 
I 'm reminded of the saying `` my way or the highway . '' 
Sen Obama seeks opinions of professionals then makes his decisions . 
He is unafraid of debating with people who are experts in their fields to get a true picture of issues . 
This is an indication of a great leader who will make the tough decisions . 
I 'm surprised that not all of us can see this . 
Say `` no more '' to the `` greedy '' republicans this November . 
I supported Sen McCain in 2000 . 
I realize there are a lot of problems laid out right now facing us but my biggest and first concern is my safety , without safety everything else is pointless . 
If you think Obama is above board you could n't be more wrong . 
I voted for Bush and yes the economy is a mess but it is because of the liberals and the Clinton administration who decided everyone should be able to get a loan regardless of their income . 
What concerns me the most though is who will do the best job to protect our country and I say McCain . 
Here is a link for you to read ! 
The McCain campaign sourced your paper I believe accurately , but in your critique you add the word `` close adviser '' , which the ad never states . 
For this you should take back your two Pinocchio 's and keep them where they belong . 
The Post has become a parody of a news organ . 
The Onion has more credibility . 
It 's too bad . 
We do need real news reporting . 
With the rise of the Internet , accuracy in media is more important than ever . 
Which is why it is a shame that the Post is caught first lying -LRB- saying McCain 's ad says something it does not -RRB- , then repudiating its own news reporting in order to prop its candidate . 
Newsflash , Post : the people know you 're shills for the Democrats . 
It 's become especially obvious this election cycle . 
And the people are starting to resent it . 
I grew up in Washington , reading the Post . 
And I 'm sorry its circulation is dropping precipitously . 
But the cause is n't the intenet . 
It 's in the mirror . 
The McCain campaign QUOTED the WaPo article , and yet it earned 2 Pinocchios . 
Should n't someone be fact-checking Mr. Dobbs , or at least refining his evaluation skills ? 
I did find it amusing that reporter Huslin 's original article last July asserted that the Obama campaign called Raines seeking `` his advice on mortgage & housing policy . '' 
After this controversy erupts , however , she supposedly checks her notes and , lo & behold , discovers that Raines actually said they discussed `` general housing , economy issues . '' 
-LRB- No mention of `` mortgage policy '' in her notes ? 
How did it get into her article ? -RRB- 
And by the time Mr. Fact Checker summarizes the case against McCain 's ad , the Obama campaign and Raines `` had some general discussions about economic issues . '' 
What housing policy discussions ? 
What mortgage policy discussions ? 
Why were all references to housing & mortgage policy omitted from Fact Checker 's summation against McCain , when they were IN the WaPo article , on which the McCain people understandably relied -LRB- not having access to what is alleged to be in reporter Huslin 's notes -RRB- ? -RRB- 
I 'm very disappointed in Fact Checker 's transparent lack of impartiality . 
I believe I 'll consult Limbaugh or Olbermann if I want an equally jaded but much less pretentious evaluation of a controversy . 
Judging by the way you spell , you must have a degree from Harvard as well . 
And across the board , Obama has received significantly more from the financial sector than McCain . 
He is truely in their pocket . 
Your article is nothing but a red herring to cover for Obama . 
Give it up - report news for once . 
For starters , how about the news that the hacker of Palin is the son of an Obama operative ? 
Now there would be some news ! 
It 's obvious that something has made you upset . 
Way to show it off . 
You 're acting like a clever four year old . 
It 's obvious that something has made you upset . 
Way to show it off . 
You 're acting like a clever four year old . 
Unfortunately , I do n't believe our country is in any particular position of strength around the world and has been weakened immensely by the current turn of events in the economic arena . 
As you read reports from around the world , China and India has become financial powerhouses and Russia is regaining their financial status very quickly . 
With their fiscal strengths come enormous global influence . 
If America can not maintain our financial dominance , it will be very difficult to exert the kind of global influence we seem to be losing that ultimately keeps us safer . 
While I respect your concerns , what I 'm saying is , that I believe we must get our house in order first , then we can get back to the global position we once enjoyed to be able to negotiate from a position of strength . 
I think Sen Obama has the better answers to our economic situation . 
I get your point . 
But is that even comparable to McCain who says that economy is fundamentally strong as our our tax payers , without any knowing forked out our own tax money to safe a giant like AIG ? 
Ignorance is a bliss to John McCain , but not to me . 
I find it hard to believe that all you McCain supporters believe that our economy is fundamentally strong . 
What country do you live in ? 
The following is a list of top aides and finance `` bundlers '' in McCain 's campaign who were employed at Fannie , Freddie or BOTH -LRB- MANY employed as LOBBYISTS -RRB- : Wayne Berman -LRB- Fannie AND Freddie -RRB- So , McCain can either fire all these folks from his campaign -LRB- please anyone - check their resumes -RRB- or be a HYPOCRITE and attack Obama for something McCain is much more guilty of . 
and ofcourse I am just a racist right ? 
I have to be right ... how else could I not vote for a radical liar ? 
It 's funny how tough liberals are on-line too ... funny cause I never met one in person ... puhleeze do n't respond and tell me about how tough your are ... you will just make me laugh . 
-- could this author be more biased ? 
Imagine the landslide it would be if McCain got fair coverage !! Posted by : Rob h | September 19 , 2008 9:58 PM | Report abuse Bottom line raines wasnt or isnt obama 's advisor , and what politician hasnt made mistakes by connecting themselves to people who they thought they could benefit from but might not have known that they were dirty . 
i have connected myself to people i thought were good people but isnt . 
that doesnt make me guilty or a bad person , only if i knew . 
so quit judging because no-one knows the personal lives of these candidates , only what the media and news gives , and what reporters dig up and distort for there personal gain . 
Bill Burton : `` This is another flat-out lie from a dishonorable campaign that is increasingly incapable of telling the truth . 
Frank Raines has never advised Senator Obama about anything -- ever . '' 
But raines and burton are telling half truths here . 
even the Washington post had to admit that raines were in talks with the obama campaign on housing and economic issues . 
As for the WaPo strawman , the mccain ad never said raines was an official advisor to obama . 
But the ad clearly stated that he was giving advice on a host of issues to the obama campaign . 
I asked him about what , and he said ` oh , general housing , economy issues . ' 
-LRB- ` Not mortgage\/foreclosure meltdown or Fannie-specific , ' I asked , and he said ` no. ' -RRB- '' does n't raines have an incentive to lie about that now ? 
did n't he lie about his official statement earlier , pretending as if he was n't in contact with the obama campaign on a host of issues ? 
`` I am not an advisor to Barack Obama , nor have I provided his campaign with advice on housing or economic matters . '' 
The actual quote from the book is from page 261 and is as follows : `` Of course , not all my conversations in immigrant communities follow this easy pattern . 
In the wake of 9\/11 , my meetings with Arab and Pakistani Americans , for example , have a more urgent quality , for the stories of detentions and FBI questioning and hard stares from neighbors have shaken their sense of security and belonging . 
They have been reminded that the history of immigration in this country has a dark underbelly ; they need specific reassurances that their citizenship really means something , that America has learned the right lessons from the Japanese internments during World War II , and that I will stand with them should the political winds shift in an ugly direction . '' 
Obama s book Audacity of Hope All of this sympathy towards this `` victim '' of racism is appalling seeing that he has had the opportunity to run for president of the most powerful country in the world ! 
When he stated that his sympathy would be with the immigrants , who are mainly Muslims now , `` if the political winds shift in an ugly direction he would stand by them '' is frightening to say the least . 
He is a racist and a threat to the U.S. in any form of political leadership , considering that the U.S. has allowed thousands of his `` own '' people a home plus the thousands of illegals . 
He has made it very clear where his loyalty is and it is NOT with Americans . 
Unbelievable for a man who will not debate , has achieved little if nothing in his political career other than his ability to impress listeners with his vacuous speeches rather than state factual policies he would impliment thus allowing Americans to really know what he 's referring to as `` change '' . 
And he is TOO OLD to lead this country out of the MESS the REPUBLICANS got us in . 
He has shown this past week that he is suffering from dementia . 
AND HONOR ??? HE HAS NONE . 
His POW glory days have all been washed away by his dishonorable LIES . 
Obama is the candidate most equipped to lead us forward . 
so many angry people . 
This campaign is nasty . 
There is a lot of people calling the candidates liars and making statements that are hard to believe . 
Mostly , made up or exagerated to support their view of things . 
All this is understandable . 
There is a lot to talk about . 
We the people are to blame for allowing elections to become dependent on Lobbyist and big corportions to get inbedded in our political system . 
It takes money to win elections . 
I think this needs reform . 
What seems to work is debates and town halls and personal visits to the States by candidates . 
What does not work is , constant Negative TV Ads . 
The ads are lies and misrepresentations . 
They do nothing to inform the public , they are intend to sway the minds of voters . 
THEY COST A LOT OF MONEY They work , people may say , they do n't like them , but they believe them . 
If we just changed parties every four years there would be no reason for all this talk and slander . 
Think about the benefit to us indirectly . 
Instead , of Big business having to spend our dollars to get their agendas through , they might take all that money and use it to help save our planet or to find cures for diseases . 
Or maybe create good will in the world , by feeding the hungry children in these poor countries , including : our homeless . 
We are being divided left and right . 
The argument that the left is too liberal and the right is too religious is causing us to attack each other . 
The republicans keep saying the Democrats are the big spenders , but facts are this Republican Adminstration has spent us into having to borrow from China . 
When bush took over the White house we were in good shape but when Bush leaves office the next President will inherit an empty treasury . 
Kinda like what took place when Palin was a mayor , the town was financially okay , when she took office : when she left , the town was in debt town . 
In fact they wanted her recalled . 
This is fact and easy to check . 
While our attention is being misdirected we are not paying attention . 
The lastest happenings in the White house . 
It seems Bush feels a war with Iran would be a good idea : leaving the next President stuck with it and the American taypayers to foot the bill . 
We can not even pay for the two wars we have now . 
should we just invade them too . 
Do we think no one will attack us if we continue to be a threat to other countries ? 
our enemies have increased and we need to do a better job in the world and set better examples . 
McCain\/Palin are hawks and will continue the idea that might is right . 
We were not right to ignore Bin Laden and go into Iraq : this was not a task from God as Palin suggests . 
We did this to get a foothold in the Middle East and to our surprise it turns out it was n't that easy . 
We are in a war that we can not get out of . 
The justification now is , we rid the world of a evil doer , a dictator . 
Will this be the justification to continue invading countrie we disagree with ? 
The , Title the War on terror seems to be a sort of manofest to keep chasing terriorist , no matter where . 
No country is free from our pursuit . 
If we had in fact , gone after Bin Laden we would not be in this mess . 
While we were busy in Iraq Bin Laden was regrouping and gaining recruits using Iraq for his cause . 
Neo cons wanted to be the Imperialist of the 21 century . 
With the support of the Evangelical base of the Repulbican Party they elected Bush , twice . 
Now , we have McCain using Sarah to appease the base and get their Pro life candidate elected . 
Shows how much influence they have . 
About 12 years ago during the Reagan era this church decided to become pro active and they used Abortion , an emotional issue , to get inbedded in our political system . 
Since , then some church 's drifted away from the more extreme ideas of the groups . 
Palin was a pick because she is a Pro lifer and a plus Mccain thought , because she was unknown and a women . 
He did not do his homework , now he is stuck defending her . 
He has lawyers trying to stop an investigation until after the election . 
Cover ups and copying the Bush policy as usual . 
Answer to know one ! 
However Mr. Obama was the # 2 recipent of money from FM&FM . 
See attached article : Home blogs La_Verdad 's blogBarack Obama and the Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae financial debacle , follow the money Submitted by La_Verdad on Mon , 2008-09-15 23:19 . 
Posted in Politics\/Social Action | La_Verdad 's blog Barack Obama has only been in Washington D.C. for four years , yet Obama is the second biggest recipient of political money from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and their associates in the last ten years . 
Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae have been financial debacles this year and one of the first to face problems and the now the government , or we taxpayers , are going to help bail them out . 
The Center for Responsive Politics has been tabulating which members of the Senate and Congress have been receiving the most money from Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae since 1989 . 
Barack Obama is 2nd on the list of those who have been at the trough of PAC money . 
Obama has only been in Washington D.C. for four years but has received more money than long term representitives in the Senate and Congress . 
McCain is around 40th , yet has been in office longer than Obama for decades . 
McCain got ZERO from PACs , but $ 21,550 from individuals . 
Notice that McCain was one of the few to get any money from PACs associated with Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae . 
Barack Obama has gotten over $ 126,000 thousand dollars in his short time , four years , in the Senate by the finanially mismanaged Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae who are currently in a financial debacle and now being bailed out by the federal government . 
In other words from our pockets . 
It 's rather sad to see that the Republicans are so bereft of ideas that they fall back on the game they know how to play well - trash your opponent . 
With Palin 's aura starting to wear thin and McCain 's daily gaffes showing just how , well , OLD he really is , I think it 's time to press the panic button . 
This latest outrageous attack is ironic , considering McCain 's past association with Charles Keating . 
Now THAT was a true scandal . 
There is a lot of angry people out there . 
Mostly , saying which candidate is the better liar . 
Depends on what side your on . 
All this hate against the left or liberals is mean spirited . 
This demonstrates how divided we are . 
It seems almost like a religious war . 
The right is right and it is all about God & country . 
While the left are the bad guys the non believers . 
This is what we have become after 8 years of Bush . 
We the people did not notice that the White house leader and the Republican base is inbedded in our political system and have and do influence our politics , and the reason this is a bad thing is , Religion is a very emotional and personal issues . 
Think about this : -LRB- with one issue -RRB- -LRB- Abortion -RRB- the church has so much power that without their support Bush would n't have be elected . 
And he was , twice . 
McCain chose Sarah Palin a Pro lifer , to get support so he could get elected . 
He is not a Pro lifer , except during the election . 
Talk about a lobbyist group . 
12 Years ago this church decided to become Pro active and here we are still dividing the country over this issue . 
With all this countries problems , we are focused on this one issue . 
We the people , are responsible for the present crisis , because we have n't held Bush responsible to balance our budget or to be straight with the American people or congress . 
We have two wars going : that is depleting our treasury and causing us to have to borrow from the chinese . 
Bush supports tax breaks for big business and no one blinks . 
McCain says , Wall Street is all about greed . 
Did Mccain just figure this out ? 
I have a suggestion : we should reform how we elect presidential candidates . 
I think we should just change the major parties every four years . 
No campaigns , no need for big money from big business just town halls , debates , visits to our States and absolutely NO TV ADS . . 
Think of the saving to these companies and the candidates . 
They might even be able to use that money to spread good will in the world by helping feed the world 's children . 
The only ones that benefit from the TV ads are the TV media and lets face it that ca n't wait for elections . 
We say we are tired of the slander the lies and the misinformation . 
We the people should be pro active and demand this stop . 
We the people need to be better informed . 
Our children 's future depend on the decisions we make . 
We all know the truth , the lobbyist , that represent big business spend excessive amounts of money and contribute to election Candidates , to gain influence for their companies agendas . 
The candidates need money to get elected . 
It cost millions to get elected where do you think this money comes from ? 
Both sides need this money and that is the facts . 
The election process is almost over and while we are distracted Bush is deciding to sow the seeds for a war with Iran , possibly using a neighbor to do the deed , and he will leave this cost to the taypayers and the next President . 
Can we afford three wars ? 
If we continue to invade countries we dislike there is no way by setting this example , other countries will not do the same . 
While we are busy bashing each other the deciders are busy thinking up justifications to this next act . 
What the White house needs is more Hawks ! 
That is the Palin , McCain strong suit , they would n't even Blink ! 
`` I join as a cosponsor of the Federal Housing Enterprise Regulatory Reform Act of 2005 , S. 190 , to underscore my support for quick passage of GSE regulatory reform legislation . 
If Congress does not act , American taxpayers will continue to be exposed to the enormous risk that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac pose to the housing market , the overall financial system , and the economy as a whole . '' 
- Sen. John McCain OBAMA TOOK MORE LOBBYI$ T MONEY THAN ANY OTHER SENATOR . 
INCLUDED IN THOSE MILLION$ WAS MONEY FROM HIS FRIEND AND ADVISOR FRANKLIN RAINES AT FANNIE MAE WHO MADE $ 90 MILLION HIMSELF . 
OBAMA WAS PAID TO STOP McCAIN 'S LEGISLATION SO THE CORRUPTION COULD CONTINUE . 
Abraham said `` to win the election , impress the ignorant '' . 
Well , I would rather use my `` small mind '' and rely on fact than just spit out the Obama kool aid talking points every single democrat on earth must get updated on by the second . 
I swear David Plouffe must send out a talking points update email every time Axlerod tells Obama to breathe , because Lord knows the way he waffles he probably does n't have the resolve to do it himself . 
Look , here 's the thing . 
America was based on faith , hope and love . 
Whether or not you agree with the Christian belief many of the founders held , the fact is they created a Constitution that requires an amount of faith , hope and love to live with . 
Life is full of ups and downs , it happens ... but like a muscle , if you do n't ever have any resistance you never get any stronger . 
It takes faith to believe that things will get better when they start going wrong . 
It takes faith to believe that people in general have the intelligence to make common sense decisions that wo n't damn the entire group . 
It takes faith to believe that a free market that is ultimately run by the people can correct itself . 
It takes hope to work at making the world better for your children -LRB- if indeed you even choose to have children in this day and age -RRB- . 
It takes hope to believe that a war that was started , whether for the right reasons or not , can have a positive outcome for the people living in that region -LRB- which the Iraqi people believe can happen -RRB- . 
It takes love to actually make relational connections with the people around you . 
It takes love to know they have needs and work to meet them when you have the means to . 
It takes faith to believe that people will have the ability to love enough to do that on their own without the government forcing them to . 
Obama 's entire platform , personally and democratically , completely opposes these foundations . 
Obama purports to be an agent of hope and change . 
It takes no faith to allow the government to come in and `` rescue '' the free market . 
It takes no hope to retreat from the pursuit of sharing democracy and independence with others . 
It takes no hope to rely on the government for handouts instead of putting in the hard work necessary to secure a strong future . 
It takes no love to allow the government to do all of your contributing for you . 
It takes no faith , hope or love to force through regulation the unity of peoples rather than allowing them to embrace one another on their own . 
It takes no faith , hope or love extinguish the life of a human being before it has taken its first breath instead of allowing it the liberties and opportunities set forth by our forefathers . 
While democrats carry the banner of minorities , women and other ostracized groups , their efforts have proven to do nothing but to keep these groups in their current status . 
It has , in fact , been the work of compassionate republicans that pushed for civil rights since democrats were the ones to start a filibuster against the Civil Rights Act that only ended when republicans reintroduced a bill that would draw more votes . 
Republicans voted for the Civil Rights Act over 80 % in favor , democrats did n't peak above 69 % . 
A number of altercations against African Americans occurred during the Civil Rights Movement , the government officials involved were democrats . 
Democrats promulgate the idea that special rights should be given , republicans stand by the idea that everyone is equal and should be judged on merit . 
It is republicans who have fought for the right for everyone to have a chance to make a life for themselves without the government taking what they work for and giving it to some one else . 
It is republicans who have fought for children who may be born with disabilities to have a chance to live and breathe rather than be deemed not worthy of life . 
It was democrats who turned down offered assistance of transportation for people in the New Orleans area before hurricane Katrina . 
Democrats consistently point to areas of dissatisfaction and promise to amend the situation , they still have done nothing for anyone because they need to only give enough to keep people coming back for more so they can stay in power . 
This is not faith , love ... or the politics of hope . 
And regardless , please go see a PhD . 
It is all about which candidate is a liar or misleading the public . 
Politics is not nice ! 
I have a suggestion : we need to reform how we choose a Presidential candidate . 
Would should just change the major political parties every four years . 
STOP TV ADS as they are negative and full of non truths . 
We all know it takes big money to get elected to almost any office . 
That is why the Big Corporations are inbedded in our political system . 
If we just change parties both parties would have a chance to do what they think is the better way . 
Republicans had there turn 8 years in fact . 
Turns out they are the big spenders . 
This suggestion could actually have a side benefit , these large Corporations would save all that big money and maybe do something worthwhile with it like , help save the Planet or feed the worlds hungry while creating American good will . 
Maybe feed our Homeless and even solve the energy crisis . 
These TV Ads only benefit the giant TV media mogals . 
They do not benefit us because they actually do more harm then good . 
We are what we are waiting for ! 
Obama , you are not only inexperienced , you are a nut . 
`` You f. . . 
ed up , you trusted us '' while mistakenly saying the original article , referenced by the McCain campaign for the ad , was in the `` Style '' section -LRB- it was in the business section -RRB- . 
This piece of `` M bius Logic '' is just impossible to decipher . 
It unmistakably makes you question if anything in the Washington Post is believable or should be taken as having any resemblance to the truth . 
John Mccain and his flucky Phil Gramm are the advocates of Deregulation . 
This is the main reason we are in this finacial Mess . 
In fact Mccain and Gramm sponcored legislation in 1995 to Deregulate across the board but it did n't it pass . 
The rebulicans belief are let the business run them self without any regulations and no over sight . 
John Mccain as been in Washington for 26 years and here he 's blaming Obama whose been in Washington less than 4 years . 
With Alan Greenspan help and with along the big advocates for Deregulation -LRB- John Mccain -RRB- allow Mortages Company to create these sub-prime loans , this how it all started . 
In fact Mccain 's Senior Adviser Rick Davis was lobbist for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac too . 
According John Mccain recieved $ 169.000.00 from lobbist and other donors that was associated with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
The Money Obama got was donated by employees who worked for these companies . 
Obama refused to take PAC money . 
As real estate agent I know the National Associates Of Realtor went to Washington to lobby for deregualtion in the Mortage Industry . 
As far Bush\/Mccain tax cuts wealth pay less than the middle class , this idea suppose to create jobs and all it did is make the rich richer and poor poorer . 
Its the middle class when they have jobs to contribute in taxes generate revune for the country , not the rich . 
John Mccain many time -LRB- 22 -RRB- that this encomny is fundamental sound and he know nothing about encomnics , finally he 's telling the truth on that one ! 
You Republicans are in denial and you that you Mccain is lilly white and shares no responsbility in this finacial crisis . 
I did have respect for Mccain but not no more ! 
Where is his plan to fix the economy ? 
Is it the firing of Mr Cox ? 
NO NO NO , I did n't mean fire him , Mr Cox should resign says McShame . 
Tomorrow McLiar will have changed his mind , to call for the firing of Senator Obama . 
I bet he 's getting his pointers from the Queen of lies , McPalin . 
Maybe he should take pointers from S Palin voodoo preacher . 
Maybe he 'll shake a few bones and McShame problems will end . 
These dem orat hacks when they thought Raines was a plus for TheCrock could n't link him to the Community Organizer enough , now that Clinton 's buddy Raines has been exposed as a corrupt CEO who got rich while screwing the shareholders is a liability these same shills at the Compost are tripping over themselves trying to bail out their man love . 
Sickening but hardly surprising from this rag . 
McCain cosponsored legislation S. 109 stating `` If Congress does not act , American taxpayers will continue to be exposed to the enormous risk that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac pose to the housing market , the overall financial system , and the economy as a whole . '' 
The full announcement at the Senate . 
gov web site : Obama was busy taking contributions from Freddy and Fannie at the same time . 
This goes to Judgement and also `` Who 's more in touch with the economy ? '' 
Now there 's one of the strongest economies in the world , and though taxes are extremely high , they provide for the entire population 's education , recreational programs , health care , and other social services . 
Why is this a bad thing ?? The system may be called `` socialism '' but hey , it is working a hell of a lot better than our ` democracy ' is -- which is really a republic -LRB- with only two electable parties -RRB- and has brought about a nation divided . 
why would you want the US to become that ??? Personally I do not want the US to become europe ... which is what liberals want . . 
Obama wants wealth redistribution whihc is also know as ROBBERY . . 
he wants to take whats not ours from wealthy people and give it to people that do n't even file tax returns . . 
Government is not suppose to take care of people , it is only there to assist . . 
I know myself , if I hit hard times , I will go out and work , dig ditches if needed . . 
Unlike most liberals who go on the draw ... Posted by : Dave | September 20 , 2008 5:51 AM | Report abuse When I saw Fox with the `` trailer '' `` Obama 's Fannie Mae connection '' I knew it would n't be long before McCain made an ad . 
I 'm surprised that McCain wants to bring up connections . 
Does he think everyone has forgotten about Keating ? 
McCain has become even sleazier than anything Rove ever did . 
He 's a liar and now he 's playing the racist card . 
No honor no wonder so many in his own party dispise him . 
Hasnt he figured out that the reason he is sliding in the polls is because he has shown himself to be a BIG LIAR ? 
Does he think lying even more will help ? 
The people arrested were ignoramuses , but the next crew may not be . 
McCain has over a 35 % chance of not fininishing his term , Obama has the greatest chance of all candidates to be killed . 
We get Palin or Biden as a replacement , a strong indictment of McCain 's pick . 
Polls tend to skewer the actual vote , with prejudice at times hidden , and the way a poll is conducted will favor one side or the other . 
The nations unions are using racial discrimination to out the hateful and I applaud their pushing a signature issue of the labor movement . 
McCain wants to punch our foreign enemies in the nose without talking first . 
Saaskeshvili took his and Cheney 's advice and tried to punch Putin in the nose . 
We all know the result . 
The Washington Post publishes 3 articles about the Raines connection to Obama without checking its facts , and we are then supposed to believe the Washington Post Fact Checker when it says the stories were , uh , exaggerations ? 
I give you 48 silly Pinocchio faces and recommend you use your vast talents to start fact-checking yourself . 
But this is a democratic republic , and the truth is , if Obama were honest about his socialism , he would not have even the remotest chance of being elected . 
His entire campaign is a lie . 
Criticizing McCain for -LRB- despite your desperate spin -RRB- citing a Post reporter accurately shows just far into the tank for Obama the Post is . 
Sounds like a connection to me ... Posted by : Ruth | September 20 , 2008 8:29 AM | Report abuse I bet Cindy longs for a young black man like Obama . 
No wonder McCain is so angry all the time . 
Obama conversed with Raines about housing and mortgage policy on several occasions - A FACT that the Washington Post has not retracted or disputed the accuracy of . 
In addition , Raines gave loads of campaign cash to Obama during Obama 's 143 working days in the Senate to keep quiet about the dire straits that the mortgage giants were in . 
Camp McCain pointed this out . 
Why is the Wasnigton Post going so hysterical in their tone defending Obama ? 
Because they 've turned into an arm of the Obama PR division , and they got caught not knowing what they 'd reported in their own paper . 
I 'm sure a flock of screaming , swearing Obamatrons reminded them . 
The GOP , by contrast , had been warning - repeatedly - of the impending collapse of the two mismanaged government-sponsored companies . 
A helpful New York Times article from Sept. 11 , 2003 , acknowledges this . 
Barney Frank denies that there is any financial crisis at the mortgage giants . 
That 's what Obama , Dodd , Gorelick and a gaggle of other Democrats wer saying prior to this boondoggle . 
The mere fact that McCain is associating Obama with somebody that Obama associated with is not a `` wild exaggeration . '' 
It 's an inconvenient truth . 
If he doesnt complete his term then I want Sarah who speaks in tongues and whose pastor went on a witch hunting mission to Africa to have the keys . 
Sarah Palin is a Jesus freak . 
Lets all go shoot some wolves from airplanes and turn in the legs to Sarah for the $ 150.00 bounty . 
Inquiring minds want to know . 
You just discredited your own paper to justify Obama 's relationship with the Fannie Mae or alleged lack thereof . 
Thanks for admitting what I have long suspected - Washington Post is not really trusted . 
So if anyone is a liar it 's the Wapo . 
Racist , `` USA invented aids to kill blacks '' Pastor - Wright 2 . 
Mentor - Communist , Frank Marshall Davis 3 . 
Real Estate Partner - Felon , Tony Rezko 4 . 
VP Search Team Member - James Johnson 5 . 
Close Friend - Terrorist Bomber , Bill Ayers . 
Policy Inspiration - Saul Alinsky Judgment to lead ? 
I think it is an ad about race . 
The picture of Raines , with `` Extensive Financial Fraud '' and the tie to Obama , followed by the elderly white women having a foreclosure is , I think , intended to tell you that this is what will happen when `` they '' are in charge . 
I may be wrong , or overly sensitive . 
But that interpretation lept out at me . 
If so , the level of connection between Raines and Obama is irrelevant to the targets of the add , because they are both black men with power . 
The McCain campaign relies on one of your crappy reports -- and then you claim that his facts are n't accurate . 
This paper has become a joke !! Posted by : Brett | September 20 , 2008 9:38 AM | Report abuse Fact Checker should offer more detail about how the McCain campaign might have concluded -LRB- correctly or not -RRB- that Franklin Raines was consulting with the Obama campaign . 
For example , the WaPo stated : `` Obama also has ties to the firms . 
James A. Johnson , the former head of his vice presidential vetting panel , was a chief executive of Fannie Mae , as was Franklin D. Raines , who said this week that he has been consulting with the campaign on housing issues '' -LRB- `` Figures in Both Campaigns Have Deep Ties to Mortgage Giants , '' Jonathan Weisman ; Washington Post Staff Writer ; 17 July 2008 Thursday , Correction Appended , Suburban Edition , SECTION : A-SECTION ; Pg . 
The phrase `` consulting with the campaign '' sounds much more involved than simply taking a few calls . 
Which of these characterizations of the relationship is more accurate ? 
So do n't trust the media because you are liars , ok got it ! 
Is n't it rather convenient to issue a `` denial '' months later rather than immediately after the story comes out ? 
Would n't it have been more prudent to fact check your stories before you print them and not months later ? 
Is it true that DC prostitutes have more integrity than WaPo journalists ? 
He ca n't remember anything like the people who he is getting advice from . 
Wow , Phil , Mr. Black and the rest of the clowns that have McCrazie on a string . 
It 's time to change the old man `` Depend '' and drop him off at the Ol' Folks home for the senile ... Posted by : Big AL | September 20 , 2008 10:26 AM | Report abuse McCain -LRB- i.e. , Rove and Schmidt -RRB- would only take the risk of using a blatant lie about Obama 's connection with Raines when he has hordes of lobbyists running his campaign , some directly connected to Fannie Mae and Freddi Mack , if he did n't have a larger objective . 
That objective was to connect Obama with a discredited black man who together allegedly robbed a white woman -LRB- see the end of the ad -RRB- . 
McCain has already played the race card by falsely saying Obama was playing it and the sex card by saying he called Palin a pig . 
It 's more of the same from the win-at-any-price , evil camp led by people like Rove and Scmidt , engineers of eight years of the disastrous Bush administration . 
I hope this is a lesson to others about the unreliability of WaPo reporting . 
I am sure that Dobbs will in a future `` fact check '' some Obama claims , like saying McCain `` will '' use racist attacks against him . 
Maybe Dobbs will mention this ad where `` an elderly white woman taxpayer '' is juxtaposed with Franklin Raines as evidence . 
Tell me Mr. Dobbs , is she a typical white woman ? 
Hey Dobbs , are you journalists all pathological liars or just incompetent buffons ? 
You clowns at the Post owe an apology to both campaigns for your shoddy , sloppy work . 
You then `` fact-check '' McCain 's assertions , and award them two Pinnochios , because he is `` lying . '' 
His `` lie '' ? 
He used YOUR newspaper articles to support his argument . 
You really ripped the lid off that one , did n't you , idiots ? 
That Raines is an adviser is a flat out lie . 
A couple phone calls from a person does not make them an adviser . 
No one even asked this guy to be an adviser . 
WaPo is over the top for McC . 
I ca n't understand why anyone is . 
I ca n't understand why anyone would vote Republican this year . 
EVERY ad that comes out of the McC campaign is either an outright lie or mislead at best . 
What part of , `` Thou shalt not bear false witness '' do you holier than thou Republicans not get . 
The Republican 's failing ideology brought us this financial disaster . 
Why is ANYONE voting for a Republican ? 
Everyone steers clear of that guy and thinks he is such a genius , but look at what he is invested in...Petro-China the Darfur Oil Drillers . 
Blood money spends too . 
Lukoil , the Russian state-supported oil company , Buffett owns 20 % . 
Buffett supports Obama and says he will bring `` outstanding ideas '' to the White House ... and leave his shady investments alone . 
Tom Maguire : WaPo to McCain : You Effed Up , You Trusted Us ! 
Which is illegal but the msm is to busy with man love for him . 
Obama likes the blame the `` failed economic policies of the last eight years '' but strangely enough the focus of the 04 election was on Iraq . 
Because the economy was humming along , home ownership was through the roof and NEITHER party but up warnig flags of the potential hangover . 
To be a Monday morning quarterback now is laughable if not insulting to one 's intelligence . 
The Dems like to poke fun at Bush 's low poll numbers yet tend to ignore that Congress ' are even LOWER ! 
If we are to play that game , then let 's look at the last two plus years that the Congress has been controlled by Democrats and ask yourself , Were you better off then or now ? 
How does putting Biden on the ticket change Obama 's lack of experience ? 
So either Biden was lying then , or he 's lying now . 
Because I clearly remember reading an article in your paper about Raines and Obama . 
So which is it ? 
Tell that to my lawyer who I just paid $ 200 a hour for phone calls billed uder `` telphone advisement '' What do you suppose they talked about with Rains ? 
The Yankees chances of making the playoffs ? 
Sarah Palin this ... Sarah Palin that . 
NOW , we have a cover-up from Obama and NO ONE in the media cares . 
It 's just a blip . 
What about Jim Johnson ???? THAT is not a blip . 
I want a FRONT PAGE article on this , you damn hypocrites . 
Not an everyday advisor , but an advisor on the mortgage industry . 
More important though , Raines was head of Fannie and probably approved the political contributions to Obama , and this is a big connection . 
Deregulation began around the 1980 's , then came low interest rates at the start of this decade . 
This allowed greedy lenders and irresponsible buyers to purchase homes beyond their means . 
Bottom line is that irresponsible , greedy , and indulged people -LRB- from the top on down -RRB- have messed things up for everyone . 
If we are to believe Raines , he did have a couple of telephone conversations with someone in the Obama campaign . '' 
But should we believe Raines or Obama ? 
Obama insisted that he somehow `` missed '' Rev. Wright 's really hideous , inflamatory sermons despite attending his church for 20 years , and also insisted that unrepentant mad bombers Dorn and Ayers were just people down the streeet he has chatted with once or twice , and so on and so on ... McCain may not have -LRB- yet -RRB- fully justified his claims , but blanket denials from the Raines\/Obama camp hardly allow any one to conclude that `` the McCain campaign is clearly exaggerating wildly ! '' 
How many of Obama 's past relationship does he have to chuck down the memory hole before the mainstream media own up to the pattern ? 
Some healthy skepticism from the Post is in order here ! 
He was forced out in disgrace for misstating Fannie Mae earnings in order to take home succulent bonuses . 
This ` retired ' label by WaPo is a screeching alarm system , informing us of the radical slant the paper applies to this ` news ' item in favor of Raines . 
There 's no reason to put much faith in anything else the paper says about him . 
`` There 's no reason to put much faith in anything else the paper says about him . '' 
This is just more behavior typical of much of today 's crowd of irresponsible , indulged , anything goes generation . 
This same prevailing attitude from politicians , financial lenders , and home buyers has wreaked havoc for everyone in America . 
Everyone pays for the greed , indulgent , and stupidity of their sorry a -- es . 
The deal now before Congress and the Senate is for the Government to buy risky mortgages from any financial institution in trouble . 
To the taxpayers this is more than $ 2,000 for each man , woman , and child in America . 
To be added to the national debt with bonds sold mainly to China and Japan , when they already own enough of our debt to destroy us financially at their whim . 
I 'll be in Tyson 's corner at 3 . 
Wanna meet up and settle this ??? Posted by : Sam | September 19 , 2008 12:34 PM So , Sam , are you threatening to hit NickinVA with your car ? 
Should we report you to the Fairfax County Police ? 
I would think the Washington Post forum monitor should take note and make the police aware of your threat . 
This just shows the Republicans and the Right that we are incapable of rational behavior when forced to become defensive . 
Keep digging , Democrats ! 
We 're in a bigger hole than you think . 
With Biden the Blowhard , Reid the Spneless and Pelosi the Inept , just think how strong our country will be ... I ca n't wait ! 
That is , providing home financing to a `` Traditionally under-served segment '' . 
No money ... you got the loan ... no job ... hey , find somebody to give a verbal verification of employment ... no down payment ... let the seller funnel it back to you . 
The vast majority of home loan institutions followed fannies lead , since it was , of course , fannie buying the paper . 
Fannie guidelines rule in home loan underwriting crteria . 
Desktop underwriting guidelines became , damn near , if you have a pulse , you have an approval . 
Loans should have been given to creditworthy buyers , a concept hard to swallow by social engineering Democrats . 
Now we have those same lefties crying about the evil wall streeters , and de-regulation . 
It was goverment interference , putting a political agenda over hard economics that gave us this mess . 
And you want one of the top recipients of fannies ' largess in the white house . 
Great , as if being in the mortgage business were n't hard enough . 
Well , guess what ? 
Politico reports that at least 20 McCain fundraisers have lobbied for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , pocketing at least $ 12.3 million over the last nine years . 
For example - cents Aquiles Suarez , listed as an economic adviser to the McCain campaign in a July 2007 McCain press release , was formerly the director of government and industry relations for Fannie Mae . 
The Senate Lobbying Database says Suarez oversaw the lending giant s $ 47,510,000 lobbying campaign from 2003 to 2006 . 
cents The lobbying firm of Charlie Black , one of McCain s top aides , made at least $ 820,000 working for Freddie Mac from 1999 to 2004 . 
cents The McCain campaign s vice-chair Wayne Berman and its congressional liaison John Green made $ 1.14 million working on behalf of Fannie Mae for lobbying firm Ogilvy Government Relations . 
Green made an additional $ 180,000 from Freddie Mac . 
cents Arther B. Culvahouse Jr. , the VP vetter who helped John McCain select Sarah Palin , earned $ 80,000 from Fannie Mae in 2003 and 2004 , while working for lobbying and law firm O Melveny & Myers LLP . 
Still want to talk about Raines ? 
Does he think he wo n't be challenged because it 's hard to challenge a liar without looking bad yourself ? 
And why are all comments by the McCain defenders just as bad ? 
It seems like this is all they have left , a bunch of lies , innuendos , and insults . 
We ca n't let another election be hijacked by these people and their unAmerican tactics ! 
What about Jim Johnson -LRB- who happens to be white -RRB- ? 
The evidence in his case is indisputable , and yet you do n't discuss that half of the ad . 
Johnson and Raines both cooked the books at Fannie Mae to line their pockets . 
So which is it -- is the Post 's reporting `` flimsy , '' or is the Post biased against Republicans ? 
Oh , I know the answer ! 
And you wonder why the public 's faith in the news media is spiraling rapidly to zero . 
Let 's have at it and we 'll see who gets the black eye ! 
We 'll see who ends up with the black eye ! 
The bipartisan bill that passed less than a month later was centered on rebate checks to the broad middle class along the lines of what Obama proposed . '' 
`` The Obama plan certainly bears a passing resemblance to one that was eventually adopted by Congress on Feb. 7 after negotiations between the Democratic leadership in Congress and the White House . 
The final $ 152 billion package turned out to be even more generous than the one proposed by Obama , including $ 600 payments for individuals -LRB- $ 1,200 for couples -RRB- and $ 300 for low-income seniors and disabled veterans . 
By contrast , McCain initially opposed individual rebates and preferred a cut in the corporate tax rate . '' 
Comparison of plans rates Obama 's the best . 
People can say whatever they want , but the FACT is Obama was the first to call for tax cuts and the final bill most closely resembled Obama . 
Remember this is FactChecker not Opinion Checker . 
I 've included a link at the bottom to the article on the web . 
New Agency Proposed to Oversee Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae The Bush administration today recommended the most significant regulatory overhaul in the housing finance industry since the savings and loan crisis a decade ago . 
Under the plan , disclosed at a Congressional hearing today , a new agency would be created within the Treasury Department to assume supervision of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , the government-sponsored companies that are the two largest players in the mortgage lending industry . 
The new agency would have the authority , which now rests with Congress , to set one of the two capital-reserve requirements for the companies . 
It would exercise authority over any new lines of business . 
And it would determine whether the two are adequately managing the risks of their ballooning portfolios . 
The plan is an acknowledgment by the administration that oversight of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac -- which together have issued more than $ 1.5 trillion in outstanding debt -- is broken . 
A report by outside investigators in July concluded that Freddie Mac manipulated its accounting to mislead investors , and critics have said Fannie Mae does not adequately hedge against rising interest rates . '' 
There is a general recognition that the supervisory system for housing-related government-sponsored enterprises neither has the tools , nor the stature , to deal effectively with the current size , complexity and importance of these enterprises , '' Treasury Secretary John W. Snow told the House Financial Services Committee in an appearance with Housing Secretary Mel Martinez , who also backed the plan . 
Mr. Snow said that Congress should eliminate the power of the president to appoint directors to the companies , a sign that the administration is less concerned about the perks of patronage than it is about the potential political problems associated with any new difficulties arising at the companies . 
The administration 's proposal , which was endorsed in large part today by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , would not repeal the significant government subsidies granted to the two companies . 
And it does not alter the implicit guarantee that Washington will bail the companies out if they run into financial difficulty ; that perception enables them to issue debt at significantly lower rates than their competitors . 
Nor would it remove the companies ' exemptions from taxes and antifraud provisions of federal securities laws . 
The proposal is the opening act in one of the biggest and most significant lobbying battles of the Congressional session . 
After the hearing , Representative Michael G. Oxley , chairman of the Financial Services Committee , and Senator Richard Shelby , chairman of the Senate Banking Committee , announced their intention to draft legislation based on the administration 's proposal . 
Industry executives said Congress could complete action on legislation before leaving for recess in the fall . '' 
The current regulator does not have the tools , or the mandate , to adequately regulate these enterprises , '' Mr. Oxley said at the hearing . '' 
We have seen in recent months that mismanagement and questionable accounting practices went largely unnoticed by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight , '' the independent agency that now regulates the companies . '' 
These irregularities , which have been going on for several years , should have been detected earlier by the regulator , '' he added . 
The Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight , which is part of the Department of Housing and Urban Development , was created by Congress in 1992 after the bailout of the savings and loan industry and concerns about regulation of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , which buy mortgages from lenders and repackage them as securities or hold them in their own portfolios . 
At the time , the companies and their allies beat back efforts for tougher oversight by the Treasury Department , the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Federal Reserve . 
Supporters of the companies said efforts to regulate the lenders tightly under those agencies might diminish their ability to finance loans for lower-income families . 
This year , however , the chances of passing legislation to tighten the oversight are better than in the past . 
Reflecting the changing political climate , both Fannie Mae and its leading rivals applauded the administration 's package . 
The support from Fannie Mae came after a round of discussions between it and the administration and assurances from the Treasury that it would not seek to change the company 's mission . 
After those assurances , Franklin D. Raines , Fannie Mae 's chief executive , endorsed the shift of regulatory oversight to the Treasury Department , as well as other elements of the plan . '' 
We welcome the administration 's approach outlined today , '' Mr. Raines said . 
The company opposes some smaller elements of the package , like one that eliminates the authority of the president to appoint 5 of the company 's 18 board members . 
Company executives said that the company preferred having the president select some directors . 
The company is also likely to lobby against the efforts that give regulators too much authority to approve its products . 
Freddie Mac , whose accounting is under investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission and a United States attorney in Virginia , issued a statement calling the administration plan a '' responsible proposal . '' 
The stocks of Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae fell while the prices of their bonds generally rose . 
Shares of Freddie Mac fell $ 2.04 , or 3.7 percent , to $ 53.40 , while Fannie Mae was down $ 1.62 , or 2.4 percent , to $ 66.74 . 
The price of a Fannie Mae bond due in March 2013 rose to 97.337 from 96.525 . 
Its yield fell to 4.726 percent from 4.835 percent on Tuesday . 
Fannie Mae , which was previously known as the Federal National Mortgage Association , and Freddie Mac , which was the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation , have been criticized by rivals for exerting too much influence over their regulators . '' 
The regulator has not only been outmanned , it has been outlobbied , '' said Representative Richard H. Baker , the Louisiana Republican who has proposed legislation similar to the administration proposal and who leads a subcommittee that oversees the companies . '' 
Being underfunded does not explain how a glowing report of Freddie 's operations was released only hours before the managerial upheaval that followed . 
This is not world-class regulatory work . '' 
Significant details must still be worked out before Congress can approve a bill . 
Among the groups denouncing the proposal today were the National Association of Home Builders and Congressional Democrats who fear that tighter regulation of the companies could sharply reduce their commitment to financing low-income and affordable housing . '' 
These two entities -- Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac -- are not facing any kind of financial crisis , '' said Representative Barney Frank of Massachusetts , the ranking Democrat on the Financial Services Committee . '' 
The more people exaggerate these problems , the more pressure there is on these companies , the less we will see in terms of affordable housing . '' 
Representative Melvin L. Watt , Democrat of North Carolina , agreed . '' 
I do n't see much other than a shell game going on here , moving something from one agency to another and in the process weakening the bargaining power of poorer families and their ability to get affordable housing , '' Mr. Watt said . 
Regarding Johnson and Fannie Mae and VP Selection : They fired him . 
He was initially involved , but it did create a stir and he resigned the position . 
Meanwhile , McCain still has the Who 's who of lobbyists running his campaign ... just waiting to cash in ... Posted by : Brad | September 20 , 2008 6:13 PM | Report abuse Do you really think it 's wise to refer to quotes taken from your own paper as `` flimsy '' ? 
Man , you must feel like you 're teflon as far as your job security goes . 
I must assume that from now on , everything that appears in the once venerable Washington Post should be looked at as `` flimsy '' , or a lie , since their very own fact checker says so . 
Am I correct in this assumption ? 
If so , then how do I know that you , sir , are not lying in this story ? 
You say that this is correct , but that the articles that the McCain campaign relied on for this ad are false ? 
How do we know ? 
Oh , because you say so ? 
McCain quotes the Washington Post and now when it suits them they have the AUDACITY to claim McCain is lying ? 
Does this get any sadder ? 
Where did our free and fair media go ? 
Most of us who read them are inclined to add a little extra to the Obama campaign needs whenever I read these posts . 
Thanks for the memories of the last 8 wonderful years guys . 
There is almost nothing left for us taxpayers to bail out now after the great Republican stewardship of the economy ! 
Small main street businesses would be forced to pay tax rates as high as 62.3 % under Senator Obama s tax proposals . 
Senator Obama s tax plan would tax small businesses at a higher rate than Wal-Mart ! 
Taxes on retirement income and savings could increase by at least 33 % , hitting millions of seniors when they need these resources the most . 
4 million workers over the age of 50 those eagerly looking forward to retirement would be hit with increased tax bills . 
Millions of Americans would only keep 38 cents of every dollar that they earn . 
Senator Obama s tax plan would reduce the after tax wages of millions of workers by 17.7 % . 
It will take 227 days per year , nearly 8 months , just to pay your tax bill ! 
97,065 carpenters , 110,908 police officers , 254,992 nurses , 208,562 postsecondary teachers and 237,000 dentists would see tax increases , if the earnings cap was successfully eliminated . 
10.3 million workers would see an average of $ 5,650 taken from their paycheck and given to government programs . 
Even YOU might be considered Rich . 
We were safe from that disaster for many years until ... Obama was a part of ACORN and other groups that pushed to have Bill Clinton put our country back in time and use mortgages once again in a way that would put our country at risk . 
He most clearly has ties to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
People , companies do n't give you hundreds of thousands of dollars and they do n't even know you . 
Both these companies were in deep trouble for years . 
Why is this mess happening now ? 
I have to wonder why this time , when McCain was leading . 
I ask this because Obama was a part of this mess , he pushed to have those extremely risky loans be approved and he pushed to have a process allowed that was banned years and years ago that puts our country at risk . 
McCain saw this , tried to warn congress about it . 
I live in Illinois , he certainly was n't helping us . 
Is it a coincidence that NOW is the time this all falls apart . 
Who worked out a -LRB- most certainly illegal -RRB- deal with Rezco in chicago while Rezco was under investigation . 
Who makes deals with someone while that person is under investigation ? 
Obama made out big time on that purchase with Rezco . 
Later he calls it boneheaded ? 
It was underhanded and I 'm sure quite illegal . 
Obama has way too many links to bad decisions and bad people . 
He lacks morals and values . 
I 'm an independent who is afraid to vote McCain because he 's republican but WILL NOT VOTE FOR OBAMA . 
I 'd rather not vote at all . 
mcCain recieved a lot more money from Fannie Mae The total listed for Obama is $ 126,349 a tiny fraction of the approximately $ 390 million his campaign has raised , according to the Center for Responsive Politics . 
The list shows McCain has received a total of $ 21,550 from Fannie and Freddie employees . 
The list includes donations of at least $ 200 from those who receive paychecks from Fannie and Freddie . 
The New York Times has published a separate list looking at contributions from `` directors , officers , and lobbyists for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac '' for the 2008 campaign cycle . 
That list using figures from the Federal Election Commission shows McCain receiving $ 169,000 , while Obama received only $ 16,000 . 
They stopped ALL eforts at reform until it was too late . 
Now they are trying to blame Bush , McCain and Republicans , everyone but themselves . 
That 's the Gods truth and here is the proof : Posted by : Charles | September 21 , 2008 12:30 AM | Report abuse I have lost all respect for Barack Obama since he can not come out with the truth about his connections to the Fannie Mae officials - and we all have proof that he ad Dodd took more money from them than any other government representative . 
Something smells on Obama . 
His attacks have no substance and was all proven to be lies tonight of the FACTS . 
ONLY A SENILE PERSON WOULD VOTE FOR MCCAIN AT THIS POINT . 
Look at The mess that we are in . 
thank god McCain was not able to have gotten his way to privatize our social security , healthcare , our economic fiasco would have been so much more horrendous . 
Under Raines , Fannie Mae committed `` extensive financial fraud . '' 
Stuck with the bill . '' 
-- McCain video release , September 18 , 2008 . 
I LOST RESPECT FOR MCCAIN A LONG TIME AGO , AND HERE IS ANOTHER REASON FOR DOING SO . 
THIS AD HAS BEEN PROVEN TO BE A LIE SO MANY TIMES OVER . . 
THESE CONSTANT LIES AND ATTACK ON OBAMA 'S INTEGRITY JUST GOES TO SHOW THAT MCCAIN CAN NOT DEAL WITH ISSUES SO HE FINDS TOTAL STUPIDITY , THAT HAS BEEN PROVEN TO BE LIES AND MAKES HIM LOOK EVEN MORE IGNORANT . 
AN EMPTY SUIT = why do n't people do their homework and research the facts , read but also try to understand what you reading , what you posted is totally incorrect . 
Especially where the tax is concerned : OBAMA WILL ONLY RAISE TAX ON THOSE FOLKS MAKING OVER 200K , HE MUST HAVE SAIT A MILLION TIME PRACTICALL IN EVERY SPEECH . 
GET YOUR HEAD OUT YOUR ASS , BECAUSE YOU HEAD SURE IS EMPTY . 
Obama will only raise tax for those make 200K or more . 
OH WHY BOTHER WITH EDIOTS . 
The Washington Post is actually saying that a McCain ad based on stories in The Washington Post should not be trusted because they rely on reporting done by ... The Washington Post . 
Dobbs is saying that McCain is misquoting the Post and also deliberately ignoring more recent , reliable facts , the contradict McCain 's claims . 
If the ad said , ` Who advises him ? 
But ... the Post says a person Obama employs once called Franklin Raines for `` advice on mortgage and housing policy . '' ' 
If phrased honestly its much more clear that they 're trying to employ guilt by association . 
That should n't be possible : We 're talking about Karl Rove here - a natural slime ball - I mean his nickname was ` Human Jabba ' in Rove 's younger days and found the moniker flattering , while it seemed impossible that Bush Jr. had managed to earn an MBA from Harvard by pulling a 2.0 GPA . 
Bush Jr. came off as a mental handicap who lacked the intellect required to master basic sentence structure before McCain came along and decided to run for president even though he 'd started to go senile . 
Then again that might be a blessing in disguise for McCain ; Maybe he really does forget his involvement in the S & L Scandals of the 80 's , and those days he spent on Michael Keating 's boat living it up , or that little ` Keating 5 ' debacle he got mixed up in ... Maybe McCain 's keeping Phil Grahmm around because he ca n't remember who he is or what his ideas for fixing the financial system he -LRB- and McCain ... -RRB- helped to destroy . 
Maybe candidate McCain will start heaping praise onto ` Trickshot ' Dick Cheney for his insight that led him to proclaim `` Deficits do n't matter ; We learned that from the Reagan years ... '' That belief is about as nutty as blaming Obama for the current financial crisis 's or for helping to create ' a climate of corruption in Washington ' . 
It 'd be funny save for one thing ; Almost 50 % of Americans actually support McCain in spite of the latest damages that have resulted as a consequence of quasi-conservative ideological beliefs ... Posted by : Brian Briggs | September 21 , 2008 4:59 AM | Report abuse If Raines was white would he have made this ad ? 
He obviously lusts after her but can only fantasize him bending her over . 
I also believe Cindy is deprived and would love a young black man like Obama to give it to her the way Johnny cant . 
If somebody can loan me their Hoveraround that is . 
Get real you neo-cons you are single handedly responsible for the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression if not even worse -LRB- we are only at the beginning -RRB- . 
John McCain did not even know that the economy was in trouble until last week ! 
To blame Obama who has had a direct influence for only 2 years vs. McCain the penultimate Washington insider has had influence for 26 years . 
Wake up GOP you messed up the economy and now your trying to shift the blame . 
You are traitors and criminals and your leaders are McCain , Bush & Cheney . 
Palin is too stupid to even be counted . 
LA Times Sept. 9\/2008 '' The article in the LA Times also states this money was contributed by employees of these private companies , not by lobbyists or from trade associations . 
I contribute to the Obama campaign . 
Does that mean my former employer , the federal government , supports Obama . 
The LA Times article states that Rick Davis , McCain 's top advisor , was a lobbyist for a trade group that included Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
That is much more significant . 
So how is it , then , that he and Biden feel your pain ? 
If the Raines connection is exaggerated , McCain campaign should correct that . 
However , attempting to make the link between Obama and Fannie Mae is not in itself misguided . 
It appears to have really existed and Obama could have tried ot introduce legislation to reform Fannie and Freddie . 
Incidentally , I met a man the other day who helped to kill the infamous `` sex ed for kindergarteners '' bill in Springfield , IL . 
It really was n't about `` inappropriate touching '' but about `` comprehensive sex education for K-12 ! '' 
Or , you could read the text of the proposed legislation for yourself ... The Obama campaign is very good at playing the demagogue and screaming `` lies '' on a whim . 
He is hiding where the majority of fuel for his life style comes from -LRB- his wife -RRB- , who has refused to make her -LRB- and therefore his -RRB- tax returns public . 
He does not need to be free from all oversight . 
He does not need to be given 700 billion dollars now . 
The bailout does not even have to be done through the treasury but could easily be done through the FDIC . 
Conditions can be imposed on the parties being bailed out . 
Help could be given to ordinary citizens as well as banks , not just to banks . 
Most of all , Congress does not need to sign Paulson a blank check and legal immunity from consequences as to how he spends it . 
This is a stickup . 
Paulson is trying to stampede the Congressional herd into giving him powers and money that he knows they would never give if they had time to think it through carefully . 
It worked with the Patriot Act . 
It worked with the AUMF . 
He 's betting it 'll work again . 
Create a crisis -LRB- or lie one into existence -RRB- then demand dictatorial powers and unlimited spending authority to deal with it . '' 
Paulson wants to make sure business for his buddies goes on as usual . 
He does n't want things to change . 
CONTACT YOUR REPRESENTATIVES NOW -LRB- WE HAVE NO TIME TO WASTE -RRB- and DEMAND they Vote ` NO ' on the BAILOUT ! 
The `` debate '' is becoming a slugging match with the American people acting as referee . 
Unfortunately with the current World economic crisis like many before it will create the seeds of a world conflict . 
The dollar amount contributions given to our next President , Barack Obama , were in the vast majority monies provided from the employees or Fannie and Freddie Mac . 
There is nothing illegal or sinister in this reality . 
Also , I want an intelligent person who is willing to pick up the one and talk to the person who was on the front lines when a situation arose . 
All Americans should be grateful that Barack Obama is an intelligent man who reaches out to the experts -- Republican or Democratic . 
If the GOP could do the same , then this nation would be far better off than we are today . 
The GOP appears to consider truth and honesty as being toxic . 
The GOP and John McCain in particular have long been advocates of deregulation . 
Now there can be no doubt that the lack of real enforcement of the governments regulatory authority is the reason for the events of the last few months and the Enron scandal that preceded this crisis . 
REPUBLICAN AND INTERGRITY CAN NEVER BE USED IN THE SAME SENTENCE . 
THIS IS AN OXYMORON . 
Man , you must feel like you 're teflon as far as your job security goes . 
I must assume that from now on , everything that appears in the once venerable Washington Post should be looked at as `` flimsy '' , or a lie , since their very own fact checker says so . 
Am I correct in this assumption ? 
If so , then how do I know that you , sir , are not lying in this story ? 
You say that this is correct , but that the articles that the McCain campaign relied on for this ad are false ? 
How do we know ? 
Oh , because you say so ? 
Take from producers and give to the lazy ... Posted by : ali baba | September 21 , 2008 6:31 PM | Report abuse Congress does n't have to agree to a blank check . 
Instead , it can choose to impose a few sensible conditions on the bailout to ensure that it will be used responsibly . 
Here are a few suggestions courtesy of Robert Reich1 : 1 -RRB- If the taxpayers are shouldering the risk , the taxpayers should reap any eventual benefits . 
We accomplish this by giving the government an equity stake in every company we bail out proportionate to the amount we give them . 
2 -RRB- If we 're paying -LRB- more than -RRB- our fair share , the CEOs and executives should have to , too . 
All of the fat cats who got us into this mess should relinquish their stock options and salaries until they start showing us , their investors , that they can once again be profitable . 
Future salaries should be linked to profitability . 
3 -RRB- NO MORE campaign contributions from Wall Street executives and PACs . 
Should taxpayer dollars be used to get our nation out of a crisis , they can not be used to fund giant , powerful lobby operations that will be used to strong arm Congress into making bad policy . 
4 -RRB- BETTER REGULATIONS START RIGHT NOW ! 
Wall Street ca n't expect to take thousands of dollars out of our paychecks without agreeing to increased transparency and more stringent oversight the kind that might have helped avoid this mess to begin with . 
5 -RRB- Bankruptcy judges get broader leeway to help homeowners . 
Why should we lose our homes so the CEOs can keep theirs ? 
If Wall Street does n't like these conditions , then it is welcome to find private investors to help it out of this debacle . 
But if American citizens are going to take this hit , then we must have a say in the terms of the deal even if we do n't have an army of high-paid lobbyists at our disposal like they do - We have elected representatives ! 
Congress must take swift and prudent action to avoid making a burgeoning crisis that much worse . 
You can help by making your voice heard to Speaker Nancy Pelosi , House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer , Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , House Finance Chair Barney Frank , Senate Banking Chair Chris Dodd , and the de facto leaders of the two parties : Senators Barack Obama and John McCain . 
Tell our elected officials that they are responsible to the taxpayers , not the Wall Street firms who line their campaign war chests . 
We ca n't afford to write another blank check for George W. Bush . 
both say they want to help the poor . 
Right Posted by : Jimmy | September 21 , 2008 9:17 PM | Report abuse Well , leftist Democrats guess what ? 
They found the person who hacked into Gov. Palin 's personal email . 
It 's the son of a Democrat State Legislator from Tennessee . 
The Democrat Legislator is also an Obama operative . 
The Democrat 's son is currently being investigated by the FBI and Secret Service . 
You can find the article in knoxnews.com . 
Nowhere in the Washington Post , NY Times or LA Times do you see an article about `` Hackergate '' . 
The Associated Press , a leftist news outlet , refused to cooperate with the FBI and Secret Service . 
I wonder why all these extreme leftist publications and news outlets are refusing to publish anything about this news item ? 
Is it because they 're trying to protect Obama ? 
Any news about `` Troopergate '' is published , whether or not the information is true . 
Liberal Democrats are self righteous enough to believe that none of their kind can be involved in any felony . 
It 's only Republicans who are felons . 
I hope that dad and son end up in prison for illegally hacking into Gov. Palin 's personal email for along time . 
Obama said he would return to Chicago style politics . 
`` Hackergate '' is only the tip of the iceberg . 
Casting Franklin Raines as some sort of Obama advisor is just the latest lie . 
Fortunately , the American people are not idiots and this clumsy race baiting does not seem to be giving McCain the boost he is hoping for . 
What a shameful spectacle . 
They criticize the facts that the McCain campaign used to base the ad on ... facts that came from three Washington Post stories !!! What 's `` dubious '' is the routine nonsense that passes for reporting in this paper . 
thank god McCain was not able to have gotten his way to privatize our social security , healthcare , our economic fiasco would have been so much more horrendous . '' 
Jana Whatever happened to America ??? Social Security was never intended to be a relied upon RETIREMENT PLAN and anyone who does so is asinine . 
The government does not owe you or anyone else a living after working age , does not owe you or anyone else health care coverage . 
I would prefer that my family could opt out of paying for other people who did not plan properly for retirement and spent everything they made and could instead invest it in something more secure rather than the government 's `` genius plans '' . 
If McCain DID have his way in 05-06 , we would not be in this mess because HE WANTED more oversight over Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and their ability to lend to and back loans made to individuals who did not have the ability to pay for the loans -LRB- which , incidentally ... no one is `` owed '' a house either , if you make enough to pay for one , you should get one . 
If you are not a wise steward and do not , then you should have to wait until you are in a position that allows you to . -RRB- 
And , for anyone complaining about the Obama\/Raines connection commercial as a race card play , McCain did make a commercial about Obama 's WHITE advisor Johnson , who worked for the same inept GSEs -LRB- Fannie Mae\/Freddie Mac -RRB- , but the liberal media will never cover that because OBAMA wants the race card played -LRB- which is why HE brings up things like `` They 're going to say `` He does n't look like the other guys on the money '' '' Nobody had said anything up to that point about his race -RRB- . 
He wants there to be division between people , that is how he manipulates and anyone who falls for it is blind . 
He WANTS Americans to feel like if they do not vote for him they are racists . 
That is part of his Chicago thug politics and it 's not going to work . 
His resume has been weighed and he has been found `` wanting '' . 
`` I am not an advisor to Barack Obama , nor have I provided his campaign with advice on housing or economic matters . '' 
- former Fannie Mae CEO Franklin Raines Posted by : WylieD | September 22 , 2008 12:07 AM | Report abuse After 8 years of being lied to by Bush , I 'm sick and tired of being lied to by McCain\/Palin . 
What has happened to my Party ? 
A couple of events in the past can be accurately described using the past perfect but not using the present tense . 
This is the one rule for counting Pinocchios that you have stated clearly and I quote `` I awarded the McCain campaign three Pinocchios for mixing up its verb tenses over the Iraq surge in May . 
Consistency demands the same verdict for Barack Obama . '' 
Does n't consistency demand the same verdict this time too ? 
Beyond that , the McCain ad asserts that Raines is Obamas sole advisor on `` mortgage and housing policy . '' 
It asks what is the set of Obama mortgage and housing policy advisors ? 
It is Franklin Raines . 
This is plainly false . 
I 'd say that the McCain campaign earned 4 Pinocchios , but consistency and I demand that you award at least three . 
The ad quotes the Post accurately ; so the McCain campaign is guilty of thinking the Washington Post has journalists in its employ ? 
well i suppose we ca n't believe they are that gullible . 
make it 3 Pinocchios . 
This kind of stuff is done by both sides and it needs to stop . 
McCain needs to tout Obama 's failed record on voting for economic issues in Congress . 
He has continuously failed to vote to stop spending and has an extraordinary amount of earmarks . 
He wants to talk about a huge deficit ? 
He has made no attempts to shrink the economic problems in America . 
In the end , both candidates lack the ability to make a significant contribution to our economy in a good way . 
However , these are the poeple we are stuck with for this election . 
So we need to look at the source for their economic thoughts , and this is where the McCain article got it right . 
We need to look at who these candiates go to for guidance on these issues , because this is where the policy with really be made . 
However , they must get away from McCain 's mistake , and actually look at real advisors . 
This kind of stuff is done by both sides and it needs to stop . 
McCain needs to tout Obama 's failed record on voting for economic issues in Congress . 
He has continuously failed to vote to stop spending and has an extraordinary amount of earmarks . 
He wants to talk about a huge deficit ? 
He has made no attempts to shrink the economic problems in America . 
In the end , both candidates lack the ability to make a significant contribution to our economy in a good way . 
However , these are the poeple we are stuck with for this election . 
So we need to look at the source for their economic thoughts , and this is where the McCain article got it right . 
We need to look at who these candiates go to for guidance on these issues , because this is where the policy with really be made . 
However , they must get away from McCain 's mistake , and actually look at real advisors . 
How the Democrats Created the Financial Crisis : Kevin Hassett Sept. 22 -LRB- Bloomberg -RRB- The financial crisis of the past year has provided a number of surprising twists and turns , and from Bear Stearns Cos. to American International Group Inc. , ambiguity has been a big part of the story . 
Why did Bear Stearns fail , and how does that relate to AIG ? 
It all seems so complex . 
But really , it is n't . 
Enough cards on this table have been turned over that the story is now clear . 
The economic history books will describe this episode in simple and understandable terms : Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac exploded , and many bystanders were injured in the blast , some fatally . 
Fannie and Freddie did this by becoming a key enabler of the mortgage crisis . 
They fueled Wall Street 's efforts to securitize subprime loans by becoming the primary customer of all AAA-rated subprime-mortgage pools . 
In addition , they held an enormous portfolio of mortgages themselves . 
In the times that Fannie and Freddie could n't make the market , they became the market . 
Over the years , it added up to an enormous obligation . 
As of last June , Fannie alone owned or guaranteed more than $ 388 billion in high-risk mortgage investments . 
Their large presence created an environment within which even mortgage-backed securities assembled by others could find a ready home . 
The problem was that the trillions of dollars in play were only low-risk investments if real estate prices continued to rise . 
Once they began to fall , the entire house of cards came down with them . 
Take away Fannie and Freddie , or regulate them more wisely , and it 's hard to imagine how these highly liquid markets would ever have emerged . 
This whole mess would never have happened . 
It is easy to identify the historical turning point that marked the beginning of the end . 
Back in 2005 , Fannie and Freddie were , after years of dominating Washington , on the ropes . 
They were enmeshed in accounting scandals that led to turnover at the top . 
At one telling moment in late 2004 , captured in an article by my American Enterprise Institute colleague Peter Wallison , the Securities and Exchange Commission s chief accountant told disgraced Fannie Mae chief Franklin Raines that Fannie 's position on the relevant accounting issue was not even `` on the page '' of allowable interpretations . 
Then legislative momentum emerged for an attempt to create a `` world-class regulator '' that would oversee the pair more like banks , imposing strict requirements on their ability to take excessive risks . 
Politicians who previously had associated themselves proudly with the two accounting miscreants were less eager to be associated with them . 
The time was ripe . 
The clear gravity of the situation pushed the legislation forward . 
Some might say the current mess could n't be foreseen , yet in 2005 Alan Greenspan told Congress how urgent it was for it to act in the clearest possible terms : If Fannie and Freddie `` continue to grow , continue to have the low capital that they have , continue to engage in the dynamic hedging of their portfolios , which they need to do for interest rate risk aversion , they potentially create ever-growing potential systemic risk down the road , '' he said . 
`` We are placing the total financial system of the future at a substantial risk . '' 
What happened next was extraordinary . 
For the first time in history , a serious Fannie and Freddie reform bill was passed by the Senate Banking Committee . 
The bill gave a regulator power to crack down , and would have required the companies to eliminate their investments in risky assets . 
If that bill had become law , then the world today would be different . 
In 2005 , 2006 and 2007 , a blizzard of terrible mortgage paper fluttered out of the Fannie and Freddie clouds , burying many of our oldest and most venerable institutions . 
Without their checkbooks keeping the market liquid and buying up excess supply , the market would likely have not existed . 
But the bill did n't become law , for a simple reason : Democrats opposed it on a party-line vote in the committee , signaling that this would be a partisan issue . 
Republicans , tied in knots by the tight Democratic opposition , could n't even get the Senate to vote on the matter . 
That such a reckless political stand could have been taken by the Democrats was obscene even then . 
Wallison wrote at the time : `` It is a classic case of socializing the risk while privatizing the profit . 
The Democrats and the few Republicans who oppose portfolio limitations could not possibly do so if their constituents understood what they were doing . '' 
Now that the collapse has occurred , the roadblock built by Senate Democrats in 2005 is unforgivable . 
Many who opposed the bill doubtlessly did so for honorable reasons . 
Fannie and Freddie provided mounds of materials defending their practices . 
Perhaps some found their propaganda convincing . 
But we now know that many of the senators who protected Fannie and Freddie , including Barack Obama , Hillary Clinton and Christopher Dodd , have received mind-boggling levels of financial support from them over the years . 
Throughout his political career , Obama has gotten more than $ 125,000 in campaign contributions from employees and political action committees of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , second only to Dodd , the Senate Banking Committee chairman , who received more than $ 165,000 . 
Clinton , the 12th-ranked recipient of Fannie and Freddie PAC and employee contributions , has received more than $ 75,000 from the two enterprises and their employees . 
The private profit found its way back to the senators who killed the fix . 
There has been a lot of talk about who is to blame for this crisis . 
A look back at the story of 2005 makes the answer pretty clear . 
Oh , and there is one little footnote to the story that 's worth keeping in mind while Democrats point fingers between now and Nov. 4 : Senator John McCain was one of the three cosponsors of S. 190 , the bill that would have averted this mess . 
Or is it new to make one candidate look better before the debates ? 
Is there any party who is responsible for the independent monitoring of these early voters ' ballots ? 
No resume , no accomplishments , no experience , no original ideas , no understanding of how the economy works , no understanding of how the world works , no balls , nothing but abstract empty rhetoric devoid of real substance . 
He has no real identity . 
He is half-white , which he rejects . 
The rest of him is mostly Arab , which he hides but is disclosed by his non-African Arabic surname and his Arabic first and middle names as a way to triply proclaim his Arabic parentage to people in Kenya . 
Only a small part of him is African Black from his Luo grandmother , which he pretends he is exclusively . 
What he is n't , not a genetic drop of , is ` African-American , ' the descendant of enslaved Africans brought to America chained in slave ships . 
He has n't a single ancestor who was a slave . 
Instead , his Arab ancestors were slave Slave-trading was the main Arab business in East Africa for centuries until the British ended it . 
Let that sink in : Obama is not the descendant of slaves , he is the descendant of slave owners . 
Thus he makes the perfect Liberal Messiah . 
It 's something Hillary does n't understand - how some complete neophyte came out of the blue and stole the Dem nomination from her . 
Obamamania is beyond politics and reason . 
It is a true religious cult , whose adherents reject Christianity yet still believe in Original Sin , transferring it from the evil of being human to the evil of being white . 
Thus Obama has become the white liberals ' Christ , offering absolution from the Sin of Being White . 
There is no reason or logic behind it , no faults or flaws of his can diminish it , no arguments Hillary could make of any kind can be effective against it . 
The absurdity of Hypocrisy Clothed In Human Flesh being their Savior is all the more cause for liberals to worship him : Credo quia absurdum , I believe it because it is absurd . 
Thank heavens that the voting majority of Americans remain Christian and are in no desperate need of a phony savior . 
His candidacy is ridiculous and should not be taken seriously by any Posted by : ObamsIStheAntiChrist | September 22 , 2008 2:15 PM | Report abuse `` Just say No to B.O. Economics 101 should be a requirement for all liberals where they learn supply and demand . 
Communism is not patriotism . 
What the hell are you talking about ? 
As you 'll see on Friday night , Goober , Obama knows much more about the economy than John , `` I 'm no expert on the economy , wait , I never said that '' McCain . 
What does this crisis have to do with supply and demand ? 
Another ignorant republican using canned phrases on a subject about which he knows nothing . 
`` Communism is not patriotism ? '' 
What the hell , are you completely stupid ? 
Enjoy president Obama , you doofus . 
So pick something else on your gottcha list and try to do at least a little research so you do n't show everybody what an idiot you are . 
I keep having a problem telling them apart . 
The senile old mans reply when Cindy said he was going bald . 
McNasty really respects women does n't he ? 
His answer to everything is war . 
This moron would love to take on Russia and Iran . 
The economy will mean nothing if he takes office . 
Will be a good time trying to drive to work while avoiding the incoming MIG 's . 
OBAMA NEVER STOLE MONEY FROM THESE USA FOR ANY REASON . 
OBAMA IS CONSTANTLY BEEN BLAMED BY THE RAUNHY , DISGUSTING , REPUBLICANS ESPECIALLY WHEN THEY HAVE NO SOLUTION . 
MCCAIN IS ALWAYS WAITING FOR OBAMA TO COME UP WITH A PRACTICAL AND FIREPROOF SOLUTION TO TRY TO OUTWIT OBAMA . 
BUT MCCAIN LIES SO MUCH AND FLIP FLOPS SO MUCH NO ONE BELIEVES HIM , EVEN IF THEY TRIED . 
HOW CAN ANYONE VOTE FOR SENILTY AND A DEBUTANT THAT OFFERS NOTHING TO THE AMERICAN PEOPLE BUT JOKES . 
90-95 % of Americans will receive a tax cut under his plan . '' 
GO BACK TO RESEACHING YOURSELF , BECUSE SOMEWHERE IN BETWEEN YOU GOT STUCK SEE HOW AND WHO WILL BE TAXED . 
OBAMA IS CONSTANTING REPEATING IT AN PUTTING IT IN WRITING . 
STUPID IS THAT TUPID SAYS . 
THIS IS A NO BRAINER , EITHER ONE GETS IT OR THEY DO N'T , BECAUSE THEY CAN NOT SEE A BLACK MAN BEIN PRESIDENT AND THAT 'S A FACT . 
Christopher Dodd , 2 . 
Barack Obama , 3 . 
So to say Obama 's role in this is purely speculation is just lies . 
Mccain hired many former Fannie and Freddie workers , and Obama took their money . 
THEY SHOULD BOTH BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE FOR THEIR ROLES IN THIS MONUMENTAL MELTDOWN . 
Put Partisan Politics aside for 10 minutes and hope that BOTH parties will own up to their mistakes . 
If you REALLY want change , vote third party . 
Until then , PUSH BOTH SIDES TO ACCEPT RESPONSIBILITY . 
What happened to being Objective . 
| September 22 , 2008 7:24 PM | Report abuse John McCain has pulled out the race card in this ad , and it 's not the first time . 
Observe how he uses language to pigeonhole Barack : Posted by : Sometimey | September 22 , 2008 8:14 PM | Report abuse John McCain has pulled out the race card in this ad , and it 's not the first time . 
Observe how he uses language to pigeonhole Barack : Posted by : Sometimey | September 22 , 2008 8:15 PM | Report abuse The LIARS are republicans and McCain supporters , by omission ; either that or they are just flat out stupid and\/or racist . 
Listen up folks : McCain and Obama BOTH took campaign contributions from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , from both employee and management contributions in the area of $ 100,00 - $ 170,000 . 
FURTHERMORE , McCain 's CURRENT CAMPAIGN MANAGER RICK DAVIS RECEIVED A TOTAL OF $ 2 MILLION OVER 5 YEARS ON A DEREGULATION ADVOCACY BOARD for FREDDIE and FANNIE . 
So , if you are squawking about the Obama Campaign taking a couple of phone calls from Frank Raines and about $ 169,000 of standard campaign contributions , surely you should shut the f \* ck up instantly when compared with the raw hypocrisy and smear tactics . 
Secondly : Phil Gramm , the deregulating Modernization Act of 2000 , ENRON and Phil Gramm 's wife , who made another $ 2 million from that debacle - in a Republican-controlled congress I may add - more housing deregulation legislation squeaked through by Bush\/Cheney in 2004\/05 , and good ` ol Johnnie 's prior involvement on the last banking deregulation debacle , Keating 5 , and you have a very DESPERATE republican smear campaign in the making . 
Oh , yeah , right - Johnnie tried to pass a `` regulatory '' bill in 2005 that would have merely changed regulators , which promptly died twice in a REPUBLICAN-controlled senate , and which he did not bother to co-sponsor in a different format under a similar bill later . 
So , Obama 's campaign made a couple of phone calls to Raines , and took campaign $ 169,000 from Fannie and Freddie . 
What 's your candidate 's multi-million dollar excuse ? 
Oh , I forgot - he does n't have one , which is why you bunch of geese need to smear . 
He has absolutely NO experience in anything pertinent when running anything -LRB- except his mouth , of course -RRB- . 
The majority of the people voting for this hack are doing so for all the wrong reasons -LRB- IF they 're actually educated enough on the topics to have any reasons at all -RRB- . 
There is an unspoken population out there that are not out in the front lines jumping up and down like Barack 's lunatics but have the power to keep this election from going to the dogs and mark my words ... they will do what needs to be done . 
So everyone back off , go get a job , work for a living , stop looking for hand out and keep your liberal , socialist views to yourselves . 
No one is interested . 
The democrats are not for the people . 
Look at their track records thru hx . 
If a drowning man is on the end of a rope and he voted for obama , let him drown ... Posted by : cphilbrick | September 23 , 2008 3:21 PM | Report abuse The truth about Obama , the Annointed , is very hard to swallow for his supporters . 
I understand the passion but I am unclear on when presented with overwhelming evidence -LRB- intelligence -RRB- like : his dubious affiliations ; his poor Senate voting record -LRB- no leadership skills ; his own words taken from context from his two books that really question his allegiance to his country ; his inability to speak extemporaneously about things which he says he is passionate about ; his denial of his link to Islam , etc. . 
So many clear indicators of someone who is confused , troubled and way over his head . 
Whether or not Obama is being counseled by Raines is not what concerns me , it was the mere fact that calls by Obama 's team were placed to this man - once again - POOR JUDGEMENT ! 
-LRB- One in an apparently endless string of Post 's biased `` fact checking '' of campaign ads -RRB- . 
A recurring theme in the old `` Star Trek '' series was the machine run amok . 
An intelligent computer , entrusted with some important task , would conclude that human beings were imperfect because they do not always act logically . 
Because humans are imperfect , the computer would reason , they must be destroyed . 
-LRB- This seems like a bit of a leap , but maybe it made sense in the '60s . -RRB- 
Invariably , Captain Kirk and the other protagonists would save mankind by using illogic to fight the computer . 
They would feed the computer some paradox or logically incoherent statement , such as `` Everything I say is a lie , '' which would overload the computer 's logic circuits and destroy it . 
Last week John McCain 's campaign put out an ad criticizing Barack Obama for his ties to Franklin Raines , former CEO of Fannie Mae . 
The ad said that Obama relies on Raines `` for ` advice on mortgage and housing policy . ' '' 
The Washington Post claims that the McCain ad is `` a stretch '' : So what evidence does the McCain campaign have for the supposed Obama-Raines connection ? 
It is pretty flimsy , but it is not made up completely out of whole cloth . 
McCain spokesman Brian Rogers points to three items in the Washington Post in July and August . 
It turns out that the three items -LRB- including an editorial -RRB- all rely on the same single conversation , between Raines and a Washington Post business reporter , Anita Huslin , who wrote a profile of the discredited Fannie Mae boss that appeared July 16 . 
The profile reported that Raines , who retired from Fannie Mae four years ago , had `` taken calls from Barack Obama 's presidential campaign seeking his advice on mortgage and housing policy matters . '' 
So the Washington Post is saying you ca n't believe McCain 's ad because it is based on reporting in ... the Washington Post . 
The Washington Post is not a reliable source of information , according to the Washington Post . 
But if the Washington Post is not a reliable source of information , how can we believe the Washington Post when it says it 's not a reliable source of information ? 
But if we do n't believe the Washington Post when it says it 's not a reliable source of information , then we must believe the Washington Post is a reliable source of information , in which case how can we believe the Washington Post is not a reliable source of information . 
But if ... You get the picture . 
Clearly this is part of a sinister plot by the Obama-coddling mainstream media to induce madness in all Americans who have the capacity for logical thought , rendering them unable to vote and ensuring the election is decided by Obama backers who act totally on emotion . 
Our Nation is in an economic crisis over the mortgage meltdown ; and , unless we own up to the historically documented cause factors , we may well be doomed to repeat this debacle with the coming election . 
This crisis , purely and simply , was set-in-motion by the cheerleading of the Politically Correct Social Engineering that flourished under the Clinton Administration in the artificially inflated boom years of the 1990s . 
In an effort to increase minority home ownership , the Clinton regime threw sound fiscal discipline under-the-bus ; and , promulgated policies that forbid mortgage lenders from using common-sense criteria such as : income ; ability to afford a reasonable down payment ; and , credit history , as metrics in the evaluation of mortgage applications . 
The same congressional left-wingers who , with their insatiable appetite for social engineering , later vehemently rejected Bush Administration efforts in 2003 to re-implement sound regulatory practices , with the Congressional infamous Dead-On-Arrival mantra . 
Charges of racism in mortgage lending practices flourished during this era ; and , lending institutions led by the quasi-federal entities of Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae , flamed by Congressional diatribe that had been massaged by enormous contributions and favorable loan rates to select politicians , were appointed to lead the charge to `` create '' and to `` absorb '' non-performing assets from such institutions as Country-Wide Financial . 
Assets which were , by sheer definition , fraudulent loans with no ability to repay ; and , via the Quasi 's were proliferated throughout our financial sector . 
In brief , mortgage lenders were compelled to abandon fiscal discipline and `` RISK '' as guiding principles in mortgage creation . 
Policies that were obscured so long as housing values continued to escalate ; but , when the bubble burst similar to the dot-com fever ; and , housing values began to implode , the crisis was set in motion . 
Two of the principal players in the Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae calamities , Jim Johnson and Franklin Raines , are now leading the financial advisory cadre for Barack Obama , the second leading Senatorial recipient of lending institution largess . 
Interesting that it was Obama who recently led the charge to prohibit mortgage lenders from tightening their lending terms for low-income recipients . 
Think there 's any possibility of a correlation here ? 
Even a Democrat Congress could n't swallow that proposal . 
Of commendable note is the fact that John McCain was one of only three -LRB- 3 -RRB- co-sponsors of the 2005 Senate legislation -LRB- S 190 -RRB- which if enacted could have short-circuited the current crisis confronting our financial sector . 
And now Obama , with his innate Marxist\/Socialist concepts , has focused his campaign on extravagant promises to find still other methods of transferring financial benefits to those whom he considers `` disadvantaged '' . 
Clearly , the election of Obama , who has learned nothing from the these catastrophic events , when coupled with the Democrat 's obstinate obstruction of America 's efforts to develop our indigenous energy resources , would set in motion still other financial crises of unparalled proportions . 
The `` Rational Majority '' in our electorate only has a brief few weeks to identify the true enemy in our midst ; and , to relegate their Socialist diatribe to a barely audible level . 
Greg Neubeck Posted by : Anonymous | September 23 , 2008 10:27 PM | Report abuse Posted by : Anonymous | September 24 , 2008 12:19 AM | Report abuse AstroGirl 's link takes you to an aspiring humorist at the Wall Street Journal named James Taranto . 
In his small article , Taranto feigns distress at the Fact Checker article discussed here . 
He does a great take , I think , on the classic `` dim witted cynical Republican '' stereotype . 
Perplexed by a simple sequence of facts , he feels he 's discovered a gravely fatal political paradox . 
Quickly embalming his state of confusion in the comfort of a narrative , something about having Star Trek flashbacks , he finds a smug comfort . 
According to Wikipedia , Taranto is also disturbed by the metric system , something about `` pagan worship of the number 10 '' . 
AstoGirl , I kinda doubt that Taranto speaks with authority for the WSJ . 
He said , ` look , here 's what happened . ' '' 
-- Sen. Joe Biden , in an interview with CBS News . 
Of course , as Reason points out , Roosevelt was n't president in 1929 and televisions were still experimental . 
says that Mr. Raines has `` taken calls from Barack Obama 's presidential campaign seeking his advice on mortgage and housing policy matters . '' 
2 -RRB- The McCain campaign accurately quotes the WASHINGTON POST artcle . 
3 -RRB- The Washington Post says that MCCAIN is lying ? 
Now tell me why we would we believe Raines ? 
You want us to believe he never met with Obama or advised Obama EVER just because he said so ??? I prefer to judge Raines ' long history of ACTIONS over his WORDS any day . 
Further , the name calling and unbridled use of `` liar '' by the Libs is really reverting back to a school yard mentality . 
The long Pinocchio nose belongs on Fact Checker 's face , , , actually I take that back . 
I give you no nose because you did n't research anything at all or give an opinion . 
Just the usual spin and innuendo . 
That is why I believe no one 's WORDS but judge everyone by their ACTIONS . 
What makes you think people will vote for her , especially when people like you are acting like children and hate this country enough to try and prove your point by voting for McCain ? 
It 's people like you that will cause me to vote for neither Hillary or McCain . 
If you ca n't play nice , then get out of the sandbox . 
I grew up on government assisstance , single mom raising two kids . 
I was a republican then and now , and have never been rich . 
I 'll never be rich or see a large amount in my savings . 
Let 's see who are the rich people in America , Opra , Jobs , Gates - Democrates ... Money does not equal belief . 
He has become a puppet to the Democratic party . 
He only repeats what he is told , lies , vague answers , and studdering as he bobs his head from side to side . 
Did you see how he wiped his brow as he refered to Sara Palin and remarked about the lipstick . 
His body language was a give away that he is a liar , not a good one either , although he has had a lot of practice at it . 
You DID see him wipe his brow did n't you , so do n't deny it ! 
And then he lied as he said he was n't refering to Sara Palin . 
Did you notice that the above culprits are DEMOCRATS ? 
Make no mistake about it ... this crash was manufactured to thin the herd - both citizens and banks . 
Look at the resulting proposition ... `` Hurry up and sign !! Time is running out ! '' 
Bigger objectives are at play . 
If you want your kids to live in a free America , you will think twice before voting the corporations in again for another 4 years . 
We need to grow the economy . '' 
May be gettin ' soft in the brain If his ol' heart starts failin ' Do they really want Palin ? 
Are they stupid or merely insane ? 
Who pushed the lending business to make loans to those who could not afford the loans by threatening legal action ? 
No one person or group is innocent in this crime . 
Why has n't the Democrats demanded an investigation ? 
Because it all leads back to all of you LIBERALS\/DEMOCRATS . 
Senator Chris Dodd , Congressman Barney Frank , and Senator Barack Obama all got money from Fannie Mae -LRB- ITS A FACT LOOK IT UP DARHLING -RRB- . 
President Bush also wanted regulation -LRB- LOOK IT UP ITS A FACT -RRB- . 
Franklin Raines , James Johnson , Jamie Gorelick , ALL RECEIVED MILLIONS FROM FANNIE MAE ; ANYONE WITH A BRAIN KNOWS THAT FANNIE MAE & FREDDIE MAC WAS A PIGGY BANK FOR THE DEMOCRATS FOR ALL OF THESE YEARS . 
HMMMMMMMM , Whom created Fannie Mae & Freddie Mac , LET ME THINK ! 
PRESIDENT FRANKLIN DELANO ROOSEVELT CREATED FANNIE MAE\/PRESIDENT LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON CREATED FREDDIE MAC . 
DO YOU IGNORANT LIBERALS KNOW HOW TO MAKE THE CONNECTIONS OKAY . 
DO YOUR RESEARCH YOU LIBERAL IDIOTS . 
NOW QUIT POSTING UNLESS YOU KNOW YOUR FACTS . 
At the RNC convention Mayor Giuliani and Governor Palin 's tele-prompter went out , but we did n't know this , because they can continue on with their speeches and do not need help with a tele-prompter . 
Senator John McCain does not need a tele-prompter every where he goes like `` THE MESSIAH '' , and by the way did JESUS USE A TELE-PROMPTER ; SINCE SENATOR OBAMA IS SUPPOSE TO BE THE NEXT COMING OF CHRIST . 
HMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMM Posted by : E. Burnsed | September 25 , 2008 2:17 PM | Report abuse NY TIMES ARTICLE PREDICTED GOVT BAILOUT 9 YEARS AGO ! 
GOOGLE `` Fannie Mae Eases Credit To Aid Mortgage Lending '' `` NEW YORK TIMES '' Quote : `` In moving , into this new area of lending , Fannie Mae is taking on significantly more risk , which may not pose any difficulties during flush economic times . 
But the government-subsidized corporation may run into trouble in an economic downturn , prompting a government rescue similar to that of the savings and loan industry Also read Ronald Brownstein 5\/31\/99 LA Times . 
Clinton 's regulators demanded that over 42 % of mortgages be subprime and to minorities !!! Obama perpetuated this , which was why he recieved more contributions than any other Congressman except DODD . 
Yeah , John , that whole banking thing worked out great . 
Now do the same for the insurance industry ? 
Surge , surge , John . 
Drill , drill , John . 
Bail when you fail , John . 
The great S&L Failure , the great Enron failure , FMae & FMac Failures , the current economic crisis -- John McCain 's Bush league party always fought against `` big government '' and `` excess regulation '' and disasters followed . 
P.S. `` Big government '' and `` excess regulations '' are McCain 's Bush league speak for `` let 's go hog wild when we 're making easy money , but save our fat assets with a bail when we fail . '' 
THEY HAVE NOT DONE THEIR JOB . 
YOU WANT CHANGE !! THEN PUT IN ALL NEW PEOPLE COME NOVEMBER . 
VOTE ALL THE INCUMBENTS OUT OF OFFICE AT EVERY LEVEL : LOCAL , STATE AND FEDERAL !!! Posted by : STRETCH5150 | September 26 , 2008 8:41 AM | Report abuse It is not your job to form opinions about what happened . 
It is your job to only report facts and nothing else . 
That is what the news does . 
Washington Post is a JOKE . 
