When newly appointed White House chief of staff Joshua B. Bolten tried to shake up the Bush administration in the spring of 2006 , he spent weeks wooing Goldman Sachs chief executive Henry M. Paulson Jr. to be Treasury secretary . 
Bolten had personal reasons for thinking Paulson might be a good pick -- Bolten himself had worked for the influential investment bank in Europe in the 1990s -- and Paulson eventually gave in to his persistent lobbying . 
`` I had always trusted him , '' Paulson once said of Bolten in an interview . 
`` I felt a bond and a sense of trust . '' 
Paulson and Bolten are just two of the onetime Goldman figures who find themselves managing perhaps the biggest financial crisis since the Great Depression . 
After Paulson took over at Treasury in May 2006 , he turned to Goldman colleague Robert K. Steel to help him oversee financial markets . 
Steel left recently to run Wachovia , but several other Goldman alumni remain to help Paulson deal with the ongoing market turmoil . 
Such heavy reliance on the most prestigious Wall Street investment firm has become something of a bipartisan Washington tradition in recent years ; Clinton Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin was also a co - chairman of Goldman Sachs , as was Bush economic adviser Stephen Friedman . 
But if the Wall Street meltdown continues , the tradition may come under scrutiny , especially if Goldman eventually needs the kind of government assistance granted Bear Stearns or American International Group . 
From the right , prominent voices question Paulson 's use of taxpayer dollars to help rescue private firms , while liberal and labor groups attack the ideological orientation of the Treasury secretary and other officials hailing from Goldman . 
`` Goldman culture has prided itself on creating sort of financial statesmen who would come to Washington as well as operate in the highest realm of finance , '' said Robert Borosage , president of the Institute for America 's Future , a liberal think tank . 
`` What 's clear is that these people in both parties -- whether it 's Rubin or Paulson -- have been leading promulgators of the deregulation that has gotten us in this hole . '' 
Jeffrey E. Garten , who worked on international economic matters in several administrations , took a different view . 
`` If we are going to have a highly skilled revolving door , I do n't think you can do better than look at the top ranks of Goldman Sachs and bring them into government , '' he said . 
`` They are brutally effective . 
They waste absolutely no time . 
They are not lone rangers . 
They surround themselves with a lot of people and seek as much advice as they can , '' said Garten , who now teaches international trade and finance at Yale University . 
`` They are masters at getting at the heart of a problem in lightning speed . '' 
Asked why presidents turn to Goldman , White House spokesman Tony Fratto said it was more a question for Goldman than for the administration . 
`` It 's part of the culture up there at Goldman that they appreciate public service , '' he said . 
Fratto said Bolten , who worked on legal and government affairs at Goldman in the 1990s , has no reason to recuse himself from matters concerning the firm because he worked there years ago and has no continuing financial interest . 
Paulson has recused himself from issues directly affecting Goldman , though he can seek a waiver if the White House counsel and Office of Government Ethics deem it appropriate , Fratto said . 
The r sum s of Bolten and Paulson illustrate the revolving door between Washington and Goldman Sachs . 
Both went to Goldman after working in government -- Bolten as counsel to the U.S. trade representative during the George H.W. Bush administration and Paulson at the White House and Pentagon in the Nixon administration -- before returning to federal service at a very senior level . 
Other Bush administration officials have followed similar paths . 
After he resigned as deputy secretary of state in 2006 , Robert B. Zoellick worked briefly at Goldman Sachs before being named by Bush as president of the World Bank . 
Dina Habib Powell , former White House personnel chief and assistant secretary of state , now oversees Goldman 's charitable and philanthropic activities . 
Democrats have turned to Goldman alumni including Rubin and Gary Gensler , a Goldman partner who served in top positions in the Clinton Treasury Department . 
Another former chief executive , Jon S. Corzine , went on to serve in the Senate and is now the Democratic governor of New Jersey . 
Political contributions suggest a Democratic tilt at Goldman ; of the $ 4.3 million so far contributed to campaigns this year by employees or by the firm 's political action committee , roughly three-quarters has gone to Democrats , according to the Center for Responsive Politics . 
The contributions suggest how attuned the firm is to Washington , where actions on regulation and other policies can affect the bottom line . 
Said one former Treasury official : `` They see long-term strategic advantage in being involved in the intersection of public policy and finance , not just here but also Brussels and other capitals . '' 
Researchers Julie Tate , Madonna Lebling and Alice Crites contributed to this report . '' 
