I thank the treasury secretary , Hank Paulson , Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and SEC Chairman Chris Cox for joining me today . 
This is a pivotal moment for America 's economy . 
Problems that originated in the credit markets and first showed up in the area of subprime mortgages have spread throughout our financial system . 
This has led to an erosion of confidence that has frozen many financial transactions including loans to consumers and to businesses seeking to expand and create jobs . 
As a result we must act now to protect our nation 's economic health from serious risk . 
There will be ample opportunity to debate the origins of this problem . 
Now is the time to solve it . 
In our nation 's history there have been moments that require us to come together across party lines to address major challenges . 
This is such a moment . 
Last night , Secretary Paulson and Chairman Bernanke and Chairman Cox met with congressional leaders of both parties and they had a very good meeting . 
I appreciate the willingness of congressional leaders to confront this situation head-on . 
Our system of free enterprise rests on the conviction that the federal government should interfere in the marketplace only when necessary . 
Given the precarious state of today 's financial markets , and their vital importance to the daily lives of the American people , government intervention is not only warranted , it is essential . 
In recent weeks , the federal government has taken a series of measures to help promote stability in the overall economy . 
To avoid severe disruptions in the financial markets and support home financing , we took action to address the situation in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
The Federal Reserve also acted to prevent the disorderly liquidation of the insurance company AIG . 
BUSH : And in coordination with central banks around the world , the Fed has injected much-needed liquidity into our financial system . 
These were targeted measures designed primarily to stop the problems of individual firms from spreading even more broadly . 
But more action is needed . 
We must address the root cause behind much of the instability in our markets : mortgage assets that have lost value during the housing decline and are now restricting the flow of credit . 
America 's economy is facing unprecedented challenges , and we are responding with unprecedented action . 
Secretary Paulson , Chairman Bernanke and Chairman Cox have briefed leaders on Capitol Hill on the urgent need for Congress to pass legislation approving the federal government 's purchase of illiquid assets , such as troubled mortgages , from banks and other financial institutions . 
This is a decisive step that will address underlying problems in our financial system . 
It will help take pressure off the balance sheets of banks and other financial institutions . 
It will allow them to resume lending and get our financial system moving again . 
Additionally the federal government is taking several other steps to address the trouble of our financial markets . 
The Department of Treasury is acting to restore confidence in a key element of America 's financial system : money market mutual funds . 
In the past , government insurance was not available for these funds , and the recent stresses on the markets have caused some to question whether these investments are safe and accessible . 
The Treasury Department 's actions address that concern by offering government insurance for money market mutual funds . 
For every dollar invested in an insured fund , you 'll be able to a dollar out . 
BUSH : The Federal Reserve is also taking steps to provide additional liquidity to money market mutual funds , which will help ease pressure on our financial markets . 
These measures will act as grease for the gears of our financial system , which were at risk of grinding to a halt . 
They will support the flow of credit to households and businesses . 
The Securities and Exchange Commission has issued new rules temporarily suspending the practice of short selling on the stocks of financial institutions . 
This is intended to prevent investors from intentionally driving down particular stocks for their own personal gain . 
The SEC is also requiring certain investors to disclose their short selling and has launched rigorous enforcement actions to detect fraud and manipulation in the market . 
Anyone engaging in illegal financial transactions will be caught and persecuted -LRB- sic -RRB- . 
Finally , when we get past the immediate challenges , my administration looks forward to working with Congress on measures to bring greater long-term transparency and reliability to the financial system , including those in the regulatory blueprint submitted by Secretary Paulson earlier this year . 
BUSH : Many of the regulations governing the functioning of America 's markets were written in a different era . 
It is vital that we update them to meet the realities of today 's global financial system . 
The actions I just outlined reflect the considered judgment of Secretary Paulson , Chairman Bernanke and Chairman Cox . 
We believe that this decisive government action is needed to preserve America 's financial system and sustain America 's overall economy . 
These measures will require us to put a significant amount of taxpayer dollars on the line . 
This action does entail risk , but we expect that this money will eventually be paid back . 
The vast majority of assets the government is planning to purchase have good value over time because the vast majority of homeowners continue to pay their mortgages . 
The risk is -- of not acting would be far higher . 
Further stress on our financial markets would cause massive job losses , devastate retirement accounts and further erode housing values , as well as dry up loans for new homes and cars and college tuitions . 
These are risks that America can not afford to take . 
In this difficult time , I know many Americans are wondering about the security of their finances . 
Every American should know that the federal government continues to enforce laws and regulations protecting your money . 
Through the FDIC every savings account , checking account and certificate of deposit is insured by the federal government for up to $ 100,000 . 
The FDIC has been in existence for 75 years , and no one has ever lost a penny on an insured deposit , and this will not change . 
BUSH : America 's financial system is intricate and complex , but behind all the technical terminology and statistics is a critical human factor : confidence . 
Confidence in our financial system and in its institutions is essential to the smooth operation of our economy , and recently that confidence has been shaken . 
Investors should know that the United States government is taking action to restore confidence in America 's financial markets so they can thrive again . 
In the long run Americans have good reason to be confident in our economic strength . 
America has the most talented , productive and entrepreneurial workers in the world . 
This country is the best place in the world to invest and do business . 
Consumers around the world continue to seek out American products , as evidenced by record high exports . 
We have a flexible and resilient system that absorbs challenges and makes corrections and bounces back . 
We 've seen that resilience over the past eight years . 
Since 2001 our economy has faced a recession , the bursting of the dot-com bubble , major corporate scandals , an unprecedented attack on our homeland , a global war on terror , a series of devastating natural disasters . 
Our economy has weathered every one of these challenges and still managed to grow . 
We will weather this challenge , too , and we must do so together . 
This is no time for partisanship . 
We must join to move urgently needed legislation as quickly as possible without adding controversial provisions that could delay action . 
I 'll work with Democrats and Republicans alike to steer our economy through these difficult times and get back to the path of long-term growth . 
