WASHINGTON | Thu Jan 6 , 2011 4:17 pm EST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Bacteria ate nearly all the potentially climate-warming methane that spewed from BP 's broken wellhead in the Gulf of Mexico last year , scientists reported on Thursday . 
Nearly 200,000 tons of methane -- more than any other single hydrocarbon emitted in the accident -- were released from the wellhead , and nearly all of it went into the deep water of the Gulf , researcher David Valentine of the University of California-Santa Barbara said in a telephone interview . 
Bacteria managed to take in the methane before it could rise from the sea bottom and be released into the atmosphere , but the process contributed to a loss of about 1 million tons of dissolved oxygen in areas southwest of the well . 
That sounds like a lot of oxygen loss , but it was widely spread out , so that the bacterial munching did not contribute to a life-sapping low-oxygen condition known as hypoxia , said Valentine , whose study was published in the journal Science . 
What happens to methane has been a key question for climate scientists , because methane is over 20 times more effective at trapping heat in the atmosphere than carbon dioxide . 
Like carbon dioxide , methane comes from natural and human-made sources , including the petroleum industry . 
For two months after the BP blowout on April 20 , 2010 , methane was not being consumed in and around the wellhead , leading some scientists to suspect it might linger in the water and eventually make its way into the air , where it could potentially trap heat and contribute to climate change . 
`` If you have a very large release of methane like this , and it did make it into the atmosphere , that would be a problem , '' Valentine said . 
`` There have been a number of ... large-scale methane releases in the past that have come from the ocean that have warmed the climate . '' 
Those methane releases came from natural sources , and researchers like Valentine and his co-authors wondered what role bacteria might have had in those cases . 
The BP spill offered an `` accidental experiment '' that showed particular bacteria with an all-methane diet multiplied quickly as the methane spread with the underwater plume from the broken well . 
Peak consumption of methane probably came in late July and early August , Valentine said . 
Other organisms dealt with other hydrocarbons , including ethane and propane emitted in the worst offshore oil spill in U.S. history . 
The methane-eating bacteria were the last to the hydrocarbon banquet , and based on past observation , the scientists questioned whether they could do the job . 
`` Given observations about how slowly methane is normally consumed , we did n't think the -LRB- bacteria -RRB- population was up to the challenge at all ... we thought it would be a lot slower , '' Valentine said . 
The fact the bacteria took in that large amount of methane could indicate that bacteria might absorb other large-scale deep ocean methane releases , the scientists said . 
The U.S. government filed a civil suit last month against BP and its partners for damage caused by the spill . 
The White House commission on the oil spill said on Wednesday that BP and its partners made a series of cost-cutting decisions that ultimately contributed to the spill . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
I do n't think we could produce enough GM bacteria to handle the load . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
