BP needs a crude awakening BP 's Lamar McKay was n't about to take blame for the spill . 
-LRB- Tracy A. Woodward\/the Washington Post -RRB- Lamar McKay , the BP official who visited Capitol Hill on Tuesday , could n't have been any more slippery if he had just bathed in the Gulf of Mexico . 
What changes has the oil company made to stop its record of accidents , the latest causing 5,000 barrels a day to pour into the gulf ? 
`` Our operating management system in the Gulf of Mexico is as good as anyone , '' McKay replied . 
`` I ca n't point to any deficiencies . '' 
Did BP ask federal regulators to reverse procedures shortly before its oil rig in the gulf exploded ? 
`` I 'm not familiar with the individual procedure on that well , '' answered McKay , the president of BP America . 
Will BP compensate state and local governments for lost tax revenue from the devastated fishing and tourism industries ? 
Here 's another question mark : What is BP thinking ? 
The British oil firm has shown a crude lack of accountability as it tries to shift blame for the spill . 
But perhaps the most unnerving part of McKay 's performance was how familiar it seemed . 
Just a week ago , Goldman Sachs officials came to Congress and declared that they have no responsibility for the mortgage-market meltdown and the resulting collapse of the world economy . 
Others in the banking industry , saved from bankruptcy by government intervention , are now bitterly fighting new regulations designed to prevent a recurrence . 
Before that , auto industry executives flew to Washington on corporate jets to demand government money . 
This all seems to be part of a new era of corporate irresponsibility , in which amoral executives pursue profits without a thought about collateral damage , then demand government help when they get in trouble . 
In a pair of Senate hearings Tuesday , BP 's McKay traded blame with the oil platform operator , Transocean , and drilling contractor Halliburton . 
Their finger-pointing led one senator to compare them to children blaming one another for the baseball that went through the neighbor 's window . 
`` Transocean , as owner and operator of the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig , had responsibility for the safety of drilling operations , '' McKay declared . 
