Three weeks ago , an oil rig far off the coast of Louisiana was hit with a sudden , massive explosion and sank in water a mile deep . 
Since then , no one has been able to stop the flow of oil into the clear waters . 
Nearly 4 million gallons of oil have spilled into the Gulf of Mexico . 
If the nonstop efforts to stop it are not successful soon , it could become the nation 's worst oil spill . 
In 1989 , a leaking oil tanker spilled 11 million gallons along the coast of Alaska . 
How did the oil spill happen ? 
After the explosion , the oil rig , called Deepwater Horizon , collapsed . 
The pipe that was directing oil up to the rig broke in several places , allowing the oil to rush into the open water . 
If you 've ever seen a fire hydrant or even a kitchen sink gushing water , you have an idea of what happened . 
Is n't there a way to stop the oil ? 
The backup system that should have stopped the flow of oil failed . 
Trying to fix it is hard because it 's so far underwater . 
Think about how much pressure you feel when you dive to the bottom of a swimming pool -- then imagine being a mile underwater . 
Remote-controlled robots are being used to try to fix this emergency shut-off valve . 
They have n't been successful so far . 
What else can be done ? 
The company that was using the rig to dig for oil , a giant British company called BP , tried to put a four-story steel and concrete box over the biggest leak and then attach a pipe to the top of the box that would bring the oil up to ships on the surface . 
But the box clogged up with ice formed by low temperatures and high pressure under water . 
BP is also spraying chemicals on the oil to make it break up in the water , the way dish soap cuts through grease when you wash the dishes . 
But pouring huge amounts of chemicals into the water can also cause harm . 
As a last resort , BP is digging what 's called a relief well nearby that would intersect with the original well and stop the flow of oil from the original well . 
But digging this new well will take up to three months . 
So what happens to all the oil ? 
The spill covers thousands of square miles and threatens the coast of Louisiana , which is home to hundreds of species of wildlife . 
It also threatens many jobs , such as fishing , that depend on clean water . 
Ships are laying hundreds of miles of booms , which look like bright orange sausage links floating on the water , to soak up oil and keep it from reaching land . 
But some oil is sloshing over the booms . 
Sandbags also are being put down to perhaps create a wall in front of the marshlands . 
A few more unusual approaches are also underway , including booms made of pantyhose packed with animal and human hair , which absorbs oil . 
BP is considering stuffing the well with golf balls , shredded tires and knotted rope . 
The idea is to try to clog the oil pipe the way a sink gets clogged . 
What happens to the animals ? 
It 's possible that many animals will die as a result of the spilled oil ; they get coated in it and accidentally eat or drink it . 
Wildlife experts are working in the area . 
If the oil leak is contained soon , the damage to wildlife will be limited . 
