Saturday 3 September 2005 00.05 BST US allies are quitting Iraq in droves but the coalition of the willing is not quite dead : 40 Estonian soldiers hope their corner of Baghdad will remain forever Baltic . 
The light infantry platoon , Estonia 's sum contribution to the war , is responsible for Abu Ghraib district , a cauldron of rubble and violence . 
The platoon loves it . 
`` We are learning a lot . 
What it 's like being under fire , stuff like that , '' said Sergeant Peter Heinsaar , 25 . 
Back home in Tallinn soldiers compete to be on the next rotation . 
It was a gleam of consolation for Washington when its coalition of the willing showed fresh signs of wilting . 
Bulgaria 's new government said yesterday it would withdraw all its 370 troops . 
A Latvian ruling coalition party wants to end its 136-strong Iraq mission . 
Japan 's main opposition said it would pull out its 500-strong contingent if it won next month 's election , while Italy withdrew 300 soldiers last month and Poland 's 2,400-strong force will go soon , as will Ukraine 's . 
Estonia , keen to strengthen bonds with Nato as a safeguard against Russia , is more enthusiastic . 
The prime minister , Andrus Ansip , told a US delegation he wanted his troops to stay after their mandate expires in December , despite much public opposition . 
On patrol near Abu Ghraib jail in western Baghdad , Estonian soldiers said there was no place they would rather be . 
`` I like to be on missions , '' said Corporal Toomas Kunnapuu , 23 . 
No one cited fighting terrorism or sowing democracy . 
All full-time professionals in a volunteer army , for them the tour was about adventure , experience , advancing career prospects and a 500 % pay rise to # 1,700 while in Iraq . 
Sgt Ramil Sadikov , 30 , said : `` In Bosnia you could sit and enjoy nature , here you have to keep your eyes open . '' 
Since 2003 two Estonians have been killed and 10 wounded , a high proportion for a tiny force , but Captain Andrus Merilo , 31 , was upbeat . 
`` This is better than being a staff officer at HQ next to the coffee machine . '' 
US officers praised the troops for finding arms caches and gleaning intelligence while on foot patrols , second nature for Estonian soldiers trained for guerrilla warfare . 
They do not display the flag on vehicles and locals often mistake them for Russians . 
`` I 'm so tired of making the distinction I tell them I 'm from the moon , '' Sgt Heinsaar said . 
