Saturday 3 September 2005 13.38 BST The fallout from the Gulf coast disaster could take a heavy political toll on President George Bush , who has been accused by some of fiddling while New Orleans drowns . 
His already plummeting popularity rating is likely to take another big hit , according to experts who say the public largely see his response to the tragedy as several days too late , inadequate and insincere . 
Visiting the storm-wrecked town of Biloxi , Mississippi , Mr Bush hugged a sobbing survivor . 
The woman , Bronwynne Bassier , 23 , clutched a plastic bag containing all she had rescued from her wrecked home . 
`` We 're going to get you some help , '' Mr Bush said . 
`` Hang in there . 
Help is on the way . '' 
Later on the tour , Mr Bush was asked if the US could continue spending billions of dollars in the war in Iraq amid the hurricane crisis . 
He replied : `` We 've got plenty of resources to do both . 
We 'll secure our country from the terrorists and we 'll rebuild this area . 
We 've got what it takes to do more than one thing . '' 
But even as the rescue operation continues , anger is growing that the administration 's focus on the war in Iraq diminished its ability to respond adequately to a growing crisis at home . 
`` There 's no doubt it has already led people to further question the president 's involvement in Iraq , '' said William Stewart , professor emeritus of political science at the University of Alabama . 
`` If we did n't have so many resources there , we might have been able to respond to the tragedy here at home more quickly . '' 
Public dissent over Mr Bush 's reaction is reflected in newspaper editorials , radio talk shows and weblogs . 
The New York Times described the president 's first public comments on the tragedy on Wednesday , two days after the storm hit , as `` one of the worst speeches of his career '' . 
Its columnist Paul Krugman wrote : `` America , once famous for its can-do attitude , now has a ca n't - do government that makes excuses instead of doing its job . 
And while it makes those excuses , Americans are dying . '' 
Amanda Lang , a retired US army officer and political commentator writing on the Opednews.com weblog , attacked the president for staying on vacation at his Crawford ranch for three days before returning to Washington . 
`` He treats his own citizens with the same contempt and callousness as he does the Iraqi civilians , as ` collateral damage ' , '' Professor Lang said . 
Referring to Mr Bush 's address to citizens of the Gulf coast , she added : `` His heart and prayers may have been there , but his ass sure was n't . '' 
Those directly involved in the tragedy have also spoken out . 
Ray Nagin , the New Orleans mayor , reflected the anger of his stranded citizens when he told a local radio station : `` We had an incredible crisis here and his flying over in Air Force One does not do it justice . 
They flew down here one time two days after the doggone event was over with TV cameras , AP reporters , all kind of goddamn - excuse my French , everybody in America , but I am pissed -LRB- off -RRB- . '' 
Prof Stewart said Mr Bush 's early handling of the situation was definitely `` not a plus '' but that he was always going to receive criticism regardless of his actions . 
`` It is easy to say in retrospect that he should have done such and such but , because of the scale of the problems , any administration would have been underprepared . '' 
Political enemies wasted little time in weighing in . 
President Hugo Chvez of Venezuela , a long-time critic who refers to Mr Bush as Mr Danger , said : `` That man , the king of vacations , said nothing but ` you have to flee ' , and did not say how . 
It 's cowboy mentality . '' 
With a war in the Middle East , economic difficulties at home , including soaring petrol prices , and now the nation 's largest natural disaster to deal with , Mr Bush is facing his biggest challenge since the 2001 terrorist attacks . 
`` This is a supreme test of Bush 's leadership at a time when resources are thin and his approval ratings are perilously low , '' poll expert John Zogby told Reuters . 
`` The president is going to have to do a lot more than a 25-minute flyover . '' 
