WASHINGTON -- WASHINGTON -LRB- AP -RRB- -- Early finger-pointing erupted Monday among companies involved in the oil rig explosion in the Gulf of Mexico and unstopped leak of millions of gallons of oil , on the eve of the first congressional hearings into the accident . 
A top American executive for BP , Lamar McKay , said a critical safety device known as a blowout-preventer failed catastrophically . 
Separately , the owner of the rig off Louisiana 's coast said BP managed it and was responsible for all work conducted at the site . 
A third company defended work that it performed on the deepwater oil well as `` accepted industry practice '' before last month 's explosion . 
`` We are looking at why the blowout preventer did not work because that was to be the fail-safe in case of an accident , '' McKay , chairman and president of BP America , said in testimony prepared for a Senate hearing Tuesday . 
A copy of his testimony was obtained by The Associated Press . 
`` Transocean 's blowout preventer failed to operate . '' 
The chief executive for Swiss-based Transocean , which owned the oil rig and the blowout preventer , shifted blame to BP . 
`` All offshore oil and gas production projects begin and end with the operator , in this case BP , '' CEO Steven Newman said in his Senate testimony , also obtained by the AP . 
Newman said BP was responsible for submitting a detailed plan specifying where and how a well is to be drilled , cased , cemented and completed . 
Newman also said BP 's contractor , Halliburton Inc. , was responsible for encasing the well in cement , putting a temporary plug in the top of the well and ensuring the cement 's integrity . 
That cementing process was dictated by BP 's well plan , Newman said . 
A Halliburton executive , Tim Probert , said the company safely finished a cementing operation 20 hours before the rig went up in flames . 
Probert said Halliburton completed work on the well according to accepted industry practice and at the direction of federal regulators . 
The blame-game took hold on Capitol Hill as Congress and federal investigators were to begin a series of hearings in Washington and on the Gulf Coast . 
Two Senate hearings were set for Tuesday , and a House hearing was scheduled for Wednesday . 
In Louisiana , near the disaster site , a six-member panel that includes investigators from the Interior Department and Coast Guard was to begin two days of hearings . 
McKay , the BP executive , said the company wants answers itself . 
He disclosed that the company has at least 40 people internally investigating the accident , but he acknowledged that the cause is still a mystery . 
Transocean has its own investigative team , Newman said . 
`` We are looking at our own actions and those of our contractors , '' McKay wrote in his Senate testimony . 
Newman said it makes no sense to suggest the blowout preventer caused the accident . 
He said it was ironic that attention was being focused on the blowout preventer because at the time of the explosion drilling at the site was finished . 
The blowout preventer , made by Houston-based Cameron Inc. , is a 450-ton piece of equipment that sits on top of the wellhead during drilling operations . 
It contains valves that can be closed remotely in case of an accident or increase in pressure . 
`` The systems are intended to be fail-safe ; sadly and for reasons we do not yet understand , in this case , they were not , '' McKay said . 
The cause of the explosion is under investigation , but lawsuits filed after the disaster have alleged it occurred when Halliburton workers improperly capped the well -- a process known as cementing . 
According to a 2007 study by the Minerals Management Service , an agency within the Interior Department , cementing was a factor in 18 of 39 rig blowouts in the gulf between 1992 and 2006 . 
Probert of Halliburton said the company had four workers stationed on the rig performing several tasks , including cementing -- a process of applying cement and water to a pipe to prevent the wall of the hole from collapsing during drilling . 
A positive pressure test was conducted after the work was finished to demonstrate the integrity of the cement job , Probert said . 
Transocean , the well owner , decided to continue operating the well after the cement job was completed , he said . 
Probert said a `` negative '' pressure test , which measures the integrity of the casing seal assembly , was conducted by BP at the direction of Transocean and according to requirements of the Minerals Management Service . 
After the test was completed , BP `` then continued to displace the riser with seawater before the planned placement of the final cement plug , which would have been installed inside the production string and enabled the planned temporary abandonment of the well , '' Probert said . 
Before Halliburton personnel could set the final cement plug , the explosion occurred . 
`` As a result , the final cement plug was never set , '' Probert said . 
David Nagel , a senior vice president and head of BP America 's Washington office , emphasized in a meeting with reporters Monday that the company is making every effort to find a way to halt the spill , pay for cleanup and address claims from people that are being harmed -- a theme that will be repeated by BP executives to senators . 
`` We want to do the right thing , '' Nagel said . 
Associated Press writers H. Josef Hebert and Frederic J. Frommer contributed to this report . 
