We should not ask whether the Iraq invasion was ` legal ' - we should ask whether it was ` good ' Sunday 6 March 2005 01.36 GMT Last week 's jilbab decision left me wondering whether the law was always this important . 
Was n't there a time when schools could take decisions about the uniforms their pupils should wear without a judge having the final say ? 
I see the advantages of greater legal protection for the individual and I also see the problems . 
And one of the dangers is that we may become reliant on legal processes to settle for us the question of what is right and what is wrong when , in reality , morality can neither begin nor end with the law . 
Just as we talk more than we used to about law at home , so we also increasingly discuss international law . 
Thus it was with some fanfare that , also last week , Penguin published an important book by Professor Philippe Sands , a brilliant international lawyer . 
In Lawless World , Sands 's central proposition is that the war on terror and the war on Iraq , as prosecuted by America and supported by Britain , pose a unique threat to a valuable system of international justice . 
There is much that I can agree with in the book . 
In particular , I accept that the arbitrary procedures for dealing with ` terror ' suspects at Guantanamo and Bagram have been a disaster , enhancing the likelihood of abuse , violating basic principles , discrediting those who laid most claim to be upholding human rights and strengthening opposition . 
And yet I have some problems with other aspects of his approach . 
One is that , at important moments in his arguments about the law , I find that I have ceased to care as much as he wants me to about whether this or that action is , strictly speaking , legal . 
Instead , I find myself more concerned about whether the action is right . 
I 'm not alone ; many of those who routinely use the word ` illegal ' about the war do n't do so because of a detailed appreciation of Sands 's judgment on UN Resolution 1,441 versus that of , say , Professor Greenwood of the LSE , but merely as meaning ` very bad ' . 
And a second is that I find myself wondering at the selectivity , the implied politicisation , if you like , of what are claimed to be dispassionate legal observations . 
It is interesting , for example , that though the book 's index lists 15 references to Abu Ghraib prison and the abuses carried out there , only one mentions it was a prison under Saddam , and none details the years when executions and torture made Abu Ghraib infamous throughout the Arab world . 
Let me further illustrate this problem of partiality . 
Before the war , a group of international lawyers , including Sands , wrote to newspapers , pointing out that an invasion of Iraq without a specific resolution of the UN Security Council would undermine the rule of law . 
The final paragraph added : ` Of course , even with that authorisation , serious questions would remain . 
A lawful war is not necessarily a just , prudent or humanitarian war . ' 
This caveat would , presumably , have left some of the authors free to campaign against military action , even if it had been mandated by the Security Council . 
But it inevitably implied that an illegal war , or a non-legal war , might quite possibly be a just , prudent or humanitarian one . 
Sands goes some way to suggest that a humanitarian justification of the war might have been available in the 1980s -LRB- or , one supposes , in 1991\/2 -RRB- when Saddam was at his most murderous . 
This is a position shared , I think , by Human Rights Watch . 
And , in giving evidence last year to the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee , Sands even seemed to recognize that under such circumstances , no authorisation by the Security Council , explicit or implicit , might be necessary . 
` My personal view , ' he told the MPs , ` is very much moving towards the view that the circumstances of Kosovo -LRB- where no UN authorisation was sought or obtained -RRB- do not pose a problem in existing rules of international law . ' 
Of course , this was a slightly unhelpful five years after the event . 
Just how the sands can shift was further illustrated by his response to the committee chairman 's worry that he was in danger of sanctifying the decisions of a body - the Security Council - which is notoriously susceptible to political and even capricious vetoes . 
` Would not , ' he was asked , ` the international law be an ass if it could not respond in those circumstances ? ' 
Sands replied that humanitarian intervention was a ` gray area , but many people are now beginning to accept that is justifiable . 
In those circumstances , it does not matter what the Security Council does . 
If there is an overriding threat to fundamental human rights on a massive scale then , irrespective of what the Security Council does , one state or a group of states may claim to be free to act . ' 
But in the book , Sands describes Tony Blair 's suggestion that Britain was entitled to override an ` unreasonable ' veto as ` outrageous ' . 
We have set up the rules of the Security Council and we must abide by them , he writes elsewhere . 
Except , apparently , when we must n't . 
This is the problem . 
In 1972 , a neo-genocide by Pakistan in what is now Bangladesh was stopped by the unilateral intervention of India . 
Pol Pot was ousted by the Vietnamese in 1979 , though the UN continued to recognize the Khmer Rouge leadership . 
Idi Amin 's rule in Uganda was brought to an end by Tanzanian intervention . 
None of these appalling situations was resolved by the UN or the international legal system . 
Nor were what Sands admits were the ` gross failures to intervene to prevent genocide and other atrocities ' in Yugoslavia and Rwanda in the 1990s the product of disregarding international law . 
Sands is against what he sees as American and British illegality because ` relying on bad legal arguments destroys the credibility of governments ' , but he does n't recognize that negligence in the face of mass murder , tyranny , the sponsorship of terror or massive abuses of human rights is a much worse destroyer of credibility . 
He observes that such events as Rwanda and the Balkans ` and most bitterly in the spring of 2003 , Iraq , raised serious questions about the adequacy of international rules to protect fundamental human rights ' . 
But why does the overthrow of a vile regime raise questions ` more bitterly ' than the world 's toleration of the murder of more than 800,000 people ? 
Nor can these negligences be somehow rectified by international courts after the event . 
As Peter Maguire has written : ` The UN has spent hundreds of millions of dollars to try nine men in Tanzania , and close to 100,000 remain in prison in Rwanda . 
Has their punishment resurrected the 800,000 hacked to death in 1994 or ended a civil war that now engulfs Congo ? ' 
It is n't just about massacres , either . 
Sands believes that ` the UN 's system of collective security had contained Saddam better than most would have expected ' . 
The unstated price , of course , included sanctions that many reckoned killed far more Iraqis than any war might have done , and the reality that Saddam was allowed to remain in power . 
But he recognizes outcomes can alter the balance of even a legal argument . 
He wrote recently in the Guardian : ` There is little evidence that the world is a safer place , and a great deal more evidence that the Iraq war has provided a major distraction to the challenge posed by global terrorism and al-Qaeda . 
Neither can it be said that the Middle East is more stable or peaceful . ' 
In the book , he describes the invasion as ' a dangerous fiasco ' . 
Meanwhile , the silly , nasty , hubristic old neocons were in disgrace having predicted the spread of democracy . 
This analysis looked a safer bet six months ago than it does now . 
Libya had already got rid of WMD capacity that it admitted possessing , but since then there have been the elections in Iraq , demonstrations against Syrian occupation in Lebanon , elections in Palestine , and suggestions of liberalisation in Saudi Arabia and Egypt . 
Even sceptics are wondering whether something is n't afoot , something caused , in part , by the removal of Saddam . 
In these circumstances , it is an act of epic solipsism to argue this outcome is negated by the affront the action posed to the international legal system , a system that seemed to permit ill-doing and penalize its prevention . 
And if the law prevents good actions and objectively protects bad ones , it needs to be changed . 
Any non-lawyer could tell you that . 
