Turkey calls Nato meeting on warplane downed by Syria Syria said it engaged the aircraft in its airspace `` according to the laws that govern such situations '' Turkey has called a meeting of Nato member states to discuss its response to the shooting down of one of its warplanes by Syrian forces on Friday . 
Ankara has invoked Article 4 of Nato 's charter , under which consultations can be requested when an ally feels their security is threatened , officials say . 
Earlier , Turkey 's foreign minister said the F-4 Phantom was in international airspace when it was shot down . 
Syria has insisted the jet was engaged while it was inside its airspace . 
It has also said no act of hostility was intended , noting that as soon as the military discovered the `` unidentified '' aircraft was Turkish its navy joined efforts to rescue the two crew members . 
But Turkey 's Nato allies condemned Syria for the act . 
`` The United States condemns this brazen and unacceptable act in the strongest possible terms , '' said US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton . 
`` It is yet another reflection of the Syrian authorities ' callous disregard for international norms , human life , and peace and security '' . 
UK Foreign Secretary William Hague said the Syrian military 's actions were `` outrageous '' and underlined `` how far beyond accepted behavior the Syrian regime has put itself '' . 
Jonathan Marcus BBC Diplomatic Correspondent Turkey 's decision to call a Nato meeting to discuss the downing of one of its warplanes by Syrian air defences is a measure of the seriousness of the situation . 
But it also sends a signal that , for now , Ankara is looking for a concerted diplomatic response rather than taking military action of its own . 
Article 4 of the North Atlantic Treaty allows for countries to consult together whenever `` in the opinion of any of them , the territorial integrity , political independence or security of any of the parties is threatened '' . 
Turkey might have sought such consultations at earlier stages in the Syrian crisis , prompted for example by the flood of refugees across its borders or shells fired by Syria landing on its territory . 
Nato 's deliberations will raise the pressure on the Syrian regime , but it is hard to see them having any practical effect in terms of convincing President Bashar al-Assad to relinquish power . 
The government has also issued a diplomatic protest note to Syria . 
Nato spokeswoman Oana Lungescu said the North Atlantic Council , the principal political decision-making body within the military alliance , would meet in Brussels on Tuesday to discuss the incident . 
`` Under article 4 , any ally can request consultations whenever , in the opinion of any of them , their territorial integrity , political independence or security is threatened . '' 
Turkey wants to be sure of the strongest backing once it decides its official response , reports the BBC 's Jonathan Head in Istanbul . 
The government has promised that it will be strong , decisive and legitimate , and that it will share all the information it has with the public . 
Earlier , Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu became the first senior Turkish official to challenge Syria 's account of the downing of the jet . 
After lengthy meetings with military chiefs , he told TRT state television that the unarmed jet had `` momentarily '' entered Syrian airspace by mistake on Friday but had left when it was shot down 15 minutes later . 
`` According to our conclusions , our plane was shot down in international airspace , 13 nautical miles -LRB- 24km -RRB- from Syria , '' he said . 
Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said the aircraft was unarmed , and on a routine training mission According to international law , a country 's airspace extends 12 nautical miles -LRB- 22.2 km -RRB- from its coastline , corresponding with its territorial waters . 
Mr Davutoglu also insisted that the jet had not been on a `` covert mission related to Syria '' but had instead been carrying out a training flight to test Turkey 's radar capabilities . 
He said the plane had not `` shown any hostility '' , been clearly marked as Turkish , and that he did not agree with the Syrian military 's statement that it had not known to whom it belonged . 
The Turkish military said it lost radio contact with the F-4 Phantom at 11:58 -LRB- 08:58 GMT -RRB- on Friday while it was flying over Hatay province , about 90 minutes after it took off from Erhac airbase in the province of Malatya , to the north-west . 
Later , the Syrian military said an `` unidentified air target '' had penetrated Syrian airspace from the west at 11:40 local time -LRB- 08:40 GMT -RRB- , traveling at very low altitude and at high speed . 
It said that in line with the laws prevailing in such cases , Syrian air defences engaged the craft , and scored a direct hit about 1km -LRB- 0.5 nautical miles -RRB- from its coastline . 
It burst into flames , and crashed into the sea at a point 10km -LRB- 5 nautical miles -RRB- from the village of Om al-Tuyour , off the coast of Latakia province , well within Syrian territorial waters , the statement added . 
Relations between Nato-member Turkey and Syria , once close allies , have deteriorated sharply since the uprising against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad began in March 2011 . 
More than 30,000 Syrian refugees have fled the violence across the border into Turkey . 
Alleged flightpath of downed Turkish F-4 Phantom 1 . 
F-4 Phantom takes off from Erhac airbase , Turkey , at approximately 10:28 local time -LRB- 07:28 GMT -RRB- , on 22 June 2 . 
Syria says the jet enters its airspace at 11:40 -LRB- 08:40 GMT -RRB- 3 . 
Turkish military loses contact with the plane at 11:58 -LRB- 08:58 GMT -RRB- , while it is over Hatay province 4 . 
Syria says its air defences engaged aircraft about 1km -LRB- 0.5 nautical miles -RRB- from the coast and that it crashed into the sea 10km -LRB- 5 nautical miles -RRB- west of Om al-Tuyour . 
Turkey says the plane was 24km -LRB- 13 nautical miles -RRB- from Syria , which under international law is considered international airspace Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
