By Jonathan Marcus BBC diplomatic correspondent Turkey is still searching for the missing plane Turkey 's decision to call a Nato meeting to discuss the downing of one of its warplanes by Syrian air defences is a measure of the seriousness of the current situation but it also sends a signal that , for now at least , Ankara is looking for a concerted diplomatic response rather than taking military action of its own . 
At the very least the downing of the Turkish jet risks a dangerous new twist in the Syrian crisis . 
Since the start of the unrest , concern at the escalating loss of life inside Syria has been coupled with fears that the violence could move beyond Syria 's own borders prompting a broader regional conflagration . 
The violence has already seeped into Lebanon but the greater fear was that if the fighting spilled over the border , say into Turkey , or if somehow Hezbollah were to be encouraged by the Syrian regime to lash out at Israel , then this could become an inter-state conflict rather than an insurgency largely confined within the borders of one country . 
The episode of the downing of the jet still raises many questions . 
Where exactly was it when it was engaged by Syrian air defences ? 
Why had it strayed into Syrian air-space for at least a small part of its flight ? 
Why were measures not taken to alert the aircraft 's crew of their error before knocking the plane out of the sky ? 
Was this just a routine training mission as the Turks say , or was the aircraft seeking to monitor what was going on the ground ? 
What 's clear is that Turkey 's concern is shared by other Nato countries . 
Britain 's Foreign Secretary William Hague has expressed his grave concern at the shooting down of the aircraft , which he says , according to the Turkish authorities , had happened `` without warning '' . 
Turkey has now determined to take the matter to Nato , calling for an urgent meeting to discuss the situation . 
Article 4 of the Nato Treaty allows for countries to consult together whenever `` the territorial integrity , political independence or security of any of the Parties is threatened '' . 
Turkey might have sought such consultations at earlier stages in this crisis , prompted for example by the flood of refugees across its borders or shelling from Syria into its territory . 
For now at least Turkey is not seeking to invoke Article 5 of the Nato treaty which would require countries to offer it practical military assistance . 
This is what happened after Iraq 's invasion of Kuwait when Saddam Hussein threatened Turkey . 
Nato warplanes and air defences were , reluctantly it must be said , despatched to bolster its air defences . 
Many will wonder if this episode brings the likelihood of direct external military intervention in Syria any closer . 
The answer is probably no. . 
The situation on the ground is complex and messy and few countries have much appetite to become involved . 
In addition the shooting down of the Turkish jet is a reminder of the capabilities of Syria 's air defences which are far more extensive than those of Libya , which still required a full-scale US air campaign to destroy . 
But what this episode does do is to highlight the escalating dangers as the Syrian crisis continues . 
As the bloodshed grows and the Assad regime becomes more desperate , so the risk of some untoward event happening which widens the circle of conflict grows accordingly . 
Nato 's deliberations will raise the pressure on the Syrian regime but it is hard to see them having any practical effect in terms of convincing Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to relinquish power . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
