Syria crisis : Amnesty alarm at Aleppo ` bombing ' images Scott Edwards from Amnesty International says the images are great cause for concern Any attacks against civilians would be documented so that those responsible could be held accountable , it added . 
Activists said shellfire had killed at least 12 people in Aleppo on Wednesday . 
Among the dead were a woman and her two children in the al-Mashatiya district , the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported . 
Turning Syria 's most populous city into a battlefield will have devastating consequences for civilians '' End Quote Christoph Koettl Amnesty International The UK-based group said at least 225 people were killed across the country on Tuesday , including 129 civilians , 50 rebels and 46 soldiers . 
In a statement published on Wednesday , Amnesty said the new satellite images of Aleppo and its surrounding area showed `` an increased use of heavy weaponry , including near residential areas '' . 
Images from Anadan revealed more than 600 probable artillery impact craters from heavy fighting between Syrian armed forces and armed opposition groups , it added . 
Amnesty said an image from 31 July showed probable artillery impact craters next to what appeared to be a residential housing complex in Anadan . 
`` Turning Syria 's most populous city into a battlefield will have devastating consequences for civilians . 
The atrocities in Syria are mounting already , '' warned Christoph Koettl , emergency response manager for Amnesty International USA . 
Civilians have become caught up in further clashes in the northern city of Aleppo `` The Syrian military and the opposition fighters must both adhere to international humanitarian law , which strictly forbids the use of tactics and weapons that fail to distinguish between military and civilian targets , '' he added . 
Neither the government in Damascus , nor the rebel Free Syrian Army have publicly commented on Amnesty 's claims . 
However , independent experts the BBC has talked to agree with the group 's interpretation of the images , the BBC 's Mike Wooldridge reports . 
On the ground , the army is said to have stepped up its bombardment of opposition-held areas of Aleppo . 
State media reported that troops had clashed with `` terrorists '' in several places , inflicting heavy losses . 
Activists estimate more than 20,000 people have been killed since the uprising against President Bashar al-Assad began in March 2011 . 
Reports of casualties often can not be independently verified . 
Are you in Syria or do you have family there ? 
You can send us your experiences and comments using the form below . 
Send your pictures and videos to yourpics@bbc.co.uk or text them to 61124 -LRB- UK -RRB- or +447624800100 -LRB- International -RRB- . 
If you have a large file you can upload here . 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
