September 30 , 2010 - 1:46 PM | by : Phil Keating Across the Gulf of Mexico , from the Florida panhandle west to the Louisiana bayou , shrimp boats still sit at the dock , unused . 
For those that rely on Gulf Seafood to make money -- fishermen , wholesalers , distributors -- the problem is n't available local product . 
It 's demand that remains down , even though no oil from BP 's Deepwater Horizon disaster has seeped into the Gulf for 2 months . 
Pure and simple , it 's a public perception issue that continues to plague the Gulf seafood industry . 
`` Our sales are down 52 % from what they were at this point last year , '' says Frank Patti , of Pensacola , Florida 's legendary Joe Patti Seafood , named after his father in 1930 . 
For the first time in 80 years of doing business , the signs above the fish on ice at his wholesale business now say exactly where each shrimp , oyster , scallop and tuna was caught . 
`` People did n't ask where it came from , but now , today , they do . 
Ever since the spill , they want to know where it came from , '' says Patti . 
Seafood caught in the Gulf of Mexico is perhaps the most thoroughly tested seafood in the world right now , according to retired Admiral Thad Allen , the federal government 's point man on the BP oil spill . 
He as well as federal scientists have repeatedly proclaimed gulf seafood safe , healthy and delicious . 
But there remains a national squeemishness among many fish eaters , thanks in large part to non-stop tv coverage of the oil spill for weeks on end . 
When the customers do n't want Gulf of Mexico shrimp , for example , then the fishermen , wholesalers and distributors -- who all want to make money -- look elsewhere for product . 
Even if a Mississippi shrimper went out today and brought back a huge haul of safe-to-eat shrimp , he can only sell it for $ 2.50 a pound , down from at least $ 4 a pound before the oil spill . 
For many , that 's not worth the cost to go net them . 
Patti thinks the solution to getting the seafood industry back on normal footing is all about the nation 's memory . 
`` Memory is the worst thing right now . 
I think it 'll come back , '' says Patti . 
`` Will they do it this year ? 
Hopefully next year it will . '' 
FOX News covers the action from all the angles . 
Get constant updates from our in-the-field reporters and producers and read stories you 'll only see here . 
