MISRATA , Libya | Mon Jul 18 , 2011 6:34 pm EDT MISRATA , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Rebel forces have routed most of Muammar Gaddafi 's troops in the Libyan oil town of Brega in the biggest boost of their campaign in weeks , spokesmen said on Monday . 
The government denied the claim . 
More than 40 people on both sides were reported killed in fighting over the city since late last week . 
The rebels have encircled Brega , an oil export terminal with a refinery which for months marked the eastern limit of Gaddafi 's control , said spokesman Shamsiddin Abdulmolah . 
But its streets were strewn with landmines , making it hard to secure full control of the area . 
`` The main body -LRB- of Gaddafi 's forces -RRB- retreated to Ras Lanuf , '' which lies to the west , he said by telephone from the eastern rebel stronghold of Benghazi . 
However , government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim said that , `` our brave soldiers and volunteer soldiers are in Brega in their thousands and control it completely . '' 
`` NATO and the rebels have tried to attack Brega for the last five days , '' he told foreign journalists in the capital Tripoli . 
`` The only way for them to control Brega is to attack it with nuclear bombs . '' 
He said the government had lost 30 soldiers over five days of fighting , but rebels had lost many times more . 
Abdulmolah said 12 rebels were killed and some 300 wounded on Saturday and Sunday . 
Most rebel forces were now past Brega and heading west toward the towns of Bishr and Ugayla , he said . 
While rebel fighters have been making gains in eastern and western Libya in recent days , Russia criticized the United States and other countries for recognizing the rebel leadership as the legitimate government of Libya , saying they were taking sides in the insurgents ' five-month-old war to oust Gaddafi . 
`` Those who declare recognition stand fully on the side of one political force in a civil war , '' Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov told reporters in Moscow . 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced U.S. recognition of the rebels on Friday , a major diplomatic step that could unblock billions of dollars in frozen Libyan funds . 
Russia and China have taken a softer line toward Libyan leader Gaddafi , and neither attended an international meeting on the conflict in Turkey on Friday . 
Brega , about 750 km -LRB- 465 miles -RRB- east of Tripoli , has a strategic oil terminal . 
The attack could signal a new rebel push westwards after weeks of stalemate . 
It has changed hands several times in the back-and-forth fighting along Libya 's Mediterranean coast since the rebellion began in February . 
Libyan TV , in a bid to counter the rebel claims , showed what it said was footage taken on Monday in Brega . 
Students were shown taking an exam , and there were pictures of the port , oil terminal and a worker at a natural gas plant in the city . 
Rebels say taking Brega will this time be a tipping point in the conflict on the eastern front . 
`` It is going to take the revolutionaries at least 10 days to claim full control of Brega , '' said rebel spokesman Abdelsalam in Misrata . 
Gaddafi is refusing to step down despite the five-month-old rebellion against his rule , a campaign of NATO air strikes , and the defections of members of his inner circle . 
The slow progress of the rebel military campaign has caused strains within NATO , some member states pressing for a negotiated solution to hasten the end of a conflict some thought would last only a few weeks . 
Reports have circulated that Gaddafi is seeking a negotiated way out of the crisis , but on Saturday he called the rebels worthless traitors and rejected the idea he was about to leave the country . 
NATO said it had on Monday struck an antenna radar system , which was being used for military purposes at Tripoli 's main airport . 
Naji Daw , acting director of civil aviation at the airport , told journalists the target had purely civilian use . 
NATO warplanes have also been attacking pro-Gaddafi forces near Brega . 
The alliance said targets hit on Friday included one tank , five armored fighting vehicles and two rocket launchers . 
On another front , in the Western Mountains region southwest of Tripoli , pro-Gaddafi forces exchanged artillery fire on Sunday with rebels in the village of Al-Qawalish , a rebel fighter manning a checkpoint there told Reuters . 
A rebel spokesman in the regional town of Zintan said rebels had repelled a bid by Gaddafi troops to enter the town . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Coordination of water tower : 30 28 ' 42.57 ? 
N 19 43 ' 25.69 ? 
E Well , if Cameron falls in the UK , as so many are predicting now , Britain is very likely to withdraw from the offensive on Libya !! And so , France will go to the negotiating table and the war will be over . 
I pray i 'm right , for the sake of Libya ! 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
