MOSCOW | Mon Jul 18 , 2011 7:12 am EDT MOSCOW -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Russia criticised on Monday the United States and other countries that have recognized the rebel National Transitional Council as Libya 's legitimate government , saying they were taking sides in the civil war . 
Setting Russia apart from the West , Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said nations that recognized the rebel National Transition Council -LRB- TNC -RRB- were pursuing a `` policy of isolation '' he suggested could undermine efforts to end the five-month war . 
`` Those who declare such recognition stand fully on the side of one political force in a civil war , '' Lavrov said . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced the recognition at a meeting in Turkey on Friday of an international contact group on Libya , which is seeking a political solution that would remove Muammar Gaddafi from power . 
The major diplomatic step could unblock billions of dollars in frozen Libyan funds . 
Russia , which in the past has warned the contact group not to try to eclipse the authority of the U.N. Security Council , was invited to the meeting for the first time along with China , but both decided not to get involved . 
Russia has also said Gaddafi must go , but has criticised the Western bombing campaign and urged talks between rebels and the government . 
Lavrov suggested that recognizing the rebel council as Libya 's sole legitimate government would not help . 
`` Supporters of such a decision are supporters of a policy of isolation , in this case the isolation of those forces that represent Tripoli , '' said Lavrov , adding that Moscow is in contact with both Tripoli and the rebels . 
`` We ... reject isolation as a method of solving problems and support inclusion , '' Lavrov said . 
He said the sides should `` show responsibility for the fate of the people and the country and sit at the negotiating table '' for a `` focused , very concrete dialogue about the conditions under which transitional structures could be formed . '' 
Those structures would prepare for reforms , legislative changes and `` free and democratic elections , '' he said . 
Russia , which has veto power and a permanent U.N. Security Council member , abstained from voting on the March resolution that authorised the Western force in Libya but has accused the NATO nations involved of overstepping their mandate . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
