Trial to parse Gulf spill blame set for Feb 2012 NEW YORK | Wed Oct 6 , 2010 7:20 pm EDT NEW YORK Oct 6 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The judge overseeing most of the legal cases stemming from the Gulf oil spill ordered an eight-week trial starting Feb. 27 , 2012 , to parse out blame among BP Plc -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- , Transocean Ltd -LRB- RIG . 
N -RRB- and other defendants , according to court documents . 
The start date for the non-jury trial , which is likely to be a centerpiece of the litigation , is a delay of four months from what the judge last month indicated was acceptable start date . 
The lawsuits , which have been consolidated in a federal court in New Orleans , stem from the April explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig , which killed 11 workers and set of the worst spill in U.S. history . 
The 2012 trial will address who is to blame for the spill , and what portion of blame they will bare . 
The trial will not assess damages . 
The trial will address whether Transocean can limit its liability under admiralty law to the value of the sunken oil rig , or about $ 25 million . 
In setting the date , the judge cited the need to complete testing on the blow-out preventer and the time it will gather evidence relating to the device , which is a key part of understanding the explosion . 
At a hearing in September , lawyers representing injured workers and families bringing wrongful death claims pushed for a much quicker schedule for starting the trial . 
Those lawsuits can not go to a jury trial to assess damages until a court has determined the level of Transocean 's liability , said Jeffrey Breit , a Virginia lawyer who has brought numerous lawsuits has a result of the spill . 
At a September hearing , the judge overseeing the cases , Carl Barbier , suggested the personal injury cases and wrongful death claims were good candidates for settlement . 
The case in U.S. District Court , Eastern District of Louisiana is In re Oil Spill by the Oil Rig `` Deepwater Horizon '' in the Gulf of Mexico April 20 , 2010 , No. 10-MDL-2179 . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Hals ; Editing by Lisa Shumaker -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
