White House relied too much on BP , blocked spill info WASHINGTON | Wed Oct 6 , 2010 5:15 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Obama administration was over-optimistic about BP 's ability to handle the oil spill after the company 's Gulf well exploded in April and blocked government spill estimates that might have prompted quicker action , an investigative panel said on Wednesday . 
The revelations from the National Oil Spill Commission , whose members were appointed by President Barack Obama , could be embarrassing as Obama 's Democratic Party struggles to retain control of the U.S. Congress in the elections on November 2 . 
The commission said that after the rig in the Gulf of Mexico exploded on April 20 , killing 11 workers , the government was too optimistic about the British oil company 's ability to bring the ruptured well under control . 
`` For the first ten days of the spill , it appears that a sense of over-optimism affected responders . 
Responders almost uniformly noted that , while they understood that they were facing a major spill , they believed that BP would get the well under control , '' the commission wrote . 
It said : `` Though some of the command structure was put in place very quickly , in other respects the mobilization of resources to combat the spill seemed to lag . '' 
Large sections of the Gulf of Mexico were closed to fishing , hundreds of miles of shoreline were polluted and the coastal economy , including tourism and fisheries , was disrupted before the well was capped on July 15 after the worst offshore oil leak in U.S. history . 
The commission also criticized the White House for blocking early worst case estimates of the oil spill , which it said may have affected how fast resources were assembled to fight it . 
The panel said the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- wanted to release some of its worst-case spill models on the accident in late April or early May . 
But the White House Office of Management and Budget -LRB- OMB -RRB- blocked the move to make the information public . 
The White House decision to block the estimates came as BP was being criticized for failing to provide accurate information on the amount of oil that was leaking . 
In a joint statement , the directors of OMB and NOAA did not deny that NOAA 's early spill estimate was blocked . 
Instead , they said NOAA 's early analysis was incomplete because it did not take into account the measures to control the oil , like using floating booms , skimming the oil and burning it at sea . 
However , those measures would not have stopped the oil from spewing out of BP 's broken well . 
The agency heads noted that other senior government officials told the public in early May what the worst-case flow rate could be . 
Commission staff said it established that the possibility of releasing the worst-case discharge figures was at least discussed at the government 's Unified Command level that oversaw efforts to plug the well and clean up the oil . 
The panel said in the end government teams and independent scientists came up with the same approximate figure on the total amount of oil that spilled from the well -- roughly 5 million barrels of oil leaked , with 4.2 million barrels pouring into Gulf waters and the rest being recovered . 
However , commission staff questioned comments made by Carol Browner , the White House 's energy and climate change director , after the well was plugged that `` more than three-quarters of the oil is gone . '' 
The panel said about 40 percent of the oil that spilled and was labeled as `` dissolved '' and `` dispersed '' was potentially being biodegraded , but was not `` gone . '' 
`` Dispersed or dissolved oil may still be present in the water , and even evaporated oil remains in the atmosphere for a short time , '' the commission said . 
The panel also said the government went overboard in placing boom to stop the oil , especially in Louisiana , where directions went out to `` keep the parishes happy . '' 
As a result boom was placed everywhere , including in passes where fast tidal currents made it ineffective , and in places where it was unlikely to encounter any oil . 
Boom was also put in environmentally sensitive areas such as marshes , where severe storms blew it onto delicate grasses and habitat . 
`` The boom wars never reached a resolution . 
In many instances , responders knew that in deploying boom they were responding to the politics of the spill rather than the spill itself , '' the commission said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Doggett ; Editing by Russell Blinch and David Storey -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Otherwise it is aka The Propaganda Ministry , a dangerous path for any democracy to embark on . 
So ... wait ... the `` most transparent White House in history '' , as they call themselves , wanted to keep information from people ? 
I wonder what else they kept from us ? 
Oh , well the healthcare bill 's real effects for one I guess ... The Obama administration handled the oil spill in a completely and totally incompetent and inept manner ! 
So what else is new ? 
Have you seen the UNEMPLOYMENT rate , or the national debt lately ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
