BP estimates oil spill up to 100,000 barrels per day in document BURAS , Louisiana | Sun Jun 20 , 2010 7:19 pm EDT BURAS , Louisiana -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc estimates that a worst-case scenario rate for the Gulf of Mexico oil spill could be about 100,000 barrels of oil per day , according to an internal company document released Sunday by a senior U.S. congressional Democrat . 
Its estimate of up to 100,000 barrels -LRB- 4.2 million gallons\/15 .9 million liters -RRB- of oil per day is far higher than the current U.S. government estimate of up to 60,000 barrels -LRB- 2.5 million gallons\/9 .5 million liters -RRB- gushing daily from the ruptured offshore well into the sea . 
BP spokesman Toby Odone said the document appeared to be genuine but the estimate applied only to a situation in which a key piece of equipment called a blowout preventer is removed . 
`` Since there are no plans to remove the blowout preventer , the number is irrelevant , '' he said . 
The British energy giant , still struggling to stop a leak that began on April 20 and is causing an economic and environmental disaster along the U.S. Gulf Coast , is planning to raise $ 50 billion to cover the cost of the largest oil spill in U.S. history , London 's Sunday Times reported . 
The oil spill is now in its 62nd day and has dealt a blow to fishing and tourism industries across four Gulf states , soiling coastlines that are a playground for tourists and vital habitat for wildlife . 
The amount of oil spurting from the well has been a matter of considerable controversy in the past two months , with critics saying BP consistently understated the flow rate . 
The internal BP document , which is undated , was released by U.S. Representative Ed Markey , chairman of a subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee . 
The document appears to estimate the highest potential flow of oil if key components of the well fail . 
It does not indicate that the 100,000 barrels per day is BP 's estimate of the actual amount gushing from the ruptured Gulf of Mexico well . 
`` Right from the beginning , BP was either lying or grossly incompetent , '' Markey told NBC 's `` Meet the Press . '' 
`` First they said it was only 1,000 barrels , then they said it was 5,000 barrels . '' 
But BP 's Odone said , `` I do n't think there 's been any underestimating . 
We 've always said we would deal with whatever volume of oil was being spilled and that 's exactly what we 're doing . '' 
The document was posted on the Internet here London 's Sunday Times , without citing any sources , said BP planned to raise $ 10 billion from a bond sale , $ 20 billion from banks and $ 20 billion from asset sales over the next two years to cover the cost of the spill . 
BP said last week it would suspend dividend payments to its shareholders and increase the pace of asset sales to $ 10 billion this year to offset liabilities from the spill , which began after an explosion on an offshore rig that killed 11 workers . 
The Financial Times reported BP is considering doubling the $ 10 billion asset sale program as part of a push to strengthen the company 's liquidity as it comes under financial pressure . 
BP said 21,040 barrels of oil -LRB- 883,680 gallons\/3 .34 million liters -RRB- -RRB- leaking from the well was collected by its siphoning systems Saturday . 
A large amount of oil continues to leak into the sea from the ruptured well a mile below the ocean surface despite the BP containment systems . 
Kenneth Feinberg , the independent administrator appointed to run the $ 20 billion fund set up by BP to compensate victims for financial losses due to the oil spill , said he would make sure that `` every eligible , legitimate claim is paid and paid quickly . '' 
Appearing on NBC 's `` Meet the Press , '' Feinberg rejected the complaint of a senior Republican congressman , Joe Barton , who said last week that the fund set up by BP under pressure from President Barack Obama amounted to a government `` shakedown . '' 
`` I do n't think it helps to politicize this program , '' said Feinberg , an arbitration lawyer who dispensed hundreds of millions of dollars to victims of the September 11 , 2001 attacks . 
`` This a voluntary program . 
No one is compelled to come into this fund . '' 
Despite assurances of swift compensation , Louisiana Gulf residents remained skeptical . 
`` Every time they say there 's a fund for fisherman , we wait years and years , '' said Tal Plork , whose fisherman husband , Phan , faced long waits for aid after two hurricanes rampaged across the Gulf region in 2008 . 
`` It was like that for Gustav and Ike . 
Hopefully now they will go faster . '' 
Plork , 42 , has had to go to work since the oil leak began because her husband 's fishing income has dried up . 
She works at a cafeteria at the BP camp in Venice , Louisiana , and has been supporting her five children mainly on credit cards . 
Mississippi Governor Haley Barbour , also appearing on `` Meet the Press , '' said he was anxious to see the well capped , the spill cleaned up and BP cover the entire cost . 
`` Nothing is satisfactory until the well is shut in . 
When the well is capped , then clean up the oil , and then BP pays the bills . 
Until all of that is done , nothing is satisfactory , '' said Barbour , a Republican . 
Barbour said he thought the U.S. federal government `` has done more right than wrong '' in its handling of the disaster . 
After falling 6.8 percent last week , BP 's shares are down 26 percent so far in June , their worst month since the October 1987 market crash . 
Despite the battering to its reputation and stock stemming from the disaster , hedge fund T2 Partners said it likes shares in the British oil firm , according to a Barron 's article published Sunday . 
In a column titled `` Other Voices , '' T2 's managing partners said their reasons for recently taking a new position in BP are that it is `` extraordinarily cheap , '' and that the firm is `` highly likely '' to be able to cover clean-up , damages , fines and lawsuits relating to the disaster . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Nobody thought it was insensitive of Obama to vacation in an $ 8m house after his inauguration , when so many people lived in their car because of the great recession . 
I 'm sure , the people in Iraq and Afghanistan would also like to get their life back after the US invasions for no more real purpose than : oil . 
20 Billion $ for the oil clean up ? 
It 's for the U.S. Government to embezzle . 
Very little of that money will make it to the Gulf victims . 
Do you know who is going to pay for the oil clean up ? 
Yep , We will probably pay a couple of bucks per a gallon more at the pump in a year or two . 
Most of that 20 billion dollars will end up in some off shore bank and then in the pockets of who knows who ????????? This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
