Syrian president says security services made mistakes Mr Assad said 4,000 personnel would receive training `` to prevent these excesses '' being repeated Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has said the authorities have made some mistakes in their handling of anti-government protests since mid-March . 
Mr Assad told a group of dignitaries that most of the blame lay with poorly trained members of the security services , the al-Watan newspaper said . 
But he said Syria had now `` overcome the crisis '' and it was coming to an end . 
The admission came as the BBC received new reports of attacks on civilians in a town near the border with Lebanon . 
Syrian refugees in Lebanon told the BBC they had fled scenes of great violence in the town of Tal Kalakh , which has been under siege by the army for several days . 
Activists say at least 27 people have been killed . 
In Syria itself , a general strike called by an influential anti-government website , Syrian Revolution 2011 , appears to have had little impact . 
Residents of the capital said no-one would dare answer the call . 
They were raping women , then killing them , and destroying their homes '' End Quote Resident of Tal Kalakh The Syrian leader told a delegation from the southern Damascus district of Midan that his security services had made mistakes handling protests , al-Watan reported on Wednesday . 
He attributed the shortcomings to a lack of experience with such situations , which he said would normally be the police 's responsibility . 
One delegate said Mr Assad had told them that 4,000 personnel would receive training `` to prevent these excesses '' being repeated . 
`` The role of the security services is to gather information , analyze it and hand it over to the proper authorities , '' the president said . 
The report also said Mr Assad `` gave assurances that Syria had overcome the crisis '' and that `` events were coming to an end '' . 
Despite the comments , thousands of Syrian civilians , mostly women and children , are continuing to flee the violence in Tal Kalakh , a town west of the city of Homs and not far from the northern Lebanese border . 
The refugees told the BBC 's Owen Bennett-Jones that the Syrian army had come with tanks and armed civilians , and fired on their homes . 
One woman described how a relative was killed when she fled . 
Syrian refugees told the BBC of their experiences of the government crackdown Having started her escape , she turned back because she decided she wanted to bring her cow with her . 
She was shot in the head . 
A man added : `` They were raping women , then killing them , and destroying their homes . 
They took everything from their houses , and then destroyed them . '' 
Officials have told the state news agency , Sana , that the violence is being carried out by armed gangs who have crossed into Syria from Lebanon . 
But the refugees blamed the Syrian army and said they had no idea when they would be able to go back to their homes . 
They are now staying with local families and receiving food and medicines from charities . 
A resident of Tal Kalakh told the Reuters news agency on Wednesday that tanks were continuing to shell the town , and that soldiers were storming houses looking for protesters and making many arrests . 
Water and electricity supplies and telephone lines had been cut , he said . 
Activists later told the AFP news agency that at least eight people had been killed on Wednesday . 
Meanwhile , the Swiss government has said it is imposing sanctions on Syria because of the violent repression of protesters . 
It is restricting arms sales , freezing assets and instigating travel bans for 13 senior officials named by the EU on 9 May . 
Activists say more than 850 people have been killed and thousands arrested in the crackdown launched to quell dissent two months ' ago . 
The US said on Tuesday that nearly 1,000 might have died . 
The authorities blame most of the violence on `` armed criminal gangs '' , saying they have killed more than 120 soldiers and police . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
