'' This Story : Read + | Watch + | Talk + | REYKJAVIK , Iceland , Oct. 9 -- The bad news just keeps coming for Icelanders , who in the last week have seen the international financial empire that they built on this remote North Atlantic island start to crumble , piece by piece . 
On Thursday came the worst shock so far : The government seized the country 's largest bank , completing the emergency takeover of virtually the entire financial system . 
Iceland might be called the first national casualty of the global financial tumult . 
Its currency , the krona , is in free fall . 
Foreign exchange markets are effectively closed -- for Icelanders who need to travel abroad , dollars or euros are nowhere to be found . 
The stock market has shut down until next week . 
The government has been placed in the role of international beggar , asking Nordic neighbors , the Russians and perhaps the International Monetary Fund for emergency loans . 
For an estimated 100,000 Icelanders -- a third of the population -- who owned shares in the nation 's three major banks , savings have been wiped out in a single , tumultuous week by uncontrollable events thousands of miles away . 
`` What can we do ? 
This is not a simple matter -- this is a national tragedy , '' said Vilhjalmur Bjarnason , a professor of business at the University of Iceland . 
He owned stock in all three banks . 
`` I was planning to use this money for my daughters , who are handicapped , '' Bjarnason said . '' 
... The fundamental question is , how can this happen in a civilized society ? '' 
In the past decade , banking 's rapid expansion helped transform this country founded by 9th-century Vikings into a kind of Switzerland of the North Atlantic . 
Families in Britain , Norway and the Netherlands sent their savings here . 
Living standards rose , and Reykjavik became a costly playground for Europe 's wealthy . 
`` The wealth trickled back to many places , '' said Bjarni Brynjolfsson , editor of the online magazine Iceland Review . 
`` To the arts , to musicians who played at the parties , to the caterers , to the restaurants , to the whole of society ... Everything seemed fine . '' 
The banking wealth also bought companies around Europe , including the Hamleys toy-shop chain in London , a British soccer team , property in the Netherlands . 
Until the spectacular collapse this week , the three banks ' assets were more than 10 times the economy of this longtime fishing outpost of 310,000 people . 
Economists and business leaders here say that the institutions had been fundamentally strong -- well financed , lots of liquidity and a history of never defaulting on loans . 
But in the past year , emerging economic troubles overseas started to pressure them and the country 's currency . 
Last week , when the smallest of the three , Glitnir , went for a routine refinancing from a German bank , it confronted the world 's frozen credit markets : sorry , no loan . 
The system began to unravel . 
The government announced last week that it was in effect nationalizing Glitnir -- Prime Minister Geir Haarde prefers the phrase `` take over . '' 
The move got people asking questions about the exposure of the country 's two other major banks . 
On Monday , Iceland 's currency dropped rapidly , and the government gave itself broad new emergency powers to intervene in all the banks ' affairs and replace their boards . 
The second-largest bank , Landsbanki , fell to government control the next day . 
Just when it seemed the worst was over , Icelanders awakened Thursday to the news that the largest bank , Kaupthing , had also been seized . 
Multimedia reports on the struggle for equality around the globe . 
