Detroit 's Ills Symptomatic Of a Manufacturing Plague Ford Motor 's stock price fell 21 percent over concerns that the nation 's economic crisis will devastate auto sales . 
-LRB- By Bill Pugliano -- Getty Images -RRB- DETROIT -- First it was the outsourcing of components , and then vehicle assembly . 
Then gasoline prices shot up , slashing demand for trucks and sport-utility vehicles . 
Now , just when things seemed as if they could not get any worse here , the credit crunch and the subsequent stock market meltdown have dealt powerful new blows to the nation 's already reeling car industry . 
Concern that tightening credit and an overall economic downturn will lead fewer people to buy new cars sent General Motors ' stock price plunging 31 percent Thursday to close at $ 4.76 , the lowest since 1950 . 
Ford Motor fell 21 percent , closing at $ 2.08 . 
Thursday 's automobile stock sell-offs sparked new concern among economists and investors that the U.S. manufacturing sector , which had been slowly constricting , may be squeezed to an unimagined degree by the turmoil on Wall Street , posing a serious new economic threat at a time when the nation is already struggling with a financial sector collapse . 
Nowhere is the pain more evident than in Michigan . 
Falling sales of vehicles and heavy equipment have sent ripples through the manufacturing food chain . 
The state 's unemployment rate is now 9 percent , the highest in the nation . 
One in 16 home mortgages is `` seriously delinquent , '' trailing only Florida and Nevada . 
`` It 's devastating , '' said Gov. Jennifer Granholm -LRB- D -RRB- , who added that Michigan has lost nearly 400,000 manufacturing jobs since 2000 . 
`` Companies ... that are already slammed by globalization are being slammed by the credit crunch . '' 
GM 's market capitalization now stands at $ 2.69 billion . 
The day after the 1929 stock market crash , the company was worth seven times as much in inflation-adjusted dollars , according to market historian Bryan Taylor of Global Financial Data . 
The current crisis is worsening a long-term trend for the U.S. auto industry . 
Over the past eight years , Michigan has lost 47 percent of its vehicle manufacturing jobs and 27 percent of other manufacturing jobs , according to a government analysis . 
Nationally , the losses have been about 21 percent in each category . 
In an economic downturn , automobile companies are often the first to feel the pinch as consumers postpone expensive purchases . 
Industry sales dropped last month to levels not seen in almost 20 years . 
Ford fell 34.5 percent compared with the previous September ; Chrysler , 32.8 percent ; and General Motors , 15.6 percent . 
Even Toyota , known for fuel efficiency , saw sales drop by 32.3 percent . 
Not since 1993 had automakers sold fewer than 1 million cars in a single month . 
Yet with fear ruling the marketplace and banks reluctant to lend money even to borrowers with strong credit , analysts believe next year 's numbers are likely to be as bad . 
That means lower revenue for automakers and less money to spend on needed innovation . 
It means fewer jobs beyond the factory gate . 
According to David E. Cole , a researcher in Ann Arbor , Mich. , every auto plant job generates nine jobs among suppliers and the surrounding community -- four times the multiplier of a typical Wall Street slot . 
Ford senior economist Emily Kolinski Morris , who likened an economy without credit to an engine without oil , said : `` The dire warnings are not terribly overstated . '' 
Inside a former Cadillac factory in Detroit , Frank Venegas runs Ideal Group , an array of businesses , some closely connected to the auto industry . 
He is accustomed to doing $ 100 million worth of annual construction work for GM , but he expects to see fewer construction cranes and is already shipping fewer steel beams for private homes . 
