Making Sense of the Global Financial Crisis Pedestrians are reflected on an electric market board in Tokyo showing the Japanese stock 's 974.12-point fall in Tokyo , Friday , Oct. 10 , 2008 . 
Japan 's key stock index plunged a stunning 9.6 percent Friday to close out its worst week in history as frantic investors worried about a global recession dumped stocks after huge losses on Wall Street . 
The benchmark Nikkei 225 index tumbled 881.06 points to 8,276.43 , its lowest since May 2003 . 
It was its biggest one-day percentage loss since the stock market crash of October 1987 . 
-LRB- AP Photo\/Katsumi Kasahara -RRB- -LRB- Katsumi Kasahara - AP -RRB- Thoughts , comments , suggestions or criticisms about The Post 's Live Q&A s ? 
Send us an e-mail . 
Friday , October 10 , 2008 ; 12:00 PM U.S. stocks continued a relentless sell off today as fears of global recession continue to overtake government efforts to address the financial crisis . 
The market is headed toward eight days of losses as it faces deepening fears about the financial crisis and its spillover to other parts of the economy . 
Traders have consistently shrugged off drastic government efforts to address the problem , from a global rate cut to plans to buy toxic mortgage debt . 
The Bush administration is now hammering out the final details of a plan that would allow the government to inject cash into banks in exchange for ownership stakes . 
Olivier Garret , economist and CEO at Casey Research , an investments firm , was online Friday , Oct. 10 , at Noon ET to discuss current economic conditions and address the `` unsettling fear , '' as President Bush described it this morning at the White House , about individuals ' and the world 's economic well-being . 
I do n't get it : So , if we are n't supposed to panic , why are people selling off their stocks like crazy ? 
Do n't they understand that continues the vicious cycle going on ? 
Maryland : Good Afternoon . 
As someone who is watching his 401k deplete , What is really the blame ? 
Free market capitalism , deregulation or just plain greed from the CEO 's ? 
This swap credit fiasco is killing many American retirement plans . 
Olivier Garret : I believe that our own government making credit easy for people that should never have afforded to buy houses was a start . 
Low interest rates , incentive for Fannie and Freddie to loan to everyone . 
Poor regulation of investment banking allowing banks to leverage 30 to one Kenosha , Wisc. : Thanks for taking the time to do this chat . 
I 've thought the market has been overvalued for a while so I 've been keeping most of my money in CDs the past few years . 
Now that stocks seem more reasonably priced , I am considering starting to move some money into stocks . 
Do you think we 've hit bottom or do you think there is more downside ? 
Ellicott City , Md. : There must be huge amounts of cash sitting out the market right now . 
In Treasuries yielding 0 percent ? 
When it comes back -LRB- and it will , right ? -RRB- 
the market might bounce back as fast as it 's dropped , or am I dreaming ? 
Boston , Mass. : Olivier , I just looked at Casey Research and it looks like you guys are big fans of gold . 
Do you suggest buying gold right now , and why ? 
What percentage of portfolio ? 
How can I buy gold ? 
N.Y. Capitalist : OK . 
I 'm buying gold . 
My question : Numismatic or just plain old bullion ? 
Which is the better investment ? 
Washington , D.C. : When you say `` cash , '' what precisely do you mean ? 
Dollar bills under the mattress ? 
Denver , Colo. : What if your retirement mutual fund companies do n't have gold as an investment option ? 
Then where do you go ? 
Do you move all your diversified investments to a companies that do have gold ? 
Washington , D.C. : You seriously think gold is a good investment while prices are high ? 
Would n't one lose their shirt , once the gold bubble bursts ? 
We are a hard-working couple that was priced out of the housing boom -LRB- we always believed in trying to save 20 percent for the purchase -RRB- . 
At this time , I only hear all the economists and academicians talk of reducing the loan amounts for the people that had no idea of the loans they were getting into . 
Why are n't any economists trying talk people into 50\/60-year mortgages rather than reducing the loan -- As a hard-working person and taxpayer I understand that money does not grow on trees -- when a person realizes they will be working for the rest of their lives for a massive loan they took out -- fiscal responsibility will set in . 
Can you please explain the challenges\/pitfalls of this approach ` vs. ' continued fiscal irresponsibility being rewarded as an economist ? 
Portland , Ore. : Are foreign investments\/currencies safer than U.S. right now ? 
If so , what country ? 
: Thanks for taking my question . 
What about the suggestion by the Feds that at least some of the $ 800 billion will be recouped ? 
A recent article claims that numerous loopholes are present -LRB- to be expected with so little time given to policy analysis -RRB- which would minimize or prevent that . 
An example they provide is that , although if mortgage holders later sell their homes for a profit , that profit reverts to the federal government\/taxpayers , there 's a de minimus provision for $ 100 million which allows for banks to package the mortgage profits for less than that -LRB- say $ 99 mill -RRB- , and the payback provision is n't triggered , so the feds\/taxpayers get nothing . 
Is that the case ? 
And given a few more such loopholes , have we just sent hundreds of billion dollars down a bottomless pit ? 
And is that what the markets are responding to ? 
Portland , Ore. : For long-term investors who do n't have to sell their house right now or are n't retirement age for quite a few years , what is the best way to ride out this storm ? 
Austin , Tex. : If you expect the dollar to collapse , why has it been strengthening so much over the last few days ? 
Retirement : I have to make a SEP IRA contribution before the 15th . 
Needless to say , I 'm not wanting to put the money into a stock fund . 
Should I open a new fund -- a tax-free money market or bond fund , for this contribution ? 
Richmond , Va. : As a recent college graduate with about $ 20k in loans I am starting to worry that with inflation and everything I am going to end up paying these loans back until I 'm 100 . 
Is there anything I can do to help minimize the hit on my bank account ? 
Eugene , Ore : If the Fed drops its interest to 0 percent , does that affect anything ; if the Fed was always at 0 percent interest does that reduce\/stop inflation ? 
Editor 's Note : washingtonpost.com moderators retain editorial control over Discussions and choose the most relevant questions for guests and hosts ; guests and hosts can decline to answer questions . 
washingtonpost.com is not responsible for any content posted by third parties . '' 
The Washington Post editorial staff was not involved in the moderation . 
