Friday 11 June 2010 22.16 BST David Cameron is caught in the middle of the row over the Gulf oil spill . 
Photograph : Andrew Yates\/AP The government moved to quell suggestions of indifference to the BP oil disaster today when both David Cameron and the chancellor , George Osborne , spoke to BP 's chairman , Carl-Henric Svanberg , urging all sides to find a constructive solution to the environmental crisis . 
Cameron and Osborne are involved in a delicate balancing act , facing calls to stand up to Barack Obama 's criticisms of BP and the anti-British sentiment on which the US president seems to be trading . 
At the same time , Cameron can not afford to wreck the so-called special relationship by being seen to attack Obama on an issue that is causing the president political trouble . 
After meeting the BP chairman in Downing Street , Osborne said : `` We are all concerned about the human and environmental impact and as the prime minister has said , we understand the concerns of the US administration . 
`` The prime minister is also clear that we need constructive solutions and that we remember the economic value BP brings to people in Britain and America . '' 
Cameron will speak to Obama tomorrow in a long arranged conversation , but there has been alarm in Tory circles after it emerged that only the climate change secretary , Chris Huhne , had been in touch with the US administration to discuss the crisis . 
Cameron told Svanberg it was in everyone 's interest for the company to remain financially strong and stable . 
BP has assured the government it is planning to suspend the planned # 10bn dividend next week , and start the next phase of its clean-up campaign next week . 
The conversation with the BP chairman took place after Cameron returned from Afghanistan . 
Number 10 said in a statement : `` The prime minister explained that he was frustrated and concerned about the environmental damage caused by the leak , but made clear his view that BP is an economically important company in the UK , US and other countries . 
He said it is in everyone 's interests that BP continues to be a financially strong and stable company . 
Mr Svanberg made clear that BP will continue to do all that it can to stop the oil spill , clean up the damage and meet all legitimate claims for compensation . '' 
Outside Number 10 , Svanberg said : `` I think we have done everything we can to try to fill the well and we have said we would do everything expected from us in cleaning up the beach , taking care of all the claims and learn from this and make deep-sea drilling an even safer place . '' 
BP directors will hold a special board meeting on Monday to decide whether to cut the dividend or take some other kind of initiative as a `` peace offering '' to Barack Obama before a meeting at the White House on Wednesday . 
The public position of the oil group remains that no decision is likely on payouts to shareholders until much nearer July 27 , when the half-yearly financial figures and the forthcoming dividend policy must be given . 
But privately there is increasing acceptance that the political heat is so intense that BP could need to make some kind of gesture , and earlier rather than later . 
Options being considered include putting the dividend into an escrow or trust fund until the full scale of the spill liabilities are known . 
The BP board meeting will include the chief executive , Tony Hayward , in Houston and other members via teleconferencing from different parts of the world . 
A common line will be hammered out which will serve as a strategy position that Svanberg and Hayward will be able to present to Obama in Washington 48 hours later . 
But sources said BP would be in `` listening mode '' when its executives meet Obama in what is expected to be a difficult encounter , given that the US president has made personal attacks on Hayward and the company which have unnerved the financial markets and sent the BP share price spiralling downwards . 
Earlier , the deputy prime minister , Nick Clegg , warned that a row between Britain and the United States over the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico risked turning into a futile and destructive bout of `` megaphone diplomacy '' . 
Clegg told an audience in Madrid : `` I do n't frankly think we are going to reach a solution to stop the release of oil into the ocean any quicker by allowing this to spiral into a tit-for-tat political and diplomatic spat . '' 
Anger is mounting in the City that Obama has singled out BP rather than US contractors such as Halliburton for criticism . 
There is also concern that Cameron has not defended the British company more robustly . 
The mayor of London , Boris Johnson , accused the Obama administration of indulging in `` anti-British rhetoric '' . 
He told the BBC that huge numbers of British pensioners , whose retirement funds invest in BP , were losing money because of the continued attacks on the company . 
New figures show that twice as much oil is spewing into the ocean than earlier estimates had suggested . 
A version appeared on p8 of the Main section section of the Guardian on Scientists this week doubled the official estimate of the size of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , with more than 40,000 barrels of oil feared to be leaking from the seabed every day Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
