Deputy prime minister responds to Barack Obama 's increasing criticism of British oil firm Friday 11 June 2010 13.01 BST Nick Clegg has warned of the risk of ` megaphone diplomacy ' with the US over the BP oil spill . 
Photograph : Ben Stansall\/AFP\/Getty Images Nick Clegg today warned that a row between Britain and the US over the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico was in danger of turning into a destructive bout of `` megaphone diplomacy '' . 
`` I do n't frankly think we are going to reach a solution to stop the release of oil into the ocean any quicker by allowing this to spiral into a tit-for-tat political and diplomatic spat , '' said Clegg , speaking in the Spanish capital , Madrid . 
The deputy prime minister , responding to a question on Barack Obama 's increasingly strident criticism of the British oil company , added : `` I am not going to start intervening in a debate which clearly risks descending into megaphone diplomacy . '' 
Anger at Obama singling out BP for criticism rather than US contractors such as Halliburton is mounting in the City . 
There is also concern that the prime minister , David Cameron , has not defended the British firm more robustly . 
Cameron is to discuss the oil spill in a telephone conversation with the US president tomorrow . 
London 's Conservative mayor , Boris Johnson , has accused the US of indulging in `` anti-British rhetoric '' and told the BBC that huge numbers of British pensioners , whose retirement funds are invested in BP , were losing money because of the continued attacks on the company . 
Pressure on the embattled oil firm grew as estimates from US government scientists suggested that twice as much oil as thought was spewing from the broken vent , the third time the Obama administration has had to increase its estimate . 
Clegg said Britain 's coalition government would avoid a spiralling war of words with Washington on the issue . 
`` I , and the whole of British government , want to only play ... as much as we can , a constructive role , which is to find a solution to what is a huge environmental disaster , '' he said . 
`` It is an ecological catastrophe . 
It does need to be dealt with . '' 
The row comes as BP said it may delay or reduce payouts to shareholders following pressure from Obama . 
The company 's board of directors is considering deferring the payment or offering shareholders a portion of the dividend , which is due to be announced on 27 July . 
`` We are considering all options on the dividend , but no decision has been made , '' the BP boss , Tony Hayward , told the Wall Street Journal . 
Previously , Hayward had said BP would continue to `` meet our obligations to our employees , and to our other stakeholders , including hundreds of thousands of shareholders , and millions more in mutual and pension funds , who rely on their investment in BP as part of their financial security and in many cases their retirement income '' . 
Reports suggest BP will seek to establish an agreement with the White House that could see payouts held in `` escrow '' until the company 's liabilities for the clean-up are fully realized . 
Other suggestions have included scrapping the dividend for one quarter or paying it in shares rather than cash , according to reports . 
BP 's dividends are the biggest single contributor to FTSE shareholder income form , accounting for around # 1 of every # 7 handed to investors last year . 
The firm 's chairman , Carl-Henric Svanberg , told investors a decision on the dividend would be made next month , while reassuring analysts that the company 's cash deposits were substantially large enough to afford the payment . 
Obama and senior US politicians have been vocal in their anger at any potential dividend payment before the total cost of the disaster is known . 
Earlier this week , the president said Hayward `` would n't be working for me '' after the BP chief 's remark that `` the environmental impact of this disaster is likely to be very , very modest '' . 
Hayward has stressed that retaining investor confidence is important to ensure that BP remains financially strong enough to pay for a clean-up operation that some have predicted will last for years . 
The chief executive of Britain 's National Association of Pension Funds said investors might be receptive to a suspension of dividends to protect the BP 's long-term future . 
`` BP 's current difficulties should n't have an immediate or serious impact on those saving into a pension scheme or on those who have retired , '' Joanne Segars said . 
Find out more and buy the ebook on Kindle from Amazon UK and US or iTunes UK or US The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off MatthewWells : Friend turns on TV and sees Ocado van driver reversing away from flames 2\/2 
