The situation appears to have worsened since then , with jobsworth officials hassling journalists . 
HuffPost claims : BP has exerted no small effort in keeping the press at arm 's length from the story . 
They 've been barring reporters from oil drenched areas , forbidden aerial flyovers , clamped down on shooting photos of the dead wildlife , and basically worked hard to give reporters the runaround . 
Then there 's this video evidence from ABC reporter Matt Gutman being niggled by silly questions from a BP manager while filming a short item from an Alabama beach . 
Example : The manager asks : `` You mind if I ask why you 've set up a camera right here while my guys are working ? '' 
In a two-way with the ABC anchor , Gutman says : `` Everywhere you go , you find police barricades , people telling you , you ca n't do this , you ca n't do that , or you ca n't talk to these people . 
We 're not exactly sure why that is . '' 
In one incident last week , a reporter and photographer from the New York Daily News were told by a BP contractor they could n't go on to a public beach on Grand Isle , Louisiana , one of the areas most heavily affected by the spill . 
The contractor summoned a local sheriff , who then told the reporter , Matthew Lysiak , that news media had to fill out paperwork and then be escorted by a BP official to obtain access to the beach . 
`` It 's just irrational , '' observed Lysiak , talking to the New York Times . 
Michael Oreskes , senior managing editor at the Associated Press , told the Times the situation was not unlike the embedding of reporters with the military in Afghanistan . 
`` There is a continued effort to keep control over the access , '' he said . 
`` And even in places where the government is cooperating with us to provide access , it 's still a problem because it 's still access obtained through the government . '' 
Despite the problems , the US press is doing its level best to report to readers on the scale of the spill . 
I rather like this simple NY Times graphic . 
Click the Play button and watch the oil slick grow day by day from 22 April . 
