Mon Jun 28 , 2010 12:19 pm EDT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Millions of gallons\/liters of oil have spewed into the Gulf of Mexico since an April 20 explosion on a drilling rig triggered the worst spill in U.S. history . 
Below is a timeline of the disaster and its impact . 
April 20 , 2010 - Explosion and fire on Transocean Ltd 's drilling rig Deepwater Horizon licensed to BP Plc ; 11 workers are killed . 
The rig was drilling in BP 's Macondo project 42 miles southeast of Venice , Louisiana , beneath about 5,000 feet of water and 13,000 feet under the seabed . 
April 22 - The Deepwater Horizon rig , valued at more than $ 560 million , sinks and a 5-mile oil slick forms . 
April 25 - Efforts to activate the well 's blowout preventer fail . 
April 29 - U.S. President Barack Obama pledges `` every single available resource , '' including the U.S. military , to contain the spreading spill and says BP is responsible for the clean-up . 
April 30 - An Obama aide says no drilling will be allowed in new areas , as the president had recently proposed , until the cause of the Deepwater Horizon accident is known . 
-- BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward says the company takes full responsibility and will pay all legitimate claims and the cost of the clean-up . 
May 2 - Obama visits the Gulf Coast . 
U.S. officials close areas affected by the spill to fishing for 10 days . 
BP starts drilling a relief well alongside the failed well , a process that may take two to three months to complete . 
May 7 - An attempt to place a containment dome over the spewing well fails when the device is rendered useless by frozen hydrocarbons that clogged it . 
May 9 - BP says it might try to plug the undersea leak by pumping materials such as shredded tires and golf balls into the well at high pressure , a method called a `` junk shot . '' 
May 11\/12 - Executives from BP , Transocean and Halliburton appear at congressional hearings in Washington . 
The executives blame each other 's companies . 
May 14 - Obama slams companies involved in the spill , criticizing them for a `` ridiculous spectacle '' of publicly trading blame in his sternest comments yet . 
May 19 - The first heavy oil from the spill hits fragile Louisiana marshlands . 
Part of the slick enters a powerful current that could carry it to the Florida Keys and beyond . 
May 28 - Obama tours the Louisiana coast , saying `` I am the president and the buck stops with me . '' 
-- BP 's Hayward flies over the Gulf . 
May 29 - BP says the complex `` top kill '' maneuver , started three days earlier to plug the well , has failed . 
June 1 - BP shares plunge 17 percent in London trading , wiping $ 23 billion off its market value , on news the latest attempt to plug the well has failed . 
-- U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder says the Justice Department has launched a criminal and civil investigation into the rig explosion and the spill . 
June 2 - BP tries another capping strategy but has difficulty cutting off a leaking riser pipe . 
-- U.S. authorities expand fishing restrictions to cover 37 percent of U.S. federal waters in the Gulf . 
June 4 - Obama , on his third trip to the region , warns BP against skimping on compensation to residents and businesses . 
June 8 - Obama says he wants to know `` whose ass to kick '' over the spill , adding to the pressure on BP . 
-- U.S. weather forecasters give their first confirmation that some of the oil leaking has lingered beneath the surface rather than rising to the top . 
June 9 - U.S. Interior Secretary Ken Salazar says BP must pay the salaries of thousands of workers laid off by a moratorium on drilling , at a congressional hearing . 
June 10 - In his first comments , Prime Minister David Cameron says Britain is ready to help BP deal with the spill . 
-- U.S. scientists double their estimates of the amount of oil gushing from the well , saying between 20,000 and 40,000 barrels -LRB- 840,000 and 1.7 million gallons\/3 .2 million and 6.4 million liters -RRB- flowed out before June 3 . 
June 11 - Supportive comments from Britain lift BP 's shares in London by 6.4 percent . 
But the rise does not mend the damage done -- the company is worth 70 billion pounds -LRB- $ 102 billion -RRB- against more than 120 billion pounds in April . 
June 14 - Obama , on his fourth trip to the Gulf , says he will press BP executives at a White House meeting on June 16 to deal `` justly , fairly and promptly '' with damage claims . 
-- Two U.S. lawmakers release a letter to Hayward saying : `` It appears that BP repeatedly chose risky procedures in order to reduce costs and save time and made minimal efforts to contain the added risk . '' 
June 15 - Lawmakers summon top executives from Exxon Mobil , Chevron , ConocoPhillips , Royal Dutch Shell and BP . 
-- Obama says in his first televised speech from the Oval Office : `` But make no mistake : we will fight this spill with everything we 've got for as long it takes . 
We will make BP pay for the damage their company has caused . '' 
June 16 - BP agrees to set up a $ 20 billion fund for damage claims from the spill , suspends dividend payments to shareholders and says it will pay $ 100 million to workers idled by the six-month moratorium on deep-sea drilling . 
June 17 - Hayward faces the wrath of U.S. lawmakers as he appears before a congressional hearing . 
He apologizes for the spill and says everything is being done to stop it . 
Members of Congress accuse BP of cutting corners and ignoring warnings for the sake of profit . 
June 18 - Anadarko Petroleum , part owner of the gushing well , says BP 's behavior before the blowout was `` reckless '' and likely represented `` gross negligence or willful misconduct '' that would affect obligations of the well owners under their operating agreement . 
June 22 - Hayward is handing day-to-day control of the spill operation to Bob Dudley -- a reflection , says BP , of the need for the chief executive to return to other aspects of the energy giant 's business . 
June 24 - A U.S. judge refuses to put on hold his decision to lift a ban on deepwater drilling imposed in response to the spill . 
June 27 - Oil washes ashore in mainland Mississippi for the first time , although some had tainted its barrier islands . 
June 28 - BP is forced to defend its chief executive after Russia 's deputy prime minister said he expected Hayward to resign soon . 
-- BP says it is now spending $ 100 million a day on efforts to cap the well , clean up the spill and compensate those affected , bringing the total bill so far to $ 2.65 billion . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Most the headlines on this page state `` Oil Spill '' -- not accurate ... This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
