CAMPECHE , Mexico | Mon Jun 28 , 2010 4:11 pm EDT CAMPECHE , Mexico -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Tropical storm Alex was set to become a hurricane on Tuesday , delaying BP Plc 's efforts to increase siphoning capacity at the gushing oil leak in the Gulf of Mexico while some companies pulled workers from the area . 
Forecasters said Alex was moving slowly away from Mexico 's Yucatan Peninsula . 
It is not expected to hurt current oil-capture systems at the BP oil spill or the company 's plans to drill a pair of relief wells intended to plug the leak by August , a BP executive told reporters in Houston . 
As a precautionary measure , Shell Oil Co , Exxon Mobil Corp , Anadarko Petroleum Corp and Apache Corp evacuated nonessential workers from platforms near Alex 's path . 
Shell also shut subsea production at the Auger and Brutus platforms over the weekend . 
Traders and brokers kept a close eye on Alex , but oil prices fell toward $ 78 per barrel on Monday as most forecasters predicted the storm would pass southwest of major U.S. offshore oil and gas installations in the Gulf of Mexico . 
A hurricane watch has been issued for the coast of Texas south of Baffin Bay to La Cruz in Mexico . 
The ports of Dos Bocas and Cayo Arcas , which handle 80 percent of all Mexico 's oil export shipping in the Gulf , have been closed since Sunday due to strong surf in the area . 
State-run oil giant Pemex said its platforms in the Campeche Sound continued to work normally on Monday although it suspended helicopter flights to and from the facilities . 
Pemex said it is monitoring wind and surf conditions caused by Alex. Its Isla del Carmen port , not essential for oil shipments , has been closed since Sunday night . 
Barbara Blakely , a spokeswoman for Shell , told Reuters the company was closely monitoring Alex 's advance in the Gulf but that its LNG plant in Altamira , Mexico was working as usual . 
The storm is due to make landfall again between Brownsville , Texas , and Ciudad Madero in Mexico at mid-week , mostly sparing BP oil collection efforts south of Louisiana . 
Alex , the first named storm of the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season , had sustained winds of about 60 mph with higher gusts and was located about 85 miles west-northwest of Campeche , Mexico . 
The system was moving north-northwest at 7 mph . 
`` Some strengthening is forecast during the next couple of days and Alex is expected to become a hurricane on Tuesday , '' the U.S. National Hurricane Center said on its latest update . 
At least ten people were killed in Central America in accidents related to Alex , local authorities reported . 
Three people died in El Salvador from flooding , two others were killed in a landslide in Guatemala and five people were swept away by swelling rivers in Nicaragua , emergency officials told Reuters . 
Alex was expected to bring 3 to 6 inches of rain to the Yucatan Peninsula , southern Mexico and parts of Guatemala through Tuesday . 
Isolated torrents of up to 10 inches were possible over mountainous areas . 
Forecasters warned the rain could cause flash floods and mudslides . 
The Atlantic hurricane season runs from June 1 to Nov 30 and meteorologists predict this year will be a very active one . 
Hurricanes feed on warm water and the sea surface temperatures in the tropical Atlantic are higher than usual this year . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
As we enter one of the most aggressive hurricane seasons on record , I can not even imagine what a hurricane would do with oil in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Dealing with oil on the beach is one thing , but what if we had to deal with it in our streets , in our businesses , in our homes ? 
What if we had to rescue humans covered in oil ? 
What if this is no longer isolated to just the Gulf Coast but found its way up the great rivers to our inner cities ? 
Now imagine if you will , the dispersants mixed with oil which could possibly cause untold diseases and catastrophic health hazards of a biblical proportion . 
It staggers the imagination , or is it prophetic ? 
What if we are dealing with the wrath of God ? 
The oil may actually make the affects of the hurricaine less severe . 
Sailors who dump oil overboard change the viscosity of the water and calm the waves . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
