TRIPOLI | Thu Jun 30 , 2011 6:18 pm EDT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Russia accused France on Thursday of committing a `` crude violation '' of a U.N. weapons embargo by arming Libyan rebels , while Washington said it was acting legally , creating a new diplomatic dispute over the Western air war . 
France confirmed on Wednesday that it had air-dropped arms to rebels in Libya 's Western Mountains , becoming the first NATO country to acknowledge openly arming the insurgency against Gaddafi 's 41-year rule . 
France , Britain and the United States are leading a three-month-old air campaign which they say they will not end until Gaddafi falls . 
The war has become the bloodiest of the `` Arab Spring '' uprisings sweeping North Africa and the Middle East . 
Rebels acknowledged French support , saying it had helped sustain them in the region . 
`` There should be no doubt that Libyans in the Nafusa Mountain -LRB- Western Mountains -RRB- area are alive and safe today thanks to a combination of heroic Libyan bravery and French wisdom and support , '' Vice Chairman Abdul Hafeedh Ghoga of the Transitional National Council said in a statement of thanks to French President Nicolas Sarkozy . 
Though rebel advances have been slow , the insurgents scored a success in the region on Sunday in pushing to the outskirts of Bir al-Ghanam , within 80 km -LRB- 50 miles -RRB- of Tripoli . 
On Thursday the rebels surveyed the strategic town from a ridge overlooking the desert plateau that leads to the capital , in preparation for a possible attack . 
A Reuters journalist with them said they were waiting for NATO airstrikes to help them . 
Libyan television broadcast a statement from tribal leaders condemning Sarkozy over the arms , calling the rebels in the Berber area `` a product of France . '' 
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said Moscow `` asked our French colleagues today whether reports that weapons from France were delivered to Libyan rebels correspond with reality . '' 
`` If this is confirmed , it is a very crude violation of U.N. Security Council Resolution 1970 , '' he said . 
That resolution , adopted in February , imposed a comprehensive arms embargo . 
Paris said on Wednesday it believed it had not violated the U.N. embargo because the weapons it gave the rebels were needed to protect civilians from an imminent attack , which it says is allowed under a later Security Council resolution . 
`` We believe that U.N. Security Council resolutions 1970 and 1973 , read together , neither specified nor precluded providing defense materiel to the Libyan opposition , '' State Department spokesman Mark Toner said . 
`` We would respectfully disagree with the Russian assessment , '' he added . 
Nevertheless , although legal , arming the rebels was `` not an option that we have acted on , '' he said . 
Although Russia is not involved in the bombing campaign , its stance could add to reservations among some NATO countries wary over an air war that has lasted longer and cost more than expected . 
Moscow could also challenge Paris at the U.N. Security Council , where both are veto-wielding permanent members . 
U.N. spokesman Farhan Haq said it was up to the Security Council to determine what is permitted by its resolutions . 
France 's weapons airlift , while possibly increasing the insurgent threat to Gaddafi , highlights a dilemma for NATO . 
More than 90 days into its bombing campaign , Gaddafi is still in power and no breakthrough is in sight , making some NATO members feel they should help the rebels more actively , something the poorly-armed insurgents have encouraged . 
But if they do that , they risk fracturing the international coalition over how far to go . 
The World Bank 's Libya representative said on Thursday Islamist militants could gain ground if the conflict wears on . 
`` If this civil war goes on , it would be a new Somalia , which I do n't say lightly , '' said Marouane Abassi , World Bank country manager for Libya who has been in Tunisia since February . 
`` In three months we could be dealing with extremists . 
That 's why time is very important in this conflict , before we face problems in managing it . '' 
Even before news of the French arms supply emerged , fissures were emerging in the coalition with some members voicing frustration about the high cost , civilian casualties , and the elusiveness of a military victory . 
Gaddafi says the NATO campaign is an act of colonial aggression aimed at stealing the North African state 's oil . 
He says NATO 's U.N.-mandated justification for its campaign -- to protect Libyan civilians from attack -- is spurious . 
NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen made clear on Thursday the weapons airlift was a unilateral French initiative . 
Asked by reporters on a visit to Vienna if NATO had been involved , he answered : `` No. '' `` As regards compliance with the U.N. Security Council resolution , it is for the U.N. sanctions committee to determine that , '' Rasmussen said . 
The rebel advance toward Tripoli 's southwest outskirts from the Western Mountains has not been matched by progress toward the capital from the east , where they hold Misrata on the coast about 200 km -LRB- 130 miles -RRB- from the capital . 
The city has been bombarded for months by Gaddafi 's forces . 
Six rockets landed early on Thursday near the oil refinery and port . 
A Reuters journalist there reported no casualties . 
Britain 's military said its Apache helicopters had attacked a government checkpoint and two military vehicles near Khoms , on the Mediterranean coast between Misrata and Tripoli . 
Insurgents say Gaddafi 's forces are massing and bringing weapons to quell an uprising in Zlitan , the next big town along the road from Misrata to the capital . 
Rebels inside Zlitan said they mounted a raid on pro-Gaddafi positions on Wednesday night . '' 
-LRB- We -RRB- carried out a violent attack last night on checkpoints ... and exchanged gunfire , killing a number of soldiers , '' a rebel spokesman , who identified himself as Mabrouk , told Reuters from the town . 
Le Figaro newspaper said France had parachuted rocket launchers , assault rifles and anti-tank missiles into the Western Mountains in early June . 
A French military spokesman later confirmed arms had been delivered , although he said anti-tank missiles were not among them . 
Despite the diplomatic storm , the rebels encouraged more arms deliveries . 
`` Giving -LRB- us -RRB- weapons we will be able to decide the battle more quickly , so that we can shed as little blood as possible , '' senior rebel figure Mahmoud Jibril said in Vienna . 
The conflict has halted oil exports from Libya , helping push up world oil prices . 
Jibril said it may take years for oil exports to fully resume : `` No , no oil is being sold . 
A lot of the oil well system was destroyed , especially in the east . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Al Quaeda finding a way to get to those weapons ? 
Is it even relevant ? 
Do you really think Al Quaeda does n't already have heaps of ways and connection to get weapons ? 
Plus do n't forget that Gaddafi is a crazy psychopath , what do you think will happen when he feels his end coming ? 
Do his best to piss the allied force off . 
by simply giving away weapons to Al Quaeda and other extremist organization because he knows they will eventually use them against the people who helped forcing him out . 
My point is that it is time to do whatever is needed to kick Gadaffi out , and also maybe stop insinuating that the rebels will give the weapons away to Al Qaeda . 
Get out of Libya , we have no business there . 
This is a trumped up war . 
If we 're so worried about civilian deaths , why are n't we addressing the slaughters that have taken place in gaza ? 
THe IDF has been killing them routinely , where is NATO on this ? 
Nato just send in a heat team like the united states did with osama bin laden . 
Because let 's face it that 's really what you want to do . 
Stop trying to cover it up with politics or with the guise of we are trying to support the people of libya . 
You want qaddafi out . 
Just do it ... This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
