June 30 | Thu Jun 30 , 2011 10:00 am EDT June 30 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Following are the latest political and military developments in the Libyan crisis . 
\* France said it did not break a U.N. arms embargo by airlifting weapons to Libya 's rebels , because the arms were needed to defend civilians under threat . 
\* Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said the arming of Libyan rebels was a `` crude violation '' of the arms embargo . 
\* France on Wednesday became the first NATO country to openly acknowledge arming rebels seeking to topple Muammar Gaddafi . 
\* NATO was not involved in the French operation to airlift weapons to the rebels , alliance chief Anders Fogh Rasmussen said , and dismissed warnings of `` mission creep '' . 
\* Sending weapons to Libyan rebels could help speed an end to the civil war , the rebels ' chief said . 
\* In the rebel-held city of Misrata , about 200 km -LRB- 130 miles -RRB- east of Tripoli , six rockets landed early on Thursday in the Habara district , near the city 's oil refinery and port . 
A Reuters journalist in Misrata said there were no casualties . 
\* NATO said it conducted 149 air sorties on Wednesday , 55 of them strike sorties that aim to identify and hit targets but do not always deploy munitions . 
\* NATO said key targets hit on Wednesday included : -- Twelve military vehicles , one military truck , one armored personnel carrier , one ammunition storage , one military compound and one military checkpoint in Brega ; -- One multiple rocket launcher , five battle tanks , two artillery pieces , three military vehicles near Misrata ; -- One self-propelled anti-aircraft gun , one military technical vehicle , two multiple rocket launchers and one military equipment storage facility near Tripoli ; -- Four battle tanks , one military technical vehicle , one heavy equipment transport near Gharyan ; -- One battle tank , one military technical vehicle near Sirte ; -- One ammunition storage facility in Waddan ; -- One military technical vehicle near Nalut . 
\* Since NATO took over command of air strikes on March 31 , its aircraft have conducted 13,184 sorties , including 4,963 strike sorties . 
NATO members participating in air strikes in Libya include France , Britain , Canada , Denmark , Norway , Belgium , Italy and the United States . 
\* Seventeen ships under NATO command are patrolling the central Mediterranean Sea to enforce a U.N. arms embargo . 
On Wednesday , 12 vessels were hailed to determine destination and cargo . 
Three were boarded but none was diverted . 
A total of 1,568 vessels have been hailed , 132 boarded and eight diverted since the start of the arms embargo . 
-LRB- Reporting by Justyna Pawlak ; Editing by Rex Merrifield and Robert Woodward -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
