Testifying before Congress on Thursday , General Carter Ham , the head of U.S. Africa Command affirmed that the situation in Libya is grinding toward a stalemate . 
The Libyan rebels are not an organized fighting force , but Moammar Gadhafi can not mobilize a major offensive against them because of NATO airstrikes and dwindling support within his own army . 
So what lies ahead ? 
Military analysts and Libya experts articulate three main possibilities : -LRB- 1 -RRB- a prolonged stalemate , -LRB- 2 -RRB- a negotiated settlement , or -LRB- 3 -RRB- total victory for one side . 
Prolonged stalemate : The situation could remain much as it is now with the opposition controlling Benghazi , Ajdabiya and some of the coastline . 
Moammar Gadhafi would control the rest . 
Zachary Hosford and Andrew Exum at the Center for a New American Security recently described what this might look like : A stalemate in Libya would effectively result in a de facto partition of the country with a severely under-governed and disorganized safe haven in eastern Libya for the rebels that could provide refuge for various militant and criminal groups capable of exporting violence and instability to other countries in North Africa and the Middle East . 
Max Boot , a national security fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations -LRB- CFR -RRB- , describes the worst case scenario in which this stalemate drags go on for years much as Saddam Hussein clung to power for a decade after the First Gulf War . 
Middle East scholar Juan Cole illustrates a more hopeful scenario in which - after weeks , months or perhaps a year - a negotiated settlement is reached . 
He noted that the 1995 Dayton Accords were signed more than a year after NATO started bombing in Bosnia . 
Negotiated settlement : Many analysts argue that time is not on Gadhafi s side . 
NATO strikes wear down his forces while other nations supply the rebels with weapons and training . 
The rebels are gaining access to oil money and potentially to Gadhafi s frozen accounts , while sanctions squeeze Gadhafi and his associates . 
Unable to pay his mercenaries and losing control , Gadhafi might ultimately feel forced to negotiate , or former loyalists may oust him and negotiate in his stead . 
In either event , the outcome of a negotiation is an open question . 
They could lead to the establishment of an interim council , paving the way for parliamentary elections , or , if the stalemate lasts for many years , potentially the partition of Libya . 
Total victory for one side or the other : Gadhafi s regime could collapse . 
This is the scenario many are hoping for . 
This could occur if Gadhafi s army breaks in the face of continued NATO bombing or if Gadhafi s deputies defect en masse . 
Tripoli would then be open to the rebels . 
Having the rebels forcibly overthrow Gadhafi would be much more difficult . 
As Libyan journalist Fadel Al-Ameen explains , I don t imagine that the rebels in the East will be capable of driving all the way to Tripoli . 
Even if they do , just to invade Tripoli would be a humanitarian catastrophe because Gadhafi and his forces would wreak havoc on the civilian population there . 
The opposite possibility is that Gadhafi defeats the rebels and reasserts control over all of Libya . 
This is the nightmare scenario , but it is also extremely unlikely . 
The world s attention would have to shift away from Libya entirely to allow Gadhafi to amass the requisite force . 
Most analysts agree that sooner or later - whether weeks , months or years -- Gadhafi has to go , leaving open the question of what happens next . 
As James Lindsay of CFR notes , Part of the problem is we re talking about what happens on day one . 
The crucial question is what will be happening in the fall and next year . 
The same is true if the rebels take it all . 
That is only the first chapter of the book . 
Exum worries because most post-conflict states go through a stage where external aid exceeds the government 's capacity to effectively administer it , creating conditions ripe for corruption . 
In Libya 's case , you will have a similar situation with both -LRB- a -RRB- a lot of government oil revenues and -LRB- b -RRB- very little bureaucracy capable of redistributing resources within the society . 
But there is also reason for optimism . 
As Al-Ameen says , Libya s level of education is high . 
We re not looking at a country like Afghanistan , which is a tribal society without leadership or government . 
Nor is Libya like Iraq with so many sectarian differences . 
Libya also has economic resources that will help it survive and prosper . 
The future doesn t look too bad . '' 
There 's only one good scenario for the future of Libya and that 's the total victory of the forces loyal to Mohammar Qaddafy . 
The fall of Qaddafy would spell the end of Libya 's independence and pave the way for the West to get their grimy hands on Libya 's oil which would be tragic at best . 
April 7 , 2011 at 6:15 pm | Reply Very well said , Onesmallvoice . 
Like you said , the only good scenario is the total victory for the Qaddafy forces . 
April 7 , 2011 at 7:25 pm | Reply What is the USA and UN doing in Libya anyway ? 
Recolonizing few centuries late ? 
America is acting like Napoleon 's France , the End of Rome and the end of colonial Europe : losing power and becoming reckless . 
April 10 , 2011 at 2:55 am | This whole endeavor is a shameful attempt at regime change which looks like it has backfired and now is a MESS . 
Obama saw this as a dirty political failure and has symbolically backed away ... This is a rebellion `` within a nation '' , unlike Iraq , which invaded its neighbor . 
UN sent into divorce court !!! The UN has been `` used and abused '' by the `` Allies '' ... April 7 , 2011 at 10:15 pm | Reply Very superficial analysis . 
I challenge you go to Libya and live in Libya for one month under Ghaddafi 's system . 
It is a psychological suffocation that even the western journalists felt despite living in 5 starr hotels . 
This is about a mafia deciding the fait of 6 million people . 
I saw my generation transforming from a peaceful society to drug addicts , extremists , corrupt people and psychological abuse Ghaddafi 's regime . 
I wish that you have some sensitivity towards sufferings of your fellow human beings in Libya . 
April 8 , 2011 at 9:24 am | Obama wanted to appear tough on the world stage and a `` freedom fighter '' for the `` oppressed '' . 
He did n't do his homework and got caught not knowing who he was `` helping '' . 
The scary thing is Obama , the Pentagon , CIA and NSA , STILL after weeks of fighting and months of advance warning that something might happen in Libya , STILL have no idea who the rebels are and what they plan on doing if they get Qadaffi out and win . 
This is the supposed Commander-In-Chief of the worlds top fighting force . 
Obama should be impeached for this attack on Libya . 
This is what happens when Sheeple get drawn in by the Orator-In-Chief . 
Great talker , no idea what he is doing . 
He is just a talking head puppet . 
Impeach and remove him now and set a new emergency election for President . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:48 am | Fred i guess you have more information than the US government ? 
If you know so much about what is going on in the world then why are n't you the one making the decisions ? 
April 8 , 2011 at 4:20 pm | The Libyan born in Canada is one who know as much about Libya as AC360 . 
Emotional crap meant for ratings . 
Folks , this is real life . 
Libyan problems are best solved by Libyans . 
Tea party protested Pres. Obama for years until they were elected in the congress and turned tame . 
Why didn ' t nato intervene ? 
Why do n't we shut the H up for once and kill some babies to pay the debt ? 
I bet you , Kadafi would n't have hesited to raise taxes on the rich and raise food stamps for the poor in his country . 
He does it all the time . 
Remember American and Italians used to mine it like they farm cocoa in Ivory coast . 
Until Kadhafi came and chased them out . 
Kadhafi may have bragged that he supported bombing Panam , but I also convinced that he simply boasted about it , because he did n't like colonial power , and the bombing of an american Panam represented a blow to American pride . 
April 10 , 2011 at 3:15 am | Total nonsense . 
Libyans consider Ghaddafi 's rule as occupation . 
No respect for basic rights , no freedom . 
If you like Ghaddafi , you can vote him for your district and enjoy being raped by his security forces if that is what you like . 
April 8 , 2011 at 9:17 am | Reply Rim , have you ever lived in Libya , how do you know about Libya , you only dirty minds of the imperialists influenced April 8 , 2011 at 9:30 am | This is a personal libyan matter and let them decide it , who are we to pick sides in this fight . 
Would you like someone from the outside coming and telling you how you should run your country and who your president should be . 
let them fight and who wins wins . 
If you want ties then good , if not do not . 
For the last night analyst on AC360 from John Hopkins to say that we need to show leadership , he is a hypocrite . 
When we help they are the same people who burn the american flag , When they need they come running otherwise americans are bad and occupation country . 
I would let them burn and then see what happens . 
if he really wants to help then he should go and do it . 
Nothing is every good enough for Arabs , as we do not do the lying they do on the Quaran . 
I would say let it burn and burn and what is left , they can sift and sell oil to build again . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:01 am | right , if you think that you know everything , then get elected as president and run the world so flawlessly as you see it . 
since you all out there know so much about everything and have the only opinions that matter then please , by all meand , stop the freaking complaining and go out there and get involved , or just leave , no one is making you stay in America , if you have so much problems , either help bring positive change or leave , either way , state your opinion respectfully , or shut your mouth . 
there is a reason why alot of people are not in charge . 
and its because there about as sharp as a lolly pop , so you there fred , of course there is issues with this whoe situation , but if they elected you as any elected senior official , you would probably have a stroke and soil yourself . 
that goes the same for all you other hippie rediculous liberal super creampuffs out there , please leave and live in these places and THEN tell me how you feel on the subject before you think you know what your saying . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:50 pm | you are a total ignorant fellow Mr. Ream . 
life in libya is the ideal life that every muslim dream . 
US , NATO and UN -- they will surely reap what they sow ... April 10 , 2011 at 5:13 am | I agree on what is presented Ones , in fact should Libyan leader Muammar Kadhafi remain in control , its people prospered under his leadership , the school up to S3 in the free , profit on oil sales people are also in profit April 8 , 2011 at 9:25 am | Reply Its high time the western world should know that Africa is not a playing ground for there machine guns toy ... American should pray for a good source of income by nature and not getting themselves involve in nation whose mineral resources is high and they needed to benefit from it . 
yes there is a conflict in Libya , Quadaffi and is people . 
what is any country business with that ... they should send there troops to Sudan and Somalia who have been suffering tribal war for a very long time . 
I guess they would n't be there , you American should shut the fuck up and go pay your debt in the world bank . 
Am so so surprise that America as the world power were the one owing most in the world bank . 
they should concentrate on building there country and paying there debt instead of analyzing other countries conflict . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:01 pm | Wow , do you folks even know what you are talking about ? 
I 'm a Libyan , born there , raised in Canada , my father left Libya , running for his life , left his whole world behind , just took his wife and kids and fled , all in one night , 32 years ago . 
Because he spoke against Gadhafi , , now please tell me about the prosperity Libyan people are experiencing . 
I 've lived in Canada and the US for over 30 years and I know at least a million Libyans who would cut off their right arm to trade places with me , and to be quite honest with you , I wish that were not the case , I wish I had grown up in my beautiful home land with my people , a place where I can get a good education , good health care , be able to share opinion freely , and just be my father 's daughter . 
But we could n't , instead we had to move to a strange new land and assimilate in order to succeed , which is what we did , but sadly , they had to do the same thing back home , Libya , has been a strange land where many people have to do strange things to assimilate with their dictator . 
It has been sickened , and the people are SICK AND TIRED of it ! 
I say go get that poor excuse for a human being and all his thugs and be done with them . 
Then my father can return and do right by his home land , my father , not afraid to speak his mind and will never , and has never taken money from Gadhafi to be one of his dirty players . 
My father , a man who is greatly respected for his intellect and his morals , would never have survived in Gadhafi 's regime . 
My father is a good man , and many people know it . 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:06 pm | I 've always envisioned - Libya World . 
With the Moammar roller coaster of doom and the dodge a missle water slide . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:02 am | Reply When and where has the west gotten their hands on another countries oil ? 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:06 am | Reply The Iraqis are so stupid . 
They keep blowing up thier own oil feilds and pipelines . 
Its the only thing in that god-forsaken land of dust and rocks that can make them any money and they keep on blowing it all up . 
National stupidity is an in credible phenomenon . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:31 pm | I 'm sure someone is getting that oil money from Iraq , while this great country that is crumbling under the expenses . 
Why are n't the oil companies paying for the Iraq war , they are the ons benefiting ... Who cut that crazy deal ??? April 8 , 2011 at 1:11 pm | I am so sick and tired of people like you bashing America over oil . 
Where the hell do you think the arab world would be without US paying top dollars for oil ? 
with that said , I do n't think American troops should be in any sesspool in the middle east or north africa . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:37 pm | Reply April 9 , 2011 at 8:43 am | Yes the worst scenerio is actually the best scenerio . 
Libya would be shaken and regime will adapt and tight up the security at the same time . 
It will start to look for friends in Arab world , Fundamentalists will be controlled too . 
It will focus on more economics , jobs and allow controlled democracy . 
It will be similar to what happened in China when they crashed Tianmen square protestors . 
It is an unfortunate incident that results both sides to think and 30 years of double digits growth . 
There will always be dissidents and unhappy people -LRB- as in China -RRB- . 
But rather than risk years of turmoil and many losses of life simply because some dissidents are unhappy , it is better to have a stable evolution . 
Everyone is adapative and surival instinct is there for everyone . 
Noticed Algeria is supposedly a more repressive regime than Egypt and Tunisia . 
But they are not doing anything because they learned the hard lessions of revolutions as Chinese did . 
At end of the days of a revolution after many deaths and turmoil , the future is too unpredictable and often much worse than before -LRB- French revolution is a case in point -RRB- April 8 , 2011 at 3:41 pm | Reply The main reason the the so-called `` revolution '' at the Tienmien Square failed Jesus , is that most of the Chinese people did n't want to lose their long awaited prosperity for some kind of bourgeois `` democracy '' . 
After all , just how many Americans are willing to endure years of joblessness and hard times just for the right to vote ??? Not too many , I presume . 
April 8 , 2011 at 8:00 pm | poor analysis , you are thinking of your own safety in regards to unstable Libya , if the George Washington listened to you he wouldn ` t had liberated the American soil against the British . 
and raised the democracy in America . 
you were born in democratic state and you do not know any thing about dictatorship or living as slave for a tyrant . 
April 9 , 2011 at 11:24 pm | I am tired of the oil scenario from narrow-minded people . 
The opposition people have endured Gadhafi 's rule for 40 + years . 
Why dont you try it for 1 month . 
April 8 , 2011 at 6:48 pm | Reply Yes , I agree totally . 
It seems that every time the US is involved somewhere in the Middle East , the typical reason is `` Oil '' -- The oil belongs to the country in question and not the US ; just like Iraqi oil , and for that matter any other critical resources to protect . 
April 9 , 2011 at 9:54 am | Gaddafi is the worst Dectator mankind ever seen , I 'm 100 % confident that the world will enjoy life more without this scum bag , this guy is mentaly sick , the crimes he has commited are more than we can count it 's endless , Libya with it 's small population and huge oil resources are still suffering from this Mad Dog of the middle east as Mr. Ronald Regan called him before ... Gaddafi go to hell , his days are numbered and those who are paid by him will regret their mistake when they see our beloved Libya after he 's gone April 8 , 2011 at 9:11 pm | Reply i am not surprised about some of the comments you people are passing here . 
libya is the best country in africa , they have it all , money , scholarships , housing , electricity , water and what have you . 
i can tell you that majority of africans are living in bad conditions because of corruption and bad governance . 
Ghana for one , i can tell you it is the people that have decided to live in peace and harmony but not that it is all well . 
A lot of ghanaians wish the people of libya would experienc what it feels like to live in other part of africa then , they will appreciate what they have . 
They will live to regret like Ghana is regretting about the over throwing Dr. Kwame Nkrumah now . 
i love America very much but , they should try hard to be fair in the way they pick the countries to help . 
April 9 , 2011 at 3:49 am | You could n't have said it any better . 
Kaddafi has n't done much for his people over the last 40 years ... -LRB- except for the one 's close to him -RRB- in terms of improving their living standards , etc. etc. . 
The question is who is the next one in line to change things around for the better ? 
I also think that Kaddafi , maybe all of his sons , and others should be held accountable when this is over ... soon I hope . 
April 9 , 2011 at 9:46 am | tThe law is what should say to all the murders rapes bullets bpmbs have to stop . 
Law will be the only answer , may peace be found April 9 , 2011 at 4:56 am | Reply I totally agree . 
There is only one scenario acceptable to Libyans , NO TO GADDAFI , NO TO HIS FAMILY , NO TO HIS REGIME . 
Those , like Erdoghan , who are trying to make a compromise , do not realize that if Gaddafi or his sons stay , they will commit massive retaliation massacres against Libyans . 
Gaddafi has killed us for 42 years . 
I thnik it is enough to know the brutality and stupidenss of this man and his regime . 
Libyans have pased their final verdict : NO TO GADDAFI , NO TO HIS FAMILY , NO TO HIS REGIME , YES to New Deomcracy , Freedom and Peace April 9 , 2011 at 5:49 am | Reply You 're one small idiot if you ask me . 
The only tragedy is and has been Gadaffi using Libyan money to kill Libyan people . 
April 10 , 2011 at 5:19 am | Reply A small population and large oil reserves make Libya of strategic importance to the Western super powers . 
But the unspoken prize is the enormous Libyan desert which can be used to dump billions of tons of nuclear waste . 
The importance of the desert has recently became apparent with the nuclear tragedy in Japan . 
Infinite tons of contaminated water can quickly be absorbed by the dry sands of the Libyan desert , turning it into a Garden of Eden with no visitors . 
April 7 , 2011 at 6:48 pm | Reply Idiocy ... No one needs their desert for that . 
Plenty of other places vitrified waste could be stored if need be . 
Other African countries have been doing this for years when suitably bribed . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:24 am | Reply Please be respectful , Walter . 
Yes , an HSBC study also found that 3 % of the solar energy produced in the Libyan desert can power up all of Europe . 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:22 pm | Troll troll all day long , troll troll troll and sing this song April 8 , 2011 at 12:05 pm | In a civilised world , we see ourselves obliged to protect the weak . 
However much we want to help , we have to respect the rules of nature , i.e. the survival of the fittest . 
In this case , it is evident , which side is more viable . 
April 8 , 2011 at 3:13 am | Reply Uhhh , they are humans , not wildebeests on the Serengeti . 
I guess `` civilized '' is a relative term though . 
April 8 , 2011 at 8:43 am | Reply I agree with you but you have to apply his to both parties . 
Ghaddafi has been helped by the west for a long time . 
Even this war he is waging agains his own people is driven by outside foces . 
Libyan people could have taken care of Ghaddafi long time ago has not been supported by the filthy greedy western companies . 
And let assure you , Ghaddafi is presence is the best fertilizer for extremis -LRB- force breeds counter force -RRB- . 
The selfish westerners can make a choice . 
April 8 , 2011 at 9:13 am | Reply It 's a waste of time to get mad at other for your own shortcomings . 
Westerners did not make Gadhafi the crazy man he is , nor did it make him kill his own people and suppress the rest . 
Westerners did not make him bomb planes or discos or any other terrorist activity he got involved in . 
Arab men can be a little off , and it 's time now for them to take a good hard look in the mirror , and not go around calling Westerners greedy , because that 's silly , EVERYONE IS GREEDY . 
Look at the way many Arab men treat woman , is that not greed ? 
April 8 , 2011 at 2:16 pm | how arab men treat women ??? why dont you take a look at mid west or central states of US and see how the red necks treat their women . 
no race or color can define how men treat women . 
just because you see or hear certain things in the news does not mean all middle eastern treat their women badly . 
but I guess you are a white trash with a small brain . 
ignorant piece of trash April 8 , 2011 at 5:19 pm | The rebels will keep advancing until they run into a squad of soldiers and then they will be begging for NATO air support . 
This `` war '' has about 1500 rebels of which 1\/4th are al Qaeda . 
The U.S. military-industrial complex needs targets so they can keep selling cruise missles at $ 1 million a pop to blow up mud huts and kill civilians . 
Then they will want the American taxpayers to rebuild the country to put money in Halliburton and Dick Cheney 's pocket . 
Americans should vote Ron Paul and repudiate the debt owed to the politician war-profiteers and the Federal Reserve . 
We can declare bankruptcy on them ! 
They took us to war for lies so they could profit . 
Let them eat the losses ! 
The money that is owed is owed to those who took us to war for lies in order to profit from slaughter . 
Vote Ron Paul and file for bankruptcy on the Federal Reserve . 
Their business is funding wars and government debt , and business is good . 
But , it is turning the middle class into wage slaves with low-paying jobs . 
War is increasing our GNP , but destroying liberty and middle class wealth . 
We can smash their racket if you will help make this message go viral . 
Day of Rage in Washington D.C. on 6\/30\/11 April 9 , 2011 at 12:52 pm | Reply I have 3 scenarios for Libya : 1 . 
The West decides not to go all the way , Gaddafi wins which leads to some very awkward moments at the next UN summit 2 . 
Libyan rebels win and install a secular democracy that protects human rights and pluralism . 
Libyan rebels win and install a Sharia regime April 8 , 2011 at 12:42 pm | Reply Frank , do you even know any Libyans ? 
Have you been there ? 
How religious in the general population ? 
When I 'm introduced to a conservative Libyan muslim , which happens but is quite rare , I 'm usually told quickly after that they are a little `` weird '' . 
The chances of Libya becoming some extreme state by the choice of the freedom fighters\/rebels , is about as likely as the Americans allowing supremacists to take control of this country . 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:36 pm | Reply As bad and brutal as guaddafi is the rebels are worse ... ! 
April 8 , 2011 at 9:08 am | Reply The rebels are worse ?? Hey Ben ! 
Put down the Daffy Kool Aid and stop watching Libyan state TV . ! 
So you believe Daf 's stories of the `` rebels '' cutting out peoples hearts and eating them ?? BTW , UNICEF is reporting that Pro Gadhafi 's snipers are targeting children in Misrata . 
Because THAT is how `` good '' government acts . 
April 8 , 2011 at 2:57 pm | Reply Soooo ... You do n't beleive when Quaddafi badmouths rebels but suddently you beleive when rebels badmouth Quaddafi ? 
Because hey they are brave rebels like from Star Wars and ca n't lie ? 
Oh americans ... April 10 , 2011 at 11:34 am | Bomb them all . 
A war in Europe would be a best gift to USA . 
What does USA produce ? 
So , it needs somebody to sell it to . 
April 8 , 2011 at 9:30 am | Reply Lybia is in Africa , not Europe . 
You 're the reason the whole world hates us . 
Total ignorance of what the world outside of the US looks like . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:10 am | Reply The problem as I see it is that no American President since WWII has had the balls to use a nuclear bomb to kill off our enemies . 
This weapon was supposed to be used to stop wars quickly and it worked amazingly to end WWII . 
It does n't have to be a huge one , just a nuclear bomb that lets everybody know we can and will use them if they keep pulling this SH \*\* T all over the world . 
Quite frankly , I 'll even say to be fair , drop leaflets over the enemy areas for a few days before bombing . 
The good people will get the F out . 
The crazies will stay and fight and then we know where they are and who they are . 
Some crazies will flee in terror and we can catch them along the road out of town . 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:26 pm | Reply I thought Gadhafi is the worse human being , until ... I read your comment . 
I know I was wrong . 
April 8 , 2011 at 6:56 pm | Reply If you honestly think that the `` west '' why you label anyone is beyond me . 
But if YOU think all we care about is money , power , and conquering other nations , you are not very smart . 
We try to help everyone , yet you criticize us and if you ask for help , we always give . 
If it were n't for the US there would be NO humanity . 
April 8 , 2011 at 9:33 am | Reply Too naive . 
how many conflicts and wars has the west initiated in the last 70 + years ?? We are trying to help the libyans by using depleted uranium munitions ???? I suppose there was no humanity before the USA ? 
Instead of tying to help everyone how about just helping ourselves for once and help the citizens of the USA durning this depression . 
Military spending is in the hundreds of billions a year . 
One fraction of that could save all the municipality about to default in the USA . 
Bring our boys home , that alone would bring down substantially world conflict . 
And then maybe Obama -LRB- wolf in sheeps clothing -RRB- can earn his peace prize . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:44 am | Reply This a nation built by men and women that fled their mother lands for one reason or another , and those who have enough respect for our own family history understand the struggles of those around the world today . 
Tis country IS the land of struggle , religion , gender , race , it all happened here folks . 
So those outside the country who wish to see America as always wrong , give it a little break . 
Noting is perfect , but I can tell you after having traveled to so many places , this is about as perfect as it gets . 
Remember , we are grading on a curve here . 
April 8 , 2011 at 2:27 pm | Reply Obama 's go home , NATO confused , want to shoot Kadhafi loyalists who were shot actually rebels , and refused to apologize to the rebels , good ... good . . 
good , the rebellion must be destroyed April 8 , 2011 at 9:35 am | Reply can anyone give a review of the humanitarian tragedy in Libya , the rebels were simply manipulated by those who can not stand want power , they are also human beings have children and wives , what is the end of all this they will not get anything , they will die in vain . 
As good as any human scenario , but can not surpass God scenario April 8 , 2011 at 9:43 am | Reply As good as any human scenario , but can not surpass God scenario April 8 , 2011 at 9:43 am | Reply I do n't think any god would approve of the senseless violence against going on in that region right now , on either side of the conflict . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:07 am | Reply I personally think that the US needs to send military troops into Libya to stop this . 
This is causing gas prices to reach record prices and it is going out of control . 
Gadhafi has made it clear that he is not going to step down . 
Even if the rebels do reach Tripoli , Gadhafi has nowhere to run , unlike bin Laden has , because basically every country hates him and will not be willing to keep him within . 
Now if Tripoli does get surrounded , I predict another Adolf Hitler scenario where he kills himself . 
But America needs to make a move herself and not just with the NATO airstrikes . 
April 8 , 2011 at 9:51 am | Reply Sorry folks , I never posted that idiotic statement above . 
The U.S. has a moral obligation not to interfere in Libya 's civil war . 
I 'm quite appalled with people who advcate our involvement there . 
Then again , through their arrogance and self-righteousness they 're bound to feel that way and that disgusts me . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:20 am | Reply Well if that s what it takes for you to get cheap gas let s just wipe them out huh ? 
You obviously never have seen war or the results of it up close . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:48 am | Reply The sad thing is the war in Libya wo n't even help lower oil prices in USA . 
They seems to be fine with that . 
Now it costs $ 40 for a tank of gas . 
$ 10 more a week breaks you financially ? 
Get a 2nd job , quit smoking , kill your i-Phone , stop downloadin ringtones and songs , save some money you morons . . 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:15 pm | I personally think you should put your gear on and go to Libya and take a stand if thats what you want . 
US got nothing to do with any of this shit that is going on in the world . 
it is not their business never should have been , but again US is a imperialist country with a greedy jew controlled government . 
so nothing else is expected April 8 , 2011 at 5:22 pm | Reply The way things are going over in Libya , it seems that Libya should be divided into Eastern Libya , and Western Libya . 
The Eastern part will have the oil , diplomatic missions , world support , etc. . . 
; while the west will be under sanctions , poor , limited in power . 
Kind of like an African version of the koreas . 
Only time will bring one Libya to all ! 
It seems this will be the most acceptable version at this time . 
The UN must send troops to create a No Man 's land dividing the two sides . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:14 am | Reply Seems like that is the westerns powers plan all along . 
I fear those rebels will be betrayed once the bullets stop . 
looks like things are moving along perfectly for that scenario . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:50 am | Reply Three ways : Tribe 1 with Guns , Tribe 2 with M16 and Tribe 3 with anti aircraft -LRB- no shells -RRB- weapon . 
Next Let them go at it . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:22 am | Reply 13 more protesters shot and killed in Syria . 
anyone know if Obama doctrine covers those innocent civilians today ? 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:35 am | Reply I see a partitioning of Libya . 
Not sure if this will be long term or short . 
Nobody wants to step up and do what it takes to help the Opposition Libyans win . 
Yet at the same time they wont let Gadhafi win . 
Its been unofficially established that the eastern part of the country is home to the opposition . 
I see a new Libya growing out of the exsisting old . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:44 am | Reply Then how long do we protect the civilians and rebels in the East of a split Libya ? 
Months , years , decades ? 
Exactly why should we spend billions to do this ? 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:48 am | Reply April 8 , 2011 at 10:52 am | The UN ca n't even run a no-fly zone -- NATO is doing it . 
The UN is useless and basically if the U.S. does n't provide the bulk of money , troops and equipment -- nothing is done . 
The same goes for NATO most of the time . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:24 am | I aggree . 
Can anyone say `` Korea '' ? 
UN brokered a ceasefire and DMZ that has barely worked and only for the fact that 50,000 American troops still sit there holding the 2 idiotic countries apart . 
Libya looks to be heading in the same direction . 
USA had wasted generations of US soldiers and trillions of dollars on this failure of a DMZ . 
They still shoot at each other all the time . 
And `` Mentally Ill Jong '' is still in control in Korea , just like Crazy Mo is still in Libya . 
Just goes to show you how the UN does n't work , the DMZ does n't work , UN Sanctions do n't work , the US Armed Forces do n't help , and oil money beats everything . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:36 pm | The UN has no troops and if the U.S. will not provide then then no one will provide them . 
Obama will never send troops no matter what happens . 
Since this is a civil war , the U.S. should never have gotten involved in the 1st place . 
If civilians need to be protected then the other Muslim nations should have provided the protection of THEIR brothers and sisters . 
There is no national or strategic interest for the U.S. in Libya . 
As to `` protecting civilians '' we have had no problem with millions being killed by other dictators and we ca n't protect all the civilians in the world . 
That is why national and strategic interests of the U.S. should control what our military gets involved in . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:44 am | Reply and I thought our military was for defending the good ole USA . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:53 am | Reply The UN has no troops ? 
As of Feb 28th 2011 they had 84,342 serving . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:01 am | Reply The UN has peacekeepers that basically leave if fighting breaks out . 
The U.N. is useless in ground combat unless U.S. troops are involved and the U.S. pays for it . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:20 am | Reply Any country that still operates under the system of ` tribes ' is still living in the stone age . 
They will take hundreds of years to move into the age USA and Western Europe take for granted now . 
This is exactly why the American Indians did n't make it when Europe `` invaded '' and why African slavery was so easy to establish back then . 
You can not teach an old dog new tricks by lunchtime . 
He has to learn it for himself over a lifetime and several lifetimes . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:41 pm | Reply PLEASE NOTE : This is Barry 's war . 
Like a child , `` Barry started it ! '' 
Now he ran away from the fight he started because he realized he was the only bully on the playground and no one would back him up . 
What was that idiotic speech he gave about school bullying recently ? 
I am so embarrassed to be an American right now . 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:09 pm | Reply Simple solution : Bring back the King . 
Idris I was a great king . 
His family has indicated that they are prepared to return and reassume the mantle of leadership . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:56 am | Reply Shame on you CNN , and shame all news papers TVs for not being fair , what is the different between Egypt and Syria , ot Libya and Syria , or because you like the regime of Bshar Assad you are not working hard on it . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:06 am | Reply I 'm sorry there is not enough coverage on Syria , there should be more , you have to gather your constants and be heard , introduce yourself , tell the world who you and what you ask of them , and what you feel you can do for them . 
Your cause is in my heart , and I hope that good will prevail . 
Keep emailing , blogging , you know , work the PR , baby ! 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:56 pm | Reply YOU HONEST AMERICAN PROFESORS , STUDENTS , SPORTS , ACTORS , PATRIOTS AND OTHER , DO NOT BELIEVE IN CNN , BBC , TV MONDO , YOUR POLITICIANS AND EUROPE DOGS-POLITICIANS . 
IT IS NOT TRUTH , THEY WANT TO DESTROY THE WORLD , THEY ARE SICK , KILLERS , MONSTRUMS !!!! BICOUSE THEM , PEOPLE IN THE WORLD SUFFERING !!!!! SUPPORT NOW THE TRUTH AND SUPPORT QADAFI April 8 , 2011 at 11:23 am | Reply April 8 , 2011 at 2:16 pm | Reply Thank you , THE TRUTH . 
That was well stated and I totally agree with you . 
April 8 , 2011 at 2:42 pm | Reply April 8 , 2011 at 7:01 pm | Reply Live and let others to live LIVE AND LET OTHERS TO LIVE , LIVE AND LET OTHERS TO LIVE , LIVE AND LET OTHERS TO LIVE , LIVE AND LET OTHERS TO LIVE , LIVE AND LET OTHERS TO LIVE , LIVE AND LET OTHERS TO LIVE , LIVE AND LET OTHERS TO LIVE , LIVE AND LET OTHERS TO LIVE , LIVE AND LET OTHERS TO LIVE , LIVE AND LET OTHERS TO LIVE , LIVE AND LET OTHERS TO LIVE , LIVE AND LET OTHERS TO LIVE , April 8 , 2011 at 11:26 am | Reply Quadafi is indeed a cruel dictator that should have been gotten rid of 40 years ago . 
Long past due that the Muslim nations control their own dogs . 
They have more then enough money and military to get rid of Quadafi if they want to . 
This is their backyard and fellow muslims -- it is of no national or strategic interest to the U.S. April 8 , 2011 at 11:29 am | Reply Three future scenarios for Libya : 1 . 
Let it float in the toilet . 
Flush it down the toilet 3 . 
Let it dry up in the desert air ! 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:35 am | Reply But what about the people who just want to be free ?? And run with bare feet through in the tall grass and be free ? 
And catch butterflies ?? What will become of these people ? 
Let 's send many American dollars to help them be free . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:27 pm | Reply Actually , while the the organized rebel army is small , the passionate civilian opposition to the Gadhafi regime is widespread , east and west , and in the majority in Libya . 
The ring of mountain towns to the south of Tripoli are all in opposition , and are defending themselves . 
Towns Gadhafi claims to control are controlled at the point of a gun , not by the peoples support . 
Tripoli is under lockdown . 
The regime 's ministers and their families have had their passports confiscated , and are under guard in the govt . 
compound lest they defect . 
Gadhafi 's own govt . 
Tripoli is simmering under this oppression . 
The most likely and immanent scenario is that Tripoli will explode and liberate themselves . 
Gadhafi 's inner circle is getting smaller and smaller . 
Not so much because of what the `` West '' has done , but becuase of utter disgust of what Gadhafi has done . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:55 am | Reply yes , it was said that the Minister of Defense became physically ill after giving the hired guns his last order , the order was to kill anything that moved , man women or child , go into their homes , rape pillage and kill . 
After that he became ill and had to `` seek treatment '' , in London . 
But there remain many dangers , Gadhafi has many friends in Tunisia and they are helping him get supplies into Libya , so while he is down he is truly fighting until the end , , he is a man of his word . 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:47 pm | Reply Yeah , this stalemate is looking temporary . 
Seems that the Libyans are not going to turn back now . 
And if supplies are smuggling in from Tunisia I 'm guessing that NATO will eventually target them . 
I 'm sure that the Libyans are looking at the long term , we just have to learn to do the same and be patient right now . 
The conflict is n't going to stay this way anyway . 
April 8 , 2011 at 4:03 pm | Reply One logical outcome , considering the apparent stalemate on the ground , is a UN brokered ceasefire ; the establishment of a Korean style DMZ , manned by UN troops , which will allow the two sides time to settle at the negotiation table . 
Not the ideal solution , but one which I think will be the outcome in the near future . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:56 am | Reply If Libya were partitioned between East and West , the population in the east would flee or be killed , because they all hate Gadhafi too . 
Only his family would be left , and then they would set upon each other . 
Saif and Muttassim are already at each others throats . 
If Daddy Daffy dies , these brothers will launch a bloody battle between them for power , and East Libya will be in it 's own civil war . 
This is what will happen with partition . 
The Gadhafi 's are the problem . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:19 pm | Reply 50 years later it has n't worked in Korea . 
Learn from the mistakes of past history so you do not repeat them . 
DMZ\/UN does not work . 
They still shoot at each other in Korea . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:21 pm | Reply gbangy is out and the trash goes on your doorstep . 
you are a big dumb poop head . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:39 pm | North is bad and south is good , but USA is still wasting 100s of $ $ millions on the DMZ for over 50 years . 
Where is the rest of the world on this ? 
Only USA and few token `` UN '' troops . 
This sucks for US . 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:04 pm | UN and NATO is not a solution for world peace , UN and NATO is a tool of imperialism , all scenarios are imperialist plot , with their humanitarian reasons arbitrarily interfere in the affairs of other countries . 
Why do they interfere in the affairs of other countries , every insurgency must be crushed April 8 , 2011 at 12:07 pm | Reply The UN and NATO may be a tool for imperialism , but the problem now is , these imperialist countries are all fighting for the same thing under the guise of a united front . 
They are still fighting each other , just not as openly , and they are still trying to be imperialoistic , but also not as openly , using the guise of `` security '' and `` nation-building '' and `` regime change '' as their reasons for doing what they are doing . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:19 pm | Reply i hope your day is filled with apples and peas . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:38 pm | Is everyone really that naive ? 
Tomorrow there 'll be a new Gadhafi . 
And another one after that . 
Your great shining dream of the future is just an illusion ! 
- a modded quote from Gabriel tosh , Starcraft 2 character There will always be a new hydra to pop out of the previous one 's severed head , there is never a resolution , till you burn it to the ground . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:28 pm | Reply I love the calls to divide Libya and await its eventual , `` just '' reunification . 
The majority of the Islamic world 's borders were drawn up arbitrarily by colonial powers . 
There is no `` historic '' anything out there . 
Same goes for the bulk of Africa . 
I 'm glad Europe is doing the bulk of the work in Libya because Britain , France , and Italy are the ones to blame for the unstable , fabricated countries that exist there to begin with . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:28 pm | Reply Italy is dumber than your children . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:37 pm | Reply France is Europes second largest Muslim country behind Romania . 
They put themselves on the wrong side of history too many times . 
But they make great food . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:55 pm | They still cling to the ` ancient tribes ' method of ruling . 
The tribes were forced together like you said by the colonial powers that controlled each area . 
For some reason when the colonial powers left , most of the tribes never really broke out to their original borders . 
So many of them have been fighting ever since . 
Also , most of these AFrican and Arab tribes view the tribal areas as more important than the `` counrty '' borders anyway . 
April 8 , 2011 at 2:15 pm | Reply Not true Fred . 
That fiction is part of Daffy 's propaganda , that with out his firm hand , the `` tribes '' with cause chaos . 
Most Libyan families have extended families with a mixed heritage . 
They drive cars too these days , not camels . 
April 8 , 2011 at 2:44 pm | sleep well all you dumb dumbs . 
the boogie man comes for you . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:35 pm | Reply April 8 , 2011 at 12:36 pm | Reply April 8 , 2011 at 12:56 pm | Reply The civil war is overt , Gadaf will have his men dress in civi 's and attack from within -LRB- if he has not already done that -RRB- and this war will make Nam look like a day in the park . 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:00 pm | Reply I mostly agree . 
Qadaffi & Co. ca n't hide in the jungle in plain sight like the Viet Cong did , even wearing civilian clothes . 
Beware all burka-wearing people in Libya . 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:06 pm | Reply ... ... one answer . 
Tactical Nuclear weapon ... there is not a problem in the world that cant be solved with the application of high explosives . . 
IMO no one on here rates to say anything because you have not experienced first hand what is going on ... but if we are going to help , JUST DO IT ... just like Iraq and Afghanistan , and Vietnam , NO F'ing POLITICS !!!!! set a defined military objective and hit it . 
none of this political you can shoot these people but not these people BS . 
EVERYONE has forgotten how to win a military campaign . 
you must LOSE lives , but the more you lose up front , the less you lose in the future . 
Look at WWII -LRB- the last of TRUE war -RRB- ... was it a politically good idea to drop the atom bombs ? 
NO , but if we had n't we would have lost millions more lives trying to do a ground assualt on japan ... NO politics . 
America doesnt want to step in ? 
fine turn Israel loose . 
HAHAHAHA April 8 , 2011 at 1:39 pm | Reply Such is to be expected from someone of your obvious limitations . 
You think that murder solves eveything , do n't you ? 
Well , I do n't . 
All this warmongering from all these ignoramuses gets to be sickening after a while . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:20 pm | Reply The idiot who support Gaddafi and his thugs do not know what it means for the free Libyans if Gaddafi regain control . 
It is a gencide . 
So where is the goodnes that will come out of his victory . 
He was in power for 42 years , what did he do ? 
killing , torturing , supporting terrorism , squadling the countries money on thugs and civil wars in Africa and terrorist groups al over the globe , paying huge rediculous compensations to abusive powers . 
So tell me where is the independence of Libya . 
Gaddafism must be thrown to the garbage bin of history with Stalinism , Facisim , Natzism and every other ugly ism . 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:46 pm | Reply Look at the situation just slightly more careful . 
Outwardly the conflict was started by the big-eared clown Sarcozy . 
Remember his bellicose escapades ! 
An apparent Commander in Chief of the whole civilized world ! 
One would like to say : `` Slow ride , man . 
The United States are obviously more cautious . 
Just backed NATO with missile hits for some time , and now are making off . 
Russia 's not participating at all , but did n't veto the resolution . 
Surprisingly well-coordinated and equally careful position of two `` competing '' superpowers . 
The United States and Russia . 
Two world biggest arm dealers . 
Swiftly exploding Northern Africa and Middle East resulting in incessant local wars . 
And not incessant , but an incessant . 
Incessant because of European belief in the possibility of future oil extracting in the ignescent region resulting in constant backing of the conflint . 
So Arabs will slaughter each other further and Europe , apart from clever Germans , will drain its economy . 
While the United States and Russia will get their money for selling weapons without any expenses for maintaining the war . 
Oh , I forgot , they 'll be also masking it by `` tension '' between Obama and McCain , and Medvedev and Putin respectively . 
No hard feelings towards those four chaps , they 're doing best for their countries . 
Just an idle observation . 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:56 pm | Reply I like the guys comment about the security guards raping us he 's totally right damn guadaffi April 8 , 2011 at 2:28 pm | Reply I would n't characterize high gas prices as `` sad '' . 
Children with shrapnel wounds is sad . 
April 8 , 2011 at 3:01 pm | Reply It is Libya 's own unrest . 
We should stay out of their own `` family '' affair . 
Is it really wrong for a government to send military troops in to settle unrests ? 
I mean , what else can Gaddafi do other simply hand the government over to whoever is protesting ... comon ! 
No one is going to do that . 
Remember '92 LA riot where we send our nation guard -LRB- ie military -RRB- in to settle unrest . 
What difference does that make ?? April 8 , 2011 at 3:13 pm | Reply Nagotiating would be foolish for the rebels to do . 
Time IS on their side , no matter how bad Gadhafi makes things in Misrata and elsewhere . 
Gadhafi ca n't resupply troops or arms , he 's no longer profiting from all of the oil export , he 'll suffer more defections over time , NATO is breaking the back and will of his army , meanwhile the rebels are getting trained up by the CIA . 
In a stalemate , the opposition might have the opportunity to get better organized too . 
If the rebels settled for Saif , the son , they would be signing their own death warrant and surely know it , so doubtful they would make such a tragic mistake . 
If this were OUR revolution , what do you think we would do ? 
The American colonists had a banner , Do n't Tread On Me . 
April 8 , 2011 at 3:49 pm | Reply let 's be realistic here , rebels ca n't win ... look at them ! 
they may just collapse from within before Gaddafi 's regime even if they could win , they will become the hardest government for the west to support ... April 8 , 2011 at 4:15 pm | Reply I dont know why there are so many people who have never been to Libya , do n't work for the government , and quite possibly do n't even know where Libya is on a map , think they know better what to do in Libya than the President of the United States . 
April 8 , 2011 at 4:40 pm | Reply The way I see , America is acting likes a bunch of jerks , this . 
We should not intervene and while I have no side in the situation in Libya I personally think that America should focus on our own problems , with Democrats and Republicans not wanting to meet in the middle with this Government collapse stuff ... It saddens me , I love the land and this country but I can not stand how its ran at this moment . 
I 've no desire to come off as if I think I could run the country better than Obama but I think maybe its time we stopp jumping into these damn wars and start focusing on all the other problems we have ... if not lets atleast stop fighting other countries and start helping those that need it like Japan . 
April 8 , 2011 at 4:58 pm | Reply Option 4 . 
This what will happen . 
I bet on Al Qaeda and the Muslim Brotherhood to prevail in the end . 
Libya , Algeria , Jordan , Lebanon , Yemen , Sudan and Saudi Arabia can look in the mirror of Iran and see what they will become . 
After the '' `` armed '' '' Muslim Brotherhood , Al Qaeda , Hezbollah , Hamas etc. quiets the '' `` unarmed '' '' voices of democracy through intimidation and murder all the above states will become radicalized Islamic theocracies . 
Calls to abrogate the peace treaty with Israel have already been announced by the Muslim Brotherhood . 
That is not a goal of a peaceful democratic movement . 
Google this Thread : Muslim Brotherhood , abrogate the peace treaty with Israel . 
April 8 , 2011 at 5:51 pm | Reply I guess you have more information than the US government ? 
If you know so much about what is going on in the world then why are n't you the one making the decisions ? 
April 8 , 2011 at 5:59 pm | Reply April 8 , 2011 at 6:03 pm | Reply Fight facts with facts not insults . 
Did you read this or are you back at the cartoon channel ? 
April 8 , 2011 at 6:35 pm | Reply The Muslim Brotherhood is a terrorist organization run by Muslims who are looking to throw the world back into Crusades like violence of Christian vs. Muslim . 
They have been linked to Al - Qeada numerous times and have made statements that `` we would love to see the fall the American bully , and we will help bring it down any way we can . '' 
April 8 , 2011 at 6:08 pm | Reply Is this a joke ? 
I bet you have been watching Glen Beck and Fox `` News '' . 
The conservatives are just trying to do exactly that and stir up hatred of Muslims . 
This is what is wrong with America today , I am ashamed to be from the same country as you . 
I wish you lived over there in Libya . 
April 8 , 2011 at 6:10 pm | Reply The uniformed and unread trash facts . 
Retards that blither here do not matter . 
Calls to abrogate the peace treaty with Israel have already been announced by the Muslim Brotherhood . 
That is not a goal of a peaceful democratic movement . 
Google this Thread : Muslim Brotherhood , abrogate the peace treaty with Israel . 
April 8 , 2011 at 6:46 pm | Reply Libya and the U.S. I do not know what you are talking to you . 
We need all the help and support of NATO as we can . 
All of you who say that Gadhaffi should remain in power have no idea what your talking about her brainless evil despots that my country for 40 years of terror . 
Sory for poor English . 
April 8 , 2011 at 6:15 pm | Reply Yeah Gadhaffi sure is a hero and every other country is evil . 
Im glad to see you 're well informed . 
April 8 , 2011 at 6:22 pm | Reply Just leav Obama alone he is doing the right thing , inocent people are being kill every day by Gadhafi loyalist like bush animal if it come to your door step you will know if you need the help of someboy to help , MR FRED i will advice you to walk majestically to US national assembly and ask them why Obama is allowed to send U.S troop to Lybia , will you impeach Obama just because he want peace to be restored back in Lybia ? 
ask yourself if there is no any other U.S president who send their army to war , pls let peace reign in the world instead of waging war of tongue on each other on internet . 
April 8 , 2011 at 6:23 pm | Reply just another poor sheep being led to the slaughter . 
Do you believe everything that the liberally biased media tells you ? 
This is just a ploy by Obama to spread Western power over a weaker country . 
I would n't be surprised if it came out that the CIA or Isreal had been involved in starting these revolutions . 
April 8 , 2011 at 6:28 pm | Reply Im sorry for all the posts that i have made . 
I am wrong and am brainwashed by Fox News the Tea Party and Glen Beck . 
April 8 , 2011 at 6:30 pm | Reply hacking is cool and mature . 
this is the real fred . 
I am renaming myself nobama for the rest of this conversation April 8 , 2011 at 6:31 pm | Reply How many `` experts '' can appear in this kind of articles , I invite all those experts to live 1 year under the rule of a leftist dictator -LRB- ghadafi , Castro , Chavez , Morales , Ortega -RRB- and see if after that time they would n't be begging for help from their embassies to leave . 
You ca n't speak about something you have n't lived ! 
I would give up all the oil in my country -LRB- Venezuela -RRB- for the right of live in democracy April 8 , 2011 at 7:18 pm | Reply I suggest some reasearch on Libya . 
Can not store nuke waste in Libya because there is far to much water in a fairly shallow aquifer , as was discovered over 50 years ago while drilling for oil . 
-LRB- cia worldfactbook etc. -RRB- Also , Putin volunteered 10 years ago , before 9\/11 , to accept all the world 's nuclear waste , and that was when sites like CNN started talking about dirty bombs . 
That being said , I have no idea why the USA is , or is expected to be , the world 's social worker and enforcer . 
Yes Ghaddafi is a despot , but he is not the worst . 
It was difficult for me to accept , but Libya is more a war for oil , water and M-I complex than any other purpose ; Mostly about the stability of M-I Complex and the instability of Africa . 
Afrique should be rich . 
1500 years ago she was rich and verdant . 
The water aquifer is not very deep , and may be the best aquifer in the world . 
There is a slight chance that he was unifying Africa , and TPTB , were feeling threatened that he might actually pull it off , without having a policy acceptable to EU , much less a succession plan . 
USA would have been better off letting EU overthrow Ghaddafi , and saving USA blood and treasure , because it is far more in the interest of Europe to depose Ghaddafi , Particularly Southern Europe 's despots , although it is arguable that even in the short term , peace and prosperity in Africa would be in the best interests of Europa 's peoples . 
April 8 , 2011 at 7:32 pm | Reply Your mistake is considering Africa as something joint . 
There are Christian Africa and Muslim Africa . 
The chances of their mutual understanding are diminutive . 
April 9 , 2011 at 6:58 am | Reply Whatever the original motive of the Western powers had when siding with the revolt is pointless at this point . 
It has been now proven to the rest of the world that the West has nothing but their own agenda when it comes to so called `` Spreading Democracy '' . 
It 's nothing but a front given to put lipstick on `` Imperialism '' . 
By the way , the most important result from this will be the death of non-nuclear proliferations . 
No one can one convince North Korea , Iran , or anyone else to stop and drop their nuclear weapons program . 
The West can not be trusted and their actions proved that ! 
Good luck to humans ... April 8 , 2011 at 8:09 pm | Reply The imperial and colonial forces are back to africa with apparently a humanitarian mission . 
who can see so fare the humanitarian mission . 
Drop THOUSANS POUNDS OF BOMBS : IS THAT THE HUMANITARIAN MISSION ? 
just a bunch of legalise state mercenaries france , britain saddly the nobel price Obama America . 
oNE DAY CHINESE LEADERS WILL be ASKing NATO COUNTRY LEADERS TO STEP DOWN IMMEDIATLY -LRB- AS DO WASHINGHTON -RRB- , IN 50Years from now April 8 , 2011 at 8:10 pm | Reply April 8 , 2011 at 8:13 pm | Reply scarry ! 
... hope we keep they record of what we are doing to others now and not cry for injustice then . 
April 8 , 2011 at 9:31 pm | China 's got approximately 400-450 nuclear warheads . 
The United States and Russia got thousands of them each -- enough to devastate the whole planet three times -LRB- each country can do it three times , I repeat -RRB- . 
And these are only declared warheads , the number of undeclared ones is said to be triple or fourfold -LRB- again , in each country -RRB- . 
The small number and poor technological level of Chinese missiles make American and Russian air defense systems almost impenetrable for them . 
But even if we go away from the US and Russia , who 's firepower is obviously superior to the Chinese , we 'll see that , for example , French armed forces can fully handle with China . 
France 's got approximately 500 warheads -LRB- and not so poor-leveled missiles as Chinese ones -RRB- . 
This is the first point . 
However , if China decides to hit France with its missiles , they 'll eminently intercepted by Russian or American air defense systems , because it is impossible to reach France from China without breaking into either Russian or American airspace . 
This is the second one . 
An the third thing is the fact that French soldiers -LRB- especially the Foreign Legion -RRB- are incomparably better trained than the Chinese . 
Of course it is absolutely theoretical scenario , only possible if Sarkozy likes the role of world number one bully so much , that drives totally wild . 
It was military-like answer to your military-like post . 
But I would advise you not to be so bellicose , my friend , and to analize the situation in China within the economic field , so that you would be able to learn all about `` Chinese economic success '' . 
April 9 , 2011 at 7:56 am | Reply 1 - a intercontinental missile from China to France doN , t need nessary to go though us or Russia . 
2-wHAT the French army can do without the US or the poor africans ? 
They can , t handle vietman -LRB- with chinese help -RRB- , it took Hitler a week to COMPLETLY NEUTRALIZE THEM a big shame , and we all know that . 
thanks to the POOR AFRICAN ENROLE INTO THIS BATLE -LRB- THAT WASN , T THEIRS -RRB- AND TO THE US . 
They can , t even handle a no-fly zone in Libya without US . 
and you are comparing France to China ? 
THE slaves predator , imperialist and colonialist are back to AFrica with the ultime `` Humanitarian mission '' . 
who is at the end the real evil ? 
have a nice day my dear April 9 , 2011 at 10:15 pm | 1 . 
Hey Dave , do you really think that if missiles aren `` t passing directly above the territory of some country , they are out of its air diffence systems ? 
You are inconceivably naive . 
Foreign Legion is not an Arabic unit . 
It consists of soldiers from the whole world , including America and Russia named above . 
And even including soldiers from France 's long-time rival in the past -- the Great Britain . 
Believe me , they are the most appreciated force of the unit . 
Soldiers from the world 's best armies -LRB- some of them even served in Seals , Spetsnaz and SAS -RRB- . 
Do you really think that somebody would need to occupy China ? 
This poorly resourced and overpopulated country ? 
The only porpuse will be to put them down . 
You have ignored my remark about Chinese economic state , I see . 
I just would advise you not to twaddle about evils . 
We are n't on the role-playing games forum , mon cher . 
April 10 , 2011 at 7:27 am | 1-originaly i did not mean Missile . 
But when you go to China or see the french leaders in China you can see how the french are littaraly kneelling before chinese leaders to open them ways to their business . 
50 years ago French were arogant in 50 year again from now France will be tarking orders from China . 
2 - they french army ? 
it took Hitler germany a week to destroy them . 
only Africa is their save heaven , they are like VAMPIRE IN africa . 
I think a burden to this continent . 
They made a oil deal with the libyan rebels as you can see the start SUCKING THE OIL FROM LIBYA : VAMPIRES . 
This inexperiance Obama follow the narcist histrionic Sarkozi , now he realize the mistake and is looking for the chance to escape in dignity . 
France can , t even enforce a no fly zone in Libya by itself . 
Only Africa is their haven . 
have a nice day my dear . 
April 10 , 2011 at 10:11 am | Ah , you do n't mean missiles already . 
Of course you do n't . 
Because you 've got nothing to say again . 
So you started publishing your offended ravings . 
Be careful , it may cause cerebral phimosis to you . 
Sad , but true . 
April 10 , 2011 at 10:56 am | What determine the future in Libya are the free Libyans not the NATO nor Gaddafi and his mercenaries . 
When the Libyans revolted peacefully against oppression and injustice they did not consult the NATO or the west about the possibility of succeeding , because they believe in their cause . 
Of course , the rhythm of the revolution in terms of the battles on the ground seems slower , but the coming days will bring pleasant surprises to the freedom fighters . 
Gaddafi is clinically dead , exactly like Sharon of Israel . 
His son is still attempting for less humiliating exit for the family of the dictator . 
When the dust of the battle settle down , the Libyans will look back and reward friends and punish those who sided with Gaddafi . 
April 8 , 2011 at 8:12 pm | Reply Jadd , do n't be discouraged by these comments on CNN . 
Despite it 's wealth , the US educational system is not as rigorous as in Europe . 
Analytical thinking and logic is not even part of the curriculum ! 
Most American 's have never traveled from their region , never mind country , so their `` world view '' is limited to whatever `` news '' programe come on after their favorite TV show . 
While many American 's are `` hicks '' , as you can see here , I have met many thoughtful , intelligent people in the US . 
Obviously , they do not post on CNN . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:30 pm | Reply The slaves predator , imperialist and colonialist are back to AFrica with the ultime `` Humanitarian mission '' . 
They come as strangers in your land you welcome them into your house , you bring them at your table for supper , THEN they corrupt , they divide , they kill , destroy , still , vandalize , burry any hope in your land , send they children and children children to do the same : slavery , colonize civilize ... then humanitarian mission April 8 , 2011 at 9:26 pm | Reply lybia hasnt been free for 42 years . 
now somebody finally stood up to the raghead gadhafi . 
GO REBELS !! April 8 , 2011 at 9:46 pm | Reply @NINA , you are so stupid for saying where the hell will the Arab world be if not for the American paying top dollars for oil ? 
how many barrel of oil did Americans bought with your so call top dollars each year ? 
do n't be deceived your government only steal oil from other gulf countries without paying for it either by war or political agreement . 
Most of the money the US government spend on crul oil are all on debt . 
Go check how much your fucking government is owing the world bank ? 
do you think USA will forever be the world power ? 
because change is coming with your economy going down each year , and change its self is inevitable . 
@ WALTER , I presume you do n't have a common sense for discussions like this , you fore fathers were brought up with wealth from Africa , without Africans you should have died or be begging for survivor as you are rightly struggling to pay your bills in that your fucking country . 
go and ask your leaders or people in power in your foolish country if they do n't take bribe ? 
so shut the fuck up and get off this discussion you fucking labourer . 
April 8 , 2011 at 10:47 pm | Reply @PETE , American have already withdrawal from the crisis in Libya because they have nothing to gain from Libya at the moment to finance there military staying there to combat Mummar Gaddaffi , your African president his wise because his an African and would have been the most foolish thing in his regime to have allowed the US soldiers in Libya . 
NATO forces are in the best position to handle Libya and not all western world running with there troops to Libya thinking they can get some oil reserve to there country especially french president whose election was funded by Mummar Gaddaffi fund before Nicolas sarkozy can be in power in France at moment . 
Africa is best with natural resource and no one can change that !!!!!!!!! April 8 , 2011 at 11:01 pm | Reply Libya is not really an american problem , its a problem because of proximity and supply of oil for Europe . 
I have family in Sardinia who are closer to Tripoli than Rome , they are afraid because of all the military aircraft roaming over their heads day and night . 
Bot islands Sardinia and Sicily are invaded by refugees from Libya and Tunisia because of the upheaval . 
NATO is doing the right thing to support the rebels whoever they are , Europe needs stability and oil and gaz to keep its economy running , Khadafi is a madman that menances the well being of Europe . 
If the USA had dealt with Khadafi after the PanAm terrorist attack , we would not experience this crisis now , its an opportunity missed for reasons I still can not understand , lets not miss another opportunity to helpt the people of Libya to get rid of Khadafi . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:09 pm | Reply April 8 , 2011 at 11:27 pm | Reply CNN is propaganda machine of Jews zoinist . 
Today Israel killed 12 civilians in Gaza . . 
no news coverage . . 
but any unrest in Islamic world is the headline of CNN . 
Israel is the main cause of unrest in Arab world . . 
Israel needs to be wiped out if peace is to be desired April 9 , 2011 at 3:18 am | Reply Oh , damn , here we go again . 
Whatever happens is Israel 's guilt . 
Maybe even the fact that my drunking neigbor plumber shed the beer on his pants when he was tight yesterday and was turning the air blue for half an our the way the whole hood heard is also zionists ' schemings ? 
You are to be injected with life-giving euthanasia to be cured of your cerebral phimosis , or you 're quickly and enevitably reaching the full calcification of thought-conducting channels of your interaural ganglion . 
April 9 , 2011 at 8:36 am | Reply April 9 , 2011 at 3:41 am | Reply The future all Libyans looking for is one WITHOUT GADDAF , HIS FAMILY nor his regime who all should and will pay for all their crimes against Libyans and humanity . 
Gaddafi and his regime not only terrorized Libyans for 4 decades , they terrorized the whole world and should be punished . 
April 9 , 2011 at 6:11 am | Reply U.S.A leaders and Some European Countries leaders should go to Japan and have a nice Nuclear Shower !!! Who make war who should be punished !!! April 9 , 2011 at 8:04 am | Reply It 's not a matter of imperialism or economic expansionism . 
The fact is the rebels are little more than impoverished farmers with a couple guns and technical trucks against a professional army equipped with tanks , artillery and snipers , not to mention training . 
All the NATO airstrikes are designed to do is eliminate the pro-governmental armor and heavy weapons to create an equal playing field between the rebels and the pro-government forces . 
Despite these strikes , it 's clear the pro-government forces still have the advantage . 
April 9 , 2011 at 9:54 am | Reply All these calls for Democracy in the arab world bring a mixed blessing . 
They will most likely succeed in over-throwing the dictators , but freedom & liberty will not follow . 
Once all of these countries take their first vote , guess who the victors will be ? 
This is not hard to figure out . 
Almost everyone will vote for the parties of islam . 
So , the mullahs will come to power , just as they did in Iran , and we see the results there . 
Un-fortunately , there can be no Liberty in any of these countries . 
After the mullahs are in charge in all of these countries , there is a much greater danger of war with the west . 
There will only be bondage . 
Where the spirit of the lord is , there is Liberty . 
There is only one scenario for Libya and the world at this time : freedom for Libya and the Libyan people ; riddance of Gadaffi . 
Those who wo n't accept it will have to accept defeat . 
April 10 , 2011 at 5:18 am | Reply I think First option and first para is most possible because UK and France are involved in this conflict . 
Both are master in dividing the nations , creating problem forever , torturing , dividing society and people and making the division and hatred and plundering wealth so much that it is not possible to fill the gap for centuries They could not solve a single problem but created many more . 
Look back history and human right in Africa , Asia , Middle East etc during occupation . 
I think US is aware of the dirty game kept itself away . 
Now they take the cover of UN and can do any thing . 
The international community is handicapped because they are also affraid of them . 
April 10 , 2011 at 8:08 am | Reply The slaves predator , imperialist and colonialist are back to AFrica with the ultime `` Humanitarian mission '' . 
They come as strangers in your land you welcome them into your house , you bring them at your table for supper , THEN they corrupt , they divide , they kill , destroy , still , vandalize , burry any hope in your land , send they children and children children to do the same : slavery , colonize civilize ... then now `` humanitarian mission '' April 10 , 2011 at 9:47 am | Reply Obama is a shame to African 's and Africa . 
Because Ghaddafi stands for the UNITED STATE OF AFRICA . 
because his investment in 25 African countries alone over shines that of the West . 
because of his idea of introducing the Africa one currency `` Afro in 2017 , because of his Malibya project in Mali that has kicked France out of the country , because of his idea of Africans to have just one set in the UN security council , ect ... Obama and his European friends have decided to see Africa remain in its down turn . 
But they are all wrong , history is on our side . 
The French will loss their grip . 
April 10 , 2011 at 8:34 am | Reply Obama grand father use to own slaves . 
He is one of them . 
it is in his gene . 
The slaves predator , imperialist and colonialist are back to AFrica with the ultime `` Humanitarian mission '' . 
They come as strangers in your land you welcome them into your house , you bring them at your table for supper , THEN they corrupt , they divide , they kill , destroy , still , vandalize , burry any hope in your land , send they children and children children to do the same : slavery , colonize civilize ... then humanitarian mission April 10 , 2011 at 9:50 am | Reply Have you got stuck , Davie ? 
First signs of cerebral phimosis . 
I fear , you have already been affected by the most horrible plague of the internets . 
April 10 , 2011 at 11:07 am | F I , M WRONG WITH the imperialist , that i know very well then tell me . 
if not why are you disrespecting yourself with your word . 
I thought you were an intelectual who want to discuss . 
if you can debate , please just withdaw from this forum please . 
April 10 , 2011 at 11:59 am | Reply Oh , damn it , the fellow who 's publishing the same spam-like posts again and again , insists on somebody 's leaving the forum . 
Tell me one thing : if you hate imperialists so much , why are YOU visiting forums of imperialistic medias ? 
The inferiority complex , huh ? 
April 10 , 2011 at 12:22 pm | Complete Victory for Lybian Rebel Forces or Qaddafi the new Saddam ? 
It has to be one or the other , if not why waste the international community 's time , effort & money ? 
The international community supports the rebels not for oil purposes but for humanity . 
People should have the right to express themselves freely and not be punished for it but middle eastern countries do not like criticism nor handle it in a humane way . 
We -LRB- the international community -RRB- should put all lies aside given to us by Qaddafi 's regime and entirely back the rebels and let them decide their future or step out completely and let Qaddafi continue killing his own people without any interference . 
I support freedom I support the rebels . 
April 10 , 2011 at 9:55 am | Reply training . 
WE ARE SPENDING MILLIONS OF $ $ every dayF REE FOR charge only for humanitarian mission . 
They rebels only said to the FRENCH AND whoever help them that : rebels : YOU CAN HAVE AS MUCH OIL THAT YOU WANT . 
April 10 , 2011 at 10:24 am | Reply Complete Victory for Lybian Rebel Forces or Qaddafi the new Saddam ? 
Humanitarian mission , No arms deal , Qaddafi regime ousted , Oil deals approved to finance a new SECULAR Lybia . 
April 10 , 2011 at 12:57 pm | The display of utter diplomatic indiscipline by those serving in Libyan foreign missions abroad when they resigned en mass should be addressed here . 
What exactly are they saying is their honest reasons for dissociating themselves from a leader they loyally served for 4 decades ? 
If this was not the most immoral sign of self preservation to avoid reprisals against them then I do not know what it was . 
So , did they all of a sudden grow brains and realized they were backing a wrong man ? 
They were appalled by the crack down on protesters so they said . 
Oooh , please move over ! 
These people who took to the streets of Libya should be called what they really are , anarchists , pure and simple . 
They were not peacefully calling on the government to discuss changes they wanted made as a matter of urgency . 
What they wanted was a sudden and disorderly removal of a regime by any means necessary . 
This is what I find rather disturbing and the West and everyone is unanimously in support of such actions . 
Is this the culture we are truly advocating all disgruntled nationals to employ whenever they are unhappy with their leaders ? 
It is clearly undeniable that the western powers are not entirely being driven by their morality in dealing with what is happening in the Arab world particularly in Libya . 
What they failed to achieve through the many years of isolating Libya , they have most definitely found a necessary primer to try again in the current crisis to push this agenda . 
April 10 , 2011 at 11:05 am | Reply The only scary thing about these revolutions is the possibility of something worse -- something more extremist -- gaining a foothold . 
Just imagine a revolution in the US that saw the Tea Party come out on top . 
The only difference is that comparing the Muslim Brotherhood with the Tea Party , the latter appears a genuine example of liberalism . 
April 10 , 2011 at 12:36 pm | Reply This article told me yet again what opinion to have about the situation in Libya , Rebels = good , Gadaffi = very bad . 
Think I got it now , is there any chance to get some news soon ? 
April 10 , 2011 at 12:28 pm | Reply The west made a mistake by invading Libya . 
Not because Gadaffi is good\/west are bad or that there will be huge mess after Gadaffi . 
No , the only reason is that if people want freedom , they have to fight for it -LRB- not necessarily with weapons -RRB- , otherwise if someone gives freedom as a gift , people do not respect it and may loose it soon . 
April 10 , 2011 at 1:35 pm | Reply @David do n't worry MDX appears to be very short sided with no sense of direction . 
out of touch and consumed with the mess-media deception . 
April 10 , 2011 at 1:48 pm | Reply Stop creating virtuals who `` support '' you , Davie . 
This is old and totally unimpressive trick . 
April 10 , 2011 at 2:01 pm | Reply Why the EU and USA care Libya , but no one cares Yemen & Syria , no foreign force help civilian in Yemen . 
All of them suffer this kind situation . 
What is the difference between Libya and Yemen ? 
Libya , an American emeny ; Yemen , an American friend . 
April 10 , 2011 at 7:42 pm | Reply Willing Willie s March 12 episode on TV5 . 
He reiterated that there was no abuse committed . 
I did not do anything wrong with that child -RRB- , Willing Willie s which featured a crying six-year-old boy while simulating a striptease as show host Willie Revillame laughed and egged him on , triggered strong rebuke from the public and government s rights and social welfare agencies . 
Revillame named the celebrities who criticised him on microblogging site Twitter and threatened he might file charges against them . 
He mentioned the members of PILIPINO CRAB MENTALITY names are : Jim Paredes , Lea Salonga , Aiza Seguerra , Leah Navarro , Bianca Gonzalez , K Brosas , Agot Isidro and Tuesday Vargas as among those who attacked him . 
April 10 , 2011 at 8:56 pm | Reply Ultimately , the success of the mission in the end is going to depend on whether or not Gaddafi retaliates because the entire rationale for arming\/supporting the rebels -LRB- after preventing the humanitarian crisis in Benghazi -RRB- was that a Libya with Gaddafi still in power would not fly and to prove to other leaders that Gaddafi 's model of response would not work . 
If there is a negotiated settlement , will Gaddafi in the future build up his arms and try to attack again ? 
And if he does will the international community respond in a similar way ? 
There should be no surprise that the opposition forces will not agree to anything that includes a Gaddafi in power . 
As Fareed pointed out earlier , if anything is going to break Gaddafi , it is going to be economic pressure and defections of his inner circle . 
In this sense , the best outcome is somewhere between 2 and 3 . 
To accomplish this , NATO should continue with its operations , continue to train\/arm the rebels , and also provide them with humanitarian aid if needed . 
Meanwhile , the African Union should work to convince Gaddafi to gracefully step down from power so as not to anger the supporters in Tripoli . 
This brings up another important question : how will Gaddafi s most ardent supporters in Tripoli view the rebels if\/when they try to form a new government in the name of Libya ? 
There is nothing wrong with arguing , protesting , or yelling at each other to achieve political power and compromise , but I do not know how attached to Gaddafi Libyans in Tripoli are . 
If they decide to reject the rebels interim government and the contention devolves into another civil conflict then the coalition will have no choice but to pull out . 
April 11 , 2011 at 11:24 pm | Reply Wow the results of `` virtual '' democrary . 
It 's pathetic that so many people have lost their lives in the Middle East wave of so called democratic revolutions ; this adds up to a manipulation of the ME masses by western media short sightedness . 
I say this because western media and politicians , in regards , keep talking about democracy , liberty and other tenets of Americanism but in every breath cheapen the value of such words , not every mentioning that each are the result of a process that `` ca n't '' be handed to anyone , anyway but must be earned by struggle over generations not to mention that many of the gulity in this matter would call themselves patriotic too unfortunately , the blood is on the west hands now . 
April 12 , 2011 at 1:18 am | Reply For so many years the world knowledge -LRB- Specially Americans -RRB- about Libya is as . 
a big lake of oil , Qaddafi and Terrorism . 
If you ask most of American 3 months ago what do you know about Libya ... the answer will be as above . 
Most of ABC , CBS CNN , ... ETC. . . 
do not know the history , culture or the Language Libyans Speak . . 
but now you know they are 6.5 million Libyans live in Libya . 
We like to see all of these Media workers to visit Benghazi ... and you are free to talk to any Libyan not like Tripoli . 
The East of Libya is a free land , soon the rest of Libya will be free from the Dictator . 
April 26 , 2011 at 2:27 am | Reply We all here actually talking but we feel . . 
but none of us has so far thought for positive solution ... Kadafi 's regime was not that much attractive . . 
but it was much more better than the current situation & Kadafi brought planned revolution with all his theories & believes which highly required for any state ... it worked for that time & he controlled his regime successfully with the tool of spreading fear unjustified brutality on his nation an easy way out to rule which was his worst cruelity & backbone for stablizing his regime ... Its pretty obvious in the history that all dictotors & king use to hang agressively to rebels by labeling them traitors ... & thats what going on uptill now even democratic countries detain & kills many of their rebels by labeling them terrorists ... a leader cant be graceful he has to be fear & pity less to run his regime ... revolution in Libya is justified but only in the sense when it was planned to win or to die . . 
not just by hang the country & start crying like a baby for help ... opposition might have brought a great start of revolution but they dont have further plan which is highly required to run the country ... they are just selling their country on any cost for throwing Kadafi out ... & Kadafi is dictotor who ruled for 42 years even after extremly opposed by West . . 
how can he accept his incomplete defiet ... the best solution is this divide the regime by accepting Saif El Islam & wait untill Kadafi dies he will die after 3 -- 4 years . . 
coz its easy to regime from Saif May 22 , 2011 at 9:18 am | Reply July 28 , 2011 at 12:19 pm | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
