Series of explosions in Libyan capitol NEW : Four journalists will be released , senior Libyan government official says Former GOP congressman still hopes to meet with Moammar Gadhafi Airstrikes on rebels in the east kill four , a rebel commander says Four journalists , including two Americans , are seized by pro-Gadhafi forces Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Airstrikes killed four people in eastern Libya on Thursday , an opposition general said , and rebel fighters and civilians made a wild , panicky retreat from a major city . 
Aircraft fired missiles on a rebel formation between al-Brega and Ajdabiya on the eastern Libyan battlefront , witnesses told CNN Thursday , an act that left the opposition wondering whether NATO aircraft conducted mistaken airstrikes on the forces they are trying to protect . 
It 's unclear whether Libyan aircraft or NATO fired the missiles , but there have n't been Libyan air force planes in the skies for some time because NATO aircraft have established a no-fly zone . 
NATO said it 's looking into the strikes but did n't say who carried it out . 
In a statement , it said that hostilities between al-Brega and Ajdabiya have `` been fierce for several days . 
The situation is unclear and fluid with mechanized weapons traveling in all directions . '' 
`` What remains clear is that NATO will continue to uphold the U.N. mandate and strike forces that can potentially cause harm to the civilian population of Libya , '' NATO said . 
Gen. Abdul Fattah Yunis , commander of rebel forces , told reporters of the `` unfortunate setback . '' 
Working in a war zone The planes fired on 20 rebel tanks near al-Brega Thursday morning , Yunis said . 
Gadhafi 's troops moved forward after the attack , causing the opposition to pull back . 
Several of the tanks were destroyed . 
The general said he wanted some answers from NATO on whether it or Gadhafi planes made the strike . 
If the latter , Yunis said , NATO should have prevented that by enforcing the no-fly zone . 
He added that the rebels had notified NATO of the tank movement and of their presence . 
`` There is no tension between us and NATO ; this is a war situation and we understand that mistakes are made , '' Yunis said . 
Two soldiers and two medics died in the airstrike . 
Fourteen people were injured and six are missing , Yunis said . 
Witnesses said the rebel fighters saw an airplane and thought it was from NATO , CNN 's Ben Wedeman reported . 
Later , the plane returned and fired several missiles and then made another strike . 
Ambulances responded , and the injured people were taken to a hospital in Ajdabiya . 
A few hours after the strikes , civilians and rebels , fearing an approach by pro-Gadhafi forces , retreated from Ajdabiya , with hundreds of civilian cars and trucks loaded with rocket launchers and ammunition headed out of town in the direction of the opposition headquarters in Benghazi . 
Tanks were reportedly part of the column of vehicles . 
The Gadhafi regime 's persistence in the face of NATO forces has frustrated and angered opposition leaders , who say they are not getting traction despite the alliance 's no-fly zone and air cover . 
NATO said weather conditions and tactics by the Gadhafi regime , such as using human shields and hiding equipment in populated areas , have hindered its efforts . 
If the latest bombing run were a NATO strike , rebels said it would have been the second in a week 's time . 
Last week , airstrikes hit rebel vehicles and killed at least 13 rebel fighters in the al-Brega area , a spokesman for the Libyan opposition said . 
The strikes come amid a deadly stalemate between pro-Moammar Gadhafi forces and rebel fighters , diplomatic maneuvering to end the conflict and blunt doubts about the potency of the opposition forces . 
Asked whether rebel fighters can push into Tripoli and oust Gadhafi , Gen. Carter Ham , U.S. Africa Command 's chief , told senators at a hearing Thursday , `` I would assess that as a low likelihood . '' 
Also Thursday , a senior Libyan government official said four detained journalists are in government hands and are safe . 
They will be brought to Tripoli and released , but the timing is uncertain , the official said . 
GlobalPost , an international news website , said pro-Gadhafi forces detained one of its freelancers and three other journalists . 
They had been taken Tuesday night on the outskirts of al-Brega , said Peter Bouckaert , director of emergencies for Human Rights Watch . 
On the diplomatic front , a former U.S. lawmaker who has been trying to meet with Gadhafi told CNN `` The Situation Room '' that Friday will be his last opportunity . 
Curt Weldon has said he will tell the leader to step aside and take other measures to end the bloodshed . 
A former Republican U.S. House member from suburban Philadelphia , Weldon has been to Libya before in his work as a congressman . 
He said he came to the country this time with `` a small private delegation . '' 
Weldon said he has met with other Libyan officials , including the prime minster and Gadhafi 's son , Saadi , conveying the Obama administration 's stance on the crisis and reinforcing the importance of an immediate cease-fire monitored by the United Nations to protect civilians . 
`` I 'm here only because I want to avoid war , '' Weldon told CNN 's Wolf Blitzer . 
`` I do n't want to see American soldiers killed , and I do n't want to see more innocent Libyans killed , '' he added . 
Fighting has raged across the country . 
Rebel fighters and pro-Gadhafi forces have been pushing back and forth between al-Brega and Ajdabiya . 
In the capital , Tripoli , four explosions were heard , and two aircraft could be seen overhead Thursday . 
Libyan government spokesman Musa Ibrahim described the Thursday airstrikes as heavy and `` really intensive . '' 
He said the strikes hit `` military academies around Tripoli where students and teachers work . '' 
A British airstrike hit an oil field in the eastern town of Sarir on Wednesday , causing damage to a main pipeline , Libyan Deputy Foreign Minister Khaled Kaim told reporters . 
But NATO 's operation in Libya denied responsibility , saying such blame reflects the desperation of the Gadhafi regime . 
`` We are aware that pro-Gadhafi forces have attacked this area in recent days , which resulted in at least one fire at an oil facility north of Sarir , '' said Lt. Gen. Charles Bouchard , commander of NATO 's Operation Unified Protector . 
`` We have never conducted strike operations in this area because his forces were not threatening civilian population centers from there , '' Bouchard said . 
`` The only one responsible for this fire is the Gadhafi regime , and we know he wants to disrupt oil getting to Tobruk . '' 
Meanwhile , violence continues in the western city of Misrata . 
Ham said the `` regime has a significantly degraded ability to continue to attack civilians '' and Misrata is a `` notable exception . '' 
`` The opposition forces have held an area in the northeastern portion of the city , in the port . 
And frankly , the port has been operating to get some relief , '' he said . 
`` But the regime forces are and remain active in the city against civilians . '' 
U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has said conditions in Misrata are `` especially grave , '' citing `` reports of the use of heavy weapons to attack the city , where the population is trapped and unable , as a result of heavy shelling that has continued over several weeks , to receive basic supplies , including clean water , food and medicines . '' 
The World Food Programme said one of its humanitarian vessels loaded with food , medical supplies and doctors has reached the port of Misrata , providing what it called a `` lifeline '' for trapped civilians . 
`` This is a breakthrough for the U.N. humanitarian operation in Libya and allows us to reach tens of thousands of people who are caught in one of the fiercest areas of conflict , '' said WFP Executive Director Josette Sheeran . 
`` It is vital that we get these relief supplies to the vulnerable . '' 
CNN 's Nic Robertson and Ben Wedeman contributed to this report Watch Anderson Cooper 360 weeknights 10pm ET . 
For the latest from AC360 click here . 
