Search for new homes , condos , and other real estate in Washington , D.C. , Maryland and Virginia . 
While policymakers and policy kibitzers , among whom I count myself , debate what is needed to cure the current crisis and recession , another debate brews in the background . 
It is about how to fix the system so that this does n't happen again . 
Any coherent proposal for fixing the system is based on judgments about the causes of the crisis . 
While there are many differences in emphasis , I believe that most observers would agree on the essentials : The crisis originated with a bubble in the residential real estate market , followed by the inevitable aftermath of declining home prices , and a subsequent explosion of home mortgage defaults and foreclosures . 
The resulting losses were worldwide , because foreign investors held enormous amounts of U.S. mortgage-related assets . 
Financial institutions did not have the capital to absorb these losses , resulting in the collapse of many and the enormous infusion of capital by governments , plus loans and guarantees , to prevent the collapse of many more . 
This sequence of events could be prevented by blocking the bubble , or by shoring up the capacity of the financial system to absorb the losses resulting from a bubble 's collapse . 
In my opinion , the second option should have priority . 
We do n't know where the next bubble will come from , but if the system has enough capital , a crisis can be averted no matter its source . 
Private financial institutions will never voluntarily carry enough capital to cover the losses that would occur under a disaster scenario . 
For one thing , such disasters occur infrequently , and as the period since the last occurrence gets longer , the natural tendency is to disregard it -- to treat it as having a zero probability . 
In a study of international banking crises , finance professor Richard Herring and I called this `` disaster myopia . '' 
Disaster myopia is reinforced by `` herding . '' 
Any one firm that elects to play it safe will be less profitable than its peers , making its shareholders unhappy and even opening itself to a possible takeover . 
Furthermore , even if those controlling financial firms knew the probability of a severe shock , and the large losses that would result from it , it is not in their interest to hold the capital needed to meet those losses . 
Because they do n't know when the shock will occur , playing it safe would mean reduced earnings for the firm and reduced personal income for them for what could be a very long time . 
Better to realize the higher income as long as possible , because if they stay within the law , the money wo n't be taken from them when the firm becomes insolvent . 
Indeed , insolvency may not mean the demise of the firm if many firms are affected at the same time . 
Governments ca n't allow them all to fail without allowing the crisis to become a catastrophe . 
This is clearly borne out by the U.S. government 's actions in the current crisis . 
Bailouts by the government further validate the premise that it is foolhardy for a financial firm to hold the capital needed to meet the losses associated with a severe shock . 
This appears to lead logically to the conclusion that government ought to impose capital requirements on financial firms . 
Capital requirements stipulate the amount of capital firms must have , based largely on the amounts and types of assets and liabilities they have . 
Unfortunately , capital requirements wo n't prevent financial crises . 
An inherent flaw in capital requirements is that required capital varies by broad asset categories , which allows the regulated firms to replace less risky assets with more risky assets within any given asset class . 
The shift to subprime mortgages during the last bubble , for example , did not increase their required capital . 
In principle , regulators can offset this by adjusting requirements in response to changing economic conditions . 
For this to work , however , regulators must have better foresight than those they regulate , which they do n't . 
An increase in capital requirements large enough to burst a bubble would be extremely disruptive , forcing many firms to sell stock at the same time , or to substantially reduce their lending . 
Concerns about such disruptions reinforce disaster myopia and political timidity among regulators . 
That 's easy to prove . 
Banks and other depository institutions have been subject to capital requirements since the 1980s , but no adjustments in the requirements were made in response to the recent housing bubble . 
Next Saturday : Replacing capital requirements with transaction-based reserves . 
