BIR AJAM , Sudan | Thu Oct 20 , 2011 8:59 am BST BIR AJAM , Sudan -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - For Sudanese worker Mohamed Taher , hunting for gold with a metal detector in the Nubian desert is a way to end years of unemployment . 
`` Sometimes I find one to four ounces , sometimes nothing . 
But if I find something it will cover all my expenses , '' says Mohamed , who regularly camps out with friends to search for gold . 
Like tens of thousands of other Sudanese , Mohamed has been lured by a gold rush in the remote northeast of the vast country , where experts say large amounts of valuable minerals may lie buried . 
Some government officials estimate 200,000 people or more may have taken part in the rush since last year . 
Mohamed 's home village , Bir Ajam , is located some 30 kilometers -LRB- 20 miles -RRB- from the Hassai mine , Sudan 's biggest , in the mountainous desert hinterland of the Red Sea city of Port Sudan . 
The venture which runs the mine , Ariab Mining Co , in which the Sudanese government holds a majority stake and Canada 's La Mancha Resources LMA . 
TO owns 40 percent , is investing millions of dollars to expand gold output and look for other minerals such as copper . 
The gold fever is spreading some wealth to one of Sudan 's poorest regions , where nomadic life for much of the population has changed little from centuries ago . 
Lured by record international gold prices above $ 1,600 an ounce , villagers like Mohamed search for gold on the outskirts of the Hassai mine . 
Hundreds of others work in the mine itself . 
A mining industry conference this month in Port Sudan , the country 's first in decades , attracted dozens of foreign executives and experts -- a rare sight in a country shunned by most Western firms because of U.S. sanctions imposed over a decade ago amid charges that Sudan sponsored terrorism . 
`` Sudan represents one of the last remaining African countries that has significant gold potential and has not been subject of intense , systematic exploration in the modern era , '' Howard Bills of the British-based mining firm Toro Gold told the conference . 
The Nubian desert has been a source of gold since the time of the Egyptian pharaohs , but only in the past few years has the government stepped up exploration efforts . 
Sudan hopes an expansion of gold exports will bring in much-needed foreign currency and compensate for oil revenues lost with the secession of the south of the country in July this year . 
Before the split , the country produced about 500,000 barrels of oil a day and earned around $ 5 billion from oil exports annually ; secession meant the north lost some 75 percent of that . 
Annual inflation was 21 percent in September , partly because the loss of oil revenues has caused the Sudanese pound to depreciate in the black market , driving up the cost of food and other imported goods . 
The government has handed out almost 100 new gold exploration licences to foreign and local firms in the past 12 months , bringing the total number of outstanding licences to about 200 . 
`` Sudan is right now high on the list globally in terms of the likelihood of gold discoveries , '' said Tucker Barrie , a Canadian mining expert who regular visits Sudan 's industry . 
`` I see it as pretty positive ... There will be more discoveries . '' 
However , mining industry executives warn it will take years to build up gold output as only about three mining firms have started production -- the rest are still exploring . 
The government predicts gold output will reach as much as 70 tonnes this year and bring in $ 3 billion of revenue , potentially making Sudan the third largest gold producer in Africa , after South Africa and Ghana and before Mali . 
But the executives say that goal is well out of reach for now . 
`` I think if they make 20 to 30 percent of the $ 3 billion , that would be good , '' said a managing director of a Sudanese mining firm , declining to be named because of the sensitivity of the issue . 
The official target is `` way too optimistic '' . 
Even the mining ministry admits that only 7 tonnes will be produced from mines such as Hassai ; the rest is projected to come from `` artisanal '' seekers like Mohamed , whose success is hard to track . 
A foreign mining expert working in Sudan said 4 tonnes of gold from mines would be a realistic target for 2011 . 
Another obstacle is the U.S. trade embargo , which deters many Western firms from getting involved , leaving the field mainly to local or Chinese companies which may lack experience . 
`` It 's a bit of a hit and miss business with Sudanese firms . 
Chinese firms are good at building mines but poor explorers , '' said a Western expert in exploration . 
Also , few of the small entrepreneurs are selling their gold to the central bank ; much of their output ends up with traders who smuggle it to Dubai or other major gold markets . 
As a result , Sudan made only $ 1.1 billion from gold exports in 2010 . 
This year might see a modest increase due to a higher gold price , but revenues will be way below $ 3 billion , experts say . 
The government is offering incentives to persuade unofficial seekers to sell their gold to the central bank , and plans to establish a refinery to enhance the value of gold products . 
`` You have to intervene to regulate the sector , '' said Abdelbagi Gailani , the minister of minerals . 
Despite the problems , Sudan 's gold output is likely to rise continuously over the next few years , experts say . 
Barrie estimated annual production could increase by a further 2.8 tonnes every three or four years as new mines came on stream . 
Meanwhile , a `` significant profit '' from the unofficial output would eventually end up in government coffers if regulation improved . 
Barrie said the gold rush had helped make the northeast one of the most stable regions in a country hit by insurgencies such as the rebellion in Darfur . 
`` We have benefited a lot from the gold mine . 
The company built a health center , which you rarely find here , '' said Mohammed Mahmoud , another resident of Bir Ajam . 
Under an expansion plan , the Hassai mine will build a pipeline from the Nile to obtain more water which engineers will use to drill deeper . 
As a byproduct , villages on the way will be connected to the pipeline . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
