By the CNN Wire Staff NEW : Saif al-Islam Gadhafi says his father 's government can survive and reunite Libya Libya 's UN ambassador applauds the unanimous U.N. resolution targeting Gadhafi A Libyan diplomat says `` we support '' an interim government led by a former minister Despite an eerie calm , a Tripoli man says he senses `` something big is going to happen '' -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The U.N. Security Council voted unanimously Saturday night to punish Moammar Gadhafi 's government in Libya for violence against unarmed civilians , hours after the nation 's budding opposition picked a former top official as its interim leader . 
The draft resolution includes an arms embargo , asset freeze and travel bans for Gadhafi and several of his family members and associates . 
It also refers the situation unfolding in Libya to the International Criminal Court . 
`` This resolution will be a signal -LRB- to -RRB- put an end to the fascist regime that is still in existence , '' said Abdurrahman Mohamed Shalgham , Libyan ambassador to the United Nations , who urged action Friday in an emotional appeal . 
He 'd earlier renounced support for Gadhafi , calling him Saturday `` a leader who loves nobody but himself . '' 
Military and security forces loyal to Gadhafi have killed more than 1,000 people , U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon has estimated . 
Meanwhile , Libya 's deputy amassador to the world body , Ibrahim Dabbashi , indicated Saturday that he and fellow diplomats `` support ... in principle '' a caretaker administration to lead Libya under the direction of former Justice Minister Mustafa Abdul Jalil . 
Embassy head : ` We were lucky to get out ' State Dept. ` concerned ' for Libyans City councils in areas no longer loyal to Gadhafi chose Jalil to head an interim government that would represent all of Libya and ultimately be based in Tripoli , according to Amal Bogagies , a member of the coalition of the February 17 Uprising , and a separate Libyan opposition source . 
Both are based in Benghazi . 
Jalil was in Gadhafi 's government through February 21 , when he quit to protest the `` bloody situation '' and `` use of excessive force '' against unarmed protesters , according to Libyan newspaper Quryna . 
Days later , he told a Swedish newspaper he had evidence that Gadhafi ordered the 1988 bombing of a jet over Lockerbie , Scotland , that killed 270 people . 
Protests began February 15 in the eastern city of Benghazi , Libya 's second largest . 
It and many others are now thought to be under opposition control , according to eyewitnesses . 
There have been numerous reports of widespread violence , some of it perpetrated by foreign mercenaries and military and security forces loyal to Gadhafi . 
Libya 's foreign minister said earlier Saturday that talks are underway between Gadhafi 's government and figures in the eastern part of the North African nation . 
Benghazi-based opposition spokesman Jalal Igallal , however , strongly knocked down reports of any discussions between anti-government figures and officials supportive of Gadhafi . 
He urged Foreign Minister Musa Kasa to say who is being talked to , if such negotiations are in fact ongoing . 
Early Sunday , Saif al-Islam Gadhafi -- one of Moammar ' Gadhafi 's sons and a prominent member of his government -- told CNN 's Nic Robertson that he was confident the regime could survive the unrest and ultimately reunite Libya . 
Saif Gadhafi added that he wanted this reunification to be accomplished without violence . 
While CNN does have staff in some cities , the network could not independently confirm reports for many areas in Libya . 
But CNN has compiled information through telephone interviews with witnesses . 
Tripoli itself was noticeably tense but largely quiet overnight Saturday , its streets largely barren except for police , armed men in civilian clothing and young people with sticks at some intersections . 
One man , who is not named for safety reasons , described an `` eerie feeling '' around the capital , even as fear of violence drove many people to hunker down in their homes . 
`` You can feel the tension and the anticipation that something big is going to happen , '' he said . 
`` Everyone is waiting for it . '' 
The situation at the main airport , about 20 miles south of Tripoli , was far more chaotic . 
Several thousand people camped outside in makeshift tents , waiting for the chance to leave the war-torn country . 
More than 200 Arab organizations and a group of 30 prominent intellectuals from across the Middle East and North Africa urged global bodies , including the Security Council , the European Union and the African Union , to take action to limit further death and destruction . 
A protester 's view from Libya Libyan : U.S. ` does n't give a damn ' `` We fear we may be witnessing the calm before the storm , '' said their statement . 
`` The window of opportunity to prevent further atrocities from occurring is closing fast . 
The people of Libya need you to act quickly and decisively . '' 
The group urged the international community to devise contingency plans for intervention and impose immediate sanctions on the Libyan regime . 
`` We appeal to you as leaders who have the power to bring an end to this horror , '' the statement said . 
`` Your failure to do so would be a lasting stain on the responsibilities of world leadership and on humanity itself . '' 
U.S. President Barack Obama also weighed in Saturday , telling German Chancellor Angela Merkel to `` coordinate our urgent efforts to respond to developments and ensure appropriate accountability , '' according to a White House statement . 
In some of his strongest wording to date , Obama said , `` when a leader 's only means of staying in power is to use mass violence against his own people , he has lost the legitimacy to rule and needs to do what is right for his country by leaving now . '' 
Later , U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton issued a statement urging Gadhafi to step down . 
`` Moammar Gadhafi has lost the confidence of his people and he should go without further bloodshed and violence , '' Clinton said . 
`` The Libyan people deserve a government that is responsive to their aspirations and that protects their universally recognized human rights . '' 
Tripoli 's Green Square , occupied by pro-Gadhafi demonstrators on previous evenings , was empty Saturday night , a witness told CNN . 
She said her neighborhood near the square was eerily quiet . 
Another man said men carrying automatic weapons had set up checkpoints at `` every major intersection or traffic light , '' while hospitals are heavily guarded by armed security personnel . 
Other frightened residents said they stayed indoors , though unable to shut off the sound of gunfire or put aside the words of Gadhafi in a public address the day before in which he vowed to keep unleashing force . 
`` We can destroy any assault with the people 's will , with the armed people , '' he said on state television Friday . 
`` And when it is necessary , the weapons depots will be open to all the Libyan people to be armed . '' 
Libya 's prime minister , meanwhile , announced on state television that every family would receive 500 Libyan dinars -LRB- $ 406 -RRB- from the government . 
The humanitarian group Doctors Without Borders said in a statement Saturday one of its teams was in Benghazi . 
Their arrival , and a promise of future aid , marked one of the first humanitarian inroads into Libya in recent weeks . 
Three main hospitals were all `` well equipped and have managed to deal with the numbers of wounded people and medical needs , '' according to the group . 
But the facilities also face shortages of drugs , bandages and other medical items , which Doctors Without Borders said it will provide . 
The group plans to send an orthopedic surgeon , anesthesiologist and nurse on Monday . 
The advocacy group Human Rights Watch said the situation was appreciably worse in Zawiya -- about 55 kilometers -LRB- 35 miles -RRB- west of Tripoli and the epicenter of violent protests Thursday . 
`` West of Tripoli in Zawiya city , government security forces firing on demonstrators are causing bloodshed and chaos , '' said Sarah Leah Whitson , the group 's Middle East and North Africa director . 
Operations at several embassies -- including those of Great Britain and the United States -- in Tripoli have been effectively shuttered , for the safety of their personnel . 
U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said he planned to speak with Obama in Washington on Monday . 
For now , Libyans themselves are left to wait to see what happens next . 
`` We wait and see what tomorrow will bring , '' a Tripoli man said early Sunday . 
`` We pray for a quick ending to this nightmare , with minimum bloodshed . 
No one is naive , however , to believe that Gadhafi is going to go easily . '' 
CNN 's Nic Robertson , Ben Wedeman , Jack Maddox and Whitney Hurst contributed to this report . 
