Fuel storage tanks are seen at Mobil Oil 's oil refinery in Melbourne March 8 , 2011 . 
NEW YORK | Wed Apr 13 , 2011 3:46 pm EDT NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - U.S. crude oil prices rose on Wednesday , snapping two days of losses , getting a lift from data showing U.S. gasoline stockpiles plunged last week and from lingering worries about the Libyan conflict . 
U.S. crude for May delivery settled up 86 cents at $ 107.11 a barrel . 
In London , Brent May crude gained $ 1.96 to settle at $ 122.88 . 
U.S. gasoline inventories fell 7 million barrels last week , the biggest weekly drop since October 1998 , to 209.7 million barrels , their lowest level since October last year , data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration showed . 
`` The gasoline stocks data was really supportive today , '' said Andy Lebow , broker at MF Global in New York . 
The big drop in U.S. gasoline supplies came amid rising pump prices , with last week 's national average climbing to $ 3.79 a gallon after crude prices rallied to 2-1\/2 - year highs . 
Rising U.S. gasoline prices have damaged confidence in the country 's future and forced Americans to adjust spending habits and lifestyles , a Reuters\/Ipsos poll found . 
U.S. crude inventories rose 1.6 million barrels to 359.3 million barrels , their sixth straight week of gains , helping pull down crude futures briefly around midday . 
That dip came as the dollar strengthened ahead of a speech by U.S. President Barack Obama outlining his proposal to cut the ballooning U.S. budget deficit . 
`` The market seemed to take seriously this lurch toward fiscal austerity from Obama . 
The numbers on the initial release appeared compelling . 
Hence , dollar rallied a bit , pushing down energies and precious metals , '' said John Kilduff , partner at Again Capital LLC in New York . 
Oil prices rose early after a two-day sell-off that was driven by cautious comments from Goldman Sachs . 
The influential bank said a robust crude rally looked overdone . 
The International Energy Agency and the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries also raised a red flag on skyrocketing prices , saying they could hurt global demand . 
The civil war in OPEC member Libya has shut off most of its production , which was around 1.6 million bpd before unrest began . 
Rebel-controlled oil fields are pumping around 100,000 barrels per day , but only a `` minimal amount '' is being exported , a rebel spokesman said on Wednesday . 
He spoke in Qatar , where talks were ongoing on Libya 's future . 
International powers called for the first time for Muammar Gaddafi to step aside , but NATO members squabbled over launching more air strikes to help topple him . 
OPEC spare capacity should be enough to cope with such an outcome , provided the upheaval does not embroil other producer nations . 
Saudi Arabia alone has more than 3 million bpd to spare . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It is not running out . 
Check the old reservoirs and ask your self why are they refilling ? 
The world will never run out of oil . 
I do n't buy into the fossil fuel theory . 
Oil is associated with Methane and they have discovered methane lakes on Saturns moon Titan and there is no way I gonna believe Titan once had a large dinosaur population . 
Time to drill and ` drill baby drill ' . 
amos033 , you may want to go take a science class or two . 
Methane is not oil . 
Methane at the temperatures of the surface of Earth is a gas , yes it is a Hydrocarbon like Oil , but it is not oil . 
Methane is a liquid on Titan because it is VERY cold there , on the order of -200 to -300 F from memory . 
Methane is a simple molecule , CH4 , there is lots of it in various places in the Universe . 
Oil on the other hand is a mix of more complex hydrocarbons . 
Yes more Oil will be generated , but it is a 100 million year type of process . 
After a few more months of rising gasoline , Americans will welcome Chinese ev 's she same way they scarfed down the German Beetle and the Japanese Prius . 
The $ 40,000 Chevy Volt was obviously designed for export , as most Americans could n't afford to charge it after paying the retail price . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
