Syria : Aleppo is nail in Assad 's coffin , says Panetta The Free Syrian Army and other rebel fighters have been engaged in fierce fighting in Aleppo US Defense Secretary Leon Panetta says Syrian President Bashar al-Assad 's assault on the city of Aleppo will be `` a nail in his coffin '' . 
Mr Panetta was speaking at the start of a five-day Middle East tour . 
Heavy fighting is continuing in Syria 's largest city where government forces are trying to oust rebel fighters . 
UN humanitarian chief Valerie Amos said 200,000 people had fled the fighting in Aleppo and that an unknown number were trapped . 
She said that the city urgently needed supplies including food and water . 
Mr Panetta said the Syrian crisis was deepening and that President Assad was hastening his own demise . 
`` If they continue this kind of tragic attack on their own people ... I think it ultimately will be a nail in Assad 's coffin , '' he told reporters . 
`` What Assad has been doing to his own people and what he continues to do to his own people makes clear that his regime is coming to an end . 
It 's lost all legitimacy . '' 
He added : `` It 's no longer a question of whether he 's coming to an end , it 's when . '' 
Ian Pannell BBC News , Aleppo A hole-in-the-wall bakery had just reopened its doors after being closed for more than a day . 
Most food shops in the turbulent districts are now closed . 
Rebel fighters tried to marshal the crowds as hundreds of hungry and increasingly desperate residents clamoured for the thin round loaves . 
Suriya had finally reached the front of the queue and the middle-aged mother thrust her hand through the railings outside the bakery , grasping for the bread . 
Like many poor Syrians she has a large family to feed and with no fresh fruit or vegetables available this is her only chance to get food . 
`` A lot of poor people are suffering from a lack of food and water , '' she complained . 
`` Many are going to bed hungry . '' 
Their suffering does not seem likely to end soon . 
Food , water and power shortages have made life hard for residents . 
The ever-present danger from bombs and bullets is making it intolerable . 
Mr Panetta 's tour will include talks in Tunisia , Egypt , Israel and Jordan . 
He said he aimed to reinforce an international consensus that Mr Assad must step down and allow a peaceful transition to democracy . 
The defense secretary said he would also continue efforts to ensure that Syria 's stockpiles of chemical weapons did not fall into the wrong hands . 
Baroness Amos , speaking in New York , said that the Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent estimated that 200,000 people have fled Aleppo and surrounding areas in the past two days . 
`` It is not known how many people remain trapped in places where fighting continues today , '' she said . 
`` I call on all parties to the fighting to ensure that they do not target civilians and that they allow humanitarian organizations safe access . '' 
UK-based activist group the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights described the situation in Aleppo as `` a full-scale street war '' . 
The BBC 's Ian Pannell , who was in Aleppo on Saturday , said government troops were trying to push into rebel-held neighborhoods and there was fierce fighting . 
Civilians are facing power cuts and food shortages , he says . 
Late on Sunday , Syrian troops said they had recaptured the south-west district of Salah al-Din from the rebels . 
`` Complete control of Salah al-Din has been -LRB- won back -RRB- from those mercenary gunmen , '' a military officer told Syrian state TV . 
`` In a few days safety and security will return to the city of Aleppo . '' 
Despite the army 's statement , activists said fighting was continuing in Salah al-Din on Sunday night . 
Aleppo activist Abo Aref al-Halabi told the BBC 's Newsday program on Monday that it had been a `` terrible night '' in the city . 
`` Nobody can sleep . 
Everywhere you can hear -LRB- the sound of -RRB- bombs , '' he said . 
`` The Assad armies are using mortars , they are using tanks , bombs , they are using helicopters , missiles coming from helicopters , to the Salah al-Din area . '' 
He said some buildings were on fire and others had collapsed . 
Our correspondent says that although the rebels are outgunned , they are fighting an effective guerrilla war in the streets of the city . 
Many are more battle-hardened than their adversaries and they are making their own improvised explosive devices , he adds . 
Syrian Foreign Minister Walid Moualem , on a visit to Iran , said that the government was winning its war against the rebels . 
`` Today I tell you , Syria is stronger , '' he said . 
`` In less than a week they were defeated -LRB- in Damascus -RRB- and the battle failed . 
So they moved on to Aleppo and I assure you , their plots will fail . '' 
Are you in Syria ? 
Send us your comments and experiences using the form below . 
Send your pictures and videos to yourpics@bbc.co.uk or text them to 61124 -LRB- UK -RRB- or +447624800100 -LRB- International -RRB- . 
If you have a large file you can upload here . 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
