By Rami Ruhayem BBC News , al-Qaim on the Iraq-Syria border Many Syrian refugees have been crammed into local school buildings Perched on top of an army Humvee on a road parallel with the Syrian border , an Iraqi gunner sits with a clear view of al-Boukamal , the city on the other side . 
`` They never stopped shelling the place last night , '' he tells me , as we wait for the next busload of Syrian refugees . 
On the Iraqi side , in al-Qaim , army jeeps patrol the street ; in contrast , on the Syrian side there is very little movement . 
Iraqi soldiers say all they can see from time-to-time are occasional tractors farming the land , and men in traditional Arab robes driving around in motorcycles . 
`` They are the Free Syrian Army . 
We have n't spoken to them yet , '' said one Iraqi soldier standing guard opposite the Syrian meadow . 
Ever since Syrian opposition fighters took over al-Boukamal , the city has been subjected to shelling by government forces . 
If they wo n't let us out of this prison , we will go back to al-Boukamal '' And after the Iraqi government reluctantly agreed to open the border for Syrian refugees , more than 2,000 have come to Iraq through al-Qaim . 
But the reception they got in Iraq sparked a showdown between the government in Baghdad and the tribes straddling the Syrian-Iraqi border . 
Facing the prospect of tribal fury , the government was first to blink . 
Al-Qaim is at the western edge of Iraq , facing al-Boukamal on Syria 's eastern edge . 
Most of the refugees crossing over have relatives in Iraq , and intended to head straight to them until the situation back home improved . 
Instead , they were crammed together in local schools and government buildings , and the army and police imposed strict restrictions on their movement . 
`` We came here to be with our families , '' one refugee told me angrily . 
Some of them were so incensed at the treatment they said they would rather return to Syria . 
`` If they wo n't let us out of this prison , we will go back to al-Boukamal , '' said one toothless man with thick greying stubble . 
The rage of the Syrian refugees confined to the sweltering playgrounds of schools was more than matched by that of their Iraqi relatives . 
After Friday prayers , hundreds of Iraqis marched through al-Qaim to denounce their government 's policy . 
The Iraqi government says an unrestricted flow of refugees could pose a security risk , and that Iraq 's 600km - -LRB- 370 miles -RRB- long border with Syria has always been a favorite route for militants traveling both ways . 
It has sent troop reinforcements to the border area , and is trying to assert control over as long a strip as possible , to guard against any infiltration . 
It also wants to keep those crossing legally under its watchful eye . 
But Baghdad is also keenly aware of the depth of the family bonds tying eastern Syria to western Iraq . 
The Syrian desert stretches well into Iraq , dominating the landscape of the Iraqi province of Anbar . 
Tribal ties also extend beyond the border , making eastern Syria and western Iraq organically entwined , and rendering the border almost an anomaly . 
Hospitality in Anbar is a deeply entrenched tribal custom . 
Even strangers traveling through the province can make use of guest houses belonging to tribal leaders for free . 
And the Syrian refugees are certainly no strangers to Anbar . 
`` All of us here , we have uncles , and aunts and brothers and sisters in Iraq , '' one of them told me . 
Iraq reluctantly agreed to open its border for Syrian refugees `` Our tribes stretch from al-Qaim all the way to Baghdad . '' 
The authorities knew they could not keep the refugees trapped in schools without running into serious trouble with their Iraqi relatives . 
On the same day of the march , a high-profile delegation from Baghdad arrived to sort out the problem . 
It included the prime minister 's security adviser and the finance minister , who is himself from Anbar . 
A compromise was hammered out , under which refugees would be able to leave the schools provided they had relatives who could `` sponsor '' them , and provide written guarantees to the government . 
The mechanisms to implement the agreement are still being debated by local authorities and the central government , but the incident highlights a wider divergence over the Syrian crisis . 
As the Iraqi government watches with growing unease the gains made by the rebels in Syria , many in Iraq can not wait for a final blow to President Bashar al-Assad 's regime to be delivered . 
Everyone here knows the end of Mr Assad 's rule in Damascus could bring many barriers crashing down , including the border line cutting the Syrian desert into two . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
