BP will ` pay every dime owed ' for Gulf oil spill , Obama warns Oil spill caused by explosion of Deepwater Horizon rig surpasses Exxon Valdez as worst slick in US history Thursday 27 May 2010 23.18 BST A vast oil slick caused by the explosion of BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig in the Gulf of Mexico has become the worst spill in America 's history , easily surpassing the Exxon Valdez environmental disaster , according to new government figures . 
As BP made tentative progress in plugging the leak through a high-stakes `` top kill '' operation a mile under the surface of the ocean , the US president , Barack Obama , pledged to hold the British company responsible for the `` horrific damage '' caused by the accident . 
`` We will demand they pay every dime they owe for the damage and painful losses they 've caused , '' said the president , who will travel to the area tomorrow . 
He insisted he was personally overseeing the response to the disaster , brushing aside criticism of his government 's actions . 
It became clear today that the disaster is several times worse than BP and the government had previously estimated . 
Experts revealed that between 12,000 and 19,000 barrels of oil had been gushing from the Macondo well daily since the spill began on 20 April , eclipsing an earlier figure of 5,000 barrels daily . 
One measurement put the spill at up to 25,000 barrels each day . 
That would mean that nearly 39m gallons -LRB- 148m litres -RRB- may have spilled . 
`` This is a very significant disaster , '' said Marcia McNutt , director of the US Geological Survey . 
Even the conservative end of the figures put the spill at nearly 19m gallons well in excess of the 11m gallons lost when the Exxon Valdez oil tanker hit a reef off Alaska 21 years ago , wreaking havoc along a wilderness coastline . 
The White House blocked permits for new undersea drilling for six months and suspended planned mining exploration at two sites in Alaska . 
The top US regulator in charge of overseeing oil exploration , Elizabeth Birnbaum , resigned as Obama criticised her Minerals Management Service for having a `` sometimes corrupt '' relationship with the oil industry . 
At a White House press conference Obama deflected comparison of his administration 's handling of the spill crisis with that of George Bush 's notoriously lacklustre response to Hurricane Katrina . 
`` I 'll leave it to you guys to make those comparisons , '' he told reporters . 
But he admitted his administration had been too slow to produce its own estimate of the size of the spill , and that it should have pushed BP harder to share data from equipment on the ocean floor . 
`` This is an area where I do think our efforts fell short , '' he said . 
`` There was a lag of several weeks that I think should not have happened . '' 
BP succeeded in stemming the flow of the leak by pumping thick drilling mud into the ruptured ocean floor at high pressure . 
But 24 hours into the `` top kill '' effort , its engineers were still trying to stabilise the well sufficiently to plug it with a concrete cap . 
A version appeared on p1 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 09.48 BST on Friday 28 May 2010 . 
Anyone can help and contribute to project . 
