BP oil spill : words flow in Louisiana , but communication is blocked The mood on day 37 of the Deepwater Horizon crisis is one of incredulity at claims by the head of the local coastguard that the rescue operation has been a success Thursday 27 May 2010 16.39 BST Dr John performs during Gulf Aid , a benefit concert for people affected by the Deepwater Horizon oil spill . 
Photograph : Patrick Semansky\/EPA Day 37 of the oil spill crisis in the Gulf of Mexico , and the head of the US coastguard for Louisiana , in charge of the battle to prevent the massive oil slew from reaching shore in this most endangered region , was locked in debate with a local man about the second world war evacuation of Dunkirk . 
`` We need a Dunkirk-type of response where we throw everything we have at it , '' said Lance Gremillion , the local vet . 
`` I hope this is not turning into Dunkirk , '' replied Captain Edwin Stanton , dressed in a navy blue coastguard uniform . 
`` The British forces in Dunkirk suffered huge losses we do n't want that to happen here . '' 
`` I do n't mean Dunkirk in terms of losses , '' countered the vet , `` I mean in terms of focusing all our resources in order to prevent a far greater disaster , ingenuity succeeding over seemingly insurmountable problems . '' 
The mood in Louisiana over the Deep Horizon oil catastrophe has matured from shock , to bafflement , to anger and has now slipped into the surreal . 
Stanton had come , along with a senior representative of BP , to address the people of Phoenix , a small community on the east bank of the Mississippi . 
In his address to the gathering , the coastguard chief discharged his secret weapon : statistics . 
About 100 miles of shoreline had by now been affected by oil , of which about 25 miles was amenable to cleaning , Stanton told 200 people assembled in Phoenix high school . 
Some 266,000 barrels of oil had been collected by skimmers out of a total of more than 6m barrels that had dispersed since the rig exploded on 20 April . 
More than 679,000 ft of hard containment boom and 540,000 ft of absorbent boom had been laid to block the oil from reaching shore . 
`` I hope you are impressed by these numbers , '' he said . 
`` I certainly am . 
This has been the most extraordinary response I have ever seen . 
I would not have expected this measure of success , and you should feel somewhat relieved by that . '' 
His choice of words was met with blank stares from the audience and a few audible guffaws . 
Sean Walsh , a teacher from the Phoenix school , had come armed with his own set of statistics . 
Over the past 100 years , more than 600bn gallons of oil had been extracted from Louisiana 's coastline and yet what had the state to show for it ? 
Louisiana ranked second worst state in America in terms of its education system . 
`` What I want to know is how is BP going to rebuild Louisiana . 
I 'm tired of all the profit being taken out of the area and nothing being put back , '' he said . 
At which point Bob Fryar , a BP senior vice-president , unleashed his own Dunkirk-style aerial bombardment of figures . 
BP had provided $ 15m to encourage tourism in Louisiana and would spend $ 500m over 10 years to research the environmental impact of the oil spill . 
`` BP will continue to invest in the things that matter to people , '' he said . 
But why was there so little sign of action , Gremillion , the vet , wanted to know . 
The sections of boom he had seen out in the sea were laid piecemeal and at random , and there seemed to be far too few skimmers drawing up the oil . 
`` This is becoming just like Katrina again . 
They are just following a flowchart and refusing to deviate from it : ` This is what the flowchart says , and this is what we are going to do . ' '' 
In the end , the head of the coastguard adopted a more conciliatory tone . 
`` There 's nothing I can say that will comfort you , '' he said to the crowd whose livelihoods some believe their entire way of life are in the balance . 
`` There 's no good face I can put on this event , '' he said . 
`` You are truly the victims . 
If I were you I would feel angry and confused I share some of those feelings myself . '' 
A version appeared on p22 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 16.47 BST on Thursday 27 May 2010 The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off moorehn : Huh ! 
RT @BrianSozzi : Within food , white bread had one of the strongest price increases in December . 
