A new piece of equipment designed to control the gushing Gulf of Mexico oil well sprung its own leak Wednesday night , the latest setback to BP 's efforts to put an end to the environmental disaster . 
BP said that the leak in what is known as the choke line could be repaired and that its effort to close the damaged well , and shut down the flow of oil permanently , would resume . 
But video streams from the seafloor showed a chaotic plume of oil and gas continuing to surge from one of the outlets on the 75-ton cap installed earlier this week . 
It was unclear late Wednesday whether the leak would be a momentary hitch in the much-anticipated `` integrity test '' on the well , or if it would put the operation in grave peril . 
But the plumbing failure showed once again that nothing has come easy in the long campaign to kill the Macondo well , which blew out April 20 and destroyed the Deepwater Horizon rig , killing 11 workers . 
Federal officials green-lighted the test after a 24-hour delay , during which government scientists and outside experts demanded more information from BP about possible hazards posed by stopping the flow of the well . 
They are concerned that a spike in pressure as the flow is clamped could blow oil and gas out of the casing of the well and into the geological formations . 
Throughout the crisis , engineers have feared the possibility that efforts to fix the problem could make it worse . 
Such concerns ultimately did not dissuade authorities from going forward with what could be a high-reward maneuver . 
Retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad W. Allen , the national incident commander , said that , notwithstanding the concerns of scientists , he is `` gung ho '' about the test . 
`` It will be terrific news if we can shut in the well , '' Allen said , adding , however , `` I do n't want to get anyone 's hopes up . '' 
Once BP engineers closed the main chimney on the new `` capping stack '' installed atop the well Monday night , that left oil and gas surging from two other ports . 
The protocol developed by BP and approved by federal authorities called for quickly closing one , known as the kill line , then very gradually reducing the flow from the choke line until the well flows no more . 
The company said Wednesday night in a statement that the leak in the choke line `` has been isolated and will be repaired prior to starting the test . '' 
Federal officials and BP engineers are anxiously observing what happens to pressures in the well . 
A steady increase in pressure as the flow is reduced would be a strong sign that the Macondo well , drilled by the now-sunken rig Deepwater Horizon , is physically intact , and that oil and gas are not leaking into the surrounding mud and rock formations below the gulf floor . 
Robotic submersibles are scrutinizing the muddy gulf floor and the base of the blowout preventer for signs of oil or gas rising from below . 
Scientists are also using seismic and sonar instruments to monitor any possible movement of hydrocarbons in the rock formations surrounding the well . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
