Dr Murray has denied he caused Michael Jackson 's death Michael Jackson 's former doctor , who is facing a manslaughter charge following the singer 's death last June , has returned to work in Nevada . 
Dr Conrad Murray was bailed for $ 75,000 -LRB- # 48,000 -RRB- after pleading not guilty to `` unlawfully '' killing the star , at a court in Los Angeles earlier this week . 
If convicted he may face four years in jail . 
He is due back in court in April . 
Dr Murray 's lawyer , Edward Chernoff , has stressed the 56-year-old intends `` to keep practising medicine '' . 
Miranda Sevcik , a spokeswoman for Dr Murray and Mr Chernoff , said the doctor was making arrangements to work out of another physician 's office in Las Vegas , having closed his own premises in the city last August . 
`` We 're not sharing the location because the doctor 's primary concern is for his patients ' privacy , '' said Sevcik . 
We 'll make bail , we 'll plead not guilty and we 'll fight like hell Lawyer Ed Chernoff , speaking in Los Angeles earlier this week Under the terms of his bail , Dr Murray is allowed to continue to practice medicine , but can not use certain drugs . 
Judge Keith Schwartz told Dr Murray on Monday : `` You may not under any circumstances use any anesthetic agents , specifically Propofol . 
Dr Murray , a cardiologist , continues to operate his other practice in Houston , having resumed work there in November . 
He is licensed to practice medicine in Nevada , Texas and California , although the California Medical Board is preparing to seek removal of his licence there . 
Jackson died at his home on 25 June last year at the age of 50 . 
His death was ruled as homicide , mainly caused by the anesthetic Propofol . 
Dr Murray had been hired to be Jackson 's personal physician last spring as the singer prepared for his comeback concerts in London . 
He told police he had been giving Jackson Propofol as part of his treatment for insomnia , according to an affidavit made public in August . 
But he has always maintained he neither prescribed nor administered anything that should have killed the singer . 
Prosecutors had filed one count of involuntary manslaughter . 
A hearing has been set for 5 April in Los Angeles . 
