KABUL | Thu Jul 14 , 2011 12:08 pm BST KABUL -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The first half of this year was the deadliest six months for civilians in Afghanistan since the decade-old war began , the country 's U.N. mission said on Thursday . 
Civilian deaths hit a record high , up 15 percent compared to the first half of 2010 , due to roadside and suicide bombings , increased ground fighting and more deaths from air strikes . 
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan -LRB- UNAMA -RRB- said 1,462 civilians had been killed in conflict-related incidents . 
It blamed insurgents for 80 percent of those deaths -- up nearly a third on the same period last year . 
`` The rising tide of violence and bloodshed in the first half of 2011 brought injury and death to Afghan civilians at levels without recorded precedent in the current armed conflict , '' the report said , adding that plans to hand over security in parts of the country helped fuel the rise in casualties . 
`` Violence rose as -LRB- insurgents -RRB- sought to demonstrate that Afghan security forces could not manage security on their own . '' 
Staffan de Mistura , special representative in Afghanistan for the U.N. Secretary-General , told a news conference the U.N. mission had been in contact with the Taliban to ask them to reduce the number of civilian deaths . 
He declined to comment on their response to the U.N. 's request . 
Pro-government forces , including the Afghan police and army and NATO-led troops were responsible for 14 percent of civilian deaths , a drop of 9 percent . 
But air strikes , one of the most controversial tactics in the war , killed more people . 
The mid-year report found that air strikes carried out by the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force -LRB- ISAF -RRB- were the leading cause of civilian deaths by pro-government forces , so far killing 79 civilians in 2011 , up 14 percent . 
Apache attack helicopters played a much more prominent role , mainly in the east and southeast of the country , said Georgette Gagnon , director of human rights at the U.N. mission . 
A third of civilian deaths attributed to air strikes in 2010 were caused by those aircraft , while in the first half of 2011 they were responsible for 56 percent of air strike deaths . 
De Mistura said that while ISAF had been successful in reducing the number of civilian deaths it caused , `` for an international force that is meant to protect civilians , one civilian killed , even by mistake , is one too many . '' 
The United Nations also warned the full picture could be even worse , as the report did not include data from the northern region of Afghanistan between March and June , because the U.N. office was shut after it was overrun by a mob that killed seven U.N. staff . 
`` It may be that UNAMA is under-reporting civilian casualties given limitations associated with the operating environment , '' the report said . 
ISAF and the Taliban were not immediately able to comment on the U.N. report . 
Pierre Kraehenbuehl , the global director of operations of the International Committee of the Red Cross -LRB- ICRC -RRB- , said he was `` gravely concerned '' about critical levels of insecurity that risked displacing many more Afghans . 
`` Many people have told us that they face now an almost impossible dilemma which is either choose a side or leave home , '' he told a separate news conference in the Afghan capital . 
The U.N. World Food Program also said Wednesday that two to three million people across Afghanistan are likely to need extra food aid from September following drought and a poor wheat harvest this year . 
While the number of insurgent suicide attacks in Afghanistan was largely unchanged , the number of civilians they killed soared by half , the largest increase in deaths from any tactic . 
Insurgents who have been squeezed in some of their traditional heartlands have tried spectacular urban attacks to underline their reach as NATO troops race to prepare Afghan forces for a security handover which begins this year . 
`` Suicide attacks in 2011 have become more complex , often using multiple bombers in spectacular attacks that kill many Afghan civilians , '' found the report . 
Eight Afghan civilians and one foreigner were killed last month in an assault on Kabul 's Intercontinental hotel , just days after a suicide car bomber killed at least 20 people at a hospital in remote east Afghanistan . 
There were 190 targeted killings , compared to 181 in the same period of 2010 . 
Ground combat caused more than 304 deaths , up more than a third , with 188 of those deaths attributed to insurgents , 66 to pro-government forces and 50 to crossfire . 
Controversial night raids by the U.S. military , which Afghan President Hamid Karzai has criticised as inciting people to join the Taliban-led insurgency , fell slightly in the first half of 2011 , accounting for 2 percent of all civilian deaths . 
`` However , resentment regarding these raids grew among the Afghan population . 
Violent demonstrations sometimes followed night raids and led to deaths and injuries of civilians . '' 
The U.N. mission in Afghanistan also said it was concerned by the increasing use of children in the decade-long war , particularly after recording the youngest suicide bomber -- a 12-year-old who killed three civilians and injured 12 on May 1 . 
