SEOUL | Thu Jul 14 , 2011 8:41 am BST SEOUL -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Apple Inc 's Korean unit has paid compensation to a user of its popular iPhone after collecting location data without consent , lawyers and court officials said , the first payout by the U.S. company over these complaints . 
Apple Korea agreed to pay 1 million won -LRB- 586 pounds -RRB- in compensation to Kim Hyung-suk , a lawyer , following a court order in May , two officials at Changwon District Court told Reuters on Thursday . 
They declined to be identified because they are not authorized to speak to the media . 
Kim 's law firm , Mirae Law , said Apple made payment last month . 
Apple could not be immediately reached for comment in Seoul . 
Mirae Law said it was now preparing a class action lawsuit against Apple for the unauthorised data collection . 
A website for class action sign-up has been set up but was paralyzed due to heavy traffic . 
-LRB- www.sueapple.co.kr -RRB- Apple released a software update in May to fix a problem that enabled its mobile devices to collect and store customers ' location data . 
The revelation that Apple 's iPhone collected data and stored it for up to a year has prompted renewed scrutiny of the nexus between location and privacy . 
U.S. lawmakers have accused the technology industry of exploiting location data for marketing purposes - a potentially multibillion-dollar industry -- without getting proper consent from phone users . 
Google Inc 's Seoul office was raided in May on suspicion its mobile advertising unit AdMob had illegally collected location data without consent , in the latest setback to the Internet search firm 's Korean operations . 
Executives of both Apple and Google have said they did not abuse the information . 
Any class action may further pressure Apple in the home market of its key rival Samsung Electronics . 
Samsung 's flagship Galaxy S smartphone has emerged as a major competitor to the iPhone . 
The iPhone is sold by top mobile carrier SK Telecom and second-ranked KT Corp in South Korea . 
KT , the major seller of the iPhone , said its iPhone subscribers reach more than 2.7 million , while SK Telecom declined to provide any details . 
Apple sold a record 18.65 million units of its blockbuster iPhone globally in the March quarter . 
-LRB- Reporting by Ju-min Park and Hyunjoo Jin ; Editing by Anshuman Daga and Lincoln Feast -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
