BP cap captures ' 10,000 barrels ' a day in US Gulf Tony Hayward , chief executive of BP , on the oil leak and stakeholder dividends A containment cap on a ruptured well in the Gulf of Mexico is now funnelling off 10,000 barrels of oil a day , BP 's chief executive Tony Hayward says . 
The amount has risen since Saturday , and implies more than half the estimated 12,000 to 19,000 barrels leaking each day is now being captured . 
The spill has been described as the biggest environmental disaster in US history . 
Mr Hayward told the BBC that BP would restore the Gulf to its original state . 
Speaking on the Andrew Marr Show , Mr Hayward said : `` As we speak , the containment cap is producing around 10,000 barrels of oil a day to the surface . '' 
Madeleine Morris BBC News , Pensacola , Florida Pensacola prides itself on its pristine , soft white sand beaches . 
Hundreds of thousands of tourists flock here every year to surf , swim and sunbathe . 
But this year , the area 's coastline is tarnished . 
Countless soft globules of tar - some as small as a coin others as big as a floormat - are washing up on shore . 
The beaches are still open , but as oil continues to spurt from the broken well 90 miles away , residents know their troubles are just beginning . 
So far the coastlines most affected have been in Louisiana , Alabama and Mississippi to the west . 
But as the leak continues , it 's expected to enter a current that will move the oil from the Gulf of Mexico around the Florida peninsula , and onto the east coast of the state . 
Asked what amount of the estimate that represented , the BP chief executive said it was expected to be `` the majority , probably the vast majority '' of the oil gushing out . 
`` We have a further containment system to implement in the course of this coming week which will be in place by next weekend so when those two are in place , we would very much hope to be containing the vast majority of the oil . '' 
His company , he said , was going to stop the leak and take care of the consequences . 
`` We 're going to clean up the oil , we 're going to remediate any environmental damage and we are going to return the Gulf coast to the position it was in prior to this event . 
That 's an absolute commitment , we will be there long after the media has gone , making good on our promises . '' 
But the man in charge of the federal efforts to cope with the spill said no-one should be pleased `` as long as there 's oil in the water '' . 
Coast Guard Adm Thad Allen told CNN the spill was `` an insidious enemy that 's attacking our shores '' . 
The Deepwater Horizon rig sank on 20 April after an explosion , killing 11 workers . 
Both BP and the US government have been criticised for the response so far . 
The environmental impact has been described as the worst in US history President Barack Obama has pledged to stand with the residents of Louisiana until they are `` made whole '' . 
Mr Obama has said he will ensure that BP is financially accountable for the damaged caused . 
The containment cap is designed to funnel most of the leaking oil to a boat on the surface . 
It will be followed by a further containment system that involves using the pipes of a failed , previous operation to divert more oil to another vessel ; and by a separate method - due to be in place by the end of this month - which is expected to be able to operate in hurricane conditions . 
BP is also digging two relief wells which it hopes will provide a permanent solution to the leak - but they are not due to be completed until August . 
The estimates for the total amount of oil that has leaked since the spill began vary widely from 20 million to 45 million gallons . 
Four states have so far been affected by the spill - Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama and Florida . 
The oil risks affecting some of the famous white beaches of Florida , whose economy is heavily dependent on tourism . 
One-third of the Gulf 's federal waters remain closed to fishing , and the spill has killed and injured birds and marine animals . 
`` These waters are my backyard , my life , '' boat captain Dave Marino from Myrtle Grove , Louisiana , told AP news agency . 
`` It 's a nightmare . 
It looks like it 's going to be wave after wave of it and nobody can stop it . '' 
The oil has steadily spread east , and there are fears it could devastate the shoreline with the hurricane season coming up . 
BP , whose share price has dropped by a third since the accident , has been coming under fire for spending a reported $ 50m on TV advertising to improve its image while the crisis was still going on . 
BP says it has spent more than $ 1bn so far on clean-up and containment efforts since the Deepwater Horizon rig accident . 
Attempt to cap oil leak The latest stage in BP 's efforts to contain leaking oil has involved lowering a cap onto the failed blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- valve system on the seabed . 
The cap sits on the BOP 's lower marine riser package -LRB- LMRP -RRB- section . 
First , the damaged riser - the pipe which takes oil from the well - was cut where it nears the seabed using a remotely-operated shear . 
This was completed at 1930 CDT on 1 June -LRB- 0030 GMT 2 June -RRB- . 
The next stage was for a diamond wire cutter to saw through the riser close to the LMRP . 
The blade got stuck and had to be removed but BP eventually cut through the pipe using giant shears manipulated by undersea robots -LRB- ROV -RRB- . 
After removing the pipe , the cap was lowered onto the LMRP enabling the leaking oil and gas to be funnelled to a drill ship on the surface . 
Latest estimates suggest more than half of the leaking oil is now being captured . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
