Wednesday 8 June 2005 00.39 BST There are many examples of Mexican politicians switching allegiances with each new season , but few have done so with as much energy and aplomb as Adolfo Aguilar Zinser , who has died in a car crash , aged 55 . 
Even fewer can expect to end their life as he did , with a reputation for integrity . 
Internationally , he caught the world 's attention in March 2003 , before the Iraq war , as Mexico 's UN ambassador at a time when his country held a seat on the security council . 
A flamboyant figure , with unruly gray hair , rimless glasses and a penchant for designer ties , he appeared to coolly defend Mexico 's anti-interventionist traditions , despite the ambiguous messages of his government . 
Together with the Chilean ambassador , Juan Gabriel Valds , Aguilar Zinser played a pivotal role in ensuring that other smaller , non-permanent council members also stood their ground . 
For many Mexicans , his willingness to incur the displeasure of the Bush administration was something they could feel proud of . 
It was a moment that sealed his reputation for political independence and daring . 
Not that Aguilar Zinser was ever a wallflower , and his career was littered with dramatic political gambles that often ended in personalised fallouts with former allies . 
It is a testament to his ability to find new ways of staying in the game that his death prompted tributes from across the political spectrum , and that his wake drew people he had not spoken to for years . 
Born into an established Mexico City family , Aguilar Zinser graduated from the prestigious Colegio de Mexico before taking a master 's degree in public administration at Harvard . 
While he remained linked to academia , he never kept away from the political action for long . 
Young , ambitious and reputedly brilliant , he began his public career when Mexico was ruled by the Institutional Revolutionary party -LRB- PRI -RRB- , the one-party regime established in 1929 that dominated the country until 2000 . 
In the mid-1970s , President Luis Echeverria made him head of a think-tank designed to make Mexico a standard bearer for the non-aligned world . 
At the time , the PRI enjoyed the approval of some Latin American leftists for its policy of welcoming exiles from the continent 's military dictatorships , even while it repressed its own dissidents at home . 
Over the years , however , Aguilar Zinser shifted towards the pro-democracy movement and joined Cuauhtemoc Cardenas , who , many believe , was denied electoral victory in 1988 by massive fraud . 
The association ended after Aguilar Zinser published a critical account of Cardenas 's next unsuccessful presidential campaign , in 1994 . 
Having established himself as a pro-democracy leader in his own right , Aguilar Zinser also gained a reputation as a committed environmental campaigner , briefly flirting with the Ecological party . 
In the late 1990s , another change of tactics turned him into a key figure in the successful presidential campaign of the brash , pro-business rancher Vicente Fox , of the National Action party -LRB- PAN -RRB- . 
Together with his equally cosmopolitan and erudite friend Jorge Castaeda , Aguilar Zinser persuaded many on the left to support the centre-right Fox in the 2000 election , as the only candidate who could bring down the PRI regime . 
Aguilar Zinser later fell out with both Castaeda , who tried to block his UN appointment , and Fox , who pushed him to resign from the post in November 2003 . 
Out in the political hinterland , Aguilar Zinser spent the rest of his life as a pundit . 
Most observers assumed he would return to the center stage soon , though few ventured to guess with which party his allegiances would be . 
He is survived by his wife , Martha , and two children , Adolfo and Nicols . 
Adolfo Aguilar Zinser , politician and diplomat , born December 2 1949 ; died June 5 2005 Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : 
