An oil sheen is seen on the water at the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico off the coast of Louisiana , May 27 2010 . 
WASHINGTON | Tue Jan 11 , 2011 5:42 pm EST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A White House panel probing BP 's massive oil spill called for an overhaul of a regulatory system that was `` entirely unprepared '' for disaster and outlined stringent , new oversight , a plan sure to face opposition from Republicans reluctant to expand government involvement . 
The White House oil spill commission said in its final major report that the U.S. government needs to expand its drilling regulations , as well as set up an independent drilling safety agency . 
`` None of the major aspects of offshore drilling safety -- not the regulatory oversight , not the industry safety standards , not the spill response practices -- kept pace with the push into deepwater , '' said commission co-chair Bill Reilly . 
`` In effect , our nation was entirely unprepared for an inevitable disaster , '' he said . 
Many of the recommendations would require Congressional approval , however , and Republicans have been critical of extensive new regulations , saying they would further slow the exploratory pace following last year 's drilling moratorium that was imposed in response to the spill . 
Republican lawmaker Fred Upton , who heads the House Energy and Commerce Committee , blasted the commission 's findings , saying they failed to clearly identify the root cause of the `` unprecedented disaster . '' 
`` Neither this nor any investigation should be used as political justification for a pre-determined agenda to limit affordable energy options for America , '' Upton said in a statement . 
Oil companies have voiced concerns that onerous new regulations could hamper offshore exploration and drive up oil prices . 
U.S. Gulf of Mexico oil production fell by 70,000 barrels per day in fourth quarter of 2010 , with further drops expected this year and in 2012 . 
But Reilly said it was time for Congress `` to exercise serious oversight '' in a regime that has not kept pace with the industry 's push into deeper and deeper waters . 
As a first step , he demanded that Congress provide the funding to hire additional government inspectors for drilling operations . 
Following the BP accident , the Interior Department restructured the agency responsible for overseeing drilling and has instituted a raft of new safety rules . 
`` We have already implemented several of the key reforms the commission has made clear are necessary , and we will use the commission 's report and the findings of other investigations to inform future actions to strengthen safety and oversight , '' Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said in a statement . 
The seven-member commission also pushed for the oil industry to create a self-regulating entity to help enforce standards and called on Congress to raise liability limits on offshore drilling operators . 
Modeled on the nuclear industry 's Institute of Nuclear Power Operations , a self-regulatory group would allow offshore drillers to hold their counterparts more accountable , the commission said in its final report . 
While not calling for a halt to drilling in the Arctic , the commission said there is need for more study of the intense physical conditions and Interior should ensure that companies have adequate plans and resources to handle a spill there . 
The commission was created by President Barack Obama after an April 20 explosion ruptured BP 's underwater Macondo well , killing 11 workers in the Gulf of Mexico and leading to the worst offshore oil spill in U.S. history . 
The commission is the first government-sanctioned group to wrap up its probe of the causes of the BP accident . 
Its report contains few surprises , as it mirrors many statements and reports released by the panel over the past six months . 
Although the commission lacks the authority to establish drilling policies or punish companies , its findings could influence future court proceedings and energy policy . 
Paul Sankey , an analyst with Deutsche Bank Oil , said he thinks U.S. offshore activity will be lower in the aftermath of the spill . 
`` The broadness of these recommendations and lack of specifics will delay activity , '' Sankey said . 
Still , despite these concerns from the industry , Chevron Corp greenlit plans to invest nearly $ 12 billion in two major deepwater Gulf projects late last year . 
The American Petroleum Institute criticized the panel 's report for casting doubt on the entire oil industry based on a single accident . 
`` This does a great disservice to the thousands of men and women who work in the industry and have the highest personal and professional commitment to safety , '' said API Upstream Director Erik Milito . 
The PHLX oil service index jumped 2.3 percent on Tuesday , outperforming the tepid gains of 0.5 percent in the broader S&P 500 index . 
The sector , which has largely been on a climb since early September , is nearing the highest point since September 2008 . 
Cameron International Corp , which made the blowout preventer on the BP well , drove the equipment sector index higher with gains of more than 4 percent in afternoon trading . 
BP added nearly 3 percent , while Halliburton gained 3.2 percent and Transocean rose 2.3 percent . 
-LRB- Additional Reporting by Timothy Gardner ; Editing by Russell Blinch and Lisa Shumaker -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
`` There is ... a profound problem with federal government limits on liability . 
That is central planning gone mad . 
The liability for environmental damage should be 100 % at least . 
Such a system would match a company 's policies to the actual risk of doing damage . 
Lower limits would inspire companies to be less concerned about damage to others than they should be , in the same way that a company with a bailout guarantee faces a moral hazard to be less efficient than it would be in a free market . '' 
-- Llewellyn H. Rockwell Jr. . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
