Tue Jan 11 , 2011 4:17 pm EST Jan 11 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The BP -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- -LRB- BP . 
N -RRB- oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico killed 11 workers and unleashed the worst offshore oil spill in U.S. history . 
April 20 , 2010 - Explosion and fire on BP 's Deepwater Horizon drilling rig kills 11 workers . 
The rig , owned by Transocean Ltd and licensed to BP -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- -LRB- BP . 
N -RRB- , was drilling 42 miles -LRB- 68 km -RRB- southeast of Venice , Louisiana , in 5,000 feet -LRB- 1,525 metres -RRB- of water . 
The well had reached 13,000 feet -LRB- 4,000 metres -RRB- under the seabed . 
April 22 - The rig , valued at more than $ 560 million , sinks and a 5-mile -LRB- 8-km -RRB- oil slick forms . 
April 30 - BP CEO Tony Hayward says the company takes full responsibility and will pay all legitimate claims and the cost of the cleanup . 
Analysts say containment and cleanup costs could top $ 3 billion . 
May 10 - BP says it has spent $ 350 million dealing with the leak . 
Analysts at Exane say it may have to take a $ 10 billion provision for the incident . 
Other analysts estimate the total cost between $ 5.1 billion and $ 8.2 billion . 
May 11\/12 - Executives from BP , Transocean -LRB- RIG . 
N -RRB- and Halliburton -LRB- HAL . 
N -RRB- appear at congressional hearings in Washington . 
The executives blame each other 's companies . 
June 9 - U.S. Interior Secretary Ken Salazar says BP must pay the salaries of thousands of workers laid off because of the moratorium on deep-sea drilling . 
June 16 - Hayward and BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg meet White House officials and announce a deal to set up a $ 20 billion fund for damage claims from the spill . 
BP also suspends dividend payments to shareholders ; says it will pay $ 100 million to workers idled by the six-month drilling moratorium . 
June 22 - Hayward hands day-to-day control of spill operations to managing director Bob Dudley , who had been CEO of BP 's Russian joint venture , TNK-BP . 
June 25 - BP says it has spent $ 2.35 billion on the response effort , including $ 126 million in claims to those affected by the disaster . 
July 19 - BP says it has spent $ 3.95 billion so far on efforts to tackle its well . 
July 20 - BP says it has reached a deal to sell $ 7 billion in assets to Apache Corp as it raises money to cover costs related to the spill . 
It later says it plans to sell assets worth up to $ 30 billion over 18 months . 
July 27 - BP names Bob Dudley as its next CEO . 
Aug. 2 - U.S. government data shows 4.9 million barrels of oil leaked before the well was capped . 
Sept. 16 - Relief well intercepts the Macondo well . 
Sept. 19 - With a final shot of cement , BP permanently `` kills '' the leaking well . 
Sept. 23 - Researchers put the spill at around 4.4 million barrels . 
The figure comes from the first independent study of the disaster . 
Sept. 26 - Halliburton , the oilfield services company that cemented the blown-out well , says a BP report laying the blame on the cement job offers a questionable account of events and `` erroneous conclusions . '' 
Oct. 4 - BP says it is to raise 2 billion euros -LRB- $ 2.7 billion -RRB- via a bond issue to help finance its $ 20 billion compensation fund . 
Oct. 26 - The Gulf Coast Claims Facility , created to compensate people and businesses , says it has paid $ 1.55 billion in claims since it took over the process from BP on Aug. 23 . 
Nov. 2 - BP increases its estimate of the likely cost of its Gulf of Mexico oil spill to $ 40 billion from $ 32 billion . 
Nov. 9 - Shares in BP rise after a U.S. presidential panel says it found no evidence that BP deliberately chose to cut corners to save costs . 
Nov. 24 - Kenneth Feinberg , administrator of BP 's fund for victims , encourages claimants to file early for final settlements to get the most generous terms . 
-- The fund has made $ 2 billion in emergency payments to 125,000 claimants . 
The final amount is likely to reach $ 2.3 billion and compensate 175,000 individuals and businesses , Feinberg says . 
Around 400,000 claims have been filed . 
Dec. 15 - The Obama administration launches a legal battle against BP and its partners by suing them for the oil spill , which could cost the companies billions of dollars . 
-- The lawsuit seeks damages from the well owners BP , Anadarko Petroleum Corp -LRB- APC . 
N -RRB- and Mitsui & Co Ltd unit MOEX , and well driller Transocean Ltd -LRB- RIGN . 
VX -RRB- and its insurer QBE Underwriting\/Lloyd 's Syndicate 1036 , part of Lloyds of London , for their roles in the disaster . 
Dec. 28 - Kenneth Feinberg , administrator of BP 's victims fund , has paid $ 43 million to Gulf Coast resident who agree not to sue BP for damages . 
To date , the fund has paid $ 2.6 billion to 467,889 claimants . 
Jan. 5 - BP and its partners made a series of cost-cutting decisions that ultimately contributed to an oil spill , the White House oil spill commission says in its final report on the causes of the largest offshore oil spill in U.S. history . 
-- The commission says BP and its collaborators lacked a system to ensure their actions were safe . 
Jan. 11 - The White House oil spill commission , in its final report of the BP drilling disaster , says the U.S. government needs to expand its drilling regulations , as well as set up an independent drilling safety agency , because the regulatory system was unprepared for the disaster . 
-- Most of the recommendations require approval from the U.S. Congress , which will be difficult as Republican lawmakers fear extensive new regulations would slow oil drilling . 
Oil companies expressed similar concerns , saying hampering offshore production with burdensome rules would drive up oil prices . 
