PENSACOLA BEACH , Florida | Fri Jun 4 , 2010 7:19 pm EDT PENSACOLA BEACH , Florida -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Tar balls washed ashore in northwest Florida on Friday , the first apparent impact there from the Gulf of Mexico oil spill that one senator said meant a `` huge economic hit '' to the tourism-dependent state . 
Oil debris came ashore among swimmers and beachgoers on Pensacola Beach , part of the Gulf Islands National Seashore , which advertises `` the world 's whitest beaches , '' as the worst environmental disaster in U.S. history widened . 
Florida , the `` Sunshine State '' with a $ 60 billion annual tourism industry , had braced for oil from the 46-day-old spill to arrive . 
Oil had already hit the coasts of Louisiana , Mississippi and Alabama to the west . 
Florida Democratic Senator Bill Nelson told CNN the arrival of the oil signified `` a huge economic hit '' to local tourism . 
`` There are already cancellations , the restaurants are down a little bit , '' he said . 
Beachgoers on Pensacola Beach , many of them children , picked up rust-colored tar blobs , ranging in size from a button to a table-tennis ball , scattered along the sugar-white sands . 
`` It 's pretty sad because we go here on vacation every summer , and now we wo n't be able to go anymore . 
I just ca n't believe it , because it used to be all just white sand , '' one visitor , Grace Vondohlen , said . 
Buck Lee , director of the Santa Rosa Island Authority , said he could not be sure the oil came from the spill leaking from BP Plc 's undersea Gulf of Mexico well off Louisiana , `` but I 'm 90 percent certain that it is . '' 
The oil will be analyzed to confirm the link with the oil spill , the worst in U.S. history . 
Of all the states affected so far , Florida has the most to lose . 
Tourism is its largest industry , generating $ 60 billion in spending from more than 80 million visitors a year , bringing in 21 percent of all state sales taxes and employing nearly 1 million people . 
Investment analysts say that since Florida has no income tax and relies heavily on sales tax revenues , any fall-off in tourism could badly squeeze a state economy still bleeding from a housing market meltdown and the global recession . 
Nelson told CNN the economic impact of the spill on Gulf Coast states including Florida was `` already billions -LRB- of dollars -RRB- ... and if it goes all summer and you put that much oil in the Gulf , it 's going to be multiple billions of dollars of economic loss and damage . '' 
He added a flotilla of ships , including several Coast Guard cutters , were working 25 to 50 miles off northwest Florida , scooping up portions of oil . 
`` That 's the goal , to try to keep it away from the bays and estuaries and the beach . '' 
Near Fort Pickens on Santa Rosa Island , workers scooped up tar balls with shovels along the high-water line and put them into plastic bags . 
`` They 're working in an area that 's pretty sensitive and has tern nesting areas , '' National Park Services spokeswoman Katie Lawhon said . 
`` I think it 's horrible , '' said Anthony Cross , walking along Pensacola Beach with his three daughters , holding a child 's fishing net full of tar . 
`` You see shells and jellyfish and trash but I 've never seen oil here . 
It 's crazy , '' he added . 
Florida tourism authorities were rolling out an aggressive advertising campaign , partially funded by BP , aimed at stressing that the state 's beaches remain open for business , despite the pollution threat . 
Florida Governor Charlie Crist has asked BP executives for an additional $ 50 million to fight the encroaching oil , on top of $ 25 million already received from the company and spent . 
On Friday , Crist asked the British-based company for $ 100 million more to fund spill response efforts by the Florida Institute of Oceanography , a partnership of 21 universities and other marine science organizations . 
Florida tourism officials , promising `` 100 percent transparency , '' are using live video and Twitter feeds so visitors can check the situation of beaches before booking . 
`` We 're not going to sit here and say , ` The whole state of Florida is going to be shut down as a result of this , ' because that 's just not true , '' said Chris Thompson , who heads the state tourism marketing board . 
Many experts believe crude from the Gulf of Mexico spill has already been caught up in the powerful Loop Current curling around the Florida Peninsula , which could take it into the Florida Keys and possibly up the East Coast . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The responsible parties have A LOT to answer for . -RRB- 
: -LRB- How about the rest of the South West Florida coast ? 
Clearwater to Naples ??? I ca n't believe this President only visited area where the oil spill is hurting so many industries . 
Like I added also the rest of the SW Florida Coast where retired Americans and those that are still working for their lively hood live and work every day . 
But I 'm sure he will take a trip to Europe many more times in the future . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
