GRAND ISLE , Louisiana | Fri Jun 4 , 2010 7:36 pm EDT GRAND ISLE , Louisiana -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - President Barack Obama warned energy giant BP on Friday not to `` nickel and dime '' Gulf coast residents over oil spill damage claims while paying out billions of dollars in dividends to shareholders . 
`` My understanding is that BP has contracted for $ 50 million worth of TV advertising to manage their image during the course of this disaster , '' Obama said . 
`` In addition , there are reports that BP will be paying $ 10.5 billion -- that 's billion with a `` B '' -- in dividend payments this quarter . '' 
BP on Friday resisted pressure from some U.S. lawmakers to stop dividend payouts until the full cost of cleaning up the spill is known . 
The company is due to announce its second-quarter dividend and results on July 27 . 
The $ 10.5 billion figure quoted by Obama covers dividend payments for the whole year and not just for this quarter as he said . 
Obama was speaking on his third trip in a month to the oil-stained Louisiana coast . 
The six-week-old spill , the biggest in U.S. history , has caused environmental devastation and threatens the future of a multibillion-dollar fishing industry . 
Obama said it was too early to say whether BP 's latest attempt to control the spill , placing a containment cap over a gushing deep-sea oil well , would be successful , but it appeared to be working so far . 
The president has vowed to hold BP accountable for the disaster , saying it must pay the costs of capping the well and dealing with the massive oil spill . 
`` I do n't have a problem with BP fulfilling its legal obligations , but I want BP to be very clear they 've got moral and legal obligations here in the Gulf for the damage that has been done , '' he said . 
`` And what I do n't want to hear is , when they 're spending that kind of money on their shareholders and spending that kind of money on TV advertising , that they 're nickel and diming fishermen or small businesses here in the Gulf . '' 
Obama , who has been criticized for not showing enough emotion about the devastation hitting the Gulf region , raised his voice when talking about the London-based oil company . 
Obama spoke to reporters after meeting local officials , state governors and administration officials involved in overseeing the response to the spill . 
Officials at the meeting told Obama that Gulf residents and businesses were having trouble getting claims paid by BP . 
Some local fishermen and boat operators have also complained that the economic hardship payments paid by BP , ranging up to $ 5,000 a person , have been insufficient to make ends meet . 
The company said on Friday it would be paying a second month of loss-of-income claims to compensate for income and profit disruptions . 
BP , which says the spill has cost it about $ 1 billion so far , put off a decision on Friday on whether to suspend paying its next quarterly dividend . 
Most analysts believe the company can foot the bill without cutting its dividend . 
Obama has repeatedly lambasted BP over the spill , which has confronted him with one of the biggest challenges of his presidency . 
The White House announced early on Friday that Obama was postponing a June 13-19 trip to Indonesia and Australia so he could focus on the oil spill . 
There is growing public criticism of his administration 's handling of the disaster . 
More than 60 percent of Americans believe both Obama and BP are not doing enough to clean up the spill , according to a CBS News poll released on Friday . 
As Obama 's motorcade drove toward the coastal town of Grand Isle , a group of people stood in front of a house holding a cardboard sign that said : `` Help us now . '' 
In Grand Isle , Obama met with local residents who had been affected by the spill . 
The president , who was criticized for not meeting `` real people '' during his last visit to the region , peeled and ate shrimp while visiting with the local mayor , fishermen , a marina owner and a convenience store owner . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Has Obama lost his mind ?! Are we in coastal Louisiana now to hope for a `` big , powerful storm ?! Obama would prefer that New Orleans East be drowned under 20 foot of oil sludge instead of water ?! Obviously I was fooled into believing this man had more smarts than me . 
What an awful thought to convey amid one of the most critical events to hit our shores . 
Yes , an hurricane right now would undoubtedly churn up the crude and disperse it over an even larger area than we could possibly imagine , but it would break up . 
We 're lacking the right type of communication from our leaders who are still too cozy with the multinationals to work on our behalf . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
