A 23-kiloton nuclear bomb detonated on 18 April , 1953 , at a Nevada test site released this mushroom cloud . 
`` A nuclear explosion over the leak , '' he says nonchalantly puffing a cigarette as he sits in a conference room at the Institute of Strategic Stability , where he is a director . 
`` I do n't know what BP is waiting for , they are wasting their time . 
Only about 10 kilotons of nuclear explosion capacity and the problem is solved . '' 
A nuclear fix to the leaking well has been touted online and in the occasional newspaper op-ed for weeks now . 
Washington has repeatedly dismissed the idea and BP execs say they are not considering an explosion -- nuclear or otherwise . 
But as a series of efforts to plug the 60,000 barrels of oil a day gushing from the sea floor have failed , talk of an extreme solution refuses to die . 
For some , blasting the problem seems the most logical answer in the world . 
Mikhailov has had a distinguished career in the nuclear field , helping to close a Soviet Union program that used nuclear explosions to seal gas leaks . 
Ordinarily he 's an opponent of nuclear blasts , but he says an underwater explosion in the Gulf of Mexico would not be harmful and could cost no more than $ 10 million . 
That compares with the $ 2.35 billion BP has paid out in cleanup and compensation costs so far . 
`` This option is worth the money , '' he says . 
And it 's not just Soviet boffins . 
Milo Nordyke , one of the masterminds behind U.S research into peaceful nuclear energy in the 1960s and '70s says a nuclear explosion is a logical last-resort solution for BP and the government . 
Matthew Simmons , a former energy adviser to U.S. President George W. Bush and the founder of energy investment-banking firm Simmons & Company International , is another calling for the nuclear option . 
Even former U.S. President Bill Clinton has voiced support for the idea of an explosion to stem the flow of oil , albeit one using conventional materials rather than nukes . 
`` Unless we send the Navy down deep to blow up the well and cover the leak with piles and piles and piles of rock and debris , which may become necessary ... unless we are going to do that , we are dependent on the technical expertise of these people from BP , '' Clinton told the Fortune\/Time\/CNN Global Forum in South Africa on June 29 . 
Clinton was picking up on an idea mooted by Christopher Brownfield in June . 
Brownfield is a one-time nuclear submarine officer , a veteran of the Iraq war -LRB- he volunteered in 2006 -RRB- and now a nuclear policy researcher at Columbia University . 
He is also one of a number of scientists whose theories rely not on nuclear bombs -- he did toy with that thought for a while -- but on conventional explosives that would implode the well and , if not completely plug it with crushed rock , at least bring the flow of oil under control . 
`` It 's kind of like stepping on a garden hose to kink it , '' Brownfield says . 
`` You may not cut off the flow entirely but it would greatly reduce the flow . '' 
Using nuclear blasts for peaceful ends was a key plank of Cold War policy in both the United States and the Soviet Union . 
In the middle of last century , both countries were motivated by a desire to soften the image of the era 's weapon of choice . 
Washington had big plans to use peaceful nuclear explosions to build an additional Panama Canal , carve a path for an inter-state highway through mountains in the Mojave Desert and connect underwater aquifers in Arizona . 
But the experimental plans were dropped as authorities learned more about the ecological dangers of surface explosions . 
The Soviet program , known as Nuclear Explosions for the National Economy , was launched in 1958 . 
The project saw 124 nuclear explosions for such tasks as digging canals and reservoirs , creating underground storage caverns for natural gas and toxic waste , exploiting oil and gas deposits and sealing gas leaks . 
It was finally mothballed by Mikhail Gorbachev in 1989 . 
The Soviets first used a nuclear blast to seal a gas leak in 1966 . 
Urtabulak , one of its prized gas-fields in Uzbekistan , had caught fire and raged for three years . 
Desperate to save the cherished reserves , Yefim Slavsky , then Minister of Light Industry , ordered nuclear engineers to use the most powerful weapon in their arsenal . 
`` The Minister said , ` Do it . 
Explode it , ' '' recalls Albert Vasilyev , a young engineer and a rising star in the project who now teaches at the Lenin Technical Institute in Moscow . 
Vasilyev remembers the technology behind the program with obvious pride . 
`` The explosion takes place deep underground , '' he says . 
`` We pinch the pipe , break it and the pipe collapses . '' 
According to Vasilyev , the blast at Urtabulak sealed the well shut leaving only an empty crater . 
In all , the Soviets detonated five nuclear devices to seal off runaway gas wells -- succeeding three or four times , depending on who you talk to . 
`` It worked quite well for them , '' says Nordyke , who authored a detailed account of Soviet explosions in a 2000 paper . 
`` There is no reason to think it would n't be fine -LRB- for the United States -RRB- . '' 
But not everything went smoothly . 
Vasilyev admits the program `` had two misfires '' . 
The final blast in 1979 was conducted near the Ukrainian city of Kharkov . 
`` The closest houses were just about 400 meters away , '' Vasilyev recalls . 
`` So this was ordered to be the weakest of the explosions . 
Even the buildings and the street lamps survived . '' 
Unfortunately , the low capacity of the device failed to seal the well and the gas resurfaced . 
Alexander Koldobsky , a fellow nuclear physicist from the Moscow Engineering and Physics Institute , insists the peaceful nuclear explosions were safe . 
The people who worked on the program `` were brilliant professionals '' , he says . 
`` They had a culture of safety , which did not accept the word ` maybe ' , but only accepted the words ` obligation ' and ` instruction . ' 
Any derivation from these in nuclear technologies is a crime . '' 
Still , he concedes , `` there were different scenarios of what happened after an explosion . '' 
At his first blast in a Turkmen gas field in 1972 , `` the stench was unbearable , '' he says . 
`` And the wind was blowing toward a nearby town . '' 
He closes his narrow lips into a smile as if refusing to say more . 
Koldobsky shrugs off any suggestion of fear or emotion when the bomb exploded . 
`` I felt nothing . 
I was just doing my job . '' 
