July 1 : Workers demonstrate a sand-cleaning technology , called Green Tech , for evaluators from Florida 's Department of Environmental Protection and BP on Pensacola Beach . 
AP PENSACOLA BEACH , Fla. -- Some inventors came with cotton fiber rolls , others with oil-clumping polymer mixes and one brought a specially designed rake . 
Their task : clean layers of crude oil and tar from a once-pristine Florida beach and prove they have the right stuff to combat the gummy onshore residue of the massive Gulf oil spill . 
The 18 U.S. and Canadian inventors displayed their science to save Florida 's beaches Thursday in a high-stakes clean-off under the critical gaze of evaluators . 
They were winnowed from among more than 400 people who submitted ideas . 
`` If we can find some gems out here , we hope we can start using them ASAP . 
We are looking for something that spreads easily and is effective . 
The answer is n't just one tool , we need a lot of tools for different weather conditions , for out in the water , on the beaches , in the marshes , '' said Darryl Boudreau , assistant director for the Northwest Florida district of the state Department of Environmental Protection . 
Intermittent rains , winds and a driving surf churned by Hurricane Alex did n't stop dozens of local , state , Coast Guard and other officials from coming to watch . 
Evaluators from the state 's environmental department , which organized the event , and from oil company BP PLC walked around the tar-covered beach to see the technologies in action and chat with inventors . 
Kalty Vazquez of Miami held a bucket in one hand and with the other he spread a green-sandy substance called GreenTech over his plot . 
Vazquez then raked through the tar and GreenTech and scooped the raked sand with a strainer , leaving mostly clean sand behind . 
He later demonstrated how GreenTech worked in water , helping to form larger tar balls that are easier to pick up . 
Watching closely , clipboard in hand and dressed in full rain gear , evaluator Daniel Kuncicky had lots of complicated questions about how the polymer-based product worked . 
Nearby , another group blanketed the sand with a cotton-fiber roll . 
The idea was for the oil and tar to adhere to the cotton when it was rolled up . 
But the group said it worked best when heavy machinery rolled over the cotton and pressed it into the sand . 
Lacking the machinery , they stomped on the cotton with their feet . 
Only a small part of the mess was removed when the cotton came up . 
Bill Vasden Jr. grows his oil spill cleanup solution on 1,500 acres in Tampa . 
The biodiesel and feed starch farmer believes kenaf , a kind of grass , is the answer to soaking up oil as it washes on shore . 
Vasden displayed kenaf booms on the beach . 
Auto mechanics have long used the material to clean oil from their floors , he said . 
`` It 's a fibrous grass , it 's renewable and we can burn it for energy , '' he said . 
`` We have 1,500 acres of it already . '' 
Among those who came to check out the ideas was Buck Lee , chairman of the Santa Rosa Island Authority , which oversees Pensacola Beach . 
`` Whoever invents the magic dust is going to be a millionaire , '' Lee said , as he handled phone call after phone call from people concerned about the oil-covered beach . 
Jeff Powell demonstrated a tar-ball rake . 
Powell 's Pensacola-based company , Ellis Trap and Cage Manufacturing , has long sold crab and bait-fish traps and sand flea rakes . 
The oil spill has hit his company hard , so Powell said he came up with another idea -- a rake that traps tar balls and filters out the sand . 
In about 30 minutes he raked his plot of sand and left a clean section . 
Peat moss is Canadian John Green 's answer . 
He demonstrated Sphagsorb , a microbe-enhanced peat moss . 
The product has worked in Canadian oil spills . 
Ten pounds of the Sphagsorb collects about 40 pounds of oil and tar , he said , as he spread the stuff over his plot . 
He glommed up a large wad of tar with his gloved hand to show how it caused the tar to stick together and made it easier to remove . 
Other ideas included spraying microbes onto the sand with containers that looked like bug sprayers , and mesh matting that could be removed from the sand after the tar washes on shore . 
After an hour , the small section of beach in front of the public walkway where the inventors demonstrated their ideas looked much cleaner than when they started . 
But evaluators were mum about whether they would choose any of the ideas or how quickly the public might see them in action . 
