James Reynolds | 07:37 UK time , Friday , 29 May 2009 China is taking the H1N1 threat pretty seriously . 
Arriving at Beijing 's airport right now is a bit like turning up at a laboratory . 
I 've just come back to Beijing following a few days in the UK . 
As our flight came in to land , the cabin crew handed out H1N1 health forms issued by China . 
These forms asked us to list our seat number and our contact numbers in Beijing . 
We also had to answer the question : `` Have you had close contact with pigs within the past week ? '' 
When we landed , we were told to stay in our seats . 
A team of Chinese health inspectors wearing masks then boarded the plane . 
The inspectors proceeded slowly down each row , pointing what I can only describe as a temperature gun at each passenger 's forehead -LRB- we made their jobs easier by politely tilting our foreheads to the inspectors as they went by -RRB- . 
A few minutes later , the inspectors escorted one passenger in an orange t-shirt off the plane . 
He looked pretty embarrassed . 
Inside the airport terminal , we passed through a further two checkpoints staffed by guards checking for anyone with a fever . 
Leaflets warned us : `` It is the responsibility of every citizen to self-monitor at home for seven days after coming back from abroad . '' 
In case that man with the orange t-shirt is diagnosed with H1N1 , the Health Ministry has enough information to track us all down and put us all into quarantine for a week . 
This report is objective , good work James ! 
And , thank you for being polite and cooperative in the inspection process . 
Wish the flu can come to an end soon . 
So this is pretty much an admission from the CCP that SARS was handled appalingly . 
At 08:47 am on 29 May 2009 , yang_rejina wrote : i feel that if chinese government did n't make some measures to prevent the flu , westerners can also find something to say . 
So it 's better to be serious than doing nothing . 
if it scared you , maybe chinese government should say sorry for the inconvience to the travellers as hongkong government did . 
However , travellers should fully understand that it is good for everybody . 
At 09:32 am on 29 May 2009 , topbear1974 wrote : That is pretty silly I have to say . 
it seems chinese government finally found a better way to control the citizen , by fear . 
This must be borrowed from west . 
At 10:16 am on 29 May 2009 , Shanghai2010 wrote : I really wish stronger controls were effected on the metro here every morning : every day I sit or stand in a carriage filled with more than a hundred people either coughing or sneezing , or both . 
There is not any effort to cover nose\/mouth with hand or handkerchief , but instead the viruses get nicely spread around everyone . 
My employers frequently complain that the commuters in our office are ill - I think the reason is obvious ! 
Just on Wednesday I saw something that made me laugh : A young lady wearing a face mask . 
I thought to myself `` At last ! 
A responsible fellow citizen ! '' 
But no , a few moments later she slipped off the face mask , sneezed violently into the air and slipped the mask back over her mouth and nose . 
Nonetheless , it is good to see this approach in airports , and while it will inconvenience passengers , it is hard not to argue that the steps are necessary . 
At 10:27 am on 29 May 2009 , XunFang wrote : I actually appreciate the seriousness of Chinese health authority with regards to the H1N1 virus . 
China is a heavily populated country . 
Virus such as this one will spread quickly if no effective control is implemented . 
People who are complaining about the inconvenience of all the safety procedures can only be called selfish . 
People who are currently infected with the virus without knowing it will also benefit from these tests and procedures , since early detection is always beneficial . 
The Chinese government obviously had learn plenty from previous outbreaks . 
At 11:43 am on 29 May 2009 , netjumper wrote : You must be joking shanghai2010 , must n't you ? 
If you are so afraid of virus why not stop breathing all together , or quanrentine yourself . 
The world is full of virus . 
It is just life . 
At 1:02 pm on 29 May 2009 , bestcbstore wrote : This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the House Rules . 
At 1:28 pm on 29 May 2009 , ghostofsichuan wrote : A friend , who as been in the U.S. went home to visit her parents in Xinjiang . 
Her father did not let her leave the house or have visitors for five days and told her this was his social responsiblity . 
The H1N1 and H1N5 always have the potential to mutate and become a potential danger on a global scale . 
If everyone took such actions the threats of pandemics would be greatly reduced . 
As seen with the H1N1 the spread across the globe was rapid and is still spreading . 
Public health is a primary responsibility of government , I think these actions are prudent and necessary . 
In high density cities a major outbreak would be difficult to control . 
As they say in the U.S. `` better safe than sorry . '' 
At 1:59 pm on 29 May 2009 , endyjai wrote : `` Have you had close contact with pigs within the past week ? '' 
I went to Beijing a couple of weeks ago , it was actually : `` Have you had close contact with pig within the past 1 week '' . 
Maybe they were informed by a spelling\/grammar critic . 
I had one check in the airport . 
Not three like you . 
At 2:04 pm on 29 May 2009 , RoastDuck wrote : This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the House Rules . 
At 2:20 pm on 29 May 2009 , aeroarchie wrote : This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the House Rules . 
At 8:28 pm on 29 May 2009 , Bloofs wrote : This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the House Rules . 
At 8:29 pm on 29 May 2009 , Bloofs wrote : This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the House Rules . 
At 9:44 pm on 29 May 2009 , redtibetan wrote : This is bid an over reaction . 
there is so many other ways you can check on pessenger whether he has flu or not . 
pointing a gun like instrument on each pessenger is way too much and not a friendly like treatment . 
At 09:53 am on 30 May 2009 , TopCat1802 wrote : Since SARS started inside China , and the H1N1 influenza virus started outside China , I am not surprised at the difference in response to the two diseases ! 
I doubt if these measures alone will be enough to prevent the spread of the virus inside China , after all they are only looking for people who may currently have the symptoms of the disease . 
At 10:39 am on 30 May 2009 , traveller79 wrote : This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the House Rules . 
At 7:28 pm on 30 May 2009 , astoundingoyes wrote : This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the House Rules . 
At 08:11 am on 01 Jun 2009 , shalimarguru wrote : What a load of rubbish this swine flu is - its not even close to normal seasonal flu in its strength Now maybe its going to mutate and hit hard later in the year or , they got it wrong in the labs where it was produced . 
Or , it was released to see how it would develop . 
At 12:24 pm on 01 Jun 2009 , peacekeeper_alpha wrote : This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the House Rules . 
At 4:00 pm on 01 Jun 2009 , thisisacryforhelp wrote : This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the House Rules . 
At 07:53 am on 02 Jun 2009 , grammanator wrote : This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the House Rules . 
At 2:05 pm on 02 Jun 2009 , Shanghai2010 wrote : This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the House Rules . 
At 2:57 pm on 02 Jun 2009 , chinabuzz wrote : Chinese government has its own way of doing thing that they believe is standard regardless of what other think about it ; an inspiration they draw from `` socialism with Chinese characteristic '' . 
After all they vantage point of number . 
I only hope that the authority there will not take it too far and make it inconvenient for others and leave them with a sense of being under constant scrutiny . 
At 3:27 pm on 02 Jun 2009 , aeroarchie wrote : My post # 13 quoted the comment of Dr Margaret Chan , Director-General of WHO , on how China responded to the swine flu outbreak . 
How has it broken the House Rules ? 
At 3:31 pm on 02 Jun 2009 , chinabuzz wrote : -LRB- Obs ... Lost the first one in the process of sending , rewriting again -RRB- Chinese authority has its own way of doing thing which they call as the standard way of doing it regardless of other existing norms other world community think about it ; an inspiration they draw from `` socialism with Chinese characteristic '' . 
After all , they have number and know how to play the number game well . 
Here in this case , i hope the authority wo n't take it too far to such an extent that it cause inconvenient to others while leaving them with a sense of hijacked privacy . 
Or , serve it as another pretext to bulldoze people 's basis rights . 
At 10:07 pm on 02 Jun 2009 , ucpegasus wrote : This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the House Rules . 
I m James Reynolds , the BBC s former Beijing correspondent . 
This blog was where I shared my thoughts on life in China during my time there . 
Subscribe to James Reynolds ' China You can stay up to date with James Reynolds ' China via these feeds . 
These are some of the popular topics this blog covers . 
