Wednesday 27 July 2005 23.59 BST It was so attractive that the people of Lille were already flocking to it , months before the official opening : two hectares of green grass , 250 shady chestnut and lime trees , fountains and a children 's play area , all bang in the middle of France 's biggest and busiest northern city . 
Sadly , the brand-new Parc Jean-Baptiste Lebas is currently firmly closed , its perimeter fence patrolled by watchful policemen while a mine clearance team more used to working in Bosnia , Afghanistan and Iraq finishes ridding it of a potentially deadly crop of first world war grenades . 
So far they have found some 200 . 
`` Thankfully no one has been hurt , but obviously we have to to take every possible precaution , '' said a city hall official . 
`` There is no question of anyone else being allowed in again until we are sure it 's safe . '' 
The scare started this month when the parents of a four-year-old boy found him playing with a lemon-sized lump of hardened earth which , on closer inspection , turned out to be a German Heer Handgranat dating from 1915 , containing 30 grams -LRB- 1oz -RRB- of unstable explosive , and capable of maiming anyone within a 25-metre radius . 
Gardeners and building workers on the site next to the city hall began hunting for more with rakes , at first with little success . 
But then a park visitor stumbled across another one , and `` quite suddenly , a whole bunch came to the surface after some heavy rainfall '' , the official said . 
The town hall called in a Toulouse-based demining company . 
Using advanced metal detectors , the company , Geomines , has spent five days inching across the new park , until recently a five-lane boulevard and car park , uncovering first eight , then 23 , then 70 , then 96 and finally 189 of the grenades , some twisted by earthmovers that had , miraculously , failed to set them off . 
ISS Espaces Verts , the contractors , told the local newspaper La Voix du Nord that after a painstaking inquiry it had come to the conclusion that of the tens of thousands of tonnes of soil it had trucked in to create the park , a portion came from the villages of Santes , Loos and Wambrechies - through which , for many months , ran the frontline of the 1914-18 war . 
`` We 've been lucky , '' the city hall official said . 
The people of Lille are used to such scares : three years ago , more than a thousand were evacuated when workers uncovered a 110kg British bomb buried on the site of the new regional council building . 
