Black Eyed Peas to play Michael Jackson Cardiff concert Will . 
I. Am said the Black Eyed Peas `` all owe Michael such a lot '' The Black Eyed Peas have announced they will perform at the Michael Jackson tribute concert in Cardiff . 
i. am , who worked as a studio producer with Jackson , said the show would be `` an incredibly personal and moving evening '' for him . 
Jackson 's music has been `` an inspiration '' to his whole life , he said . 
The Michael Forever concert will take place at Cardiff 's Millennium Stadium on 8 October . 
The real star of this tribute to Michael is going to be the music itself . 
And that 's the only way it should be . '' 
i. am Black Eyed Peas Days after Jackson 's death on 25 June , 2009 at the age of 50 , the Black Eyed Peas paid tribute to the Thriller singer during their performance at Glastonbury . 
They have continued to do so at every one of their shows since . 
Michael Jackson died while rehearsing for his This Is It tour Will . 
i. am added that Jackson 's `` great , great songs '' had formed the soundtrack to his childhood . 
`` When I was a little kid of six or seven growing up in Los Angeles , there was Michael recording Thriller , and all his early hits , just a few miles away across town - obviously I did n't know him at that time , but I loved him as a fan , '' he said . 
`` Then one day about four years ago , with the Black Eyed Peas well-established , I got a call from him I will never forget . 
I then had the great privilege of working with him and getting to know him and his beautiful family . '' 
He said the Black Eyed Peas would be proud to perform at the concert , as `` we all owe Michael such a lot '' . 
Michael Jackson 's brother Marlon said the family was `` delighted and touched '' that the Black Eyed Peas would be taking part . 
`` My brother rated Will . 
i. am and the original things he does in music very highly . 
I guess you could say it was a case of mutual respect , '' he said . 
The line-up will include performances from Beyonce via video link , singer and Oscar-winning actress Jennifer Hudson , Cee Lo Green , Leona Lewis , JLS , Jamie Foxx and Christina Aguilera . 
Two of Jackson 's brothers , Jermaine and Randy , have said the concert should not go ahead because it will clash with the trial of Conrad Murray , the singer 's former doctor accused of involuntary manslaughter . 
`` It seems plain to me that the real star of this tribute to Michael is going to be the music itself , '' said Will . 
`` And that 's the only way it should be . '' 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
