NEW ORLEANS -- No oil appeared to be leaking from a drilling rig that exploded and sank in the Gulf of Mexico , the Coast Guard said Friday , though officials were trying to contain what spilled after the blast and prevent any threat to the coast 's fragile ecosystem . 
The search continued for 11 workers missing after the explosion late Tuesday on the Deepwater Horizon , though family members said they had been told they probably did not survive . 
The rig burned for nearly two days until it sank Thursday morning . 
The fire was out , but officials initially feared as much as 336,000 gallons of crude oil a day could be rising from the sea floor nearly 5,000 feet below . 
Coast Guard Rear Adm. Mary Landry said Friday morning that no oil appeared to be leaking from a well head at the ocean floor , nor was any leaking at the water 's surface . 
But she said crews were closely monitoring the rig for any more crude that might spill out . 
The crew was finishing the well about 50 miles off the Louisiana coast when the rig exploded . 
Officials have not said what caused the blast , and the oil they are dealing with now is left over from the explosion and sinking . 
`` If it gets landward , it could be a disaster in the making , '' said Cynthia Sarthou , executive director for the environmental group Gulf Restoration Network . 
BP PLC , which leased the rig and took the lead in the cleanup , said Friday it has activated an extensive oil spill response , including using remotely operated vehicles to assess the well and 32 vessels to mop up the spill . 
BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward said the company will do `` everything in our power to contain this oil spill and resolve the situation as rapidly , safely and effectively as possible . '' 
Ed Overton , a Louisiana State University environmental sciences professor , said he expects some of the light crude oil to evaporate while much of it turns into a pasty mess that ultimately breaks apart into small chunks of oily residue that can wash ashore . 
`` It 's going to be a god-awful mess for a while , '' he said . 
`` I 'm not crying doomsday or saying the sky is falling , but that is the potential . '' 
Weather forecasts indicate the spill was likely to stay well away from shore at least through the weekend , but if winds change it could come ashore faster , said Doug Helton of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 's office of response and restoration . 
The Coast Guard , which was leading the investigation , had not given up the search early Friday for those missing from the rig . 
Carolyn Kemp of Monterey , La. , said her grandson , Roy Wyatt Kemp , 27 , would have been on the drilling platform when it exploded . 
`` They 're assuming all those men who were on the platform are dead , '' Kemp said . 
`` That 's the last we 've heard . '' 
Most of the crew -- 111 members -- were ashore , including 17 taken to hospitals . 
Four were in critical condition . 
Four others made it off safely were still on a boat operating one of several underwater robots being used to assess whether the flow of oil could be shut off at a control valve on the sea floor , said Guy Cantwell , spokesman for rig owner Transocean Ltd. . 
Landry said crews saw a 1-mile-by-5-mile rainbow sheen of what appeared to be a crude oil mix on the surface . 
At the worst-case figure of 336,000 gallons a day , it would take more than a month for the amount of crude oil spilled to equal the 11 million gallons spilled from the Exxon Valdez in Alaska 's Prince William Sound . 
A turn in winds and currents might send oil toward fragile coastal wetlands -- nurseries for fish and shrimp and habitat for birds . 
`` As you get closer to shore , you get richer and richer marine habitats , and also get the potential for long-term exposure , '' Helton said . 
To prevent that , the Marine Spill Response Corp. , an energy industry cleanup consortium , brought seven skimmer boats to suck oily water from the surface , four planes that can scatter chemicals to disperse oil , and 500,000 feet -- 94.6 miles -- of containment boom , a floating barrier with a skirt that drapes down under the water and corrals the oil . 
In addition to other environmental concerns , the well is in an area where a pod of sperm whales is known to feed , said Kim Amendola of NOAA . 
Those who escaped the rig did so mainly by getting on lifeboats that were lowered into the Gulf , said Adrian Rose , vice president of Transocean . 
`` There are a number of uncorroborated stories , a lot of them really quite heroic stories , of how people looked after each other . 
There was very little panic , '' Rose said . 
Family members of two missing workers filed separate lawsuits Thursday accusing Transocean and BP of negligence . 
Both companies declined to comment about legal action against them after the first suit was filed . 
The U.S. Minerals Management Service , which regulates oil rigs , conducted three routine inspections of the Deepwater Horizon this year -- in February , March and on April 1 -- and found no violations , MMS spokeswoman Eileen Angelico said . 
Apr. 21 : Fire boat crews battle the blazing remnants of the offshore oil rig Deepwater Horizon . 
April 21 : In this aerial photo taken in the Gulf of Mexico more than 50 miles southeast of Venice on Louisiana 's tip , the Deepwater Horizon oil rig is seen burning . 
-LRB- AP -RRB- Stanley Murray , left , father of Chad Murray , who was rescued from the Deepwater Horizon oil rig that exploded in the Gulf of Mexico , and Christy Murray , background right , hug loved ones of their unidentified neighbor , a crew member reported missing , after surviving crew members arrived at a hotel in Kenner , La. , Thursday , April 22 , 2010 . 
