President Obama : `` This is good news '' BP says it is encouraged by the first test data following its stoppage of the oil from its leaking Gulf of Mexico well . 
President Obama gave a cautious welcome but added : `` It is important we do n't get ahead of ourselves . '' 
Pressure within the well is steadily rising , a good sign , said Kent Wells , BP 's vice president . 
The oil has been stopped for the first time since 20 April , as part of a 48-hour test . 
Spilled oil has damaged hundreds of miles of Gulf coastline since April , with serious economic damage to the region . 
BP has already paid out more than $ 200m -LRB- # 130m -RRB- in claims to 32,000 claimants . 
A further 17,000 claims are being evaluated for payment , and more information is being sought on 61,000 other claims . 
On the sea floor there is currently no evidence of the well rupturing . 
Eleven workers were killed in the Deepwater Horizon explosion , and the oil spill has raised fears of an environmental catastrophe . 
The flow of oil was shut off at 1425 local time -LRB- 1925 GMT -RRB- on Thursday . 
The stoppage is part of a test of the integrity of the well . 
When the oil stops gushing , everybody feels like we 're done - and we 're not '' End Quote Barack Obama US president If the pressure within the new cap on the well stays high , that could mean there are no other leaks or ruptures within the wellbore . 
If it drops , that could suggest problems . 
`` The new cap is good news , '' Mr Obama said , noting that it would either mean the oil was stopped or that almost all of it would be able to be captured . 
But he added : `` One of the problems with having this camera down there is , is that when the oil stops gushing , everybody feels like we 're done - and we 're not . '' 
The pressure within the well is currently 6,700 pounds per square inch -LRB- psi -RRB- and steadily rising , said Mr Wells . 
If it were to drop below 6,000 psi that would probably mean there was a problem within the well . 
If it continues rising and stays over 8,000 psi that would probably mean the well was intact , Mr Wells said . 
There is currently `` no negative evidence of any breaching '' of the sea floor , Mr Wells said . 
BP will soon run another seismic survey to check for any evidence of ruptures . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL In June , BP placed a cap , known as an LMRP cap , over the top of the Deepwater Horizon well so oil could be collected at the surface . 
However , this continued to leak oil and has now been replaced with a better fitting device . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL When engineers removed the LMRP cap on 10 July , oil began to freely flow from the top of the blowout preventer once more . 
However , the Q4000 containment system continued to take some oil to the surface . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Engineers then bolted on a new capping stack onto the blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- . 
This allowed them to conduct a series of tests to see if the flow of oil could be stopped using the newly installed equipment . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL During the test the three ram capping stack has been closed and all sub-sea containment systems collecting the oil temporarily suspended , effectively blocking the flow of oil from the well . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Once the tests have been successfully completed , BP will resume collecting oil . 
The Helix Producer ship was recently connected to the BOP to provide another collection route in addition to the Q4000 rig . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT BP is also resuming work on a relief well that has 30ft left to drill before it hits the original leaking well . 
Once the wells intersect , mud and cement will be used to permanently deal with the leak . 
The current pressure test could last for up to 48 hours , with BP and government experts reviewing results every six hours . 
If the test is successful it is not clear what will happen next . 
BP has suggested it might be possible to keep the well shut , with oil collection vessels left on standby . 
But government incident commander Thad Allen has suggested the most likely outcome is the resumption of collection of the oil with four vessels and the capacity to collect 80,000 barrels - all or virtually all of the oil - each day . 
Do you live in the Gulf of Mexico region ? 
What is your response to the latest attempts to stop the oil spill ? 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
