Environmental activist Dave Janka shows Rajesh Mirchandani oil from the Valdez still in local waters Before the BP accident in the Gulf of Mexico , America 's worst offshore oil leak was the Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska . 
Twenty-one years later , the BBC 's Rajesh Mirchandani went to a nearby fishing village to see how its people had recovered - and found not all of them had . 
Surrounded by jagged snow-covered peaks and perched on the edge of a chilly fjord on Prince William Sound , the small Alaskan fishing town of Cordova is in a beautiful part of the world . 
But 21 years after one of the worst environmental disasters in US history , it remains scarred . 
In March 1989 , the Exxon Valdez tanker hit a reef and spewed 11m gallons of crude oil into the sound 's pristine waters , and , until April 's BP accident in the Gulf of Mexico , it was America 's worst spill . 
Today , oil can still be found here . 
Exxon Valdez oil polluted coastlines , contaminated fishing grounds and killed huge numbers of animals . 
Now , most of the species affected by the spill have recovered or are on their way back . 
But herring - once a major catch in Cordova - disappeared in the years after the spill and have never returned . 
Oil company Exxon cites studies that suggest no link , but local scientists and fisherfolk will tell you otherwise . 
This year Cordova opened shrimp fishing for the first time since 1989 They point out that the spill occurred during spawning season , that the inlets and bays where herring traditionally laid their eggs were choked with oil , that herring spawn at age four and that the herring population collapsed four years after the spill . 
Either way , Cordova 's fishing industry was badly hit . 
Permits to fish herring commercially had been worth hundreds of thousands of dollars before the spill but became worthless , leaving many fishermen facing huge amounts of debt . 
RJ Kopchak , a former fishermen turned development director for the Prince William Sound Science Center , says he held herring fishing permits and equipment worth $ 200,000 -LRB- # 132,000 -RRB- when the spill happened . 
`` Today , they are worthless , '' he said . 
The disappearance of the herring lead to the loss of money and people . 
Nearly a third of Cordova 's population departed in the wake of the spill , restaurants and five nightclubs closed and businesses went bankrupt . 
Sue Laird , a former fisherwoman who now runs a seafood company , said the fishing industry had begun to recover . 
`` We 're still missing herring , we 're still missing several things . '' 
But , she added : `` This is the first year -LRB- since the spill -RRB- we 've had a shrimp fishery . '' 
Exxon spent billions of dollars on the clean-up and claims against it , just as BP is doing in the Gulf of Mexico today . 
A court ordered Exxon to pay $ 5bn -LRB- # 3.3 bn -RRB- in damages . 
After years of court battles , the amount was reduced to a tenth of that , $ 500m . 
My heart goes out to those people in the Gulf ... I think they 're going to have it worse than we had '' End Quote Leroy Gilkinson Fisherman Many fought for compensation for years , and the stress took its toll . 
While Cordova is not a depressed place now , the scars remain evident . 
`` We had lost our community during the spill years , '' said Sylvia Lange , whose family had to leave Cordova in order to carry on fishing . 
Now , she runs a hotel in the town . 
She said watching news of the BP spill reminded her of how the town was split into `` haves and have nots '' , when some people working for the Exxon clean-up effort became known as `` spillionaires '' . 
`` All told there were 10 years of total chaos , families splitting apart , not talking to each other , divorce , '' she continued . 
`` And then there were 10 years of making it right again , and I think we were there , after 20 years . '' 
The BP spill has re-opened old wounds in Alaska . 
Many fear the past here could foreshadow the future in the Gulf of Mexico . 
`` My heart goes out to those people in the Gulf , '' fisherman Leroy Gilkinson said over a morning coffee and smoke in the wood-panelled bar of the historic Alaskan Hotel on the town 's main street . 
`` I think they 're going to have it worse than we had . '' 
View from Cordova 's Alaskan Hotel : ` The Valdez broke a lot of people ' Mr Kopchak , of the science center , said he does n't think Cordova will be the same again until the herring recover . 
`` In March of every year , commercial fishermen would begin to arrive back to town , those that did n't live here permanently , '' he said . 
`` The crewmen would come back to town , the cannery workers would come back , the restaurants would open up . 
`` Now that there are no herring , it 's not until May before the community has an opportunity to take an economic part in the fisheries . 
`` That means that many kinds of businesses that could make enough money in six months to stay alive no longer have enough time to make enough money to be here . '' 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
