The well has temporarily stopped leaking oil , but beach clean-up efforts continue BP says there are no signs of leakage from its ruptured oil well in the Gulf of Mexico , a day after the flow was stopped for the first time since April . 
No oil has escaped from the new cap sealing the well and there was no sign of any breach under the sea floor , BP executive Kent Wells said . 
However , more pressure testing is being done to check there are no ruptures . 
Earlier , the US official overseeing the spill response , Adm Thad Allen , said the latest tests were inconclusive . 
Adm Allen said the pressure test of the well would continue for several more hours . 
Speaking in Washington on Friday , US President Barack Obama cautioned against over-optimism and said much work remained to be done . 
`` It is important we do n't get ahead of ourselves , '' he said . 
`` One of the problems with having this camera down there is , is that when the oil stops gushing , everybody feels like we 're done - and we 're not . '' 
A new cap was used on Thursday to stop the flow for the first time since 20 April , as part of a 48-hour test of the well 's integrity . 
Eleven workers were killed in the Deepwater Horizon explosion , and the oil spill has caused an environmental catastrophe , killing wildlife and coating fragile coastal marshlands with thick , brown crude . 
Spilled oil has affected hundreds of miles of Gulf coastline since April , with serious economic damage to the region as tourists have avoided Gulf Coast beaches and fishing grounds have remained closed . 
BP has already paid out more than $ 200m -LRB- # 130m -RRB- to 32,000 claimants . 
The company is evaluating a further 17,000 for payment and is seeking more information on 61,000 other claims . 
On the sea floor , robotic cameras and monitoring instruments currently show no evidence of the well rupturing . 
The flow of oil was shut off at 1425 local time -LRB- 1925 GMT -RRB- on Thursday , as part of a test of well 's integrity . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL In June , BP placed a cap , known as an LMRP cap , over the top of the Deepwater Horizon well so oil could be collected at the surface . 
However , this continued to leak oil and has now been replaced with a better fitting device . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL When engineers removed the LMRP cap on 10 July , oil began to freely flow from the top of the blowout preventer once more . 
However , the Q4000 containment system continued to take some oil to the surface . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Engineers then bolted on a new capping stack onto the blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- . 
This allowed them to conduct a series of tests to see if the flow of oil could be stopped using the newly installed equipment . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL During the test the three ram capping stack has been closed and all sub-sea containment systems collecting the oil temporarily suspended , effectively blocking the flow of oil from the well . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Once the tests have been successfully completed , BP will resume collecting oil . 
The Helix Producer ship was recently connected to the BOP to provide another collection route in addition to the Q4000 rig . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT If the pressure within the new cap on the well stays high , it could mean there are no other leaks or ruptures within the well bore . 
If it drops , that could suggest problems . 
BP scientists have detected `` no negative evidence of any breaching '' of the sea floor , Mr Wells said . 
The company will soon run another seismic survey to check for any evidence of ruptures . 
BP and government experts are reviewing results every six hours . 
If the test is successful , it is not clear what will happen next . 
BP has suggested it might be possible to keep the well shut , with oil collection vessels left on standby . 
Adm Allen has suggested the most likely outcome is the resumption of collection of the oil with four vessels and the capacity to collect 80,000 barrels - all or virtually all of the oil - each day . 
BP is also resuming work on a relief well that has 30ft left to drill before it hits the original leaking well . 
Once the wells intersect , mud and cement will be used to permanently deal with the leak . 
Do you live in the Gulf of Mexico region ? 
What is your response to the latest attempts to stop the oil spill ? 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
