NEW ORLEANS -- NEW ORLEANS -- The U.S. government said engineers will start work Monday to remove the temporary cap that stopped oil from gushing out of BP 's blown-out Gulf well so that crews can raise a key piece of equipment from the seabed . 
Retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , the government 's point man for the spill response , told reporters Friday that engineers must remove the cap so they can raise the failed blowout preventer . 
The blowout preventer is considered a key piece of evidence in determining what caused the April rig explosion that unleashed the gushing oil . 
The leak was first contained when engineers were able to place a cap atop BP 's well . 
Workers then pumped mud and cement in through the top in a so-called `` static kill '' operation that significantly reduced pressure inside the well . 
Officials do n't expect oil to leak into the sea again when the cap is removed , but Allen has ordered BP to be ready to collect any leaking crude just in case . 
The Department of Justice and other federal investigators are overseeing the work to remove the blowout preventer , Allen said . 
The 50-foot -LRB- 15-meter -RRB- , 600,000-pound -LRB- 272,000-kilogram -RRB- device -- which was designed to prevent such a catastrophe -- will be taken out of the water with the well pipe still inside to ensure the pipe does n't break apart any more than it already has . 
Keeping the blowout preventer intact is important because it 's considered an essential piece of evidence in determining what caused the blast aboard the Deepwater Horizon on April 20 . 
After the explosion , 206 million gallons -LRB- 800 million liters -RRB- of oil spilled into the Gulf of Mexico until the temporary cap stopped the flow . 
The explosion on the rig -- which was owned by Transocean Ltd. and being operated by BP PLC -- killed 11 workers . 
Engineers are hoping the blowout preventer can be detached easily , but they are prepared to exert 80,000 pounds -LRB- 36,000 kilograms -RRB- of pressure if needed , Allen said . 
A new blowout preventer will be placed atop the well once the one that failed is raised . 
After that , the goal is to drill the final 50 feet -LRB- 15 meters -RRB- of a relief well beginning Sept. 7 , Allen said . 
From there , it will take about four days for drilling crews to reach their target . 
The relief well has been called the ultimate solution to plugging the well . 
Once the relief well is drilled , engineers will be able to pump mud and cement in through the bottom of the well , plugging the one that gushed oil once and for all . 
Meanwhile , the U.S. government said Friday that it is reopening more federal waters in the Gulf of Mexico for commercial and recreational fishing that had been closed because of the spill . 
The government is reopening 4,281 square miles -LRB- 11,000 sq. kilometers -RRB- of waters off the coast of western Louisiana . 
Oil sheen has not been seen there since July 29 , and scientists found no oil or dispersants on samples of the area 's shrimp and fish . 
Twenty percent of federal waters in the Gulf remain closed . 
`` We 're sort of nibbling at the edges if you will , areas that have been free of oil for the longest time and were oiled the least , '' Lubchenco said . 
The news came as hearings continued in Houston before the joint U.S. Coast Guard-Bureau of Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement investigative panel . 
On Friday , Mark Hafle -- a BP drilling engineer who was a key decision maker at the now-sunken rig -- exercised his constitutional right to refuse to testify . 
The panel 's goal is to determine what caused the explosion . 
The panel also will make recommendations to prevent such a catastrophe in the future . 
