See a gallery of Sean Smith 's Iraq pictures here US marines in the town of Ubaydi , as part of an ongoing offensive against insurgents in the North west of Iraq . 
Photograph : Sean Smith\/Guardian I was attached to squads from the 3rd Battalion\/Sixth Marines and 2nd Battalion\/First Marines as they moved into Iraqi towns along the border with Syria . 
The US said the aim of Operation Steel Curtain , which began two weeks ago and has now been completed , was to break up insurgent cells and disrupt their supply lines from Syria . 
The marines worked their way house by house through the border towns along the Euphrates . 
They had not been in the towns for at least a year and thought they would encounter a lot of insurgents on the first day . 
But they took only a little fire in Karabila and Husayba , from IEDs -LRB- improvised explosive devices -RRB- set off in the streets and hidden in walls . 
There was more resistance at Ubaydi in the following days . 
The US went in with tanks , Humvees , helicopters and planes . 
They swept from one end to the other , searching for weapons . 
They kicked in doors or used explosives to get in , or used tanks to do it . 
Humvees went in behind the troops with loudspeakers calling on people to leave . 
They encountered Iraqis with guns and rocket-propelled grenades . 
Two marines were killed , one of them going into a building . 
I heard it but did not realize what had happened until 20 minutes later . 
There was a group barricaded in a house and they waited for the soldier to come in and shot him . 
I saw the body of one of the men who killed him lying in the street . 
Five other marines were killed when they went to a farmhouse outside Ubaydi . 
They were chasing two men , went into the house , and it blew up . 
When people saw a ferocious assault was under way , they began to leave town . 
Women and children came out carrying white flags . 
It was eerie seeing columns of people appearing through the smoke and explosions , with no one knowing which direction the shooting was coming from . 
I am sure we will hear of more casualties . 
All men of military age were detained . 
they had material sprayed on their hands to reveal whether they had handled explosives or gunpowder . 
Families were split up and loudspeakers were barking commands . 
Some of the detainees came back and some did not . 
At Rawa the Iraqi army carried out searches , with US advisers . 
They did not arrest all males of military age , only those on a two-page list of suspects . 
They found about 3,000 lb of explosives . 
They took the detainees - about 20 - to a hill overlooking Rawa . 
There were a lot of mines so it took ages to get there . 
They were handcuffed all night , with their eyes bandaged . 
There was no room for everyone in the shelter so some slept outside . 
They were given a bottle of water and a blanket , then herded in the morning on to a helicopter and taken to the base at Qaim for questioning . 
