Is talk of withdrawal premature ? 
Does a `` phased withdrawal '' from Iraq in 2006 really herald the beginning of the end for the coalition effort in Iraq ? 
An Oxford Research Group report released today suggests policy makers in Washington DC and London are being wildly over-optimistic about an exit strategy and concludes the Iraq war could last decades . 
Photograph : Martin Argles Does a `` phased withdrawal '' from Iraq in 2006 really herald the beginning of the end for the coalition effort in Iraq ? 
An Oxford Research Group report released today suggests policy makers in Washington DC and London are being wildly over-optimistic about an exit strategy and concludes the Iraq war could last decades . 
The best-case scenario for the coalition goes like this . 
After elections for a new national government in Baghdad in three weeks ' time the coalition can start to publicly name dates , along with specific numbers of troops to leave . 
With the Iraqi police becoming better trained each day , it should soon be able to take more control over day-to-day security thus reducing the current raison d'tre for the presence of western forces . 
Pictures of US troops boarding military planes and US tanks crossing back into Kuwait all live on Al-Jazeera , will gradually draw the poison fuelling the insurgency . 
It also gives the new government something to show to nationalists of all kinds within Iraq . 
The Pentagon has already started to put out briefings that its overall force will be cut by a third next year , with three brigades to leave early in the New Year , as an immediate payback for Iraqi voters . 
The UK too has indicated it will reduce its force in southern Iraq in the coming year . 
As the Guardian reported last week , talks have taken place between British and Iraqi officials about reducing troop numbers next May . 
With elections on December 15 allowing Tony Blair to hail the introduction of democracy , a joint UK-Iraqi statement is expected about British withdrawal . 
If the first phased reduction goes well and the insurgency begins to decline , the end of the occupation can then be planned sometime in the middle of next year in time for George Bush to present to voters ahead of next autumn 's mid-term congressional elections . 
Professor Paul Rogers casts serious doubt on this rosy scenario today . 
He argues in the Oxford Research Group paper , Iraq and the War on Terror , that occupation of Iraq is a `` gift '' to the al-Qaida movement . 
Not only is the occupation a powerful magnet for young jihadists seeking combat experience , it 's a powerful propaganda tool for their belief in a Christian crusader\/Zionist plot against Islam . 
Given their dependence on oil , a US withdrawal in the face of such terrorism would , he concludes , be a strategic catastrophe larger than the retreat from Vietnam . 
Since the al-Qaida movement measures its struggle in decades , not years , Prof Rogers believes that maintaining a friendly government in Baghdad will require the US military to stay for decades . 
He argues a UK withdrawal in the south is similarly difficult because it would mean handing over military power to pro-Iranian forces which would result in a break with Washington . 
