Wednesday 23 November 2005 10.47 GMT Arabic TV news channel al-Jazeera has called on the US and UK governments to provide a `` good explanation '' for comments allegedly made by George Bush about a plan to bomb its Qatar headquarters . 
The comments , which surfaced in a leaked memo , alleged that the American president considered bombing al-Jazeera 's offices in Doha , the capital of Qatar , at the height of last year 's Iraqi insurgency in Falluja . 
Al-Jazeera said it was still investigating the validity of the memo and whether Mr Bush was serious about his alleged comments or not , but warned that if they were credible it was a `` bad day '' for news organizations worldwide . 
`` We are still investigating the credibility and the contents of the document and in the absence of comment from Downing Street we are slightly cautious , '' said al-Jazeera 's London bureau chief , Yofri Fouda . 
`` We certainly hope it 's not true , but if it turns out to be true it would be horrific and bad news not only for al-Jazeera but for every news organization around the world . 
`` We hope Downing Street or the White House comes up with a good explanation - either denying the memo exists or , if it is true , that the president was at least joking . '' 
Mr Fouda said if details about the alleged memo - covered in a story in yesterday 's Daily Mirror - were correct , it would throw into question US explanations about attacks on al-Jazeera 's offices in Kabul and Baghdad in 2001 and 2003 . 
`` It will cast even more doubt on the circumstances surrounding previous incidents , '' he said . 
The channel 's London bureau chief said al-Jazeera wrote to the Pentagon at the start of the 2003 Iraq war detailing the locations of its offices in an official letter . 
`` Our Doha office is a one-storey building located in the middle of nowhere . 
It would be incredibly easy to knock out , '' he added . 
Both the US and UK government 's declined to comment on the allegations . 
`` We are not going to dignify something so outlandish with a response , '' a White House official said . 
A Downing Street spokesman said : `` We have got nothing to say about this story . 
We do n't comment on leaked documents . '' 
The alleged threat by Mr Bush to take `` military action '' against the broadcaster 's Qatar headquarters was contained in a leaked memo , which surfaced in the Daily Mirror yesterday . 
Quoting unnamed sources , the paper claimed the US president was `` deadly serious '' about the plan , which he allegedly talked about at a face-to-face meeting withTony Blair in April last year , but backed down after pressure from the UK prime minister . 
The US has long criticised al-Jazeera . 
During the Iraq war of 2003 , the US defense secretary , Donald Rumsfeld , accused the broadcaster of `` consistently lying '' and `` working in concert with terrorists '' . 
To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or phone 02072399857 If you are writing a comment for publication , please mark clearly `` for publication '' . 
