The attorney general last night threatened newspapers with the Official Secrets Act if they revealed the contents of a document allegedly relating to a dispute between Tony Blair and George Bush over the conduct of military operations in Iraq . 
It is believed to be the first time the Blair government has threatened newspapers in this way . 
Though it has obtained court injunctions against newspapers , the government has never prosecuted editors for publishing the contents of leaked documents , including highly sensitive ones about the run-up to the invasion of Iraq . 
The attorney general , Lord Goldsmith , last night referred editors to newspaper reports yesterday that described the contents of a memo purporting to be at the center of charges against two men under the secrets act . 
Under the front-page headline `` Bush plot to bomb his ally '' , the Daily Mirror reported that the US president last year planned to attack the Arabic television station al-Jazeera , which has its headquarters in Doha , the capital of Qatar , where US and British bombers were based . 
Richard Wallace , editor of the Daily Mirror , said last night : `` We made No 10 fully aware of the intention to publish and were given ` no comment ' officially or unofficially . 
Suddenly 24 hours later we are threatened under section 5 -LRB- of the secrets act -RRB- '' . 
Under section 5 it is an offence to have come into the possession of government information , or a document from a crown servant , if that person discloses it without lawful authority . 
The prosecution has to prove the disclosure was damaging . 
The Mirror said the memo turned up in May last year at the constituency office of the former Labor MP for Northampton South , Tony Clarke . 
Last week , Leo O'Connor , a former researcher for Mr Clarke , was charged with receiving a document under section 5 of the act . 
David Keogh , a former Foreign Office official seconded to the Cabinet Office , was charged last week with making a `` damaging disclosure of a document relating to international relations '' . 
Mr Keogh , 49 , is accused of sending the document to Mr O'Connor , 42 , between April 16 and May 28 2004 . 
Mr Clarke said yesterday that Mr O'Connor `` did the right thing '' by drawing the document to his attention . 
Mr Clarke , an anti-war MP who lost his seat at the last election , returned the document to the government . 
`` As well as an MP , I am a special constable , '' he said . 
Both men were released on police bail last Thursday to appear at Bow Street magistrates court on November 29 . 
When they were charged , newspapers reported that the memo contained a transcript of a discussion between Mr Blair and Mr Bush . 
The conversation was understood to have taken place during a meeting in the US . 
It is believed to reveal that Mr Blair disagreed with Mr Bush about aspects of the Iraq war . 
There was widespread comment at the time that the British government was angry about US military tactics there , particularly in the city of Falluja . 
Charges under the secrets act have to have the consent of the attorney-general . 
His intervention yesterday suggests that the prosecution plans to ask the judge to hold part , if not all of the trial , in camera , with the public and press excluded . 
