\* Vattenfall plans to sell Finnish networks , heat business \* Vattenfall says has approached potential buyers \* Goldman Sachs , EQT , Macquarie working on offers - sources -LRB- Adds Vattenfall comments -RRB- By Greg Roumeliotis and Terhi Kinnunen AMSTERDAM\/HELSINKI , Oct 11 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Swedish state-owned power group Vattenfall has begun the sale of electricity network and heat distribution assets in Finland and has approached potential buyers , the group 's Finnish manager said . 
`` This week teaser letters have been sent . 
The letter says Vattenfall 's networks in Finland and heat business are the assets to be sold , '' Hannu Kostiainen , Vattenfall 's country manager in Finland , told Reuters . 
He declined to offer a time table for the sale . 
Sources close to the matter said Vattenfall hopes to wrap up the deal this year and was expected to raise at least 1 billion euros -LRB- $ 1.4 billion -RRB- . 
The divestment is expected to attract infrastructure funds that could offer more than 1 billion euros . 
Vattanfall , one of Europe 's largest utilities , has been selling noncore assets to cut costs and reduce debt . 
Germany 's decision to shut nuclear power plants by 2022 has added to its woes . 
-LRB- ID : nLDE76R0JH -RRB- Infrastructure funds managed by EQT and Macquarie -LRB- MQG . 
AX -RRB- are preparing separate offers for the assets , sources close to them said . 
EQT was looking for local partners and could team up with Finnish municipalities , the sources said . 
A consortium of Goldman Sachs Infrastructure Partners -LRB- GS . 
N -RRB- , 3i Infrastructure -LRB- 3IN . 
L -RRB- and Finnish group Ilmarinen Mutual Pension Insurance Co is working on a joint offer for the assets , several sources familiar with the matter said . 
`` We are interested in investing in infrastructure and in making new investments of that kind . 
We do not comment on specific firms or specific investment targets , '' Ilmarinen Deputy Chief Executive Timo Ritakallio said . 
Goldman Sachs , 3i Infrastructure and Macquarie all declined to comment . 
EQT was not available to comment . 
Vattenfall is the second-largest electricity distributor in Finland , serving 347,000 retail customers . 
The main asset on sale is its regulated power grid , attractive to infrastructure funds because of predictable returns . 
The launch of the sale in the current market demonstrated Vattenfall 's confidence its infrastructure assets will be popular with financial investors seeking euro-denominated opportunities in the sector , industry sources said . 
The euro zone debt crisis has limited the scope of infrastructure funds to invest in countries with a precarious financial position . 
Finland 's debt-to-GDP ratio , set to stand at 43 percent this year , is among the lowest in the euro zone . 
Vattenfall 's decision to consolidate came after it had tripled revenues over the past decade in a rapid expansion in northern Europe . 
It wants to cut annual costs by 6 billion Swedish crowns -LRB- $ 900 million -RRB- . 
In its drive to focus on three key markets -- Germany , the Netherlands and Sweden -- Vattenfall announced in August the $ 2.6 billion sale of Polish assets to the country 's gas monopoly PGNiG PGNI . 
WA and utility Tauron TPE . 
-LRB- ID : nL5E7JN0LQ -RRB- That followed sales of assets totalling 4.6 billion crowns in the second quarter . 
The company has said it may sell coal-fired plants in Germany and the Netherlands . 
-LRB- ID : nL5E7KU1T2 -RRB- -LRB- $ 1 = 0.733 Euros -RRB- -LRB- $ 1 6.691 Swedish Crowns -RRB- -LRB- Additional reporting by Veronica Ek in Stockholm ; Editing by Erica Billingham , Dan Lalor and Steve Orlofsky -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
