Tue Oct 11 , 2011 11:42 am BST \* Aiming to open 100 hotels in Asia over next 4 years \* Credit-tightening may delay openings HONG KONG , Oct 11 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - American hotel , restaurant and travel group Carlson will team up with local investors and developers to help achieve its growth targets in key markets China and India over the next few years , despite a rocky global economic outlook , its CEO said on Tuesday . 
The family-run group , which owns the Radisson and Park Plaza brands , is spending $ 1 billion to develop new hotels in Asia . 
This includes in key cities Hong Kong , Singapore , Taipei , Jakarta , Kuala Lumpur and Manila , where Carlson lacks presence . 
`` We are ready to use some of our own equity , partnering with local investors and developers to accelerate our development in these key cities , '' Chief Executive Officer Hubert Joly told Reuters in an interview . 
The $ 1 billion will be spent over 5 years and will come from the company 's reserves and debt , Joly said . 
Funding for hotels in mid-scale markets in China , India and the Philippines as well as expanding its Radisson Blue hotel brand in both primary and secondary cities would all be aided by help from local partners , he said , without elaboration . 
The firm aims to open around 100 hotels over the next 4 years in Asia , more than doubling the number of hotels opened over the last 4 years , Joly said . 
Carlson , which owns most of its hotels through Rezidor Hotel Group -LRB- REZT . 
ST -RRB- , is forecasting a compounded growth rate of 20 percent in the region for its hotel business over the next 4 years . 
The group is planning to add 22,000 jobs in Asia Pacific in the period , with more than half of those in China . 
Minneapolis-based Carlson competes with U.S. brands Starwood -LRB- HOT . 
N -RRB- , Marriott -LRB- MAR. . 
N -RRB- and Hyatt Hotels Corp -LRB- H. N -RRB- in the increasingly competitive Asian hospitality sector . 
Carlson also owns restaurant chain T.G.I. Friday . 
and travel management company Carlson Wagonlit Travel -LRB- CWT -RRB- . 
While headwinds from Europe 's sovereign debt crisis and slowing economic growth prospects in much of the developed world could temporarily slow down travel , Joly said the firm 's targets were on track . 
`` Short term there are some clouds . 
But being a privately held company we have the luxury of being long-term focused , '' the French born Joly said . 
As expectations of Asian growth remain strong , major hotel chains have stepped up expansion plans in the region , trying to capture brand loyalty in some of the world 's fastest growing economies . 
Joly said while investors were receptive towards investing in new projects , a tightening of credit in the short term may delay the openings of some projects . 
`` There is tightening of the credit for sure , so that can slow down , that can delay some of the openings , '' he said , shrugging off the impact on overall investor sentiment . 
Short-term oversupply of hotels in China were an issue , he said , due to the abundance of new properties springing up in the world 's second-largest economy , pushing down the average daily rate below other countries . 
However , in the longer term , the number of hotel rooms in construction would not keep up pace with the economic growth rate of the region , giving the group ample opportunity , he said . 
`` Even if for one or two quarters you have some supply-demand imbalance with the growth rate , it does n't matter . 
Demand will catch up . '' 
Republication or redistribution of Reuters content , including by caching , framing , or similar means , is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters . 
Reuters and the Reuters sphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group of companies around the world . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
