A campaign rally during Ghana 's election in December . 
-LRB- By Rebecca Blackwell -- Associated Press -RRB- For more than a decade , much of Africa has been moving forward . 
Economic growth is rising , poverty is falling and democratic governance is spreading . 
But the global financial crisis threatens to undo this progress by reducing investment , exports and aid just as they should be expanding to build on these successes . 
While international attention has been understandably focused on events in Darfur , Somalia and Zimbabwe , countries across the continent including Ghana , Tanzania , Mozambique and Liberia have been quietly turning around . 
Economic growth rates regularly exceed 5 percent in many nations . 
Since 2000 , 34 million more African children are in school . 
More than 2 million Africans are on lifesaving HIV\/AIDS medicines . 
Malaria deaths have been halved in Rwanda and Ethiopia , and the disease has been virtually eradicated in Zanzibar . 
Poverty rates are falling fast , from 58 to 51 percent across the continent in just six years , according to the World Bank . 
The key to this progress is stronger African leadership and more accountable governance . 
Today , more than 20 African countries are democracies , up from just three in the 1980s ; they have competitive elections and improved human rights , and their news media are much freer . 
These efforts have been supported by increasingly effective development assistance from the United States and other partners . 
Consider what has happened in my country , Liberia . 
After 14 years of devastating war , we faced enormous challenges but had precious few resources . 
Our democratically elected government has worked with international partners and a growing number of private investors to turn things around . 
In the past three years , we have doubled primary school enrollment nationwide , refurbished hundreds of health facilities , and begun rebuilding roads and generators . 
We have taken steps to root out corruption and remove unscrupulous officials . 
Growth has exceeded 8 percent per year . 
And , most critical , we are at peace . 
We are restoring our once-vibrant nation , and the crucial component -- hope -- has already been revived . 
Without international support , we would not have made this progress and would be at much greater risk of returning to war . 
The economic crisis threatens the progress in my country and elsewhere on our continent . 
An estimated $ 50 billion in income could be lost in Africa during the next two years . 
Declining remittances , trade flows and investment could undermine new businesses , throw millions out of work , and increase tensions and instability . 
The crisis -- which Africa did nothing to cause -- demands a strong response . 
African nations must do their part by continuing to address corruption , eliminate red tape and reduce obstacles to private-sector growth . 
But just as industrialized countries need a stimulus , African economies need a boost to keep their progress on track . 
The Group of 20 meeting last week produced a helpful first step . 
Going forward , five additional steps are critical . 
First , the G-20 pledge to provide the International Monetary Fund with new resources must be fulfilled , and the IMF needs to get those resources to countries quickly and without onerous conditions . 
Second , the World Bank and the African Development Bank must better leverage their resources ; aggressively front-load support ; and better target growth , jobs and safety-net programs . 
The International Finance Corp. , the World Bank 's private-sector affiliate , must be especially creative in keeping private investment on track . 
Third , bilateral partners must build on their promises to increase aid and make it more effective by reducing bureaucratic delays , speeding disbursements and better aligning programs with African priorities . 
Fourth , export credit agencies must use their resources to attack risk and other barriers to trade finance , such as liquidity issues . 
Fifth , all countries must resist protectionist pressures so that trade can be the critical engine for restoring global growth . 
The citizens and leaders of donor nations should recognize how important their assistance has been to the new leadership in Africa and how appreciative most Africans are for this partnership . 
Critics say that African economies are shrinking , that poverty is rising and that failing aid is the culprit . 
But this argument is at least a decade out of date . 
Africa 's turnaround is real , the evidence indisputable . 
Africans themselves have been the key to this reversal , but more effective aid has played an important role . 
Reducing aid would slow private-sector growth , stall poverty reduction , and undermine peace and stability in countries that are struggling to become part of the global economy . 
It would be a cruel irony if , just as Africa began to succeed , its prospects were cut short by a crisis beyond its control . 
Strong action by African governments and robust support from the international community can keep Africa 's recovery on track . 
Both should continue to do their part . 
The writer is president of Liberia and the author of `` This Child Will Be Great : Memoir of a Remarkable Life by Africa 's First Woman President . '' 
