BP faces backlash over Gulf oil spill report The explosion on the Deepwater Horizon killed 11 workers and injured 17 Drilling firm Transocean branded the report `` self serving '' while cement contractor Halliburton said it contained `` omissions and inaccuracies '' . 
BP blamed a `` sequence of failures involving a number of different parties '' for the spill . 
It faces billions of dollars worth of compensation claims over the disaster . 
Transocean dismissed BP 's report , accusing the oil giant of having designed a `` fatally flawed '' well and making `` cost-saving decisions that increased risk - in some cases , severely '' . 
`` This is a self-serving report that attempts to conceal the critical factor that set the stage for the Macondo -LRB- well -RRB- incident : BP 's fatally flawed well design , '' the Swiss-based group said in a statement . 
Halliburton also hit back at the 193-page report . 
`` As we continue to review BP 's internal report published earlier today , we have noticed a number of substantial omissions and inaccuracies in the document , '' it said . 
`` Halliburton remains confident that all the work it performed with respect to the Macondo well was completed in accordance with BP 's specifications for its well construction plan and instructions , and that it is fully indemnified under its contract for any of the allegations contained in the report . '' 
The rig exploded in April , killing 11 people , and an estimated 4.9 m barrels of oil then leaked into the Gulf . 
20 April : Deepwater Horizon rig explodes , killing 11 people 28 April : Coastguard fears one of worst spills in US history 8 May : Giant metal dome fails to cap leak 2 June : US government begins criminal inquiry 15 July : New cap brings temporary halt to spill 4 August : BP says `` static kill '' of well successful . 
President Obama says battle to stop leak close to an end The well was capped on 15 July , and an operation to permanently seal it is due to take place in the coming weeks . 
BP leased the Deepwater Horizon rig from Transocean , and its cement contractor was Halliburton . 
The BP report was critical of the processes and actions of teams from both firms . 
The report , conducted by BP 's head of safety , Mark Bly , highlighted eight key failures that , in combination , led to the explosion . 
BP said that both BP and Transocean staff incorrectly interpreted a safety test which should have flagged up risks of a blowout . 
`` Over a 40-minute period , the Transocean rig crew failed to recognize and act on the influx of hydrocarbons into the well '' which eventually caused the explosion . 
BP criticised the cementing of the well - carried out by Halliburton - and repeated previous criticism of the blowout preventer . 
Among the other findings , the report said : There were `` no indications '' that Transocean had tested intervention systems at the surface , `` as was required by Transocean policy '' , before they were deployed on the well `` Improved engineering rigor , cement testing and communication of risk '' by Halliburton could have identified flaws in cement design and testing , quality assurance and risk assessment A Transocean rig crew and a team described as `` mudloggers '' working for Halliburton Sperry Sun may have been distracted by what are described as `` end-of-well activities '' and , as a result , important monitoring was not carried out for more than seven hours Crew may have had more time to respond before the explosion if they had diverted escaping fluids overboard . 
`` To put it simply , there was a bad cement job and a failure of the shoe track barrier at the bottom of the well , which let hydrocarbons from the reservoir into the production casing , '' said outgoing chief executive Tony Hayward . 
`` The negative pressure test was accepted when it should not have been , there were failures in well control procedures and in the blowout preventer ; and the rig 's fire and gas system did not prevent ignition , '' he said . 
The blowout preventer that failed was recovered from the Gulf of Mexico on Saturday . 
It will be placed in the custody of the US Justice Department and examined . 
BP 's incoming chief executive Bob Dudley said the report proved that the explosion was `` a shared responsibility among many entities '' . 
The company said it had accepted all the recommendations in the report , and would implement them worldwide . 
`` We are determined to learn the lessons for the future and we will be undertaking a broad-scale review to further improve the safety of our operations , '' Mr Dudley said in a statement . 
BP says dealing with the aftermath of the spill has cost $ 8bn -LRB- # 5.2 bn -RRB- , and it has already paid out about $ 399m in claims to people affected by the spill . 
A national commission is expected to submit a report to President Barack Obama by January . 
A Congressional joint investigation will submit a report later than month . 
The US justice department is also investigating the disaster . 
The Deepwater Horizon explosion according to BP 19 April - ` Bad ' cement is pumped down casing to stop gas and oil -LRB- hydrocarbons -RRB- leaking into wellbore 20 April - Gas and oil leak through shoe track barrier and float collar valves Tests carried out on the rig incorrectly suggest pressure is at a safe level because the lie to check pressure is blocked The crew do not recognize there is a major problem or act to control it until the hydrocarbons are flowing rapidly up the riser The crew close the blowout preventer and diverter , routing oil and gas to the mud gas separator -LRB- MGS -RRB- system rather than diverting it overboard The MGS is overwhelmed by the force of oil and gas which leaks into the rig 's ventilation system The heating , ventilation and air conditioning system is thought to have sent a gas-rich mixture into the engine rooms 2149 local time . 
There are two huge explosions , killing 11 men April 21 - 22 . 
The BOP designed to work automatically fails to seal the well as control pods and cutter -LRB- blind sheer ram -RRB- are not working The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
