Who 's blamed by BP for the Deepwater Horizon oil spill ? 
At the time of the explosion , 126 crew members were on the rig , 50 miles off the coast of Louisiana BP has revealed a number of key findings made during its internal investigation into who it believes was responsible for the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
Eleven people were killed and 17 people were injured in an explosion on the Deepwater Horizon on 20 April . 
An estimated 4.9 m barrels of oil leaked into the Gulf after the blast . 
The report says no one action or inaction was behind the accident . 
Instead , `` multiple companies , work teams and circumstances were involved over time '' . 
It blames the combination of `` a complex and interlinked series of mechanical failures , human judgements , engineering design , operational implementation and team interfaces '' . 
Transocean was responsible for the safety valve known as the blowout preventer . 
The report says six leaks were identified in its hydraulic system . 
While it was on the wellhead , the investigators say the preventer appeared to follow BP and Transocean 's standards . 
However , they say there were `` no indications '' that intervention systems had been tested at the surface , `` as was required by Transocean policy '' , before it was deployed on the well . 
The day before the accident , cement was pumped into the drill column of the well to prevent hydrocarbons entering it from the reservoir . 
The BP investigation says there were `` weaknesses in cement design and testing , quality assurance and risk assessment '' . 
It suggests that `` improved engineering rigor , cement testing and communication of risk '' by Halliburton could have identified those flaws . 
But the report also says the Houston-based BP staff at the site could have raised awareness of the problems . 
Transocean and BP -LRB- the well owner -RRB- A `` negative-pressure test '' was carried out to check the mechanical barriers . 
The report says that Transocean rig crew and BP leaders on the site `` reached the incorrect view '' that the test had been a success and the well was secure . 
The report says that the Transocean rig crew and a team described as `` mudloggers '' working for Halliburton Sperry Sun may have been distracted by what are described as `` end-of-well activities '' and , as a result , important monitoring was not carried out for more than seven hours . 
The crew `` underbalanced '' the well by pouring seawater into it rather than heavy-drilling mud . 
This allowed gases through the blowout preventer . 
For an estimated 40 minutes , the influx of gases into the well was apparently not spotted . 
By this time `` hydrocarbons were rapidly flowing to the surface '' and , according to witnesses , mud flowed uncontrolled on to the rig platform . 
The BP report says that if the blowout preventer had been closed and sealed around the drill pipe before that point , gases probably would not have entered the pipe known as the riser . 
The gases moved to areas of the rig where there was a greater risk of explosion . 
The heating , ventilation and air conditioning system `` probably transferred a gas-rich mixture '' into engine rooms on the Deepwater Horizon . 
The report says : `` The surface facilities were overwhelmed with the volumes of fluids and gas , which resulted in the explosions and fire . '' 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
