Syria crisis : EU sanctions on Asma al-Assad Foreign Secretary William Hague said Asma al-Assad is not likely to re-enter the UK . 
Anti-government activists accuse the regime of killing thousands of protesters over the past year . 
In recent weeks , the Damascus government has stepped up its efforts to crush pockets of rebellion in cities including Homs and Hama . 
Every day , activists report dozens of deaths and more protests . 
The envoy for the UN and the Arab League , Kofi Annan , is to travel to Moscow and Beijing this weekend for talks on the crisis , his office said . 
EU : Travel bans and asset freezes on President Assad and senior officials ; ban on sales of arms and telecommunications monitoring equipment ; restrictions on banking and financial services ; ban on imports of Syrian oil Arab League : Travel ban on senior officials ; freeze on Syrian government assets in Arab countries ; end to dealings with the Syrian central bank ; suspension of commercial flights to and from Syria ; halting investment by Arab governments for projects in Syria US : Lists Syria as a `` state sponsor of terrorism '' , triggering automatic bans on most transactions with Syria , save exports of humanitarian aid ; travel bans and asset freezes on President Assad and other senior figures ; ban on imports of Syrian oil Turkey : Travel ban and asset freeze on senior government officials ; financial dealings with Syrian state banks stopped ; ban on arms sales Russia and China have vetoed two UN Security Council resolutions on Syria for fear that intervention could lead to regime change , as happened in Libya last year . 
Mr Assad has promised political reform , but observers and his opponents have dismissed his plans as window-dressing . 
The latest round of EU sanctions has added Mrs Assad , as well as Mr Assad 's mother , sister and sister-in-law . 
`` With this new listing we are striking at the heart of the Assad clan , sending out a loud and clear message to Mr Assad : he should step down , '' Dutch Foreign Minister Uri Rosenthal said , quoted by Reuters news agency . 
The BBC 's Chris Morris in Brussels says for years there was a perception that Mrs Assad 's Western upbringing could encourage reform in Syria . 
The 36-year-old , who is of Syrian descent , was born in the UK and spent much of her life in west London . 
The UK Border Agency has confirmed that Mrs Assad is British . 
UK Foreign Secretary William Hague said he did not think Mrs Assad would be traveling to the UK any time soon . 
`` British nationals , British passport holders do obviously have a right of entry to the United Kingdom , '' he said . 
`` But given that we are imposing an asset freeze on all of these individuals , and a travel ban on other members of the same family and the regime , we 're not expecting Mrs Assad to try to travel to the United Kingdom at the moment , '' he said . 
Mrs Assad , who worked as an investment banker in the City of London before her marriage in 2000 , has generally played a low-key role in the regime . 
The BBC 's Caroline Hawley looks at Asma Assad 's UK roots However , in February she wrote to Britain 's Times newspaper to explain why she thought her husband was still the right man to lead Syria . 
The EU already has extensive sanctions in place against Syria . 
These include a ban on arms sales and imports of Syrian oil . 
Last week activists released some 3,000 emails they said were from private accounts belonging to Mr Assad and his wife . 
The messages , which have not been independently verified , suggested Mrs Assad continued to shop online for luxury goods even after the uprising was in full swing . 
The UN says at least 8,000 people have died since the uprising against Mr Assad 's regime began in March 2011 . 
The president and his allies say terrorist and armed gangs are behind the violence , and say hundreds of security personnel have been killed fighting them . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
