The international community has imposed wide-ranging sanctions on President Bashar al-Assad 's regime , in an attempt to put pressure on the Syrian government to stop using violence against demonstrators . 
The Arab League , European Union , United States and Turkey have all imposed economic sanctions on Syrian individuals and companies . 
In March , First Lady Asma al-Assad became the latest person connected to the regime to be targeted for sanctions when EU foreign ministers imposed a travel ban and asset freeze on her . 
What sanctions are already in place on Syria ? 
The EU , Syria 's biggest trading partner , has imposed travel bans and asset freezes on more than 120 individuals and 40 companies . 
These include President Assad and most of his close family , the Syrian Central Bank and senior officials , including seven ministers . 
Last year , the EU banned crude oil imports from Syria and in February it expanded sanctions to block trade in gold , precious metals and diamonds with Syrian public bodies and the central bank . 
The US designated Syria a `` state sponsor of terror '' in 1979 , a label which brought a raft of sanctions with it . 
Those have been added to since , by the Bush administration in 2004 and last year by Barack Obama in response to the current crisis . 
In August 2011 President Obama signed a new executive order , imposing sanctions on Syria 's energy sector and freezing all Syrian government assets in the US . 
Arab League members suspended Syria last November and imposed sanctions . 
They include the freezing of Syrian government assets in Arab countries , stopping dealings with the Syrian central bank , the suspension of commercial flights to and from Syria , halting investment by Arab governments for projects in Syria , and a travel ban on senior officials . 
However , some Arab states - particularly Syria 's neighbors , said the sanctions would be difficult to apply . 
Turkey announced plans to freeze Syrian government assets and suspend all financial dealings with Turkey on 30 November 2011 . 
Foreign Minister Ahmed Davutoglu also said a co-operation agreement with Syria would be suspended until a new government was in place . 
Canada , Australia and Switzerland have also imposed sanctions . 
What is likely to have the biggest impact ? 
The EU 's oil import ban is likely to hit Syria 's economy hardest . 
Oil revenues account for around 20 % of Syrian GDP . 
Before the EU ban , 90 % of oil exports went to the EU , mainly to Germany , Italy and France . 
According to some experts , when the ban came into force , Syria was confident that other buyers could be found , in China and India for example . 
However , initial indications are that other buyers have been harder to find than first thought and that production may have fallen as a result . 
Enforcing a wider trade embargo may be more difficult , given that Syria 's long borders have been historically porous and prone to smuggling , particularly those with Lebanon and Iraq . 
Who are Syria 's largest trading partners ? 
According to the European Commission , in 2010 the EU was Syria 's biggest trading partner , accounting for 22.5 % of Syrian trade , followed by Iraq -LRB- 13.3 % -RRB- , Saudi Arabia -LRB- 9 % -RRB- and China -LRB- 6.9 % . -RRB- 
Turkey was in fifth place with 6.6 % and Russia was ninth with 3 % . 
Who opposes sanctions on Syria ? 
Three members of the Arab League voted against Syria 's suspension - Syria itself , Lebanon and Yemen , with Iraq abstaining . 
Syria still exerts substantial influence in the politics of neighbouring Lebanon , which also abstained in a UN Security Council vote in October 2011 on a resolution backing the use of `` targeted measures '' against Syria if the clampdown continued . 
That resolution was vetoed by Russia and China , who have expressed their opposition to UN involvement in Syria 's internal affairs . 
Russia 's UN Ambassador Vitaly Churkin expressed concerns that a resolution could lead to a Libyan-style foreign military intervention in Syria . 
According to the Moscow-based Centre for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies , current contracts for sales of arms and military equipment from Russia to Syria are worth at least $ 2.5 bn -LRB- # 1.58 bn . -RRB- 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
