The dome will be lowered 5,000 ft -LRB- 1,500 m -RRB- under water to funnel leaking oil to the surface BP has managed to seal the smallest of the three leaks spilling oil into the Gulf of Mexico , the company says . 
Oil is still gushing into the sea at a rate of about 800,000 litres a day , but officials say working with only two leaks makes tackling the spill easier . 
A controlled burn of the slick to remove oil from open water has also begun , AP news agency said . 
And a special containment box to funnel oil to the surface from the leaking well is being sent to the site . 
Engineers plan to lower the 100-tonne concrete and steel box over the site on Thursday , using remote-controlled submarines , officials say . 
BP has never deployed such a structure at a depth of 5,000 ft -LRB- 1,500 m -RRB- and difficulties may occur , it says . 
The operation is expected to take more than two days . 
If successful , BP said it hoped to begin pumping oil to the surface early next week . 
Describing the cap , coast guard officer David Mosley told AP news agency : `` It does n't lessen the flow , it just simplifies the number of leak points they have to address . '' 
A burn was last tried on 28 April when thousands of litres of oil were successfully removed . 
Favourable weather conditions have now allowed crews to begin burning off more of the oil where it is most heavily concentrated , AP said . 
Concerns for the impact of the burn on wildlife in the area have been dismissed by the body co-ordinating the response to the spill . 
`` No populated areas are expected to be affected by the controlled burn operations and there are no anticipated impacts to marine mammals and sea turtles , '' the Deepwater Horizon Incident Joint Information Center was quoted as saying by AFP . 
The spill was set off by an explosion that destroyed the Deepwater Horizon oil rig and killed 11 workers off Louisiana last month . 
A sheen of oil has already reached the shore in parts of Louisiana , but officials say coagulated crude oil is not expected to reach coastal areas until the end of the week , AFP reports . 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- said the oil slick was not expected to move much in the next several days . 
BP has told members of a US congressional committee that up to 9.5 m litres a day could spill if the leaks worsen , AP notes . 
How the oil has spread Approximate oil locations 22 April - 15 May FOXNews.com Giant Box Close to Being Over Oil-Spewing Well - 1 hr ago News24 . 
com Giant box to fight US oil spill - 3 hrs ago Mirror . 
co. uk Box used in bid to avert oil spill - 3 hrs ago CTV . 
