John Curry , from BP , explains how the funnel should work A giant iron funnel being built in a bid to halt the huge spill from a Gulf of Mexico well will be deployed to the seabed on Thursday , BP says . 
The 98-tonne , dome-topped box being built by steel workers will be connected to a drill ship and lowered to the sea floor . 
BP has never deployed such a structure at a depth of 5,000 ft -LRB- 1,500 m -RRB- and difficulties may occur , it says . 
`` There 's no guarantees , '' BP boss Tony Hayward told AP news agency . 
`` We 'll undoubtedly encounter some issues as we go through that process . 
`` But if that was a good outcome , then you would have the principal leak contained by the early part of next week , '' Mr Hayward said . 
BP has accepted it is `` absolutely responsible '' for cleaning up the spill caused by a blast on a drilling rig . 
Its shares have plunged more than 15 % since the 22 April explosion . 
It is estimated that the clean-up could cost BP up to $ 15bn -LRB- # 10bn -RRB- . 
BP insists that the rig 's contractor , Transocean , was to blame for the accident but , under US law , it has to bear the cost of the clean-up as the operator of the oilfield . 
Arnold Schwarzenegger : `` It will not happen here '' Both companies are expecting lawsuits over the slick , which US President Barack Obama described as a `` potentially unprecedented '' environmental disaster . 
Californian Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger has withdrawn his support for a plan to expand oil exploration off that state 's coast , saying he has changed his mind about the safety of oil platforms in the Pacific Ocean . 
After seeing television pictures of the Gulf of Mexico spill , he asked : `` Why would we want to take that kind of risk ? '' 
Meanwhile , weather conditions have improved considerably , allowing some 3,000 personnel involved in the clean-up operation to get back to work , the BBC 's Andy Gallacher in Louisiana reports . 
He adds that winds and tides are now forcing the oil slick towards the coast of Florida , where Governor Charlie Crist has added 13 more counties to the six that are already under state of emergency . 
The slick may not come ashore for at least three days , according to a Coast Guard official . 
The 40ft -LRB- 12m -RRB- funnel resembles a primitive space rocket with a hole on top to channel oil through a pipe from the sea floor to the surface where it can be collected on a barge , Reuters news agency reports . 
HOW THE OIL FUNNEL WORKS The funnel is a 40ft tall iron box , weighing 98 tonnes It will be placed over the leak , 5,000 ft down on the seabed BP hopes it will collect 85 % of the leaking oil and pipe it to the surface It is being built at Golden Meadow , near Port Fourchon in southern Louisiana , by Wild Well Control , a company that specialises in controlling oil fires . 
A team of 25 people is working around the clock on the funnel , marine engineer Jason Holvey told the agency . 
In theory , the system should collect 85 % of the oil rising from the sea floor . 
While the precise location of the leak is known , work will have to be carried out in the face of severe technical challenges , not least because of the softness of the sea floor . 
Asked by Reuters if he was confident it would work , BP spokesman John Curry said : `` We sure hope so . 
`` If not , we will keep trying other options until something does work . 
I think we have some great engineers and they have worked very hard . '' 
The funnel will have to be tested before it can be shipped to the spill site . 
A back-up funnel is also under construction , AP said . 
Mr Holvey said similar containment devices had been used in the Gulf before , but in shallow waters . 
They were used , for instance , after Hurricane Katrina to channel oil to the surface that had spilled from platforms . 
The US government has been putting pressure on BP to act quickly . 
In a BBC interview , Hayward dismissed talk of a rift between BP and US officials , saying an `` incredible co-operative relationship '' had been established with the federal authorities . 
Thousands of barrels of oil have been leaking into the Gulf of Mexico every day since the rig sank . 
Some oil has washed ashore , but officials say the bulk of the slick remains a few miles from the Louisiana coastline . 
The oil is already having a devastating effect on the area 's fishing industry , and officials fear much wider environmental damage if the full slick hits land . 
Other efforts being made by BP , according to Mr Hayward , include using undersea robots to work on the safety valve which failed , allowing the oil to escape , and drilling a new well to help relieve the pressure and stem the flow from the rupture . 
BP has said it will honor legitimate claims for compensation from people affected . 
