Ushahidi is a free , online mapping tool that can be used to collect and plot reports coming in from people via e-mail , SMS and Twitter . 
It was used in the aftermath of the Haiti earthquake to co-ordinate relief . 
The oil spill map aims to track the long-term impact of the spill on the commercial fishing industry . 
Most reports are coming from fishermen who can not put to sea because of the oil . 
One anonymous report reads : `` He called himself a pearl diver . 
He said he 's eating off the Red Cross truck and hates it - all he wants to do is get back to his work of harvesting oysters . '' 
Others report dead birds and animals as well as incidents such as containment booms being washed ashore . 
The spill began after an explosion that destroyed the Deepwater Horizon oil rig off Louisiana in April . 
BP has managed to seal one of three leaks but oil is still gushing into the sea . 
The Ushahidi map was set up by the environmental monitoring group Louisiana Bucket Brigade to track the effects of the spill . 
Send a text to 504-272-7645 Send an e-mail to bpspillmap@gmail.com Send a tweet with the hashtag #BPspillmap Fill in a web form `` The point is to produce a collective visual where we can all see the magnitude of the problem , '' Anne Rolfes , director of the group , told BBC News After Hurricane Katrina , she said , there were lots of anecdotes about people 's experience but they were not all recorded in one place . 
The group had decided to concentrate on documenting the effects on the fishing industry because it would `` suffer the biggest pain '' , she added . 
`` They managed to rebuild after Katrina but now , not only can they not fish , they are going further into debt . '' 
The oil spill map was set up with help from students at Tulane University in New Orleans . 
It had originally been designed to monitor pollution from oil refineries in the area but had not been used . 
`` We had the infrastructure in place and then along came the oil spill , '' said Ms Rolfe . 
Ushahidi was built amidst the post-election violence in Kenya in 2008 to document the trouble . 
Since then it has been deployed in South Africa , the Democratic Republic of Congo and in Haiti , where it helped to plot thousands of reports , which were then used by organizations such as the Red Cross to co-ordinate their relief efforts . 
The so-called `` crowd sourcing '' tool is free and the organization behind it encourages people to install and run it on their own . 
Offshore Technology Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill Reaches Land - 3 hrs ago CNN Citizens monitor Gulf Coast oil - 6 hrs ago Reuters UK Huge containment chamber expected atop U.S. Gulf oil leak - 7 hrs ago The Sun Dome arrives in oil-polluted Gulf - 17 hrs ago Guardian . 
co. uk Gulf oil spill reaches Freemason Island as BP prepares to lower giant funnel - 17 hrs ago The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
