An earlier version of this op-ed referred to the Natural Resources Damages Assessment process as prescribed by the Ocean Pollution Act of 1990 . 
It is the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 . 
Research on gulf oil spill should n't take a backseat to litigation The Gulf of Mexico has been inundated with the equivalent of more than an Exxon Valdez-size spill each week -- threatening the health of the marine environment , the public and the livelihoods of gulf residents . 
From the first day of the Deepwater Horizon disaster , Gulf Coast residents have wanted to know how much oil was spilling ; where it was coming from and where it was going ; what effects the oil would have on coastal ecosystems and how fast they would recover ; and how this tragic event was going to affect their health , their jobs and their communities . 
Unfortunately , the government , BP and scientists were not prepared to answer those questions . 
Three months later , we still have more questions than answers . 
The major federal scientific response to date has been focused on the Natural Resources Damages Assessment -LRB- NRDA -RRB- process prescribed by the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 , as the government begins to build its case against BP to ensure that the nation is reimbursed for the immense damage done to the environment . 
It has also been widely reported that BP has been engaging academic scientists for its NRDA defense . 
Billions of dollars are at stake , so litigation is likely to go on for years . 
Because the NRDA is an adversarial process , both sides will seek to use science in a legal context , with the administration attempting to maximize financial damages and BP trying to minimize them . 
Much of the information obtained from research and monitoring will be tied up in the courts rather than being made publicly available and scrutinized . 
The broader scientific community will be unable to use much of this information to understand the ongoing effects of the oil and dispersants , or to help our nation 's policymakers better prepare for future accidents . 
Early on , there was hope for development of a comprehensive science plan that would enable the nation to learn from this disaster and better understand the effects of oil spills on the marine environment and coastal communities . 
The aim was to integrate the efforts of federal agencies with academic research capacities . 
An initial effort to provide support for such a plan was spearheaded by BP , which announced in May that it would launch a 10-year , $ 500 million research initiative based on a peer-reviewed process separate from the NRDA process . 
Results from research funded by this initiative were to be made available to the public and subject to peer review . 
We hoped that this research would be based in part on recommendations that resulted from a symposium convened at Louisiana State University in June , when more than 200 researchers from across the nation discussed the scientific needs for understanding the ecological impact -- such as the spill 's toxicity and effect on the food chain -- and other consequences of oil , gas and dispersant contamination . 
While $ 30 million was allocated , the BP research initiative is unfortunately on hold . 
More than six weeks ago , the White House requested that the company work closely with Gulf Coast governors and state and local environmental and health authorities to determine the next steps for this initiative . 
A decision has yet to be reached . 
Our nation needs a comprehensive science plan to learn from and respond better to this tragedy . 
Those working in academia , federal and state government , nongovernmental organizations , and industry need to be consulted and included . 
The federal government must also make funding available , apart from the NRDA process , to enable independent , peer-reviewed science to be undertaken . 
We need these things now . 
Every day of delay means more valuable data is not being collected , and ultimately lost . 
After the Exxon Valdez spill , it took more than three years for a research initiative to come to fruition , a terrible loss of scientific opportunity and information critical to planning and implementing better responses to future spills . 
President Obama signed an executive order last week establishing a national policy for the stewardship of the oceans , coasts and Great Lakes . 
The White House needs to express similar leadership when it comes to the gulf region 's marine environment and the research necessary to understand it with respect to the spill . 
We hope this can still be a `` teachable moment '' and not another lost opportunity . 
Robert B. Gagosian is president and chief executive of the Consortium for Ocean Leadership and a former director of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution . 
Christopher F. D'Elia is dean of the School of the Coast and Environment at Louisiana State University . 
LSU has received funding from BP for research on the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
