BP to cut U.S. tax bill by $ 10 billion because of losses in gulf spill Tuesday , July 27 , 2010 ; 11:56 PM BP said Tuesday that it plans to cut its U.S. tax bill by $ 9.9 billion , or about half the amount pledged to aid victims of the disaster , by deducting costs related to the oil spill . 
A portion of that could be refunded from taxes BP paid in earlier years . 
The company disclosed its intentions as part of its second-quarter earnings report , in which it said it would record a $ 32.2 billion charge to reflect the costs of the spill . 
Under U.S. corporate tax law , companies can take credits on up to 35 percent of their losses . 
The credit for BP could mean , however , that taxpayers will indirectly foot part of the bill for the $ 20 billion fund that BP established to compensate people and businesses harmed by the disaster . 
On Tuesday , White House press secretary Robert Gibbs said U.S. taxpayers would not be responsible for the cost of the spill . 
When asked whether BP should be claiming a credit , Gibbs said , `` I do n't think anybody would prefer that they do that . '' 
Gibbs would not say whether the president would press BP on the tax deduction . 
He said , though , that `` there are tax laws in this country that have been written for quite some time . '' 
Lawmakers called for BP to renounce any claim for a refund . 
`` I call on BP to show , for once , a glimmer of humanity in this situation and halt its claim for this tax break immediately , '' said Rep. Eliot L. Engel -LRB- D-N.Y. -RRB- . 
Policymakers crafted the tax code this way so that companies can spread their profits and losses over more than just one calendar year . 
Let 's say a company makes $ 100 billion one year and pays the U.S. corporate tax rate of 35 percent , or $ 35 billion . 
The next year , the economy goes south , and the company loses $ 100 billion . 
Over those two years , the company made nothing but still paid $ 35 billion in taxes . 
From the tax code 's perspective , the company overpaid in previous years . 
To rectify this , companies can claim a credit , also at the 35 percent rate . 
Companies can seek a refund for taxes paid from the previous two years or , if there 's money leftover , carry the credit forward up to 20 years . 
`` What they 're trying to do is take the arbitrariness of what you did this particular year over the life of the company , or over a long period of the life of the company , '' said Douglas Shackelford , a tax professor at the University of North Carolina . 
It 's how a company such as General Electric , which reported $ 408 million in losses at its U.S. operations last year , not only paid nothing in U.S. corporate income taxes last year but also received a refund . 
Robert Willens , a corporate tax expert , said it 's unlikely that BP will give up its tax credit , even if faced with public opposition . 
The company voluntarily established the $ 20 billion escrow account for victims of the spill and never promised the government that it would not seek any deductions associated with the spill , he said . 
This month , Goldman Sachs promised not to ask for tax credits associated with the $ 535 million it paid in penalties to the Securities and Exchange Commission to settle a fraud charge . 
But as Willens says , that was specifically negotiated in Goldman 's agreement with the SEC . 
`` The cost associated with the cleanup and the damage and all that -- that 's just another cost of doing business from the tax perspective , '' Shackelford said . 
`` It 's viewed no different from paying salaries or other costs they might incur . '' '' 
