For a London-based petroleum company that relies largely on oil produced in the United States and Russia , Robert Dudley might be just the ticket . 
BP 's board is expected to announce early Tuesday that it has picked Dudley , who grew up in Hattiesburg , Miss. , and later spent eight years working in Russia , to become the company 's chief executive , cutting short the turbulent tenure of British geologist Tony Hayward , who has been caught in the vortex of U.S. public anger over the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
The choice of the even-keeled Dudley , who would become the first American to run the company formerly known as British Petroleum , would represent a fresh start for a firm that has been soiled by the massive oil spill . 
`` It turns a new page , and it starts to look to the future , '' said Daniel Yergin , chairman of IHS Cambridge Energy Research Associates . 
`` I think Bob has both the technical competence and a broad view of the industry and where it fits into the world . '' 
The mere prospect of Dudley becoming BP 's chief executive marks a cultural shift for a corporate goliath that suffered from identity issues ever since it acquired three big U.S. oil firms -- Amoco , Arco and Sohio -- more than a decade ago . 
Although British BP chiefs had shuttled back and forth by plane from their St. James Square headquarters in London to their U.S. empire , the cultural gulf proved too big . 
And after the April 20 drilling rig explosion killed 11 workers and set off the largest oil spill in U.S. history , Hayward struck several wrong notes with an angry American public . 
On Monday , Florida Attorney General Bill McCollum -LRB- R -RRB- said that throughout the spill , Hayward `` has appeared disingenuous , disinterested , and often dismissive of what our state , our businesses and our residents are suffering . '' 
In some ways , picking Dudley is like reaching back to the past to move into the future . 
He worked for Amoco -LRB- formerly known as Standard Oil Co. of Indiana -RRB- for nearly 20 years in the United States , Britain and Russia . 
When BP bought the company in 1998 , Dudley , then Amoco 's general manager for strategy , made the leap to BP . 
His U.S. background might prove an asset both to him and the company . 
Forty percent of BP 's shareholders live in the United States , and BP is the largest producer of oil in the United States . 
With Congress contemplating a ban on BP operating on federal lands , and with the Justice Department weighing criminal charges in connection with the rig blowout , Dudley 's background and temperament could help BP navigate U.S. political waters and protect the company 's ability to do business here . 
`` BP has two vulnerabilities , political and legal , '' said Robin West , chairman of PFC Energy , a Washington consulting firm . 
`` The political vulnerability is that Congress wants to punish BP . '' 
Dudley also has experience around the world . 
While at Amoco , he negotiated projects in the South China Sea and in Russia . 
At BP , he fit in well . 
He played a key role in politically sensitive negotiations over the construction of a pipeline in Azerbaijan . 
Later , he ran BP 's TNK-BP joint venture in Moscow , and helped oversee improvements in safety , accounting and drilling practices in old Soviet fields . 
His five-year stint ended in discord with BP 's Russian billionaire partners ; after being denied a visa , Dudley ran operations from abroad until an accord was reached on a successor . 
`` He has demonstrated an ability to operate successfully under pressure , '' West said . 
`` This is a guy who has really been battle-tested twice . '' 
A source close to the Russian partners in TNK-BP said that the dispute in Russia arose because `` we felt our strategies were diverging . 
It had nothing to do with Dudley . 
He 's a competent manager and has the potential to be a successful CEO . 
We partner with institutions , not individuals . 
Whoever they pick is their decision . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
