Syria crisis : Obama rejects US military intervention Mr Obama said for the US to take military action unilaterally or to think that there was some simple solution was a mistake President Barack Obama has described the situation in Syria as `` heartbreaking '' but said that unilateral US military intervention there would be a mistake . 
Mr Obama said President Bashar al-Assad would fall , as other dictators had fallen , but the US would try to achieve this by working to isolate Syria . 
More deadly clashes were reported across Syria on Tuesday . 
The international community remains divided on how to end violence there . 
The UN says more than 7,500 people have died as a result of the violence in Syria over the past 12 months . 
In his first news conference of 2012 , Mr Obama warned his critics not to forget the cost of war . 
He rejected a comparison to Libya , saying Syria was more complicated . 
In Libya , where rebels backed by Nato air strikes ousted longtime leader Col Muammar Gaddafi after an uprising lasting several months , the US had `` the full co-operation of the region , '' the president said . 
Activists claimed 35 people were killed in Syria on Tuesday `` The notion that the way to solve every one of these problems is to deploy our military , that has n't been true in the past , and it wo n't be true now , '' said Mr Obama . 
`` We 've got to think through what we do through the lens of what 's going to be effective - but also through what 's critical for US security interests . '' 
On Monday , US Senator John McCain - Mr Obama 's opponent in the 2008 presidential election - called for US air strikes against Syrian forces . 
Syrian security forces continued shelling rebel-held towns on Tuesday , activists said , as President Assad vowed to continue fighting `` terrorism '' . 
A boy and five soldiers were reportedly killed as troops launched an assault on the southern town of Herak , a base of the Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- . 
The Local Co-ordination Committees -LRB- LCC -RRB- , a network of Syrian activists , said 35 people were killed by security forces across Syria on Tuesday . 
Twenty-three people died in Homs , it said , including 13 members of two families , who were allegedly killed with knives by security forces personnel and pro-government militiamen in the Baba Amr district . 
The International Committee of the Red Cross -LRB- ICRC -RRB- and the Syrian Red Crescent are still being prevented from entering Baba Amr . 
The UN refugee agency -LRB- UNHCR -RRB- has said that more than 1,500 people , mostly women and children from in and around Homs , have crossed the border into Lebanon to escape the violence . 
The UN humanitarian chief Valerie Amos is due to arrive in Damascus on Wednesday . 
She said her aim was to `` urge all sides to allow unhindered access for humanitarian relief workers so they can evacuate the wounded and deliver essential supplies '' . 
The United States says it is proposing a new UN Security Council resolution on Syria . 
Ambassadors from the five permanent members of the council held talks at UN headquarters on Tuesday , along with Morocco , representing Arab countries . 
Russia and China have vetoed two previous resolutions , saying they were unbalanced and only demanded the government stop attacks . 
Russia has made it clear that its position on Syria has not changed since Vladimir Putin was re-elected as president at the weekend . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
