BP oil spill : Larry King rides to the rescue Robert Redford and Cameron Diaz bring star power to a decidedly B-list lineup for CNN stalwart 's two-hour telethon Cameron Diaz , one of the celebrities who participated in the telethon . 
Photograph : Rex Features The combined might of the US federal government and the world 's top engineers appear powerless to stem the raging Gulf of Mexico oil spill , but last night in New York and Los Angeles help was finally at hand : celebrities came rushing to the rescue . 
Larry King , who has made a career out of celebrating celebrity for celebrity 's sake , explained the purpose of his CNN telethon in characteristically eloquent fashion . 
`` Remember bureaucracy is slow ; you can hear about billions being donated but it do n't get there tomorrow . 
We 're going to do our best to get it there pronto . '' 
The Larry King Live show turned itself over to two hours of fundraising to help the stricken people and animals of the Gulf region . 
The broadcast was broken only by regular advertising breaks to raise funds for the stricken CNN cable network . 
The celebrities on offer were decidedly B-list compared with , for instance , the impressive lineup for George Clooney 's Hope for Haiti Now telethon earlier in the year . 
Headlining this time was Sting , who performed his song Fragile , dedicating it to `` all the people in the Gulf who have lost their livelihoods , and all the animals and birds , and to remember our ecology is very fragile '' . 
Robert Redford delivered the most politically poignant message of the evening , saying `` had somebody been connecting the dots and ignored the propaganda that was coming out of the company and the consequence of the collusion between government and the oil companies that has been going on for decades , we would have seen this thing coming . 
It would not be a question of whether this would happen , but when . '' 
Redford , who worked on oil rigsas a teenager , said the challenge was to find a solution to ensure a disaster like that of the Deepwater Horizon rig never happened again . 
Cameron Diaz provided some more heavyweight star power . 
She said that what was going on in the Gulf made her `` mad and sad and sick at heart '' . 
Beyond that it quickly descended into the kind of has-beens and wannabes you would find on Celebrity Big Brother . 
Kathy Griffin , the self-proclaimed D-lister , was shown on screen talking to another supposed star . 
Griffin : That 's right , the surfers are here . 
Ivanka Trump , famous for being the daughter of the humanitarian legend Donald , said the experience of manning the phone lines and talking to the people affected by the disaster in the Gulf had been `` humanising beyond belief '' . 
Ryan Seacrest , famous for being the foil to Simon Cowell on American Idol , was busy running a social networking channel for donations which CNN called the Social Suite . 
`` This is a two-screen experience , '' Seacrest said . 
`` While watching television you can reach out to the stars on Twitter and Facebook . '' 
Seacrest breathlessly announced that the search engine Bing had promised to donate $ 10 -LRB- # 6.80 -RRB- every time someone retweeted his own tweet about donating via Twitter -LRB- though he added that Bing had put a ceiling on its largesse of $ 100,000 , which at current rates is about how much BP is spending on the crisis every hour -RRB- . 
With technology as sophisticated as that now being brought to bear on the problem , it can only be a matter of time before the oil spill is finally vanquished . 
