Bono and Alicia Keys join Hope For Haiti benefit Alicia Keys and Bono will be joined by Sting and Christina Aguilera Stars including Bono , Justin Timberlake and Alicia Keys will perform in the Hope For Haiti TV fundraising event , organiser George Clooney has announced . 
The actor said more than 40 celebrities were expected to attend the Hope For Haiti event on 22 January . 
The aim of the telethon , he added , was `` to show the people of Haiti that the whole world is paying attention '' . 
Clooney and Haitian-born singer Wyclef Jean will host the benefit , to be shown on more than a dozen US TV networks . 
Other performers will include Sting and Christina Aguilera . 
Clooney attended the Golden Globe awards on Sunday , where he was nominated for best actor for his film Up In The Air . 
Clooney attended the Golden Globes with Italian model Elisabetta Canalis Asked whether it was `` a bit odd '' to be thrown into an awards show while trying to organise a charity concert , the star replied : `` It is , except this is a perfect place for me to go recruiting some people , so it works out . '' 
Organisers of the Globes pledged $ 100,000 -LRB- # 61,400 -RRB- to Jean 's Yele Haiti Earthquake Fund and many of the night 's guests used the opportunity to raise awareness of the ongoing relief effort . 
Actor Mark Wahlberg said : `` Haiti has been one of the poorest countries in the world for such a long time . 
And it 's important for people to continue to help and change that . '' 
Penelope Cruz added : `` Everybody can use an opportunity to remind people to do something . 
Even if it 's a little help . 
But everything counts . '' 
The Hope For Haiti event will benefit the Red Cross , Unicef , Oxfam America , Partners in Health and Jean 's Yele Haiti Foundation . 
Clooney said songs from participating artists would be made available on iTunes , with proceeds going to the relief effort . 
Estimates of the numbers killed by the earthquake range from 50,000 to at least 200,000 . 
Six days after the 7.0 magnitude earthquake , food and water are finally reaching some parts of the capital Port-au-Prince , but relief efforts are being slowed by bottlenecks . 
