`` We have at least 300 people in a 100 bed hospital '' Aid workers helping victims of Tuesday 's earthquake have been sharing their accounts with us . 
The following people have been sending us their diaries . 
Stuart Coles , Plan International I see dawn rise and hear the sound of singing as I stand on the terrace roof . 
For this devout Catholic country , today is a traditional day of worship , contemplation - and many funerals . 
Help is here but it 's still woefully inadequate in this battered city - everyone is stretched to capacity The people of Port-au-Prince pause to remember their loved ones , but with no shortage of the living in desperate need of help , this rare moment of reflection is gone all too soon . 
Thousands upon thousands of homeless Haitians still walk the streets in a desperate search for those vital services - water and shelter - that will keep them safe and alive . 
Help is here but it 's still woefully inadequate in this battered city - everyone is stretched to capacity . 
Yesterday we visited one of Plan 's partner organizations - a local clinic . 
Staff have been swamped with hundreds of casualties , all with typical quake injuries : head , upper and lower limb fractures and wounds . 
In a desperate bid to help the most at risk the clinic refers some cases to the specialists at Medicins Sans Frontiers , but they tell us they too are at full stretch . 
And so it goes on . 
Our communications team , myself and video journalist Shona , head south . 
The quake has turned the usual two-hour drive to Jacmel into a savage , bone-jarring 12-hour mountain slog . 
Plan 's relief boat from the Domican Republic is on its way to isolated Jacmel with trucks bearing 1,000 family-sized tents and hundreds of emergency kits containing essentials of water , dried food , sugar soap , plastic sheeting , cups and plates . 
A seemingly mundane grocery list , but here these goods take on a new , priceless value . 
We hope to reach the coast by nightfall and see what challenges and future the people of Jacmel face . 
The situation remains critical , few aid agencies are in place , still hundreds of bodies are stuck in buildings . 
In the entire city , I 've only seen about four or five trucks and cranes trying to remove buildings to get people out . 
At night we must be careful not to run over people who are sleeping on the roads The smell can be overwhelming in some areas , where corpses are rotting in the heat , and near Internal Displaced Persons gatherings , because there is no sanitation , no showers , no latrines , and people are gathering in the hundreds anywhere where there is open space in the city . 
At night , we must be careful not to run over people who are sleeping on the roads . 
I saw one person sleep in the middle of an intersection , just to avoid any buildings that may fall if there is another earthquake . 
On my way back from an assessment in Legoane -LRB- about one hour from Port au Prince -RRB- in the dark around 1800 yesterday , we crossed some check points set up by civilians . 
They were jumping on a pick-up truck , that was carrying a load of corpses . 
They were very angry because the driver was going to dump the corpses in their town . 
People were angry about this but I would be too , if someone was dumping corpses in my town ! 
When we crossed the checkpoints , they let us through no problem and showed respect for us . 
Last night we could smell that horrible smell , because the windows are open in the house . 
That team is under a lot of stress because they have extremely limited surgical capabilities . 
I spoke to a surgeon yesterday , and he was so frustrated and stressed about the fact that five patients he saw yesterday needed immediate surgery . 
It 's getting worse because the patients who were not critical only three days ago are now in critical phases But he ca n't save their lives because they do n't have a proper operational theater . 
We need more space to perform surgeries , which the inflatable hospital will provide - if it ever arrives ! 
So , it 's getting worse because the patients who were not critical only three days ago , are now in critical phases . 
This means that people will die from preventable infections . 
It 's horrible , it 's really so terrible that people are begging for help and we ca n't help them all to save their lives . 
It 's the night shift here at the operations base and it is finally quiet . 
The MapAction team is still up preparing directions and maps for the morning 's missions . 
The window is fast closing and the urban search and rescue team are going for a final push to find and extract people . 
We in the back-office are also pushing to get what they need to maximize the time left . 
The camaraderie among all in the operation is great and there is the feeling that every life saved is a tribute to all . 
SUNDAY 17 JANUARY - CARWYN HILL This morning I arrived back from my first trip to Port-au-Prince . 
I can barely believe what I have seen . 
It is as if I entered a different world . 
Yesterday 's mission was to seek out appropriate places for us to send aid . 
The water we handed out was an incredible blessing , and today we are planning a large truck to take down thousands of water sachets . 
We will also be transporting some very important medical supplies to an Orthopaedic Surgery team in Port-au-Prince who we work with . 
It took us over 4 hours to get from one side of the city to the other . 
People walked through the streets aimlessly with nowhere to go , carrying the few bags and possessions they had left . 
Many crammed onto any vehicle available desperate to leave . 
The mass exodus of Port-au-Prince has begun , and on our way out we followed cars full of the injured , and in some cases even the dead . 
As we drove through the city the scale of the atrocity sunk in further . 
Human bodies were used beside burning tires and rocks for road blocks . 
Some roads had been closed whilst one of the few remaining hospitals discharged the mass of patients they could n't help any more . 
Those hospitals that did survive are dangerously low on medication and most , from my understanding are completely out of supplies . 
People are turned away , even a child I saw carried in desperately by his mother . 
Tragically the doctors just had to say , ` we ca n't do anything , you must look elsewhere . ' 
At the moment though there simply is n't really anywhere to go . 
On the way back our car was full of refugees . 
It was strange hearing their conversations as they listed the dead . 
We had just a small number of the many thousands leaving . 
Many already filling hospitals up North . 
Our ` unfinished ' wards are now being prepared for action . 
We 've bought mattresses , cleaned beds , and got the ward as finished as possible with what we have . 
Our staff have worked tirelessly on this . 
We do n't know when we will start receiving patients as we will be acting as an overflow facility for the government hospital which struggles on a normal day without the predicted large influx of people . 
`` Broken bones are the most common injuries '' I 've been living in Ecuador for four years . 
I 'm originally from Yorkshire . 
I 'm with a team of seven medical staff working at the Baptist Haiti Mission hospital on a mountain above Port-au-Prince . 
It 's a 100-bed hospital and we have at least 300 people here . 
When we got here there was only one doctor , he was almost falling asleep on his feet from exhaustion and was absolutely delighted to see us . 
Injured people are lining the corridors of the hospital and about 50 are outside the gate waiting . 
We have some security to try and control things and if somebody comes in who is close to death we 'll take them in and treat them , otherwise , we 've worked out a system where we treat priority cases first . 
We 're getting a lot of people coming here because they 've heard that this hospital is still standing . 
There are people coming down from the villages . 
We 've heard of three villages that were completely flattened not far from here . 
One of these was a community of 2,000 people and every single house was destroyed . 
And people are coming up the mountain from the city too . 
Yesterday a truck full of injured people arrived . 
Broken bones are the most common injuries The problem is that we 're beginning to run out of materials to treat broken bones , which is the most common injury we 're seeing . 
We 're trying to ask some of the organizations at the airfield for help with supplies . 
There 's no electricity either - we 're using a generator that works on diesel but this will last two days only . 
In terms of injuries , we 're seeing lots of people with gangrene too - it 's not a pretty sight . 
It 's the dry season now and there 's no supply of drinking water . 
I 'm a water engineer and I 'm meant to be setting up a filtering system today to create a more secure water supply . 
Our water will be for the hospital initially , and if we have more , we 'll hopefully be able to release some to the community . 
David Darg -LRB- left -RRB- with Eric Lotz from Operation Blessing Our emergency paramedic team arrived this morning from Israel . 
We immediately coupled them with medicines and transported them into the heart of the quake zone and to the National hospital . 
Since that moment , the hospital has been inundated with patients with too few doctors to keep up with the influx of emergency cases . 
The halls are filled with the groans of the untreated , the screams of those undergoing treatment and the stench of those who did n't make it . 
The Israeli doctors were incredible ; they worked tirelessly and were extremely reluctant to leave with so many patients still waiting to be seen . 
But we had to pull them back to the airport before nightfall because of the lack of security in downtown Port-au-Prince . 
The National hospital in Port-au-Prince . 
Photo : Tony Cece The airport is filling with more and more relief teams every day . 
The relief camp looks like an Olympic village with national flags flying from nations all over the world . 
We came across a soccer field with 2000 people camping in it , many of them sick or injured . 
They only have one doctor between them , so we have agreed to visit the camp tomorrow and set up a clinic , provide some food and give out hygiene supplies . 
