NI woman 's UN husband missing in Haiti quake Andrew Grene is missing in the Haiti earthquake A Northern Ireland woman is waiting for news of her husband , an Irish citizen and senior United Nations official , missing in the Haiti earthquake . 
Andrew Grene , 44 , who has dual Irish\/US citizenship , was in a meeting with Hedi Annabi , the head of the UN , when the building in Port au Prince collapsed . 
Mr Annabi 's body was recovered from the rubble on Saturday . 
Mr Grene 's family are desperately seeking information . 
His wife , Jennifer , is from County Down . 
His two sons , Patrick , 20 , and Alex , 19 , were born in Belfast and he also has a daughter , Rosamund , 14 , who was born in Chicago . 
The family have posted information on the Red Cross website in the hope that he might be found . 
The Irish Department of Foreign Affairs is liaising with the US state department in trying to establish Mr Grene 's whereabouts It is understood that 37 members of the peacekeeping mission have been killed and more than 300 are missing following last Tuesday 's earthquake . 
The US general in Haiti has warned that 200,000 people may have died in the disaster , although it is too early to know for certain . 
Tens of thousands of people are living on the street and relying on each other to try to survive . 
The UN building collapsed in the earthquake The UN has launched an appeal for $ 562m -LRB- # 346m -RRB- intended to help three million people for six months , most of whom are thought to need emergency relief . 
Mr Grene was born in Chicago and grew up between the US and County Cavan , on a small farm outside Belturbet . 
His late father David Grene was a classics translator and professor at the University of Chicago . 
He was born in Donnybrook , Dublin . 
His mother , Ethel May Weiss , is a doctor . 
His half-brother Nicholas Grene is a professor of English at Trinity College Dublin . 
Mr Grene has a twin brother Gregory , who is a founder member of US-based Celtic rock band The Prodigals . 
He has posted a message online seeking information . 
Gregory Grene said : `` We are simply on an edge in a way that words can not fathom '' . 
