Despite losing their homes and many of their belongings people still turned out to church on Sunday dressed immaculately . 
Aid is arriving , but many Haitians are still waiting There were still songs of praise being sung , but also prayers for the dead and dying . 
Relief has now started trickling through , with non-governmental organizations , the UN and the US military getting aid to some of those who need it . 
But demand far outstrips supply as the food distribution and water points , as they are being called , quickly become overwhelmed by people clamouring for supplies . 
Bottlenecks still exist between the large amounts of aid arriving and the people who so desperately need it . 
At last there are convoys of aid making their way through the city . 
But you have to search to find the limited foreign assistance on the street . 
The most common `` water points '' are run by local people with hose pipes who have tapped into the occasional mains supplies . 
Long and mostly patient queues of people with buckets and bottles wait their turn to fill up . 
The most common `` food distribution '' consists of families and neighbors sharing their meager resources with others . 
And while many Haitians continue to fend for themselves the delays have cost lives , with vital medical supplies not getting to the injured . 
`` We 're running out of supplies to treat serious injuries , '' said Martin Harrison , an engineer from the UK helping medical staff in a hospital above Port-au-Prince . 
`` The other complication is that we 're on a diesel generator and we only have two days of fuel left , '' he said . 
Ban Ki-moon visited the destroyed headquarters of the UN mission UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon came to see the full extent of what happened and why there have been delays in getting aid to the people of Haiti . 
For Mr Ban this visit to a disaster zone was personal . 
The headquarters of his organization in Port-au-Prince was destroyed - the chief of the mission killed along with nearly 40 other members of staff , with hundreds more still missing . 
Security is still a major concern for the aid agencies , with reports of looting and jostling at distribution points , and the fear is that if more people do not get food it could spread . 
At a supermarket where workers have been called in to clear up the mess they cover their noses as they wheel out rotten meat from inside the shop . 
As you enter there is food spilled across the aisles , shelves having been emptied by the force of the quake . 
I ask the owner if she is worried about looters and she says no , `` the people round here are n't like that '' . 
But she does acknowledge that if more food aid does not arrive , supermarkets like hers could be a target . 
The armed security guards with pump-action shotguns give some added reassurance . 
