Rapid UK volunteers are in Haiti to rescue survivors of Tuesday 's earthquake When an earthquake struck the Caribbean country of Haiti on Tuesday , many of us here in Wiltshire were preoccupied with the snow in this country . 
But in the days since the quake struck , more and more information and images of the destruction have reached our shores and the Haitian earthquake has stolen our attentions . 
For two Wiltshire firefighters though , it will have been at the forefront of their minds since the first news of the quake was broadcast . 
Dan Cooke from Salisbury and Stuart Hillier from Pewsey may fight fires for a living , but they also volunteer for Gloucestershire-based Rapid UK . 
The search and rescue charity dispatches highly-trained volunteers to help in the aftermath of disasters around the world . 
By Wednesday , Dan Cooke was on a plane out to the island that Haiti shares with the Dominican Republic . 
Dan Cooke is in Haiti to help in the rescue effort His colleague Stuart Hillier followed on Thursday and by Thursday night the pair were reunited in Santa Domingo . 
By Friday they had made it into Haiti . 
There was no time to spare and their effort to rescue survivors of the quake got underway immediately . 
Friday saw the Rapid UK team pull a young police officer alive from the rubble . 
A similar success story followed on Saturday , when the team spent six hours using hammers and chisels to free a woman trapped beneath a collapsed concrete building . 
The 39-year-old had been buried under the ruins of her home . 
Dan Cooke said , `` There was a woman yesterday under three or four floors of concrete squashed in with dead members of her family . 
`` That was a hammer and chisel job and it took six hours before the doctor assigned to our team took her to hospital . 
`` It 's a great lift but people think it 's like scoring a point or scoring a goal and it 's not . 
`` The moment you 've done that you look around and see there is something else to do . 
`` It does n't change the fact this is a catastrophe . '' 
Mr Cooke said his team was one of 47 working across the capital in dangerous conditions . 
He said , `` You hear gunfire , you see gangs of youths carrying machetes but to some extent that is part of the culture here . 
Rapid UK spent six hours freeing one woman trapped under her home `` We are doing quite well . 
`` The UN security forces are attaching themselves to us and some teams have brought their own armed security . 
`` We have been working with other teams and local people and they have been fantastic . 
`` The conditions yesterday were very hot and dusty . 
`` There is always a smell of the dead and sometimes it is extremely potent . 
`` There are some very horrific scenes . '' 
Mr Cooke said his team rescued two people on Saturday and two the day before . 
He said , `` It is more than we would usually come across . 
`` The people are very tough as a nation , and the weather conditions help to keep people alive , but as the days go on the chances of people surviving fall massively . 
`` There are 1,700 rescue workers here and there is work for everyone which gives some sense of the scale of what has happened . '' 
Rapid UK is a small charity dependent on donations . 
You can find details of how to donate on the home page of their website . 
