Douglas Alexander : ` We all need to pull together . ' 
Britons have donated # 23m to the Haiti earthquake appeal , the Disasters and Emergency Committee -LRB- DEC -RRB- has said . 
The UK government has trebled its funding for the humanitarian response from # 6.2 m to # 20m , to provide food , shelter , health and relief work . 
United Nations worker Frederick Wooldridge , 41 , from Kent , was the first confirmed British casualty . 
Downing Street said more than 60 Britons were safe and well after Tuesday 's 7.0-magnitude earthquake . 
But No 10 said there were still concerns over the safety of others . 
`` We do n't know how many British nationals were in the country , '' a spokesman said . 
The international community is dealing with an almost unprecedented level of devastation . 
Disaster Emergency Committee chief executive Brendan Gormley said the public response had been `` absolutely overwhelming '' . 
A grateful Prime Minister Gordon Brown sought to reassure donors that their `` money would get through '' to those in need . 
He also pledged the UK would not walk away from `` a country which has suffered so many disasters '' with only `` a week 's charity '' . 
Outlining the trebling in aid , International Development Secretary Douglas Alexander said : `` The international community is dealing with an almost unprecedented level of devastation '' . 
Money so far pledged by the Department for International Development -LRB- Dfid -RRB- has been used by the Haitian Red Cross to help 20,000 families . 
Frederick Wooldridge was a keen skier and mountaineer Funds have also been used to deploy UK search and rescue teams and by the World Food Programme to transport and organise relief . 
The DEC , an umbrella group of 13 major British-based charities , said charities were facing `` a huge challenge '' but water supplies and medical expertise were `` increasingly reaching '' people . 
It said Oxfam had installed four water tanks capable of holding 10,000 litres of water each since Sunday , and charity Merlin was sending a surgical team of 12 . 
A # 25 donation buys a kit of household essentials , # 50 is enough to feed a family for a fortnight and # 100 funds temporary shelter for two families , it said . 
The DEC appeal for victims of the earthquake in Haiti Relief efforts have been hampered by supply bottlenecks , leading to security concerns over looting and violence amid increasing desperation . 
There are concerns about the safety of aid workers - with reports of gunfire - and some charities have taken security guards . 
The DEC said it was monitoring the security situation , but based on the information it had , `` isolated incidents '' were not interfering with the arrival and distribution of aid . 
It is unclear how many Britons remain unaccounted for in Haiti after the earthquake . 
The leading US general in Haiti , Ken Keen , said it was a `` reasonable assumption '' that up to 200,000 people may have died . 
Steven Fisher , the UK 's ambassador to Haiti and the Dominican Republic , said the Foreign Office 's rapid deployment team was `` doing quite well '' in its efforts to account for expatriate Britons but visiting sites was taking `` an awful lot of effort '' . 
The Disasters Emergency Committee is co-ordinating an appeal to help the people of Haiti There are 13 charities involved including the British Red Cross , Islamic Relief and World Vision Donate via the DEC website or by telephoning 0370 60 60 900 However , one British survivor - bank worker Alistair Cameron , from Inverness - disputed reports access was such a problem . 
`` Where there was a blockage due to fallen trees or masonry from collapsed buildings , I always found , without too much difficulty , an alternative route , '' he said . 
The Foreign Office said it was beginning to repatriate UK nationals . 
Mr Wooldridge was a senior political affairs and planning officer at the UN , for which he had worked in Geneva and Liberia before moving to Haiti in 2007 . 
A family statement said he had `` loved '' his work and `` had many friends in the UN and beyond '' . 
Another UN worker , Ann Barnes , 59 , of Leigh-on-Sea , Essex , is feared to have been killed in the collapse of the headquarters in the capital . 
