Reading Haitian women united in grief Kathy Johnson believes she and Ms Lepine are the only Haitians in Reading Two Haitian women who met after being interviewed by a BBC radio station have united to await news of their family in the earthquake-hit country . 
Kathy Johnson said she thought Herlande Lepine and herself were the only two Haitians living in Reading , Berkshire . 
They met after hearing each other talk on BBC Berkshire about the the 7.0-magnitude quake , which left tens of thousands of people dead . 
Ms Johnson said her uncle had died and she was worried about five cousins . 
On Friday she made a public appeal about her relatives ' whereabouts in the capital city Port-au-Prince . 
We are desperately looking for storage space to cover the south The 39-year-old finance manager , who has lived in Shinfield for 22 years , said : `` The last few days I 've been appealing for my uncle , who 's missing , as well as his children and other cousins . 
`` Unfortunately yesterday , I received news from home that indeed , he did pass away . '' 
She does not yet know the fate of the others . 
Ms Johnson invited Ms Lepine to her home after learning they both lived in the same town . 
Ms Lepine said she still had not heard from her relatives . 
She said : `` I have n't been able to get in touch at all . 
I 've got my mum and everybody there . '' 
Close to tears , she added : `` It 's nice to have someone who 's going through the same thing . '' 
Kathy Johnson and Herlande Lepine met after hearing each other talk on BBC Berkshire Ms Johnson , who is the Reading representative of the United Haitians in the UK , said she was appealing for aid but needed more storage space . 
The group has been donated two warehouses in London , where she said any aid would be sent before being flown to Haiti . 
`` We are desperately looking for storage space to cover the south , '' she said . 
She added she would then appeal for donations of medical supplies , non-perishable food and clothing . 
`` We are also appealing to anyone with a courier company , or airline company that can perhaps donate space or a couple of seats . '' 
Britons have so far donated more than # 15m to the Disasters and Emergency Committee -LRB- DEC -RRB- , an umbrella group of 13 major British-based charities , which has broadcast appeals on TV and radio . 
