'' This Story : Read + | Watch + | BEIJING -- The global financial crisis is bringing out the worst in the trade relationship between the United States and China . 
U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner accused China of `` manipulating '' its currency , vowing in written testimony submitted for his confirmation hearing that the United States would act `` aggressively '' to remedy the situation . 
The U.S. Trade Representative 's office , in a harshly worded and wide-ranging complaint to the World Trade Organization in December , alleged that China uses cash grants , cheap loans and other subsidies to illegally aid its exporters . 
China , for its part , has bashed the `` Buy America '' program embedded in the just-passed stimulus package , calling it `` poison to the solution '' of the global economic crisis . 
At the World Economic Forum meeting in Davos three weeks ago , Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao , without naming the United States explicitly , blamed the financial crisis on unsupervised capitalism . 
`` The crisis has pushed the China-U.S. relationship to a flash point . 
From now on , it will either become more stable or more confrontational , '' said Mei Xinyu , a trade expert with the Chinese Commerce Ministry 's research arm . 
When Hillary Rodham Clinton arrives in China on Friday as part of her first diplomatic visit as secretary of state , she said she hopes to broaden the bilateral dialogue to include climate change and human rights . 
But it is economic cooperation that will be at the forefront of many people 's minds . 
Both the United States and China , the world 's No. 1 and No. 3 largest economies , have railed about the dangers of economic protectionism , but so far both have been guilty , according to the other , of practicing it . 
`` While both countries have come to an agreement that trade protectionism should n't be practiced by any country , when it comes to the details -- maybe due to domestic reasons -- they may feel pressured toward it , '' said Jia Qingguo , the vice dean of Peking University 's international studies school . 
Li Wei , a researcher at the Chinese Academy of International Trade and Economic Cooperation , said `` the purpose of ` Buy America ' is clearly to kick out foreign competitors . '' 
In the United States , industry groups are pushing for more action against China , saying it is trying to export its way out of the crisis by dumping cheap products abroad . 
The latest figures , released in mid-February , show that the U.S. trade deficit with China hit at an all-time high of $ 266.3 billion in 2008 , the worst imbalance ever recorded with any country . 
It came as the overall trade deficit shrank for the year and hit its lowest levels in six years in December amid depressed demand for imports . 
U.S. steel and textile manufacturers have been especially loud in their call for the Obama administration to be more aggressive with Beijing . 
The U.S. International Trade Commission has imposed duties of 35 to 40 percent on some steel products from China -- imports hit an all-time high this fall -- to counteract Chinese subsidies . 
The textile lobby has accused China of increasing its share of the U.S. apparel market to more than 50 percent this year by using export subsidies . 
The Dec. 19 WTO petition filed by the USTR addresses some of these concerns ; a WTO official said the complaint is still being reviewed . 
