In Steep and Swift Fall , Dow Lands at 6-Year Low Banking Shares Dive Again ; Fears Over Jobs Intensify Your browser 's settings may be preventing you from commenting on and viewing comments about this item . 
See instructions for fixing the problem . 
Friday , February 20 , 2009 ; Page D01 NEW YORK , Feb. 19 -- The Dow Jones industrial average slid to its lowest level in six years Thursday on fears about the weak financial system and a gloomy jobs outlook . 
The Dow 's fall illustrates the rapid destruction of wealth in the stock market during the financial crisis . 
The Dow now stands at about half of its all-time high of 14,164 , reached in October 2007 . 
The total value of all shares of companies on the Dow has dwindled to $ 2.45 trillion , down from $ 4.51 trillion . 
With banks stocks weighing on the market Thursday , the Dow sank 1.2 percent to 7465.95 , dipping below the bear market low of 7552 reached in November . 
The index is now at its lowest level since October 2002 . 
Bank stocks have tumbled as investors grow increasingly nervous about the fragile economy and the pile of toxic mortgage assets clogging the financial system . 
Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner last week announced a bank rescue plan that disappointed traders for its lack of details . 
Both Bank of America and Citigroup fell about 14 percent Thursday . 
American Express was also hit hard , losing almost than 9 percent because of growing concerns about consumers ' ability to make good on credit card debt . 
`` The uncertainty about the banks has kept the black cloud over the markets , '' said Todd Clark , director of trading at Nollenberger Capital Partners . 
The markets are not likely to recover `` until we find out what Treasury 's plan is to come to the aid of these money center banks , '' he said . 
The Standard & Poor 's 500-stock index , a broader market measure , fell 1.2 percent , to 778.94 . 
The tech-heavy Nasdaq composite index lost 1.7 percent , to 1442.82 . 
Both indices are still above their bear-market lows in November . 
Some analysts said the Dow 's new low could further fuel anxiety and cause more selling . 
`` There 's almost a multiplier effect in fear , '' said David N. Dreman , chief investment officer of Dreman Value Management . 
`` We 're really in a historic type of bear market . 
It 's an incredibly nervous market . 
There 's fear that we 're not going to recover for a long , long time . '' 
Thursday 's losses came after the Labor Department said the number of people receiving unemployment benefits neared 5 million last week . 
First-time jobless claims stayed flat at 627,000 . 
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday said the unemployment rate would remain elevated through at least 2011 . 
Reversing months of decline , wholesale prices rose 0.8 percent last month , according to the Labor Department . 
The rise in the producer price index , which measures wholesale prices for various goods , was bigger than analysts expected . 
Meanwhile , another set of government data showed a surprise decline in domestic crude oil inventories . 
The report prompted a surge in the crude oil price , which rose 14 percent on the New York Mercantile Exchange , to $ 39.48 a barrel . 
Hewlett-Packard was down 8 percent after the huge computer and printer company reported disappointing earnings . 
The company 's first-quarter profit fell 13 percent , and it cut its forecast for the rest of 2009 . 
A bright spot was Sprint Nextel , which surged 20 percent despite reporting a $ 1.6 billion loss during its fourth quarter . 
The results beat analysts ' expectations . 
Staff writer Renae Merle contributed to this report . '' 
