Trouble Trickles From Steep Drop in Oil Prices A worker monitors an automated manifold as it directs oil in Cushing , Okla. -LRB- By Shane Bevel -- Bloomberg News -RRB- The precipitous fall in the price of oil in recent months , while good for consumers , has contributed to the confusion in the global economy , wreaking havoc with the budgets and economies of oil-exporting nations and putting many expensive energy projects on hold . 
In Canada , where President Obama visited yesterday , the drop in oil prices has done more to slow development of controversial oil sands projects than the protests of environmental groups , who note that the energy-intensive process of mining those sands contributes to global warming . 
Executives in the past have said oil must cost $ 60 to $ 90 a barrel to justify the investment . 
In Kuwait this month , the government unveiled a $ 5 billion rescue plan for banks , pledging to guarantee 50 percent of new loans to ease a credit crunch in the oil-rich nation . 
The country 's biggest investment bank , Global Investment House , said last month it had defaulted on most of its debt , while an Islamic rival said in December it needed up to $ 1 billion in loans . 
Russia , which last year was flush with oil and gas revenue , bolstered its deteriorating financial position this week by promising to supply China with 300,000 barrels a day of Siberian oil over the next 20 years in return for $ 25 billion in loans to Russian state-owned oil and pipeline firms with large debt payments coming due this year . 
In Venezuela , Hugo Ch vez won a referendum that would allow him to extend his presidency . 
But Ch vez , who became president during widespread discontent in 1998 when oil prices were extremely low , must deal with an oil slump of his own . 
Oil accounts for 95 percent of exports and about half of fiscal revenue , analysts say . 
`` The last five years saw the rebirth of the use of oil as a critical instrument of foreign policy by key resource countries , Iran , Russia and Venezuela in particular , '' said Ed Morse , managing director and chief economist of LCM Research . 
`` With oil and natural gas prices having collapsed , the power of their weapons has been waning rapidly , turning creditor into debtor nations and depriving them of the revenue required to fulfill their international goals . '' 
Just one year ago , the price of oil finished trading at more than $ 100 a barrel for the first time , fueling speculation about a new era of oil prices . 
Yesterday , oil finished trading in New York at $ 39.15 a barrel , and that after surging 13 percent for the day . 
The overwhelming cause of the collapse in oil prices has been the faltering world economy , which has fueled the drop in consumption . 
Oil use in China , which most forecasters a year ago assumed would be the engine for increasing global demand , has screeched to a halt . 
Paul Ting , an independent oil analyst , says preliminary estimates suggest that petroleum consumption in China fell more than 6 percent in January compared with the month in 2008 . 
Crude oil imports hit a 14-month low , he said . 
In the United States , where passenger vehicles use about one of nine barrels produced worldwide , strapped motorists in December traveled less than they did a year ago , even though gasoline prices are more than $ 1 a gallon cheaper . 
The Federal Highway Administration said it was the 14th consecutive month in which American motorists drove fewer miles . 
In 2008 , U.S. motorists drove 3.6 percent less , or 107.9 billion fewer miles , than in 2007 , the FHA said . 
Total miles driven , which normally rise every year with the population and number of cars on the road , fell slightly below 2004 levels . 
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries has cut production three times since September . 
It plans to meet again March 15 , and senior officials of the cartel said additional cuts in output are likely . 
But OPEC has been having trouble keeping up with shrinking global demand . 
