An employee counts money at a fuel station in Kolkata April 7 , 2011 . 
NEW YORK | Mon Aug 22 , 2011 4:46 pm BST NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Brent crude fell more than 1 percent on Monday as investors anticipated a resumption of oil exports from the OPEC-member Libya , where rebels moved to control most of Tripoli and an end to the 6-month-old civil war seemed close . 
Libyan government tanks and snipers put up scattered resistance in Tripoli after rebels swept into the heart of the capital , cheered on by crowds hailing the end of Muammar Gaddafi 's 42 years in power . 
`` A resolution of the conflict is modestly bearish for crude oil prices , but it is less likely that we will get a $ 10 - $ 20 drop in price of crude , '' Jason Schenker , president at Prestige Economics LLC in Austin , Texas , said in a note . 
`` While the fundamentals of the conflict resolution appear at first glance to be only bearish , it could turn out to be quite bullish , as it could engender further conflict in the region , '' Schenker said . 
Brent losses were limited by the dollar 's weakness . 
DXY and the greenback 's slip and a bounce by equities on Wall Street helped lift U.S. crude prices , for both the expiring front-month September and October contracts . 
The euro edged up , helped by a rise in European shares , while the dollar weakened on speculation that the Federal Reserve may show some indication this week about the need to take additional measures to support an ailing economy . 
ICE Brent October crude fell $ 1.25 to $ 107.37 a barrel by 11:09 a.m. -LRB- 4:09 p.m. BST -RRB- , having recover from a $ 105.15 intraday low . 
U.S. expiring September crude rose 84 cents to $ 83.10 a barrel , having reached as high as $ 84.30 . 
More actively traded October crude rose 79 cents to $ 83.20 a barrel . 
Brent 's premium to U.S. crude narrowed to $ 24.05 a barrel , after reaching a record $ 26.69 on Friday . 
Part of U.S. crude divergence from Brent is because traders are starting to bail out of their Brent\/U . 
S. spread positions , said Dominick Chirichella of the Energy Management Institute . 
Speculators raised slightly their long exposure to Brent in the week to August 16 , data from the Intercontinental Exchange showed . 
Selling by `` soft longs '' who increased exposure last week and profit taking by traders with long-held positions could put more short-term pressure on Brent , according to brokers . 
Libya pumped around 1.6 million barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- , nearly 2 percent of global supply , before the war cut its output . 
Most of Libya 's high-quality crude flowed to European refiners . 
After Libyan exports ceased , tighter supply drove Brent to a two-year high of $ 127.02 in April . 
Production fell to almost nothing during the conflict but technical staff from Italy 's oil and gas major ENI -LRB- ENI . 
MI -RRB- have already arrived in Libya to look into restarting oil facilities . 
Some Libyan output will be able to restart in a few months , but it will take as long as 18 months to reach the prewar level , Libya 's former top oil official Shokri Ghanem said on Monday . 
