Monday 8 August 2005 00.05 BST In the early hours of May 2 1997 Robin Cook made the short journey from his constituency count to Edinburgh airport . 
He was due to join Tony Blair and Labor 's leading lights at the Festival Hall to celebrate the party 's return from the wilderness after 18 years . 
But the man who was to be foreign secretary was depressed . 
His agent and his local fixer both asked him why he seemed so glum . 
Earlier that evening Cook had told his wife Margaret over dinner that he feared government might bring out the worst in those he knew . 
A few weeks earlier I had gone to see Cook in his Commons office to tell him I was planning to write his biography . 
I told him I would rather he would cooperate , but it was not essential - I would do it anyway . 
He said he would help on the politics , but not `` the other stuff '' . 
I got to know him well in those early years of government ; not as well as some , and not as well as I might have liked . 
Cook was alternately warm and offhand , intellectually impressive but strangely lacking in strategic sense . 
He knew he was capable of terrible put-downs , and wished it otherwise . 
He knew he should have made shrewder alliances , but did not seem to care enough to change . 
And yet , for all his personal foibles , he did more than perhaps any single politician of his generation to restore faith in the profession . 
He was a man of deep conviction , a man who would compromise only under duress . 
An evening with him - copiously supplied with malt whisky - was always invigorating . 
Conversation with him was intellectually stimulating . 
I know precious few among his profession who on that score come close . 
There was something about Cook that unnerved lesser minds . 
There was something about him that unnerved those of similar minds . 
His feud with Gordon Brown will go down as one of the great lost opportunities of progressive politics . 
Two men of similar backgrounds - son of teacher , son of preacher , both making their mark in Edinburgh politics - could have forged a potent alliance . 
At first they did work together , co-editing a book in 1974 , the year Cook , the older and senior figure , first entered parliament . 
Nobody can quite tell - not even the protagonists - exactly when and why their relationship turned sour . 
The one incident that several people point to is the launch of their second pamphlet in 1983 when , with Brown still on his way to the meeting , Cook started it early , giving the impression it was all his idea . 
Cook was slower than Brown to adapt to the strictures of New Labor . 
He resented the spin tactics that began to take hold in the early 1990s -LRB- although in government he retained a curious respect for Alastair Campbell -RRB- . 
On policy , he was slower than others to shed old certainties such as state ownership , unilateral nuclear disarmament and hostility to the European Community . 
Paradoxically , given everything that was to follow , Cook resented Blair for giving him the foreign affairs portfolio in 1994 . 
He held Brown responsible for that - and he was not wrong . 
He was frozen out of the important discussions on economic affairs . 
As he mustered enthusiasm for the new job , Cook saw an opportunity to forge a radical foreign policy , breaking with the cynicism of the Tory years that had led to a surge in weapons sales and dodgy trade deals masquerading as international development . 
His single-handed destruction of the Major government over the arms-to-Iraq scandal in 1996 has been attributed to his forensic skill . 
But there was passion and raw anger too . 
When , a few weeks into office , he declared a new `` ethical dimension '' to his foreign policy , he accepted he would be mocked by the opposition and parts of the press . 
He was bitterly upset , but not surprised , when Blair was so contemptuous of measures such as a tightening of the rules on arms sales . 
Cook lost what political independence he had the moment his marriage broke up so publicly . 
He became dependent on the Blair machine for his survival . 
After a turbulent first year he performed with increasing professionalism , handling prewar negotiations on Kosovo with aplomb . 
He became an increasingly respected figure in the EU . 
He performed a 180-degree turn , becoming a proselytiser for the European cause . 
But the ease with which Blair dispensed with his services in 2001 demonstrated the shallowness of Cook 's political base . 
It has become a commonplace to portray Cook 's opposition to the war on Iraq as one of great principle . 
It was , but it was also rooted in pragmatism . 
While still in the cabinet he insisted on being briefed on the latest intelligence . 
Cook suggested to me that he possibly would have gone along with the war if the evidence had been compelling . 
It was shoddy and the man with the forensic mind could not understand how Blair and those around him had been so hoodwinked . 
Even as he resigned , however , Cook sought to minimize the damage to the government . 
He could have made his departing speech at the start of the crucial debate on Iraq , but allowed himself to be convinced by Campbell not to . 
It is possible his intervention that day could have tilted the balance against Blair . 
Never a man to lightly admit mistakes , I suspect Cook regretted that since . 
I suspect too he regretted not making up earlier with Brown . 
As for Clare Short , why had she and Cook not coordinated their resignations prewar ? 
Neither has a convincing answer . 
He made mistakes , yes , but Cook did his best to stop this government making the biggest mistake of all . 
There seems little justice that he has parted the scene so early , depriving the critics of the Iraq war with their most principled - and practical - voice . 
John Kampfner is the editor of the New Statesman . 
