TOKYO | Tue Nov 8 , 2011 8:50 am GMT TOKYO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Japan looks set to commit itself to talks on a U.S.-led free trade pact at the Asia-Pacific summit in Hawaii this weekend , to help ties with the United States and tap into the region 's strong growth to revive its sluggish economy . 
Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda has signalled he is leaning towards joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership -LRB- TPP -RRB- negotiations despite fierce opposition from many in his own party and the politically powerful farming sector . 
For Noda , who became Japan 's sixth premier in five years in September , the pact is the first big test whether he can take tough decisions , preserve party unity and avoid alienating the opposition , whose cooperation he needs in a divided parliament . 
The TPP would in principle eliminate all tariffs within the zone , likely helping Japan 's auto and electronics exporters to better compete in the global market but hitting hard its agricultural industry , which has been protected by high tariffs on farm imports . 
`` This is a step that needs to be taken sooner or later if one thinks about Japan 's economic future , '' Mikitaka Masuyama , professor at National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies . 
`` But most noticeable effects in the short term will be negative ones such as damages to the farming sector . 
Few would praise him for his decision . '' 
Free trade is expected to top the agenda of the November 12-13 summit in Honolulu , where leaders will also discuss a green growth initiative , which would cut tariffs on environmental goods and services such as solar panels and wind turbines . 
In an effort to appease farmers , Noda 's government last month unveiled a plan to strengthen Japan 's agriculture by consolidating typically tiny patches of farmland into bigger farms that can withstand foreign competition . 
`` If we give the reform enough time , Japan 's agriculture can be stronger . 
A growing number of wealthy consumers in Asia will be buying Japan 's high-quality farm products , '' said Hisashi Yamada , chief economist at Japan Research Institute . 
The TPP was launched in 2006 as an free trade initiative among Singapore , New Zealand , Chile and Brunei . 
In addition to the four original members and the United States , talks have also been joined by Australia , Malaysia , Peru and Vietnam . 
If Tokyo joined the pact , Japan and the United States would account for more than 90 percent of the total GDP within the TPP countries . 
`` Some people may say this is going to be a U.S.-Japan free trade agreement in disguise . 
But Southeast Asian markets are the ones that will expand rapidly as we go forward , '' National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies ' Masuyama said . 
With its population shrinking and greying , Japan needs to look overseas for growth . 
But its society is split down the middle on the trade pact . 
A survey by Kyodo news agency earlier this month showed 38 percent backed Japan 's participation in the pact , while 36 percent opposed it . 
Its proponents say it is crucial to join the talks as soon as possible , so that Japan can better protect its interest , for example by seeking an exemption for rice , Japan 's staple diet . 
`` When it comes to rice , Japan can not easily open up its market 100 percent . 
Just like the United States is aiming to make sugar an exception , there is a good chance that Japan can make rice an exception , '' said Tomoaki Iwai , professor at Nihon University . 
Japan currently imposes 778 percent tariff on imported rice to protect typically small-scaled domestic rice farmers . 
-LRB- Editing by Tomasz Janowski and Jonathan Thatcher -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
