Analysis : Syrian attack on rebel city mocks Arab peace plan LONDON | Tue Nov 8 , 2011 8:30 am EST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syria 's assault on the recalcitrant city of Homs has shredded an Arab peace plan and exposed the failure of world outrage to force President Bashar al-Assad to halt a violent crackdown on an eight-month popular uprising . 
Tanks and snipers have battled to cow protesters and hunt army defectors in Homs , killing more than 100 , activists say , since the Arab League said on November 2 that Damascus had accepted a plan to pull the army out of cities and talk to its foes . 
`` The Arab peace plan died on arrival , '' said Murhaf Jouejati , a Syrian-born scholar in Washington . 
`` There has been no let-up in the violence . 
The Assad regime is in complete defiance mode . '' 
Arab foreign ministers will review the plan on Saturday , but Syrian opponents of Assad show no surprise at its fate . 
`` I do n't think anyone in his right mind was expecting Assad to pull his troops out of the streets and allow peaceful protests , '' Walid al-Bunni , a lawyer and often-jailed dissident who left Syria for Paris two weeks ago , told Reuters . 
`` Lack of even a threat of international intervention is viewed by the authorities as a license to kill , '' he said . 
Evident Arab impotence to deflect Assad from the path he has chosen for survival against what he calls Islamist militants and foreign-backed gangs throws the ball back to Western powers whose own rebukes the Syrian leader has ignored or denounced . 
Assad has played on fears that without him Syria could slide into civil war , Islamic militancy or Iraq-style sectarian carnage , causing what he has called a regional `` earthquake . '' 
Nadim Shehadi , of London 's Chatham House think-tank , said Assad had already lost power , in the sense of legitimacy , but argued that the outside world had effectively propped him up with unheeded calls for reform and dialogue . 
`` The people who are protesting in Syria seem to have crossed the barrier of fear , but the international community has n't . '' 
Many Syrians have defied a feared security apparatus to keep up demands for change , despite bloodshed which the United Nations says has cost more than 3,500 lives -- as well as those of 1,100 soldiers and police , according to the government . 
Armed with a U.N. Security Council mandate to protect civilians , Western powers lent air support to Libyan rebels who toppled Muammar Gaddafi , but have disavowed any intent to repeat the feat in Syria , in a far trickier area of the Middle East . 
Russia and China , stung by the robust Western reading of the U.N. resolution on Libya , oppose even U.N. criticism of Syria , whose uprising was inspired by others in the Arab world . 
The Arab League , which had suspended Libya 's membership and backed a no-fly zone there , has treated Syria more leniently . 
Assad 's own doom-laden warnings have reinforced the fears of Syria 's neighbors -- Israel , Lebanon , Iraq , Jordan and Turkey -- about the possibly seismic consequences of a power shift in a nation on the faultlines of several Middle Eastern conflicts . 
Instability in Syria , Iran 's only Arab ally , could spread to Lebanon or Iraq , which have volatile sectarian divides . 
Israel , long used to a calm border with Syria , frets that Assad 's fall could herald less predictable rulers . 
Syrian refugees have already spilled into Lebanon and Turkey , which is also wary of any revived Syrian support for rebel Kurds in its southeast . 
Assad still retains substantial support from his own Alawite minority , part of the business elite in Damascus and Aleppo , Christians and others who fear that Islamist radicals might come to the fore , and , crucially , army and security force commanders . 
`` Until now there are segments of the Syrian population on the sidelines , afraid for their lives if they go out in the streets , or betting that Assad will survive , '' said a leading dissident in Syria , who asked not to be named . 
He said the Arab League had embarrassed Assad with a plan he could not implement without inviting huge street protests . 
It could now suspend Syria and refer it to the United Nations , putting pressure on Russia and China to alter their stance . 
An Arab League source said a ministerial committee might return to Damascus with a reprimand and perhaps a new deadline for compliance , or dispatch Arab observers to identify violators of the deal . 
Sterner action , such as suspending Syria from the League or blaming it for the violence , was unlikely immediately . 
Waheed Abdel Maguid , at Cairo 's al-Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies , said the League was hamstrung by its own rifts , with Algeria , Lebanon and Yemen hostile to penalizing Syria , and Iraq , Sudan and Mauritania hesitant . 
`` This puts the League in an awkward situation , '' he said . 
`` It holds meetings but is unable to act . '' 
The big powers seem just as indecisive and divided , although seemingly agreed on ruling out military intervention . 
`` In these conditions , it is not unlikely that Turkey will take some kind of action , with implicit support from Washington and major European capitals , '' Jouejati said . 
But Turkey , now a bitter critic of its former friend , has yet to impose sanctions promised weeks ago , or to send clear signals on the idea of a safe haven or no-fly zone in Syria . 
`` We hope there will be no need for these type of measures , but of course humanitarian issues are important , '' Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu told the Financial Times this month . 
Western countries , preoccupied with global economic woes , have sharpened their rhetoric , but otherwise seem at a loss . 
`` Those leaders trying to hold back the future at the point of a gun should know their days are numbered , '' U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said on Monday , referring to Syria , while acknowledging the difficulty of any Libya-style `` liberation . '' 
The same day , French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said Syria 's behavior after the Arab peace plan was `` absolutely unacceptable '' and that it `` could no longer be trusted . '' 
But , like his British counterpart William Hague who deplored Syria 's policy , he offered no blueprint for action . 
The West has urged Assad 's foes to form a united , coherent front , but Chatham House 's Shehadi said this was absurd , given the diversity of opinion lurking beneath years of repression . 
`` This is not really an opposition , this is the whole of Syrian society , '' he said . 
Without decisive outside moves or the growth of a more powerful insurgency at home , Assad could survive for years , said Joshua Landis , a Syria expert at the University of Oklahoma . 
`` Today , the opposition remains weak and the Syrian military has the upper hand . 
That could change if the opposition begins to construct a real insurgency , if Turkey goes to war against Syria by supporting some sort of insurgency , or if a foreign intervention is launched , such as happened in Libya , '' he said . 
`` None of these possibilities is on the horizon , '' Landis added , arguing that small guerrilla groups might begin to proliferate and harass the Syrian military and state . 
`` If they gain traction , foreign funding and arms , they could transform into a real insurgency over time . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
