ULAN BATOR | Tue Nov 8 , 2011 8:44 am GMT ULAN BATOR -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Mongolia has cut short a lecture tour due to be given by the Dalai Lama , a government minister said on Tuesday , under pressure from China , which brands Tibet 's exiled spiritual leader a dangerous separatist . 
Ulan Bator has restricted the Dalai Lama to just one lecture on Tuesday , Mongolian Transportation Minister Battulga Khaltmaa told reporters following a cabinet meeting . 
But the Nobel Peace Prize laureate 's planned talk on Tuesday at the Mongolian capital 's new 4,000-seat Buyant-Ukhaa sports complex , which was constructed using Chinese aid , went ahead despite government efforts to move the lecture to a less controversial location . 
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei said Beijing had made `` stern representations '' to the government in Ulan Bator about the Dalai Lama , who fled Tibet in 1959 after a failed uprising against Chinese rule . 
`` We have always opposed any country providing a platform for the Dalai Lama to engage in activities to split China in any form , '' he told a regular press briefing on Tuesday . 
`` The Dalai Lama always uses the opportunity of furtive visits to publicise Tibetan independence , smear the Chinese government and play up issues related to Tibet . '' 
The Dalai Lama , fresh from a visit to Japan , arrived in the Mongolian capital on Monday for a three-day lecture tour at a invitation of a Buddhist group . 
He denies being a separatist , saying he only seeks autonomy for his homeland . 
Choijamtsa , the head monk at Mongolia 's Gandan-Tegchilen monastery , which is organising the visit , told Reuters that organisers remained determined to go ahead with the planned lectures . 
`` This is Mongolian territory and Mongolian property and we are going to do it even if others oppose it , '' he said . 
The Dalai Lama 's visit comes amid growing concern about China 's hardline rule in ethnically Tibetan parts of the country . 
At least 11 Tibetans have set themselves ablaze this year in the western Chinese province of Sichuan in protest against government controls on their religion and culture . 
Beijing has blamed the Dalai Lama for encouraging unrest , but the spiritual leader said the situation was caused by Chinese policies in the region , which amounted to `` cultural genocide . 
Mongolia , landlocked between China in the south and Russia in the north , has seen a rapid revival of Tibetan Buddhism since the collapse of the Soviet-backed Communist government in 1990 , and the Dalai Lama is recognized as one of the country 's spiritual leaders . 
China has been accused by human rights groups of using its growing economic clout to pressure trading partners into refusing visits by the Dalai Lama . 
His plans to visit South Africa earlier this year were canceled amid accusations that the government in Cape Town had refused to process his visa . 
Mongolia won its political independence from China in 1912 , but Beijing did not recognize its sovereignty until 1946 , and many in Mongolia are concerned about Beijing 's growing economic hegemony . 
Mongolia 's booming , mining-dependent economy is almost completely reliant on its southern neighbor , with 90 percent of its exports going to China in the first half of this year . 
During the Dalai Lama 's previous tour of Mongolia in 2002 , China retaliated by closing the border rail crossing for two days , leaving 500 passengers stranded and severing one of the country 's few links with the outside world . 
Mining companies based near the Chinese border said they were not aware of any disruptions to border transport so far . 
