Sparks fly in Washington , but doubts remain Thursday 19 May 2005 02.15 BST Daily Record Editorial , Scotland May 18 `` Love him or loathe him , no one can doubt George Galloway has got guts - and he 's got a point . 
-LRB- On Tuesday -RRB- he went to the US senate and delivered his own attack of shock and awe on the senators who claim he traded oil for Saddam Hussein . 
`` But he did something more important than just have his day in court to clear his name ... He asked the questions the senators have ignored . 
Such as what happened to $ 8bn worth of Iraqi oil produced in the 14 months when the US ran Iraq ? 
Such as how many billions of dollars have American multinationals such as Halliburton pocketed for their work in Iraq ? 
Such as did that company get the contract because the US vice-president , Dick Cheney , used to be a senior executive with them ? 
... At the end of the day , there are bigger questions about the war in Iraq than the role of Mr Galloway . 
-LRB- On Tuesday -RRB- he managed to pose some of them . '' 
Daily Mirror Editorial , May 18 `` Even when Daniel was in the lion 's den , he did n't humiliate and torment the lion . 
But that 's what Mr Galloway did in Washington to the senator who accused him of making millions from Saddam oil . 
Mr Galloway not only defended himself robustly but also threw the charges back in the face of the American administration . 
The jibe which must have most stung them was when the Respect MP pointed out that their own defense secretary , Donald Rumsfeld , had twice met Saddam to sell him arms . '' 
Washington Times Editorial , May 18 `` Unfortunately , the most talked-about aspect of -LRB- the senate sub-committee hearings -RRB- is Mr Galloway 's vitriolic attack on the integrity of -LRB- chairman -RRB- Norm Coleman and the sub-committee , his denunciation of the war to liberate Iraq and his assertions of persecution at the hands of Zionists , Christian fundamentalist and other alleged malefactors . 
None of this is out of character for a man who has described the fall of Soviet communism as a tragedy , who openly attacked his own government for opposing Saddam and who depicts Iraq 's terrorist insurgents as liberators . 
`` Mr Galloway 's reprehensible political views aside , proving he was paid off by Saddam has been no easy task ... -LRB- But -RRB- things are becoming increasingly uncomfortable for some of Saddam 's staunchest supporters . '' 
`` Mr Galloway was able to show that the senate has found no concrete evidence showing that oil bribes ever came into his possession . 
On the other hand , his verbal gymnastics failed to answer some basic questions put to him by the senators . 
`` Specifically , he pointedly refused to distance himself from his Jordanian collaborator , Fawaz Zureikat , who was chairman of the Mariam Appeal set up by Mr Galloway ostensibly to help a four-year-old girl suffering from leukemia . 
Much of the cash that went into the appeal came from Mr Zureikat . 
The Americans claim to have solid evidence that Mr Zureikat was involved in questionable oil trading . 
However , Mr Galloway refused to condemn Mr Zureikat and instead blustered about the corruption of US politics . 
Mr Galloway can not have it both ways . '' 
Herald Editorial , Scotland , May 18 `` The committee wanted to know why Mr Galloway had taken money from Mr Zureikat ... for the appeal . 
Did Mr Galloway know Mr Zureikat was dealing with Saddam and might have been given kickbacks from selling oil , they asked ... `` The onus is on the senate to prove its documents are genuine . 
But Mr Galloway will be unable to occupy the moral high ground with any certainty while questions concerning Mr Zureikat 's involvement , the source of his donation and his precise motivation remain unanswered . '' 
Like a MacBook Pro '' says @Mister_Solomon : Westminster Dog Show - live ! 
