TRIPOLI\/SFAX , Tunisia | Mon Apr 4 , 2011 7:12 pm EDT TRIPOLI\/SFAX , Tunisia -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Forces loyal to Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi are staging a `` massacre '' in the besieged city of Misrata , evacuees said on Monday , as Turkey said it was trying to broker a ceasefire to halt the bloodshed . 
A government spokesman said Libya was ready for a `` political solution '' with world powers . 
He said the country was ready to discuss political reform , but Gaddafi had to stay . 
Libyan TV showed Gaddafi saluting supporters outside his fortified compound in Tripoli late on Monday . 
But some residents of the capital , angered by fuel shortages and long queues for basic goods , began openly predicting his imminent downfall . 
With Libya in chaos , an official in neighbouring Algeria told Reuters that al Qaeda was exploiting the conflict to acquire weapons , including surface-to-air missiles . 
The U.S. State Department said it had raised concerns with the Libyan rebels about the Islamist group obtaining arms in the east of the country , where they are battling Gaddafi 's forces . 
Evacuees from Misrata , the rebels ' last major stronghold in western Libya , described the city as `` hell . '' 
They said Gaddafi 's troops were using tanks and snipers against residents , littering the streets with corpses and filling hospitals with the wounded . 
`` You have to visit Misrata to see the massacre by Gaddafi , '' said Omar Boubaker , a 40-year-old engineer with a bullet wound to the leg , brought to the Tunisian port of Sfax by a French aid group . 
`` Corpses are in the street . 
Hospitals are overflowing . '' 
Misrata rose up with other towns against Gaddafi last month but is the only major one in western Libyan left in rebel hands . 
`` I could live or die , but I am thinking of my family and friends who are stranded in the hell of Misrata , '' said tearful evacuee Abdullah Lacheeb , who had serious injuries to his pelvis and stomach and a bullet wound in his leg . 
`` Imagine , they use tanks against civilians . 
He -LRB- Gaddafi -RRB- is prepared to kill everyone there ... I am thinking of my family . '' 
State TV showed live footage of Gaddafi briefly waving to supporters through the roof of a Jeep outside his compound while bodyguards tried to prevent them from mobbing him . 
But in the maze-like lanes of Tripoli 's medieval market , some openly forecast his fall as rebels based in eastern Libya battle his forces . 
`` People from the east will come here . 
Maybe in two weeks , '' said one entrepreneur who asked that his name not be used for fear of reprisals . 
`` But now , people are afraid . '' 
Stalemate on the frontline of fighting in eastern Libya , defections from Gaddafi 's circle and the plight of civilians caught in fighting , or facing food and fuel shortages , have prompted a flurry of diplomacy to try to end the civil war . 
Turkey said it was seeking to broker a ceasefire as an envoy from Gaddafi 's government arrived in Ankara from Athens . 
`` Turkey will continue to do its best to end the sufferings and to contribute to the process of making a road map that includes the political demands of Libyan people , '' Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said after the arrival of Libyan Deputy Foreign Minister Abdelati Obeidi from earlier talks in Greece . 
Turkey also expected officials of the rebel National Council to visit Ankara soon , Davutoglu told a news conference . 
A Turkish Foreign Ministry official said both sides had `` conveyed that they have some opinions about a possible ceasefire . '' 
Obeidi later also held talks in Malta . 
ITALY SAYS GADDAFI MUST GOT Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini , who had spoken to Greek officials after Obeidi 's talks in Athens , dismissed the Libyan message . 
`` A solution for the future of Libya has a pre-condition : that Gaddafi 's regime leaves and is out and that Gaddafi himself and his family leave the country , '' he said . 
In Washington , the U.S. Treasury said it had lifted sanctions against former Libyan foreign minister Moussa Koussa in the hopes that other senior officials would defect . 
-LRB- nWNA5394 -RRB- Koussa fled to Britain last week and Scottish police want to question him over the 1988 Lockerbie airliner bombing , for which Libya accepted responsibility and paid compensation to relatives of the 270 dead . 
U.N.-mandated air strikes to protect civilians have so far failed to halt attacks in Misrata by the Libyan army . 
At least five people died when Gaddafi forces shelled a residential area of Misrata late on Monday , a doctor said , warning the death toll was likely to keep rising . 
`` The reception in the hospital is full . 
Five people were confirmed killed in the last two hours and five more are in critical condition , '' the doctor , who gave his name as Ramadan , told Reuters by phone from the city . 
Libyan officials deny attacking civilians in Misrata , saying they are fighting armed gangs linked to al Qaeda . 
Accounts from Misrata can not be independently verified as Libyan authorities are not allowing journalists to report freely from there . 
A Turkish ship that sailed into Misrata to rescue 250 wounded was protected by Turkish warplanes and warships and had to leave in a hurry after thousands pressed forward on the dock , pleading to be evacuated . 
Another ship operated by Medecins Sans Frontieres docked in Sfax with 71 wounded from Misrata . 
In Algiers , a senior security official said that Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb -LRB- AQIM -RRB- , the Islamist group 's regional wing , was getting hold of weapons in Libya . 
The Algerian official , speaking on condition of anonymity , said a convoy of eight Toyota pick-up trucks had left eastern Libya and headed via Chad and Niger to northern Mali , where in the past few days it had delivered a cargo of weapons . 
`` We know that this is not the first convoy and that it is still ongoing , '' the official said . 
`` Several military barracks have been pillaged in this region -LRB- eastern Libya -RRB- with their arsenals and weapons stores , and the elements of AQIM who were present could not have failed to profit from this opportunity . '' 
In Washington , State Department spokesman Mark Toner said the United States had raised concerns with the Libyan rebels . 
`` We are aware of these reports too and it has been one of the topics of our conversation with ... the opposition forces , '' Toner told reporters . 
`` We have made very clear our concerns and they have ... pledged that they will look into it . '' 
Gaddafi says the uprising is fueled by Islamist radicals and Western nations who want to control Libya 's oil . 
The rebels , whose stronghold is in the eastern city of Benghazi , want nothing less than the removal of Gaddafi and his circle . 
The U.N.-mandated military intervention , in which warplanes have attacked Gaddafi 's armor , radar and air defences , began on March 19 and was intended to protect civilians caught up in fighting between pro-Gaddafi forces and the rebels . 
After chasing each other up and down the coast road linking the oil ports of eastern Libya with Gaddafi 's tribal heartland further west , the two sides are stuck around Brega , a sparsely populated settlement spread over more than 25 km -LRB- 15 miles -RRB- . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It would have been over two weeks ago had the U.S. not intervened . 
Why will the West not even hear what the Libyan government has to say ? 
We refuse to even talk to him . 
That does n't make much sense to me . 
It 's the same as if I was in a fight with someone and I kept punching them and told them I wanted peace but they had to vanish -LRB- as I kept punching them -RRB- and then when they say , ` ok lets talk about this , we want to compromise . ' 
We follow them up with a big F U. High stand-off technology has limited effects on urban combat . 
The boots-on-the-ground military understand this . 
Misrata is clearly the line in the sand for Gaddhafi , since it only lies about 200 kilos east of Tripoli -- he has to throw everything at the rebels in this location or defeat will be imminent . 
We should finish off targeting the tanks and large artillery and then let the rebels complete their objective . 
Otherwise , we 'll be seen once again as an imperialistic , intervening force which wants oil and a market for western products -LRB- mostly weapons -RRB- . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
