Rebels in Aleppo are calling for the regime to go The aerial bombardment of Aleppo intensified on Saturday morning , activists said , while clashes were reported in central districts . 
Western nations have warned of a potential massacre . 
Turkish PM Recep Tayyip Erdogan said it was not possible `` to remain a spectator '' to events in Aleppo . 
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon urged the Syrian government to halt its offensive . 
He also demanded a clear statement that it would not use chemical weapons under any circumstances `` The violence from both sides must stop for the sake of the suffering civilians of Syria , '' he said in London . 
Mr Erdogan , speaking after meeting British Prime Minister David Cameron in London , urged the international community to `` make progress '' in its efforts to stop the violence . 
`` There is a regime there that kills and massacres its own people , '' he said . 
`` There is a build-up in Aleppo , and recent statements with respect to the use of weapons of mass destruction are actions that we can not remain an observer or spectator to . '' 
Syria has implicitly acknowledged that it has chemical weapons but says it will not use them against its own people , only against foreign invaders . 
Mr Cameron said he and Mr Erdogan had discussed concerns that the Syrian regime `` is about to carry out some truly appalling acts around and in the city of Aleppo '' . 
`` This regime needs to realize it is illegitimate , it is wrong and it needs to stop what it is doing , '' he said . 
`` The international pressure against this regime and against -LRB- President -RRB- Assad is only going to build until he finally goes . '' 
Separately , UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay appealed to both sides to spare civilians , citing concerns of `` the likelihood of an imminent major confrontation '' . 
The BBC 's Wyre Davies , on the Syria-Turkey border , says conditions in Aleppo are reported to be dire . 
Thousands of government troops have been drafted in from other areas and are encircling the city , he says . 
The pro-government al-Watan newspaper warned that the `` mother of all battles '' was about to start . 
An activist based in Fardos in the city told the BBC at least 15 people had died on Friday morning during the military 's bombardment of a building . 
`` The people of Aleppo are not coping with this crisis , '' said the activist , identified only as Ramy . 
`` They are dying . 
It is a massacre . 
People can leave their homes and move around the city but who would really want to take the risk of being shot or bombed ? '' 
The BBC has been unable to independently verify Ramy 's comments . 
The Red Crescent has suspended some of its operations in Aleppo because of the heavy fighting . 
Rebels have been stockpiling ammunition and medical supplies in preparation for the expected assault . 
Earlier , the former head of the UN observer mission in Syria said it was `` only a matter of time '' until President Bashar al-Assad 's government fell . 
`` It 's impossible to imagine a future in Syria where the current people in power remain in power , '' Maj Gen Robert Mood told a news conference in Oslo . 
`` So in that view , it 's just a matter of time before this regime collapses . 
And that is how it 's supposed to be . '' 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
