BP starts ` static kill ' to plug Gulf of Mexico oil well The Macondo well has been temporarily sealed with a cap for just over two weeks BP has started the `` static kill '' of its leaking Gulf of Mexico oil well , a step towards permanently sealing it . 
Specially formulated mud is being pumped in from the top , forcing oil back down into the well . 
After the procedure - which could last up to two-and-a-half days - the top of the well could be filled with cement . 
The US government estimates the well leaked 4.9 million barrels of oil before being capped last month , with only 800,000 barrels being captured . 
Pressure in the well dropped rapidly in the first hour-and-a-half of the work , indicating that good progress was being made . 
The well ruptured after an explosion on a drilling rig in April which killed 11 workers . 
The new assessment of the leak is higher than previous estimates . 
The figure will be crucial in calculating the environmental damage done , as well as the money to be paid by BP . 
The BP spill is greater than the 1979 Ixtoc I leak in the Gulf of Mexico , which gushed 3.3 million barrels . 
Only the intentional release of an estimated eight million barrels of oil into the Gulf by Iraqi troops during the Gulf War in 1991 was greater in recent decades . 
During the `` static kill '' procedure , BP engineers will pump enough drilling mud into the well to counter the pressure from the oil pushing out of the reservoir below the seabed , BP senior vice-president Kent Wells told reporters . 
`` We 're so early in the process there 's no way for me to give you any early indication . 
The only thing I would say is the injectivity test went well and so that gives us the encouragement , '' said Mr Wells late on Tuesday . 
If that goes well , the company could top off the well with cement to seal it . 
Meanwhile , work on a relief well - currently 100ft -LRB- 30m -RRB- away from intersecting with the damaged well - will continue , incident commander Admiral Thad Allen said . 
The relief well will reach the damaged well some time between 11 and 15 August . 
When that is complete , BP may pump cement from the relief well into the bottom of the damaged well , in a procedure called a `` bottom kill '' . 
The well initially leaked about 62,000 barrels of oil per day , higher than any previous estimate of the flow . 
But as the reservoir of oil became depleted , the flow slowed to about 53,000 barrels per day . 
The flow ended on 15 July , when BP closed a new cap it had put on the well . 
Last week , BP reported a record $ 17bn -LRB- # 11bn -RRB- loss , having set aside $ 32bn to cover the costs of the spill . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
