Policemen wearing protective masks restrict access to a hotel Hong Kong May 1 , 2009 . 
Hong Kong government has confirmed on Friday a Mexican from Shanghai , who has stayed in the hotel , got influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- . 
HONG KONG | Fri May 1 , 2009 6:23 pm BST HONG KONG -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Hong Kong confirmed Asia 's first case of the new H1N1 flu virus in a Mexican traveler on Friday , prompting authorities to seal off the hotel where the 25-year old man had been staying . 
Hong Kong Chief Executive Donald Tsang told reporters the man arrived on a China Eastern flight on Thursday afternoon after a stopover in Shanghai . 
He had a fever and went to Ruttonjee Hospital for help on Thursday evening , Tsang said . 
The Mexican is now in hospital in a stable condition . 
The confirmation of the H1N1 infection was made by a laboratory at the University of Hong Kong . 
`` He did n't leave the hotel -LRB- except to go to hospital -RRB- because he was feeling sick , '' Health Minister York Chow told a news conference . 
Two companions of the Mexican and a friend he met in Hong Kong were now in isolation wards at another hospital , he said . 
Tsang said he had accepted the recommendation of government health experts to seal off the Metropark hotel in Wanchai district where the Mexican was staying . 
Dozens of police wearing surgical masks stood guard both inside and outside the hotel late on Friday . 
Hotel guests were prevented from leaving while outsiders could not get in . 
`` I assure you the Hong Kong government will try its best to conquer the virus , '' Tsang said . 
`` At the present moment , I would prefer to do it more stringently instead of missing the opportunity to control the spread of the virus . '' 
Chow said the hotel had about 200 guests and over 100 staff and they would be quarantined for seven days . 
He urged those who were not in the hotel as well as taxi drivers who took the Mexican to the hotel and to hospital to report to authorities . 
The drastic action left some visitors distressed . 
Cinmei Sinaga from Indonesia was left standing for hours on the pavement with her eight-month-old daughter . 
`` I do n't feel that they are doing anything to help me . 
I just need my passport but we can not go to another hotel and my baby needs to sleep . 
I feel scared , '' she told Reuters . 
The affluent financial hub on the south coast of China is widely seen as one of the best-prepared Asian cities to deal with the new H1N1 flu virus , given its experience in handling sporadic outbreaks of H5N1 avian flu , as well as SARS in 2003 which killed 299 people . 
The order to seal off the Metropark hotel brought back memories of how SARS started in Hong Kong in February 2003 . 
A doctor from mainland China who knew he had been infected with SARS had traveled to Hong Kong to try to seek medical help . 
But before he could get admitted to hospital , he infected eight people in a lift lobby of the Metropole hotel where he was staying . 
Some of them then went on to spread the disease in Hong Kong , Singapore , Canada and Vietnam . 
To tackle the H1N1 flu virus , Hong Kong authorities have beefed up surveillance at airports and hospitals , improved public health response systems and stockpiled over 20 million doses of the anti-influenza drug Tamiflu . 
