Video Feed : Alaska Airlines Steps up Efforts to Sanitize Aircraft Cabins in Response ... \* Reuters is not responsible for the content in this press release . 
In addition to removing all pillows and blankets from its fleet of 114 planes , Alaska is conducting comprehensive interior surface cleaning of all aircraft during overnight maintenance using a disinfectant and sanitizer with `` virucidal '' -LRB- virus - killing -RRB- performance against multiple types of flu . 
The cleaner , registered with the Environmental Protection Agency , provides a lasting microbial barrier to prevent recontamination of surfaces . 
Surfaces receiving special attention include walls , windows and shades , seat belts and buckles , armrests , tray tables , seat backs , passenger air vents , overhead bin doors and handles , and galleys and lavatories . 
Aircraft arriving from Mexico are also receiving an additional , thorough interior surface cleaning before boarding for the next flight begins . 
Alaska 's fleet uses air conditioning systems with HEPA filters that remove 99.7 percent of airborne particulates , reducing the potential for the spread of bacterial and viral organisms through cabin air . 
These filters are checked and changed according to a regular maintenance schedule to ensure optimal performance . 
Cabin air is refreshed through these systems more than 30 times an hour . 
Alaska was the only domestic network carrier to earn this distinction . 
SOUNDBITES : Rod Grimes , manager of fleet service performance , Alaska Airlines B-ROLL INCLUDES : -- Removal of all pillows and blankets from the aircraft -- Aircraft interior cleaning -- Alaska Airlines airplane exteriors COMPANY INFORMATION : Alaska Airlines and Horizon Air , subsidiaries of Alaska Air Group -LRB- NYSE : ALK -RRB- , together serve more than 90 cities through an expansive network in Alaska , the Lower 48 , Hawaii , Canada and Mexico . 
Alaska Airlines ranked `` Highest in Customer Satisfaction among Traditional Network Carriers -LRB- tie -RRB- '' in the J.D. Power and Associates 2008 North America Airline Satisfaction Study -LRB- SM -RRB- . 
For reservations , visit alaskaair.com . 
