CIBOLO , Texas | Fri May 1 , 2009 1:22 pm EDT CIBOLO , Texas -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - When Hayden Henshaw came down with a new and worrying kind of influenza last month , he thought he had strep throat . 
Henshaw , 18 , and a senior at Steele High School northeast of San Antonio , was among the first U.S. patients to catch a new strain of the H1N1 swine flu virus , which has spread to 13 countries . 
Within days Henshaw 's fever spiked to 102 degrees Fahrenheit -LRB- 39 degrees Celsius -RRB- , and he was confined to bed . 
`` I could n't lift my head up to get out of bed to take a drink . 
I was really sick , '' said Henshaw , who along with his family have been under voluntary quarantine for a week . 
`` I could n't stop coughing . '' 
Mexico , the worst-hit country , has reported as many as 176 deaths from the virus . 
Cases have been reported around the world , mostly among travelers from Mexico , but they have been mild and most people recovered so far with little or no treatment . 
The only death outside Mexico was a Mexican toddler visiting Texas . 
Henshaw has recovered and is feeling better . 
But he 's still confined to his two-story stucco house , along with his family , who were advised by local health officials to remain in `` voluntary quarantine . '' 
A `` do not disturb '' sign hangs from the front door and the phone has been turned off in an attempt to ward off an onslaught of calls from journalists . 
Inside , surgical masks hang from the doors and cans of Lysol and hand sanitizers are in plentiful supply . 
Henshaw said he has grown tired of television and video games , and fears to venture onto the Internet because his class-mates are blaming him and two other flu-infected classmates for interrupting their lives . 
`` I tell them , hey , I did n't ask for any of this , '' he said . 
`` I just want to leave . '' 
`` It 's been a constant turmoil , '' said Patrick Henshaw , Hayden 's father . 
`` It 's like we 've done something wrong or something . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Jim Forsyth , writing by Chris Baltimore , editing by Alan Elsner -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
