S. Goldsmith and A. Balish\/Centers for Disease Control\/Handout By Maggie Fox , Health and Science Editor WASHINGTON | Fri May 1 , 2009 9:46 am EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The new virus that has killed as many as 177 people and spread globally is a mongrel that appears to have mixed with another hybrid virus containing swine , bird and human bits , U.S. researchers reported on Thursday . 
Raul Rabadan and colleagues at Columbia University in New York analyzed the published genetic sequences from the H1N1 virus that has brought the world to the brink of a pandemic . 
`` The closest relatives to the virus we have found are swine viruses , '' Rabadan said in a telephone interview . 
`` Six segments of the virus are related to swine viruses from North America and the other two from swine viruses isolated in Europe\/Asia , '' they wrote in the online journal Eurosurveillance . 
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said last week after discovering this virus in two U.S. children that it had four virus types -- two swine , an avian and a human component . 
It may be even more complex than that . 
Influenza viruses mutate constantly and they also swap genetic material with one another promiscuously , especially if an animal or person is infected with two strains at once . 
Rabadan 's team said this particular strain looked partly like another hybrid , or what scientists call a reassortant , virus . 
`` The North American ancestors are related to the multiple reassortants , H1N2 and H3N2 swine viruses isolated in North America since 1998 , '' they wrote . 
`` In particular , the swine H3N2 isolates from 1998 were a triple reassortment of human , swine and avian origin . '' 
Scientists can study those genetics to try to track the origin of the new virus . 
Mexican officials have denied it came from pigs in Mexico and pork producers have been battling rumors it could have come from pig farms there . 
Rabadan said the findings did not show the virus came directly from pigs . 
`` We do n't know how long this virus has been in humans , '' he said . 
Many different influenza strains are circulating at any given time and pandemic strains -- the ones that cause global outbreaks from a whole new strain -- are believed to have come from animals . 
`` We know that with the two pandemics in 1957 and 1968 they were coming from a mixture of human and avian viruses , '' Rabadan said . 
The H1N1 strain that caused the far more serious 1918 pandemic appears to have been virtually a pure avian strain , according to published analyses . 
-LRB- Reporting by Maggie Fox ; Editing by Peter Cooney -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
