Mickey Mouse leads other Disney characters in dancing to the music of the Florida A&M marching band down Main Street USA during the 25th anniversary and re-dedication of the Magic Kingdom at Walt Disney World in Orlando , Florida October 1 1996 . 
ORLANDO , Florida | Fri May 1 , 2009 12:09 am BST ORLANDO , Florida -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Mickey Mouse , Pluto , the Fairy Godmother and other Walt Disney favorites were still dishing out kisses , handshakes and high-fives at the Magic Kingdom on Thursday , despite the flu virus alert gripping the United States . 
At the world famous Florida theme park , which is run by Walt Disney Co and visited by millions each year , enthusiastic crowds filled the avenues and rides , apparently unworried by the warnings of a possible pandemic of a new strain of influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- virus . 
The United States has declared a health emergency and in Mexico , where up to 176 people have died following the outbreak there of the virus originally termed `` swine flu , '' the government has ordered a five-day partial shutdown of nonessential government offices and businesses . 
The Mexican Health Ministry also warned people against touching or kissing while greeting each other . 
Authorities in the United States , who have reported 109 confirmed swine flu infections but only one death , are recommending that people sick with flu symptoms seek treatment and stay home . 
Florida is testing a number of suspected cases . 
At the Magic Kingdom on Thursday , one mother pressed her baby 's face into the costumed character Pluto 's furry snout for a kiss . 
Other youngsters continued to snuggle up to various other Disney characters and share `` high-fives , '' while fidgety kids slid their hands along the rope lines while waiting to get on the rides . 
Among the crowds were the Jansens from Amsterdam in the Netherlands . 
They said they were not worried about bringing their 2-year-old and 7-year-old children to the Magic Kingdom . 
`` There 's no concern for us . 
We always go to the big public places with the kids , '' said Ed Jansen . 
`` Just like any Dutch man or Dutch woman , we have both feet on the floor . 
We 're not a panicked people . '' 
Coordinating the international campaign against the new flu virus , the World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- has its current alert level just one notch below a full pandemic . 
Despite some official fears that crowded venues could increase contagion risk , there were no visible extraordinary precautionary measures in place at Disney 's Magic Kingdom . 
Trash sweepers , as usual , swept up bits of garbage almost before they touched ground , but they did not appear to be doing any extra disinfecting or unusual cleaning . 
The Walt Disney Co. has maintained a tight-lipped stance about the flu alert , wary of any news that could trouble its carefully crafted guest experience at the world 's largest theme park . 
Disney spokeswoman Andrea Finger in Orlando told Reuters this week , `` We 're not really talking about it , '' declining to say whether any special health measures were being taken . 
Disney World representatives held a closed-door meeting with public health leaders on Thursday in Orlando to discuss the flu alert . 
After the meeting with Orange County Health Director Dr. Kevin Sherin , Disney representative Mike Griffin told local media the company was `` monitoring the situation . '' 
Sherin and Orange County Mayor Rich Crotty said they had full confidence in Disney 's contingency plans in the event of a health emergency , but they gave no details . 
`` We truly have world class theme parks in Orange County and Osceola County , '' Sherin said , referring to Disney World , Universal Orlando and SeaWorld Orlando . 
`` These are the best in the world . 
The practices they have to protect cast members and staff and guests are second to none . '' 
Universal Orlando is co-owned by the Blackstone Group and NBC Universal , a unit of General Electric Co. . 
Most visitors seemed determined not to let the alarm over the spreading flu virus spoil their family fun . 
`` We come from a tropical island and we have many kinds of fevers , '' said Puerto Rican retiree Luis Larregoity and his wife Miriam Cruz . 
Ann Genthner , a grandmother from Boston visiting the Magic Kingdom with her daughter-in-law and two grandchildren , said she had n't bothered to follow the news about the flu . 
`` I thought about it , but it did n't affect me in any way , '' Genthner said . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
