KANSAS CITY | Fri May 1 , 2009 8:34 pm EDT KANSAS CITY -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Humans have it . 
At least not yet , and U.S. pork producers are doing everything they can to make sure that the new H1N1 virus , known around the world as the `` swine flu , '' stays out of their herds . 
`` That is the biggest concern , that your herd could somehow contract this illness from an infected person , '' said Kansas hog farmer Ron Suther , who is banning visitors from his sow barns and requiring maintenance workers , delivery men and other strangers to report on recent travels and any illness before they step foot on his property . 
`` If a person is sick , we do n't want you coming anywhere on the farm , '' Suther said . 
Those sentiments were echoed by producers around the nation this week as fears of a possible global flu pandemic grew , with more than 200 people sickened , including more than 100 in the United States , and at least 177 dead , all but one in Mexico . 
`` There is no evidence of this new strain being in our pig populations in the United States . 
And our concern very much is we do n't want a sick human to come into our barns and transmit this new virus to our pigs , '' said National Pork Producers chief veterinarian Jennifer Greiner . 
`` If humans give it to pigs , we do n't have things like Tamiflu for pigs . 
We do n't have antivirals . 
We have no treatment other than to give them aspirin , '' said Greiner . 
The World Health Organization on Thursday officially declared it would stop calling the new strain of flu `` swine flu , '' because no pigs in any country have been determined to have the illness and the origination of the strain has not been determined . 
The never-before-seen H1N1 flu virus has elements of swine , avian and human varieties . 
Still , U.S. hog farmers said flu fears have hit them hard in the wallet as hog prices plummeted this week in response . 
Many countries reacted to the outbreak earlier this week by banning pork or meat from U.S. states that have human cases of the flu . 
And Egypt ordered the slaughter of all pigs in the country as a precaution . 
U.S. hog producers have already been struggling financially for more than a year due to poor prices and high feed costs . 
If the new flu strain does hit their herds , it could spur further price declines , and could potentially spread broadly through herds . 
To try to protect against such a scenario , industry groups and veterinarians this week warned farmers to step up their biosafety protocols , keeping pigs in barns behind security fences with access by any outsiders extremely limited . 
Purdue University veterinarian Sandy Amass said farmers should keep an eye on pigs for `` coughing , runny nose , fever and a reduction in feed intake , '' and to have the animals tested immediately if they exhibit such flu symptoms . 
`` Pigs get flu just like people get flu , '' Amass said . 
`` We 're want to do everything possible so the pigs do n't get infected . '' 
For Carroll , Iowa , producer Craig Rowles that means if any of his workers feel sick , they are ordered to take time off work -- paid -- to keep them away from the pigs . 
`` It 's a real issue , '' Rowles said . 
`` If the pigs get it , there is n't much we can do . 
Water , aspirin , and bed rest , that 's all we 've got . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Carey Gillam ; additional reporting by Bob Burgdorfer in Chicago , Editing by Sandra Maler -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
