WASHINGTON | Fri May 1 , 2009 5:03 pm BST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The outbreak of a new and worrying kind of influenza in Mexico may not be as severe as it first looked , with many mild cases that were not immediately noticed , U.S. health experts reported on Friday . 
Health workers are rushing to get a fuller picture of the outbreak of H1N1 swine flu , which the World Health Organization fears could tip into a pandemic . 
Mexico , the worst-hit country , has reported 176 deaths from the new strain of the H1N1 virus . 
Cases have been reported around the world , mostly among travelers from Mexico , but they have been mild and most people recovered so far with little or no treatment . 
The only death outside Mexico was a Mexican toddler visiting Texas . 
Experts have been struggling to explain why so many deaths in Mexico and nowhere else , but the CDC report suggests there is a simple explanation -- there are many cases in Mexico , most are mild , and just the bad ones have been seen so far . 
`` The clinical spectrum of swine-origin influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- virus illness is not yet well characterized in Mexico . 
However , evidence suggests that swine-origin influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- virus transmission is widespread and that less severe -LRB- uncomplicated -RRB- illness is common , '' the CDC said in a special report . 
`` To date , case-finding in Mexico has focused on patients seeking care in hospitals , and the selection of cases for laboratory testing has focused on patients with more severe disease . 
Therefore , a large number of undetected cases of illness might exist in persons seeking care in primary-care settings or not seeking care at all . '' 
But more information is needed , the CDC team stressed . 
The CDC has sent test kits to Mexico that will help get a better picture of who is sick . 
It is difficult to know without special tests because respiratory diseases are so common and many infection look like flu . 
`` Additional investigations are needed urgently to evaluate the full clinical spectrum of disease in Mexico , the proportion of patients who have severe illness , and the extent of disease transmission , '' the CDC said . 
Even garden-variety flu can be deadly , with seasonal influenza killing an estimated 250,000 to 500,000 people globally every year . 
-LRB- Reporting by Maggie Fox , Editing by Sandra Maler -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
