GRAND ISLE , LA. -- The pile of soiled boom sitting more than four feet high and cooking under the summer sun at an abandoned shipyard here will be a part of the oil spill that endures . 
As beach cleanup is scaled down , the fate of all the oily trash created and collected along the Gulf Coast is causing a raging debate that BP and federal officials are trying hard to curb . 
`` We 're getting all kinds of complaints from people , '' said Burnell Tolbert , president of the NAACP branch in nearby Lafourche Parish , a staging area where more than 2,500 tons of waste has been deposited . 
People want to know what is in those trash bags , where they will end up and if the workers handling the oily trash are safe , he said . 
The answers are leaving important groups unsatisfied . 
One coastal county threatened to sue BP if it continues to put trash from the spill in a local landfill . 
Not wanting to get into a tussle with the residents , the company relented , diverting the trash to other landfills . 
Others are arguing that too much of the trash is going to low-income and minority communities . 
The oil from BP 's rig explosion in April has already created more than 45,000 tons of garbage -- the solid oil and all the materials used to gather it -- and much more oily liquid waste . 
The trash is being shipped every day to nine landfills that store household garbage and non-hazardous industrial waste in communities across Louisiana , Alabama , Mississippi and Florida . 
The Coast Guard , the Environmental Protection Agency and BP are `` working hand in hand '' to manage all that trash -- and are reaching out to community groups to try to allay fears that chemicals from the oil-soaked material could seep into the groundwater drinking supply , said BP spokesman Scott Dean . 
The federal government issued a 34-page plan directing BP to recycle and reuse as much trash as it can and to post information about the trash it is collecting online . 
-LRB- So far about 50 tons of trash has been recycled , according to BP . -RRB- 
The government also has asked the company to start holding meetings with the communities around the landfills . 
Still , contractors working for BP bag tons of trash daily . 
From Grand Isle alone , anywhere between eight and 16 dump trucks a day carry trash to landfills throughout Louisiana . 
The oily water is processed for refining . 
From the isle , waste is trucked to places such as Venice , La. -- a small strip of land surrounded by bayous in the southernmost reaches of the state . 
The big landfill there -- with its rolling hills of decaying metal and household trash -- has already received 2,800 tons of oily waste , according to BP . ' 
A slap in the face ' Kindra Arnesen , who lives about four miles from the landfill , sent her children to live 200 miles inland because she 's worried about all that the oil spill has left in its wake . 
`` I grew up being told not to even throw a Coke bottle in the bayou , '' she said . 
What are we leaving for our children ? '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
