Iata members were in sombre mood at their annual meeting The global economic downturn , the spread of H1N1 and volatile oil prices make for an unpleasant mix that has hit the airline industry more than most . 
These themes were clearly occupying the minds of many of the world 's airline chiefs , more than 200 of whom gathered at the International Air Transport Association 's annual meeting in Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia , this week . 
The atmosphere at the meeting was subdued , with many worried brows . 
Massive losses in the industry made even previously friendly chief executives , such as newly-installed Iata chairman Tony Tyler of Cathay Pacific , reluctant to speak to the journalists . 
Iata is projecting a $ 9bn annual loss for the commercial airline industry this year and as the global airline body , it should know . 
It counts 230 airlines as members . 
Giovanni Bisignani , Iata 's director general , reckons the industry is in survival mode . 
`` I am a realist and I do n't see facts to support optimism , '' he says . 
`` Whether this crisis is long or short , the world is changing . 
Travel budgets have been slashed and consumers will need to reduce their debt . 
It will not be business as usual in the post-crisis world . 
`` Governments , partners and airlines must use this crisis as an opportunity to build a stronger industry . 
That means resizing and reshaping . '' 
The resizing is already taking place . 
From Singapore Airlines to Qantas , planes have been grounded and carriers are reducing capacity . 
It will not be business as usual in the post-crisis world The ones in the Asia Pacific stand to lose the most - $ 3.3 bn according to Iata 's projections - so scaling back is imperative . 
However , the elusive chief executive of the region 's largest airline , Singapore Airlines , was keeping a brave face . 
Chew Choon Seng often eschews one-on-one interviews , but he was happy to talk to us on the sidelines of the meeting 's first cocktail reception about prospects for the future . 
`` Oil prices are still quite high in historical terms . 
The recession has affected our business globally . 
`` And on top of it , the H1N1 flu epidemic has dampened demand more in Asia , than perhaps in America or Europe , '' he says . 
`` We do not know when the global economy will turn around , but it will in due course , and when it comes around , demand will be there , there will be a revival and the challenge for all of us in the industry is to position ourselves in the interim until we get there . '' 
Airlines are cutting back in other ways . 
First-class travel may be on its way out if Alan Joyce , the newly installed chief executive of Qantas Airways is to be believed . 
The Irishman took the helm of the Australian airline last November , when his predecessor , Geoff Dixon , retired . 
Since he took over , more than 1,000 jobs have been axed , 10 planes have been grounded and the airline has delayed the deliveries of 12 Boeing 737s and four Airbus A380s by up to a year . 
`` What we 've done is said , how do we cope with the current environment where we 've seen 20 to 30 percent drop in premium traffic ? 
On some routes , we 've seen the first-class cabins particularly empty , '' says Mr Joyce . 
`` So the easiest thing to do in the short term is what we call a cosmetic configuration , which is not selling those seats as first class but selling them as business class , so effectively we have more seats on sale on the aircraft . 
We have introduced that on a number of routes . '' 
These worries over the global slowdown , though , did not dictate the entire agenda . 
Iata also outlined plans for the industry to become carbon neutral by 2020 . 
At the meeting , airline bosses committed to a global cap on emissions by 2020 . 
After that date , aviation 's emissions will not grow even as demand increases , according to Mr Bisignani . 
Airlines currently account for 2 % of global emissions and that figure continues to grow . 
The environment is only the last in a long list of concerns that continue to dog the industry , which may , more than most , encounter turbulence while riding out the storm . 
