@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effect of alternative video displays on postures, perceived effort, and performance during microsurgery skill tasks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Compared with microscopes, neck posture was more neutral and neck movements were more frequent on the video displays.Task completion times didn’t differ between 2D and 3D, but times were slower on the video displays than the microscope.Video displays reduce posture constraints and may reduce musculoskeletal symptoms and fatigue in microsurgery.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Microsurgery displays,Posture patterns,Biomechanics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Physical work demands and posture constraint from operating microscopes may adversely affect microsurgeon health and performance. Alternative video displays were developed to reduce posture constraints. Their effects on postures, perceived efforts, and performance were compared with the microscope. Sixteen participants performed microsurgery skill tasks using both stereo and non-stereoscopic microscopes and video displays. Results showed that neck angles were 9–13° more neutral and shoulder flexion were 9–10° more elevated on the video display than the microscope. Time observed in neck extension was higher (30% vs. 17%) and neck movements were 3x more frequent on the video display than microscopes. Ratings of perceived efforts did not differ among displays, but usability ratings were better on the microscope than the video display. Performance times on the video displays were 66–110% slower than microscopes. Although postures improved, further research is needed to improve task performance on video displays.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Work-related musculoskeletal pain, fatigue, and discomfort can affect both the comfort of surgeons and their ability to complete surgical tasks; yet, the reported prevalence of musculoskeletal symptoms in the neck, back, and shoulders is as high as 87% among surveyed laparoscopic, ophthalmic, and general surgeons (Davis et al., 2014; Capone et al., 2010; Park et al., 2010; Sivak-Callcott et al., 2011; Szeto et al., 2009; Wauben et al., 2006). Furthermore, a survey of 130 ophthalmic surgeons who frequently used magnification, e.g., loupes and microscopes, showed that 9.2% of surgeons stopped operating due to neck pain (Sivak-Callcott et al., 2011). Due to the high cost of training and impending shortage in the surgical workforce (Williams et al., 2009), time away from work and reduced career longevity due to musculoskeletal pain can be a costly form of waste in the healthcare system.Surgeons who perform microvascular surgeries, frequently done in the plastic, otolaryngology, and reconstructive surgery specialties (Jarrett, 2004), may be at additional risk for musculoskeletal symptoms. Although microsurgery can be performed with loupes or microscopes, surgeons who perform microsurgery frequently (i.e., maxillofacial, plastics, ophthalmologists, otolaryngologists, and neurosurgeons) predominantly use operating microscopes (Jarrett, 2004). Additionally, operating microscopes are used exclusively for procedures requiring high magnification, e.g., 0.5 mm vessels during finger replantation and neurosurgery. Previous studies observed that operating microscopes required surgeons to fixate over optical eyepieces (Fig. 1), constrained the surgeon's eye locations, reduced comfort, and forced surgeons to be in awkward positions (Franken et al., 1995; Ross et al., 2003; Yu et al., 2013). For example (Fig. 1), while adjustable operating microscopes can allow a surgeon to have upright neck posture (right surgeon, Fig. 1), the small patient work site, assisting surgeon's position, operating room table, and microscope working distance can constrain surgeon posture and can lead to neck flexed positions (left surgeon, Fig. 1). Finally, a vast majority of microsurgery is done from a standing position, since the operating room (OR) table components prevent sitting with the surgeon's legs underneath the table. Despite these ergonomic risk factors in microsurgery, current literature quantifying the impact of these workplace and microsurgical task constraints on surgeon postural demands is limited.A preliminary study by Yu et al. (2013) found that microsurgeons remain primarily static (0.3 ± 0.4 movements per minute) while using the microscope compared to 5.5 ± 6.1 movements observed at rest. Another study rated postures of laryngologists performing microsurgery on an operating microscope and measured rapid upper limb assessment (RULA) scores of 4–5, indicating poor posture and potential risk for injuries (McAtamney and Nigel Corlett, 1993; Statham et al., 2010). Posture constraints were postulated to be responsible for the significant association observed between microscope use greater than three hours per week and the prevalence of cervical and thoracic pain reported among 339 surveyed plastic surgeons (Capone et al., 2010).Alternative video displays to traditional loupes and operating microscopes have been proposed to 1) reduce the physical demands of microsurgery, 2) allow surgeons to select comfortable postures, and 3) improve team communication (Chen et al., 2012; Franken et al., 1995; Gorman et al., 2001; Nissen et al., 2011; Yu et al., 2015). Although performance times were longer using video displays (Cheng et al., 2012; Nissen et al., 2013), these pilot studies showed 1) video displays can be successfully used during live microsurgery and 2) 50–75% of surveyed surgeons viewed the comfort and education potential of video displays favorably (Franken et al., 1995; Gorman et al., 2001). However, the posture benefits from alternative displays were merely speculated by these previous studies, and quantitative measurements are needed to compare the impact of microscope and video displays on postures.To address microsurgery performance limitations observed by previous studies using 2D video displays (Gorman et al., 2001; Nissen et al., 2011), a recent study suggested that stereoscopic displays may reduce the observed performance gap between video and conventional microsurgery (Jianfeng et al., 2014). However, the performance benefit of stereoscopic video systems over non-stereoscopic systems in surgery is still currently under debate and warrants further investigation (Bilgen et al., 2013; Gurusamy et al., 2011; Hofmeister et al., 2001; Kong et al., 2010; Munz et al., 2004). Quantitative and controlled studies on the effect of stereo and non-stereoscope alternative displays on posture stresses and perceived effort are needed to assess the potential musculoskeletal health and performance benefits of implementing alternative video displays over traditional microscopes.The purpose of this study is to measure the effect of stereoscopic video displays in reducing physical risk factors that may contribute to musculoskeletal fatigue and injuries during simulated microsurgery skills tasks. In contrast to conventional microscopes, it is hypothesized that video displays will allow users to:1)Assume more neutral and less static postures,Reduce perceived efforts, andImprove task performance, i.e., completion time and errors.Findings from this study will quantify the impact of video displays and microscopes on postures, perceived efforts, and task performance for microsurgery skills tasks and provide guidance on the application of video displays for improving postures in the operating theatre and in other jobs that require optical magnification.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Video displays have been previously suggested to improve ergonomics and comfort during microsurgery, and this study examines three hypotheses to quantitatively compared postures between displays. First, results showed that neck postures were more upright and postural shifts were more frequent on video displays than microscopes. These observations suggest that video displays can reduce biomechanical loads and muscle exertions. The second hypothesis focused on the relationship between displays and perceived efforts, and no differences in perceived efforts were observed among display. Finally, video displays were hypothesized to improve task performance, but task completion times were 66–110% faster on the microscopes than video displays. In addition, 2D and 3D displays did not differ in performance times, and errors were significantly different only on the more advanced threading task.