@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improving the detectability of oxygen saturation level targets for preterm neonates: A laboratory test of tremolo and beacon sonifications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Too much supplemental oxygen can be a hazard for some premature neonates.Pulse oximetry sonifications do not reveal when oxygen saturation is too high.We added tremolo or a reference beacon to the current pulse oximetry sonification.The Tremolo sonification supported better monitoring than the current sonification.The Beacon sonification supported better monitoring than the current sonification.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Patient monitoring,Pulse oximetry,Sonification,Auditory display,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recent guidelines recommend oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels of 90%–95% for preterm neonates on supplemental oxygen but it is difficult to discern such levels with current pulse oximetry sonifications. We tested (1) whether adding levels of tremolo to a conventional log-linear pulse oximetry sonification would improve identification of SpO2 ranges, and (2) whether adding a beacon reference tone to conventional pulse oximetry confuses listeners about the direction of change. Participants using the Tremolo (94%) or Beacon (81%) sonifications identified SpO2 range significantly more accurately than participants using the LogLinear sonification (52%). The Beacon sonification did not confuse participants about direction of change. The Tremolo sonification may have advantages over the Beacon sonification for monitoring SpO2 of preterm neonates, but both must be further tested with clinicians in clinically representative scenarios, and with different levels of ambient noise and distractions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When the oxygen saturation of the arterial blood of a preterm neonate receiving oxygen support is too high or too low, it can lead to serious injury or even death. To avoid adverse outcomes, recent clinical guidelines recommend that neonatal arterial oxygen saturation levels determined using pulse oximetry (SpO2) should stay within a narrow 90%–95% target range (Saugstad and Aune, 2014). However, as will be discussed, the current audible pulse oximetry tones are limited in how effectively they alert clinicians to SpO2 changes away from that range.In a recent study, Hinckfuss et al. (2016) added a reference tone, or “beacon”, at regular intervals to the current pulse oximetry tones whenever SpO2 levels were outside the neonatal target range. Non-clinician participants listening to simplified scenarios could identify general SpO2 ranges and discriminate the target and non-target SpO2 states more accurately with the beacon than without. However, potential disadvantages of the beacon enhancement were noted.The study reported herein provides a further test of the beacon enhancement to the pulse oximetry tones. In addition, the present study tests another way of signalling whenever SpO2 levels are outside the target range—by changing the quality of the pulse tones with ‘tremolo’, a vibrating characteristic added to the sound.Pulse oximetry is a clinical monitoring technique that noninvasively estimates a patient's arterial oxygen saturation level by analysing light transmission though a vascular bed, such as in a finger or, for an infant, in the wrist, palm, or foot. Along with a visual display of HR and SpO2, most pulse oximeters use ‘sonification’—a continuous auditory display. A tone is played with every pulse, allowing estimation of pulse rate in beats per minute. The pitch of the tones represents SpO2. A series of tones increasing or decreasing in pitch indicates rising or falling SpO2 levels, respectively.The current pulse oximetry sonification works well when the highest SpO2 levels are also the target levels, but not if the target levels are in a lower range. In healthy adults, oxygen saturation levels typically remain between 100% and 97%. Therefore, for adults it is usually a good sign if the pitch of the pulse oximeter tones is increasing, and bad if the pitch is decreasing.However, in preterm neonates, too much supplemental oxygen can lead to oxygen toxicity, development of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (Saugstad, 1997; Saugstad and Aune, 2014), and retinopathy of prematurity which can lead to blindness (Chow et al., 2003; Saugstad and Aune, 2014; Tin et al., 2001). Conversely, hypoxia (oxygen insufficiency) can damage organs, including the brain, contributing to cerebral palsy (Askie et al., 2011; Collins et al., 2001) and infant mortality (Dawson et al., 2010; Finer and Leone, 2009; Ford et al., 2006; Lim et al., 2014; Saugstad and Aune, 2014).Therefore for preterm neonates monitored with the current pulse oximeter sonification, an increasing tone pitch could indicate either that the oxygen saturation level is becoming too high and the infant is at risk of oxygen toxicity, or that oxygen saturation is safely moving upwards towards the target zone. Likewise, a decreasing tone pitch could indicate either that oxygen saturation levels are moving safely downwards into the target range, or that hypoxia is imminent.A further problem relates to knowing when the preterm neonate's SpO2 has entered or exited the target range. Recent clinical guidelines recommend that neonatal SpO2 should remain between 90% and 95% (Saugstad and Aune, 2014), but debate about the exact range continues (Manja et al., 2015). The current pulse oximetry technology does not provide SpO2 range information in a manner that is suited to the clinical monitoring environment (Goos et al., 2013; Janata and Edwards, 2013; Lim et al., 2014; Tin and Lal, 2015). A recent study in two NICUs revealed that neonatal SpO2 levels remained within a target range only 31% of the time, and were frequently outside it for prolonged periods (Lim et al., 2014). The longer and further a preterm infant's SpO2 is outside target range, the higher the neonate's risk of adverse outcomes (Askie et al., 2011; Carlo et al., 2010; Lim et al., 2014).Current pulse oximetry sonification relies on the clinician's ability to discern relative and absolute pitch (Brown et al., 2015). Multisensory training has been suggested as a way to improve clinicians' perception of the pitch of pulse oximetry tones (Schlesinger et al., 2014). However, this approach is unlikely to work across different pulse oximeter models, which use different mappings of tones to SpO2 (Loeb et al., 2016; Santamore and Cleaver, 2004). Creating an auditory display design that makes deviations from target SpO2 range obvious without the need for training could be a more robust approach to addressing the problem.However, a redesign of the pulse oximetry sound for neonates must take into account the problem of adding extra sounds to an already demanding auditory environment. A major area of concern in all neonatal monitoring contexts is excess noise, which can lead to attentional narrowing, resulting in impaired monitoring performance (Hockey, 1997) as well as poorer health outcomes for patients (Long et al., 1980). Pulse oximetry devices use conventional auditory alarms alongside the variable-pitch sonification, so that their users also suffer from the well-documented disadvantages of auditory alarms (Edworthy, 2013; Edworthy et al., 2014; Lim et al., 2014). Neonates have higher heart rates than do adults, so variable pitch tones are emitted more frequently. In many NICUs, pulse oximeter variable-pitch tones are silenced to decrease the noise level, and intermittently-emitted earcons have been proposed as an alternative (Janata and Edwards, 2013). Within NICUs, clinicians rely on conventional threshold alarms to alert them to oxygenation deviations, given the impracticality of monitoring multiple pulse oximetry sonifications. During neonatal transport and resuscitation, clinicians are more likely to use the pulse tones as well as conventional threshold alarms.Sonification offers several advantages. It may help to reduce reliance on alarms and may convey more information to the clinician. Sonification also supports eyes-free monitoring, where the patient's vital signs can be monitored in the clinician's peripheral awareness while other important tasks are performed (Watson and Sanderson, 2004; Woods, 1995). When a sonification is designed appropriately, changes in the sound should draw the clinician's attention to deteriorations in a patient's vital signs (Loeb and Fitch, 2002; Sanderson, 2006; Sanderson et al., 2009; Sanderson et al., 2005). A well-designed sonification should let clinicians maintain continuous awareness of the neonate's oxygen saturation levels during visually demanding tasks.Recently, Hinckfuss et al. (2016) examined whether a beacon, or reference tone, added to a simulated “log-linear” pulse oximetry sonification could improve detection of oxygen saturation deviations compared with the log-linear sonification alone. A log-linear sonification maps fixed increments of SpO2 to a fixed percentage increase in frequency [Hz], thereby mapping a linear scale to a logarithmic one. Several conventional pulse oximetry sonifications use a log-linear mapping (Loeb et al., 2016). Previous research indicates that participants can identify SpO2 values more accurately with a log-linear mapping than with a linear mapping (Brown et al., 2015), making the log-linear mapping a better control condition.In the Hinckfuss et al. (2016) study, the beacon functioned as both an alert and a reference tone. It was played immediately before every fourth tone when oxygen saturation fell outside the 90%–95% target zone, alerting the listener to a non-target state. The pitch of the beacon was the same as the 93% oxygen saturation level, which is the middle of the target range, offering the listener a reference tone. When oxygen saturation levels were above the target range, the beacon was lower in pitch than the higher pitched heart rate tones, indicating the SpO2 should decrease. When oxygen saturation levels were below the target range, the beacon was higher in pitch than the lower pitched heart rate tones, indicating that SpO2 should increase.When using the log-linear sonification with the beacon, participants could identify in which of five ranges SpO2 fell with a 25-percentage point advantage compared with the log-linear sonification alone. However, the beacon sonification has potential drawbacks. First, it adds extra sounds to an already sound rich environment. Second, because the beacon is played only on every fourth heart rate tone, there may be a short delay between oxygen saturation going out of range, and the auditory signal of that change. Third, the listener must infer how far SpO2 has deviated from the target range from the difference in pitch between the beacon and the tone.In addition, there were shortcomings in the Hinckfuss et al. (2016) experiment and its findings. First, the effect of the beacon was tested within subjects: a clear between-subjects test would provide additional support for its effectiveness. Second, participants were not given a visual anchor of the SpO2 range at the start of each trial, potentially making range identification unrealistically difficult. Third, a minor concern was that participants detected the direction of change with the beacon sonification slightly less accurately than with the log-linear sonification, although the 2-percentage point difference for the latter was well below the clinical effect size of 10 percentage points or more that had been chosen by the authors. A resolution of the above shortcomings would put the beacon design on a stronger basis for a future clinical test.There are many further ways of indicating acoustically whether SpO2 is in or out of the target range, and by how much. For example, tremolo can be produced by amplitude modulations that create a vibrating or corrugated quality to a tone. As tremolo frequency increases, in cycles per tone or per second (Hz), the vibrating becomes more rapid. In a subsequent pilot study with a between-subjects design, Hinckfuss et al. (2015; Experiment 3) added three cycles of tremolo to tones in the low and high SpO2 ranges, and five cycles of tremolo to tones in the very low and very high SpO2 ranges (see Table 1for ranges). A third dependent variable was also introduced: participants’ accuracy at detecting when SpO2 first exited or entered its target range, as this moment is clinically important. Participants could identify range 12 percentage points better with the tremolo sonification than with the log-linear sonification, but even better with the beacon sonification. Moreover, participants could detect transition into or out of the target SpO2 range significantly better with the beacon than with the log-linear sonification, but the tremolo sonification did not yield a significant improvement. The beacon sonification confused a minority of participants regarding the direction of SpO2 change, with the result that the average accuracy for identifying direction of change with the beacon sonification was as much as 17 percentage points worse than for the log-linear sonification, but accuracy was good for participants using the tremolo sonification.The current study extends this prior research in a between-subjects study. First, a stronger implementation of tremolo is used, to make it more perceivable. Accordingly, we seek an improvement of at least 15 percentage points for the tremolo sonification over the log-linear sonification, and will define 15 percentage points as the minimum improvement expected in all comparisons. Second, the effect of the beacon on direction identification is tested again to determine whether or not the confusions experienced by some participants in Hinckfuss et al. (2016; Experiment 2) and Hinckfuss et al. (2015; Experiment 3) are repeatable, and a cause for concern.The three hypotheses to be tested for both the tremolo and beacon sonifications—referred to collectively as enhanced sonifications—are as follows, making a total of six hypotheses:•Participants using an enhanced sonification will show a 15-percentage point or more advantage in how accurately they identify the SpO2 range (very low, low, target, high, very high) over participants using a log-linear sonification alone.Participants using an enhanced sonification will identify the direction of change (decreasing, steady, increasing) significantly less accurately than participants using a log-linear sonification alone, if the enhancement is confusing.Participants using an enhanced sonification will show a 15-percentage point advantage or more in how accurately they detect transitions into or away from the target range, compared with participants using a log-linear sonification alone.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
