@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The impact of display angles on the legibility of Sans-Serif 5 × 5 capitalized letters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A laboratory study on quantifying the impact of display angles on legibility of text.Tested Sans-Serif 5 × 5 Capitalized Letters C, D, E, F, H, K, N, P, R, U, V, and Z.Examined a complete range of possible display angles 0.0°–90.0°.Derived two equations and modified an existing legibility index.Corrected the interference of people's normal reading habit on legibility evaluation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Legibility,Display angle,Normal reading habit,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduced a laboratory study on quantifying the impact of display angles 0.0°–90.0° on the legibility of Sans-Serif 5 × 5 Capitalized Letters C, D, E, F, H, K, N, P, R, U, V, and Z, commonly used for acuity tests. This study addressed three issues not tackled in the previous studies, including (a) extremely large incident angles 82.8°–90°, (b) multiple letters other than a single letter E previously used, and (c) the interference of people's normal reading habit on legibility evaluation. A total of 20 young college students with Snellen acuity 20/20 or better and normal color vision participated in this experiment. They were asked to read viewing materials presented at 15 display angles. This study derived two equations and modified an existing legibility index to correct the interference of people's normal reading habit on legibility evaluation at extreme oblique display angles.vertical viewing anglehorizontal viewing angleincident angle between the display normal and an observer's sightlinethe threshold incident angle, where the viewing materials were readable by 50% of the young subjectsthe largest incident angle at which the materials could still be readable with 100% accuracysolid angle subtended by the legible text viewed at any anglescolor contrastnormal text area, A = W × Hobserver's visual acuity levelobserver's ageluminance contrastluminance contrast percentviewing distance to the display viewed at any anglesviewing distance to the display viewed perpendicularlyadjusted viewing distancethe height of the LED panel used in this study to provide the uniform display window, in mmnormal text heightheight-to-strokewidth-ratio of textbackground luminancesurrounding luminance of the ambient environmenttarget luminanceconventional legibility index, LI = D/Ha new legibility index to evaluate text and graphics viewed at different display angles, LI′ = ω−0.5modified legibility index to correct the interference of people's normal reading habit on evaluating the legibility levels of characters viewed at extreme oblique display anglesminimum angle of resolutiondenominator of an observer's Snellen acuitystrokewidth of textvisual angle subtended by the legible textnormal text width

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Every day people read text presented on different displays, such as books, newspapers, signs, computer screens, navigation monitors, instrument panels, etc., often not perpendicularly but at a display angle. The angle between the display normal and the sightline of the observer is called incident angle, which has a possible range from 0° to 90°. People prefer to read text presented horizontally from left to right at an incident angle of zero or close to zero, as of a normal reading habit to which people get used. People's reading performance may be affected if text is presented in a different way, e.g., on rotated and/or tilted displays. It was found that reading is slower for vertical text due to a decrease in the size of the visual span (the number of letters recognized without moving the eyes) for vertical reading (Byrne, 2002; Yu et al., 2010; Legge et al., 2007). Although the legibility of an individual letter is not affected by the visual span, it is affected by the orientation and the perspective view of the text changed with the display angles from horizontal left to right (at 0°) to some oblique directions (Cai, 2008).Nonetheless, oblique viewing of displays is unavoidable in daily life. Extremely large display angle close to 90° is also possible, e.g., when a driver reads road pavement markings at a far distance, when a customer in a shopping mall walks around fixed advertising boards, when a police officer tries to spot the plate of a moving vehicle on the opposite side of the street, or when a pharmacist looks at the pill description on the side of a medicine bottle label (before she/he rotates the bottle). In addition, the display angle often varies over time and space when moving observers read a fixed sign (e.g., a driver spots a roadway sign), or when seated or standing still observers read a moving or rotating display (e.g., observing a street parade).Since Erdmann and Dodge (1898), numerous researchers in human factors and related fields studied the legibility of Roman characters. In the majority of those studies, the viewing materials were read perpendicularly to the sightline of the observers (i.e., display angle = 0°). Only a few researchers looked into the common oblique viewing of text, including Snyder and Maddox (1978), Reinwald (n.d.), and Payne (1983). In addition, those studies focused on the target size (e.g. character height H, width W, or strokewidth Sw) and viewing distance D, but rarely took other critical factors of legibility into account, including (a) age Ag of observers; (b) visual acuity Ac of observers; (c) viewing angles (e.g., horizontal viewing angle φ, vertical viewing angle α, or incident angle ξ); (d) visual angle subtense V of characters (V = arctan (H/D)); (e) font; (f) target luminance Lt, background luminance Lb, or surrounding luminance Ls; (g) luminance contrast C or C%; and (h) color contrast ΔE (Cai et al., 2013).Some quantitative studies developed equations for quantifying the legibility of characters. Cai (2008) collected 96 legibility equations (http://people.ku.edu/∼h717c996/research.html). Among them, Howett (1983) derived an equation, as Equation (1), for estimating the legibility of text (i.e., letters A–Z) viewed perpendicularly. Equation (1) examines five critical factors (text height or strokewidth, viewing distance, background luminance, luminance contrast of text, and the Snellen eyesight of the observer), more than any other equations, but no incident angle, nor the surrounding luminance of the ambient environment.(1)H=0.00041·D0·(HSw)·Sd·Lb−0.213·C%−0.532Another outstanding legibility equation for examining text viewed perpendicularly is Equation (2), which has been used for making eye charts (e.g., E-chart, Snellen chart), used to measure visual acuity of an observer's eyes. Equation (2) was theoretically derived from the minimum angle of resolution (MAR, in minutes of arc, or min arc), which specifies the visual acuity of human eyes, via the geometric relationship between the MAR and the viewing distance D (Holick and Carlson, 2002; Colomb et al., 1991; Cai, 2008). Equation (2) calculates the threshold legible (100% accurate) strokewidth of sans-serif 5 × 5 (i.e., being framed tangentially by a square, 5 unit lengths in height and width) capitalized letters C, D, E, F, H, K, N, P, R, U, V, and Z used for making eye charts that are viewed perpendicularly to the observer's eyes. The MAR has different values for different eyesight levels (e.g., MAR = 0.63 min arc for Snellen eyesight 20/12.5, 0.8 for 20/16, 1 for 20/20, 1.25 for 20/25, 1.6 for 20/30, 2.0 for 20/40, 2.5 for 20/50, and 3.2 for 20/60, etc.). Equation (3) was derived from Equation (2) in that the height-to-strokewidth ration (H/Sw) of those capitalized letters C, D, E, F, H, K, N, P, R, U, V, and Z is 5. Equations (2) and (3) do not include any lighting related critical factors. Instead, they assume an optimal lighting condition—a uniform (variation ≤ 20%) background luminance of at least 120 cd/m2—required for reading eye charts by the British standard BS 4274-1:2003 (BSI, 2003). Therefore, Equation (1) is more useful in practice than Equations (2) and (3) for estimating legibility of text under varying lighting conditions.(2)Sw=0.000291·MAR·D(3)H=0.00145·MAR·DOn the other hand, Reinwald developed Equation (4) to predict legibility distance of text viewed obliquely from either its horizontal viewing angle (φ) or vertical viewing angle (α), but not both. Since φ and α are both needed to define the incident angle ξ(cosξ=cosφcosα), Reinwald's formula cannot examine all display angles. In addition, without accounting other critical factors, such as target size, contrast, illumination level, observer's acuity, age, etc., Reinwald's formula has limited use for common oblique displays.(4)D={D0(cosϕ)2/3horizontalD0(cosα)1/2verticalFurthermore, Cai (2008) found that different forms were adopted in those regression equations, including power (24 equations adopted this form), linear (19), quadratic (14), logarithm (7), inverse (2), cubic (1), and other mixed types (12). Some equation forms, such as linear, quadratic, or cubic, were chosen by those researchers to best fit the legibility data, without a thorough examination of the physical and psychophysical fundaments behind their research. Nonetheless, it is expected that unitary forms be adopted by equations developed in different visual situations but with the same dependent variable (DV) and independent variables (IV).Moreover, there lacked an index for evaluating the legibility level of text and graphics presented on oblique displays in those old studies. The conventional Legibility Index, LI (LI = D/H), defined as the distance D at which material can be read with perfect accuracy divided by the character height H, assumes that the viewing material is perpendicular to the observer. The D/H ratio cannot be used for evaluating characters viewed at display angles.Cai et al. (2013) recently conducted a study on legibility of text presented on oblique displays. Cai et al. used nine assumptions to narrow the research scope to achromous letter ‘E’s presented on diffusive displays under uniform glare-free fluorescent lighting, and read at threshold (just readable) 100% accuracy by young people at 20–29 years of age with Snellen acuity ratio 20/20 or better and normal color vision. Cai's study came out with several results, as follows.•A new legibility index (LI′), as Equation (5), to evaluate text and graphics viewed at different display angles (Cai and Green, 2009). LI′ is used to replace the conventional legibility index LI (LI = D/H) widely used in the signage industry for legibility evaluation. LI′ is the inverse square root of the solid angle ω(ω=A·cosξ/D2)subtended by the legible target. The smaller the solid angle subtended by the legible characters, the larger the calculated value of the LI′, the more legible the characters. The LI′ reflects that people can recognize smaller characters due to its higher legibility.(5)LI′=1ω=DA·cosξThe impact of display angles (0.0°–82.8°) on the legibility of the achromous letter ‘E’s was found, as shown in Equation (6) (Cai et al., 2013). Hobserved is the height of the threshold legible (just readable 100% accurate) achromous letter E observed at different display angles. Hpredicted is the predicted height of the letter E at different display angles using the new index LI′ (Equation (5)), so that the letter E has a constant legibility level independent of display angles. As shown in Equation (6), the mean Hobserved/Hpredicted = 1.00 for incident angle 0° ≤ ξ ≤ 65.2°. From 65.7° until 82.8° (the maximum angle tested in the laboratory), the average Hobserved/Hpredicted increased linearly with the incident angle ξ, following Hobserved/Hpredicted = 0.024ξ − 0.577. Equation (6) reveals that people's normal reading habit starts to play a role at large display angles, which lowers their reading performance that could no longer be negligent starting at the critical angle of 65.7° (Cai, 2008).(6)HobservedHpredicted={10°≤ξ≤65.7°0.024ξ−0.57765.7°<ξ≤82.8°A new legibility equation, as Equation (7), to quantify the legibility of a single achromous letter E (with H/W = 1 and H/Sw = 5, black/white) presented on oblique diffusive displays under uniform glare-free fluorescent lighting (Cai et al., 2013). Seven critical factors are examined in Equation (7), including (i) acuity of observer Ac; (ii) viewing distance D; (iii) horizontal angle φ, vertical angle α, or incident angle ξ; (iv) visual angle V; (v) text height H, width W, and strokewidth Sw; (vi) luminance contrast C (or C%); and (vii) target luminance Lt, background luminance Lb, and surrounding luminance Ls.(7)H={4.1×10−4·D·(HSw)·SdLb0.213·C%0.532·(cosξ)0.50°≤ξ≤65.7°4.1×10−4·D·(HSw)·Sd·(0.024ξ−0.577)Lb0.213·C%0.532·(cosξ)0.565.7°<ξ≤82.8°As the initial effort on quantifying the legibility of text viewed on oblique displays using most (seven) critical factors, Cai's studies (Cai et al., 2013; Cai and Green, 2009) still have some limitations. This paper introduces a follow-up laboratory study on quantifying the impact of display angles 0.0°–90.0° on the legibility of sans-serif 5 × 5 capitalized letters C, D, E, F, H, K, N, P, R, U, V, and Z commonly used for visual acuity tests. Results were first used for deriving two equations to predict the height of legible Sans-serif capitalized letters viewed at different display angles. Corresponding adjustment of the equations of the new legibility index LI′ was also made to take the interference of people's normal reading habit on legibility into account when materials were no longer presented perpendicularly to their sightline which people get used to. The adjustment would eliminate the impact of such interference on lowering the legibility of materials presented at large display angles.Cai's studies (Cai et al., 2013; Cai and Green, 2009) have three unsolved issues that need immediate attention. They limit the applications of the new legibility index LI′ (Equation (5)) and the new legibility equation (Equation (7)), as detailed below.•Cai's study (Cai et al., 2013) did not examine the extremely large display angles 82.8°–90.0°, which actually occur in daily viewing. To create and maintain legible environments, it is necessary to quantify the legibility of text viewed at all possible display angles 0.0°–90.0°.The assumptions used in Cai's study (Cai et al., 2013) make Equation (7) inapplicable for multiple realistic letters. As a result, Cai recommended deploying the capital letter E (C% = 97.9, black/white, H/W = 1, H/Sw = 5) as a reference target in practice, to estimate legible sizes of texts, calculate ideal viewing distances or ideal viewing angles of multiple displays, and design threshold lighting conditions with enhanced legibility (Cai et al., 2013). Future studies will need to examine more realistic letters, such as those Sans-serif capitalized letters C, D, E, F, H, K, N, P, R, U, V, and Z, which are commonly used for legibility and visual acuity tests.The redefined legibility index LI′ (LI′ = ω−0.5) does not take the impact of people's normal reading habit on reading oblique materials into account, which lowers the LI′ value of equally legible characters viewed at extremely large display angles. Fig. 1shows the collected solid angle ω subtended by the threshold legible (100% accuracy) letter ‘E’s viewed at different display angles (0.0°–82.8°), and the calculated values of the corresponding LI′. It was found that for display angles 0.0°–65.7°, calculated values of the LI′ remain constant for all participants with different acuity levels (20/20, 20/16, 20/12.5), which match the steady reading performance (threshold legible 100% accuracy); for display angles above 65.7° till 82.8°, calculated values of the LI′ gradually decrease (since the collected solid angle gradually increases), which does not match the actual reading performance, thus, need correction.To address these three issues that need immediate attention, this paper introduces a new laboratory study to look into the impact of display angles in a complete range (0.0°–90.0°) on the legibility of the sans-serif 5 × 5 capitalized letters C, D, E, F, H, K, N, P, R, U, V, and Z.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
