@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
River and fish pollution in Malaysia: A green ergonomics perspective

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Human factors increase heavy metal concentrations in river water in Malaysia.The bioaccumulation of toxic metals in the food chain impacts social wellness.There is limited awareness of the dangers of high heavy metal concentrations.Policy interventions can address human factors (e.g., enhancing awareness).More collaboration between stakeholders can enhance policy effectiveness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Green ergonomics,Human factors,Heavy metal pollution,Sustainable development,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Human activities, such as industrial, agricultural, and domestic pursuits, discharge effluents into riverine ecological systems that contains aquatic resources, such as fish, which are also used by humans. We conducted case studies in Malaysia to investigate the impacts of these human activities on water and fish resources, as well as on human well-being from an ergonomics perspective. This research shows that a green ergonomics approach can provide us with useful insights into sustainable relationships between humans and ecology in facilitating human well-being in consideration of the overall performance of the social-ecological system. Heavy metal concentrations contained in the effluents pollute river water and contaminate fish, eventually creating significant health risks and economic costs for residents, including the polluters. The study suggests a number of policy interventions to change human behavior and achieve greater collaboration between various levels of government, academia, civil society, and businesses to help establish sustainable relationships between humans and ecology in Malaysia.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ergonomics (or human factors) deals with the study of relationships between humans and other elements of a system they interact with in a workplace and applies relevant theories, principles, data and methods to optimize the performance of the system while maximizing human well-being (IEA, 2015). The ergonomics discipline primarily emerged to address challenges with relationships between humans and the machines/equipment they operate and interact with in a workplace. Several scholars have attempted over the past three decades to broaden the discipline's narrow scope to accommodate natural and ecological environment by exploring designs for optimizing relationships between humans that degrade the natural environment (or ecology) and the natural environment that in turn reduces human well-being. As a part of this effort, new concepts such as “green ergonomics” (Hanson, 2010, 2013; Thatcher, 2013) and “ergoecology” (García-Acosta et al., 2014) have been developed.It is in this broader context of ergonomics that we examine how humans in the agriculture, industry and household sectors generate pollutants that move beyond the boundaries of their workplaces and degrade river water quality and fish health, causing a deterioration in the overall human well-being in Malaysia. In this regard, we conducted case studies to examine the impacts of human activities on river water and fish resources, as well as possible impacts of these phenomena on human well-being. We collected and analyzed water and fish samples from two rivers in Malaysia, the Langat and Klang rivers, and interviewed residents living in the river basin areas. Our findings reveal that heavy metals, such as mercury and arsenic, enter into the river water and contaminate water and fish, posing significant health risks and economic costs for residents, which in turn disrupts the performance of the social-ecological system. A green ergonomics approach can help explain sustainable relationships between humans and ecology in facilitating human well-being in terms of the performance of the social-ecological system performance.Given that the scope of ergonomics was confined to the relationships between humans and equipment in a workplace, Moray (1993) has emphasized the potential of ergonomics to include issues of water and food shortages, inefficient energy usage, pollution and waste. Furthermore, Moray (1995) argued that the role of ergonomics “is to design a lifestyle support system that elicits the behavior required to reduce the severity of the global problems.” Helander (1997) was more specific and stated that ergonomists should address “global environmental and social problems, such as the pollution of the big cities.” Sauer et al. (2004), arguing along similar lines, noted that ergonomics should focus on pro-environmental considerations, which are becoming increasingly important in recent years in various parts of the world.Zink (2006) proposed the human factors and ergonomics (HFE) approach to sustainable development, requiring a complex balance between economic, social, and natural capital. Additionally, Steimle and Zink (2006) argued that with reference to sustainable development, HFE needs to focus on both social and environmental capital. From the social perspective, Docherty et al. (2002) earlier argued that sustainable initiatives are those that are within the physical, physiological, and psychological limits of human functioning that allow adequate rejuvenation opportunities (i.e., recreation and rest).Adopting the perspective of human-nature connections, Hanson (2010) used the term “green ergonomics” to focus specifically on how ergonomics can assist in reducing environmental impact by considering production methods that use less energy. Drawing on Hanson's work (2010; 2013), Thatcher (2013) further redefined the term as the reciprocal interdependent relationship of human and natural systems, pushing the traditional boundary of ergonomics to accommodate environmental concerns. This includes human interactions with the environment causing pollution of natural resources and corresponding consequences for the environment, conservation, and sustainable development (see also García-Acosta et al., 2014; Haslam and Waterson, 2013; Lange-Morales et al., 2014; Pilczuk and Barefield, 2014; Radjiyev et al., 2015; Saravia-Pinilla et al., 2016; Thatcher et al., 2013).The degradation of the natural environment can increase the incidence of cancers, respiratory problems and birth defects. Ergonomics interventions have focused on economics (eco-efficiency and socio-efficiency) and social factors (socio-efficiency and socio-effectiveness) but have largely ignored the impact on natural systems (Thatcher, 2013). The emerging green ergonomics promotes the understanding of the role of human-nature connections in meeting the goals of ergonomics. Humans are inextricably connected to the natural system (natural capital) and strains on that system can have significant negative implications for human health, safety, efficiency and effectiveness which ergonomics attempts to optimize (Pimentel et al., 2007).Lange-Morales et al. (2014) have proposed the inclusion of sustainable development in ergonomics and human factors discipline. Following Thatcher and Yeow (2015), sustainability refers to not only sustaining human development, but also interactively sustaining the ecosphere that supports human habitation. Sustainable development and human factors embody a complex balancing of economic capital, social capital and natural capital, called the Triple Bottom Line (TBL) approach (Dyllick and Hockerts, 2002). The need for balance between these three forms of capital is guided by the assumption that poverty exacerbates negative environmental effects through over-exploitation of scarce resources (e.g. overgrazing, overirrigation, deforestation, poor agricultural methods, the use of outdated industrial machinery and polluting limited water supplies).This work focuses on an ergonomic evaluation of heavy metal pollution in rivers of Malaysia. Water pollution has been of major importance in Malaysia as it affects the quality of river water (Department of Statistics, 2013). According to the Department of the Environment (2010), Malaysian industry produced a total of 1.88 million metric tons (MT) of scheduled waste in 2010, compared with 1.71 million MT in 2009. Human factors, including industrial practices, contaminate river water, exposing other people to metals such as arsenic, chromium, mercury, lead, and cadmium, which are extremely toxic in high concentrations. These metals can enter the food chain, affecting safety and public health and the well-being of society (Sany et al., 2013; Mokhtar et al., 2011). These effects can undermine the ecosystem values of rivers.This research investigates how human activities cause pollution in river water. Specifically, this study aims to (i) identify heavy metal pollution in the Langat River and the Klang River in Malaysia, (ii) identify the human activities causing and exacerbating the effects of pollution, (iii) establish health impacts of polluted water in rural areas in Malaysia, and (iv) identify policy interventions to address human factors in order to reduce and mitigate ergonomic effects of pollution.This research is important to Malaysia because a degraded riverine environment cannot provide the resources needed to promote health and well-being. The relationship between green ergonomics and river pollution has not yet been properly investigated in the country. The Malaysian government has not included heavy metal content in river water as a parameter in the Malaysian water quality index (Department of Statistics Malaysia, 2013). Further, Malaysia's capacity for and research on HFE is limited. The green ergonomics approach to examine river pollution and human factors in Malaysia is a novel extension of the ergonomics literature.The contribution of this study is three-fold. First, this study provides insights on the usefulness of the HFE framework to understand river pollution and the implications for the future. Second, this study extends and adds to the repertoire of ergonomic studies in Malaysia. Third, while most studies of water and air pollution in Malaysia have been carried out in the immediate vicinity of the industries, industrial water pollution may have impacts far away from the immediate location of the industry. In order to adequately explain river pollution, a comprehensive understanding of the physical, economic, political, institutional and social dimensions is essential.Ergonomics focuses on wellness at work and contributes to an understanding of employment practices, design of sustainability-oriented products, and more efficient work systems to ensure the safe operation of complex systems (Steimle and Zink, 2006). Human activities and river systems are embedded in complex socio-ecological systems (SES) with multiple subsystems. Interventions include designing eco-efficient systems and ensuring system health, safety, and socio-efficiency, as well as the usability of systems by people in a socially effective manner (Thatcher, 2013). In particular, there has been little focus on interventions that support eco-effectiveness and sufficiency. Steimle and Zink (2006) and Zink et al. (2008) called for a balance between the three dimensions of sustainable development. Dekker et al. (2013) argued that sustainability needs to embrace complexity and emergence in resolving HFE problems, and Thatcher and Yeow (2015) further argued that a shift of paradigm that moves from a local context (i.e., the linear model) to a larger variety of distributed systems is needed to support a more sustainable future.The integration of sustainability with ergonomics occurred slowly (see Hendrick, 1996). McDonough and Braungart (2002) have noted that a focus on eco-efficiency and socio-efficiency might actually exacerbate eco-effectiveness problems. Scott (2008) further extends areas of application, urging ergonomic interventions to consider the uplifting of entire communities and societies. Thatcher's (2013) green ergonomics concept extended the boundaries of ergonomics to integrate social and environmental aspects within a bidirectional relationship. Responsible human behavior can optimize this relationship by enhancing nature conservation and a variety of ecosystem services such as food, recreation and aesthetic benefits.Irresponsible human behavior causes pollution of river water and affects other natural resources (i.e., fish depletion). The accumulation of a variety of chemicals and heavy metals can adversely affect human well-being. Therefore, we require a comprehensive ergonomic approach, which integrates the micro-ergonomics, through meso-ergonomics, to macro-ergonomic intervention (Dul et al., 2012) that involve ecological, socio-economic, institutional and political sub-systems. At the micro-ergonomics level, HFE considers sustainability interventions that focus on improved technological interfaces in factories to reduce resources depletion. At the meso-ergonomics level, interventions that facilitate multiple stakeholders and distributed organizations in supporting waste reduction strategies to enable the river system to remain socially and environmentally viable, and facilitate social equity. At the macro-ergonomics level, sustainability interventions focus on entire communities, with respect to ecological, socio-economic, institutional legal, and political sub-systems.Fig. 2provides a diagrammatic framework of the above-mentioned concepts. We include not only Thatcher's (2013) environmental and social elements, but also the political and institutional elements that must be integrated for a holistic analysis. The political element is essential because of the prerogative of the political process to intervene in optimizing the relationships between other elements. The environmental sub-system (i.e., natural resource system), the socio-economic sub-system (i.e., people and society), the institutional sub-system (i.e., local and indigenous rules), and the political sub-system (i.e., environmental policy) are inter-linked in complex ways through a multitude of second level variables, which affect interactions and final outputs (i.e., manufactured products, air and water). The four elements are not independent and are interactively related (Ostrom, 1990). We need to understand these specific interactions and how they are interrelated. The features of the four sub-systems and their interactions are briefly discussed below.Natural capital includes the natural resource system, that is, the physical and biological resources used to optimize human needs. Water, air and land are used in mining activities, agriculture, manufacturing, etc. Sustainable management of human activity is a major challenge because of scarcity of these resources and a rapidly declining natural resource base. Changes within the natural resource system affect other sub-systems. For example, water scarcity may result in reduced industrial production and income loss, creating socio-economic problems.The socio-economic sub-system is an integral element in human activity because human socio-economic characteristics affect the adoption and outcomes of various production systems. Socio-economic differences exist within any system and these have major impacts on the exploitation of natural resources and on production outcomes. For example, poor unskilled workers who form the majority of the work force in mining and manufacturing activities can adversely affect human health and well-being. Heavy groundwater abstraction can increase heavy metals such as arsenic that can have adverse health effects (Käkönen, 2008). The need to recognize human factors in the socio-economic sub-system and their interaction with other sub-systems are critical to providing an insightful ergonomic representation of human activity and interactions with nature (e.g., how humans create pollution and how pollution affects humans).Many studies have provided evidence that institutional variables affect the success and sustainability of human activity. Institutions are the regularized practices structured by the rules and norms of society. Power relations are embedded within institutional forms, and contestation over institutional practices, rules, and norms is thus always significant (Scoones, 1999). Human activities are guided by these social norms. Analysis of the institutions of governance included in the institutional sub-system and of interactions with other sub-systems is thus critical. The resilience of productive human activities depends on rules matching the attributes of the resource system and of the socio-economic system. Many institutional variables interact in a complex non-linear fashion. For example, the use of sand in a cement factory may cause immense pollution owing to the production of dust and may need new relevant institutional arrangements, such as monitoring groups to avoid pollution and minimize impacts on human health.The political system, along with the three sub-systems discussed above, can affect human activity and the nature of outputs and the accompanying impacts on human health. In Malaysia, vertical integration of environmental policy is observable in sectoral policies, such as the Third National Agricultural Policy to promote renewable energy, municipal waste, and cleaner production in industry. Environmental objectives have also been incorporated into the structures of non-environmental agencies and organizations (Shahrizaila et al., 2003). Environmental policies are delegated to three levels, namely the federal, regional, and local, which are closely interrelated. The major theme motivating Malaysia's environmental policy since the 1980s has been the drive for sustainability, following the Brundtland Commission (Mebratu, 1998). This has led to crisscrossing and overlapping jurisdictions, creating much uncertainty. These attempts at “vertical” integration were mainly expressions of policy formulation. As these intentions are translated into programs, careful examination is needed as to the effectiveness of policy implementation in meeting the sustainability objectives (Dovers, 2005a; 2005b). However, policy has not been coherent, exhaustive, or integrated. The important interrelationship among the different sub-systems to achieve a holistic view of sustainable development is absent although necessary. For example, in Malaysia, heavy metal pollution is totally absent from priority setting and water quality indices. It is therefore relevant to question the extent to which ergonomics framework has been integrated into policy.Fig. 2 depicts the integration of the environmental, socio-economic, institutional, and political sub-systems. These can be related in a multidirectional fashion. The left-hand side of Fig. 2 shows that flow of human activities on natural capital generate toxic residues, such as polluted water, toxic metals, and polluted air, which adversely affect workers' health as reflected in the socio-economic system (bottom box of Fig. 2). The generation of pollutants can also be affected by the institutional system, such as local rules governing pollution, as shown on the right hand side of Fig. 2. The right hand side of Fig. 2 also shows the political process, notably government's role in managing pollution and quantity of pollutants emitted by industry. Human health will be affected if there are excessive pollutants and toxic metals in the environment and a delicate balance is therefore needed across the four sub-systems to ensure the productive potential of the earth for future generations. The nature and intensity of impact depends on the interaction between socio-economic and other characteristics of producers and consumers, and the natural, economic, social and institutional, and political characteristics of the total system.There is strong evidence of the impact of heavy metal concentrations on health. In Bangladesh, 35% of deep wells contain arsenic (Smith et al., 2000) and drinking from these has been prohibited (MEA, 2005). More than 20,000 individuals (mainly rice farmers) from the dry zone of Sri Lanka have died over the last ten years due to chronic kidney disease (CKD) caused by toxic metals from deep well water (Bandarage, 2013; CBSNEWS, 2015; International Committee of the Fourth International, 2013). Although the cause of CKD in Sri Lanka remains controversial, some scientists attribute this to heavy metals from fertilizers and agrochemicals entering the human body through the food chain (Chandrajith et al., 2010). High arsenic content in water has also had dermatological manifestations and has caused arsenicosis in India (Mazumder, 2008). During the 1980s, endemic arsenicosis was also found in many provinces of mainland China, with the arsenic concentration in groundwater reported to be in the range of 220–2000 μg/l (Mandal and Suzuki, 2002). Heavy metals have accumulated in agricultural soils in South China, especially in mining areas polluted by manganese (Li et al., 2007), lead (Wong et al., 2002), and cadmium (Li et al., 2007; Wong et al., 2002). In addition, the accumulation of contaminants in sediments, with increasing content of lead and zinc, has also posed serious environmental problems (Li et al., 2000). In Central Java, Indonesia, it was reported that significant differences were found in the concentrations of metals (particularly lead and zinc) in aquatic biota (Widianarko et al., 2000). Meanwhile, heavy metal contamination in freshwater fish from the border region between Norway and Russia has manifested itself in increasing contents of cadmium and nickel in fish tissue with increasing proximity to smelters (Amundsen et al., 1997).The political process influences the structure, priorities, and implementation of water resources management policy. From 1971, the Federal Government of Malaysia began to play a key role in environmental issues but had difficulty in coordinating policy, because states had been granted some degree of independence to determine their own environmental policy by the Constitution. The effectiveness of the Department of Environment (DOE) of Malaysia in enforcing policy is also limited, given its limited operational budget (Hezri and Hasan, 2006).From 1977 onwards, the Environmental Quality Act (EQA) of 1974 was amended to regulate prevalent pollutants, and to impose discharge fees; in 1978, it was further modified to address water pollution from palm oil mills (Panayotou, 1994). Regulation remained the main policy instrument under the EQA, amplified with scheduled toxic wastes in 1989 and marine pollution in 1993. However, the effectiveness of the EQA remained low due to a limited budget, limited human and technical resources, and poor support from outside bureaucracy. Conflicts arose because standards were set by the federal government and water quality monitoring was conducted by the DOE, while enforcement was mostly left to the states (Lowry and Carpenter, 1985).In 2010, the DOE of Malaysia developed a River Water Quality Index (WQI). River water is classified into three categories, based on the WQI: clean (81–100); slightly polluted (60–80); and polluted (0–59) (Department of Statistics Malaysia, 2012). The WQI is assessed using six pollutant parameters, namely: (1) biochemical oxygen demand for periods of five days (BOD5)11BOD5 refers to the amount of dissolved oxygen required for the bacterial decomposition of organic waste in water samples.; 2) ammoniacal nitrogen; 3) suspended solids; 4) chemical oxygen demand; 5) pH value; and 6) dissolved oxygen. Heavy metal concentrations are not included in WQI measurements. In 1987, Malaysia turned its focus to sustainable development and introduced administrative changes and legal authorities, establishing a national environmental agency and a Ministry for the Environment and National Environmental Law. However, the success of Malaysia's sustainable development initiatives with respect to environmental quality, in the pursuit of environmental, social and economic goals, has been limited (Hezri and Hasan, 2006).According to the Department of Statistics Malaysia (2012; 2013), a total of 140 river basins were monitored, and it appears that the percentage of clean rivers in Malaysia has decreased remarkably, from 63.6% in 2007–52.8% in 2012. The percentage of slightly polluted and polluted river basins increased over this same time period, from 31.5% to 38.6% and from 4.9% to 8.6%, respectively (Department of Statistics Malaysia (2012), 2013). The number of river basins in which water contained high levels of BOD5 increased almost five-fold, from 12 cases in 2007 to 59 cases in 2012. This increase in BOD5 in river basins was caused by untreated sewage. Palm oil mill waste constitutes the highest proportion of annual discharge of industrial solid wastes in Malaysia (Embrandiri et al., 2012). Increased use of chemical fertilizers in oil palm plantation areas has caused water contamination through seepage. Meanwhile, there has been an increase over the last five years in the percentage of rivers polluted with ammoniacal nitrogen from 36% in 2007 to 38% in 2012 (Department of Statistics, 2012; 2013).Studies of water pollution in Malaysia have largely focused on the effect of human activities on water pollution but not on human activities per se and/or on health risks from polluted water and contaminated fish resources (e.g., Adnan et al., 2012; Mokhtar et al., 2009, 2011; Othman et al., 2002; Taweel et al., 2011; Shazili et al., 2006). Studies on the west coast of peninsular Malaysia reported no acute toxicities of heavy metal concentrations (cadmium, copper, lead, and zinc) in the green-lipped musselPerna viridis(Linnaeus), with these lower than permissible limits for human consumption (Yap et al., 2004). Nevertheless, if such toxic pollutants accumulate over time and enter the human food chain through contaminated water, this may affect human health in future.The above review shows that Malaysia (i) has no explicit guidelines for including heavy metal pollution of rivers in the WQI, (ii) lacks adequate information about and awareness of heavy metal pollution of river water and impacts on fish populations, and (iii) has only very few studies on heavy metal concentrations and household impacts of polluted water. Furthermore, there has been no specific effort by Malaysian authorities to focus on the ergonomic issues of human health related to river pollution and health risks. This empirical study was initiated against this background to investigate heavy metal concentrations in Malaysian rivers and the potential ergonomic impacts of such pollution.The Malaysian government introduced the Occupational Safety and Health (Use and Standards of Exposure of Chemicals Hazardous to Health, {USECHH}) Regulations 2000. More than 600 hazardous chemicals and their permissible exposure limits are listed in Schedule 1, with 34 hazardous chemicals, mainly heavy metals and solvents, indicated as requiring medical surveillance based on the Chemical Health Risk Assessment (CHRA) (Hansso, 1998). In Malaysia, the 1999 threshold limit values were adopted as the permissible exposure limits for the majority of the chemicals in the USECHH Regulations. A CHRA is performed by a trained professional to make decisions on appropriate control measures, induction and training of employees, and health surveillance for employees exposed to hazardous chemicals (Rampal and Nizam, 2006). Actions to be taken by the employer include medical surveillance that needs to be conducted by registered Occupational Health Doctors.This empirical study was conducted in the Langat River Basin (LRB) and in the Klang River Basin (KRB), both located in Selangor State, Malaysia. The total length of the LRB is 78 km, with a catchment area of 2350 km2. It originates in the Titiwangsa Range at Mount Nuang and there are 39 tributaries draining into the river (Toriman et al., 2012), with the major ones being the Langat River, Semenyih River, and Labu River. The main tributary, the Langat River, flows from the northeast (Hulu Langat District) towards the west (Kuala Langat District), before draining into the Straits of Malacca (See Fig. 1 for a map locating rivers, communities and places where water and fish samples were taken).The KRB is approximately 120 km long and its basin area is nearly 1288 km2. It flows through the heavily populated Klang Valley districts (Kuala Lumpur and Selangor states) before flowing into the Straits of Malacca. The river is joined by 11 main tributaries, and it is located in heavily urbanized and residential areas, with 5.28 million people in Selangor State alone, equivalent to 18.3% of the entire national population. The adverse impacts of anthropogenic disturbances on sustainable development are already evident in these two rivers from other studies and anecdotal evidence, as explained in the next section. These rivers were thus very useful research sites to evaluate our research framework in an empirical setting.There have been several significant instances of pollutant discharges into rivers that disrupted water supply along the LRB. For instance, in September 2010, the Sungai Semenyih Water Treatment Plant was shut down due to ammonia contamination. This incident left 1.2 million consumers in four Selangor districts22See Bernama.com (Malaysia National News Agency) Malaysian Paying The Cost For Polluted Water, January 18, 2011, at http://www.bernama.com/bernama/v3/printable.php?id=557485.without water. The Salak Tinggi Water Treatment Plant33The Salak Tinggi water treatment plan draws its supply from Sungai Labu and has a design capacity of 10.8 Mld (million liters per day).in Kampung Ginching, located in the Sepang District, has been closed since July 6, 2012 after high ammonia levels were detected at the Sungai Labu raw water intake point. In 2013, over one million consumers in seven districts were affected by water disruptions due to the closure of the Selangor River following a diesel tanker spillage 10 km from the intake area of a water plant. Consequently, four treatment plants were closed. These four plants produce 2.67 billion liters of water daily, meeting 57% of water demand in Selangor, Kuala Lumpur, and Putrajaya (The Star, 2013). Meanwhile, the Klang River is polluted by sewage, sullage, and discharge from septic tanks and industrial activities. The Langat and Klang Rivers thus provide two ideal research sites to examine heavy metal-contaminated waters that endanger water, fish, and the health security of stakeholders (Department of Statistics, 2012;2013).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
