@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluating change in user error when using ruggedized handheld devices

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
There are no significant differences between user error and age.Lack of corrective software may not impact user error as much as expected.Keypad devices had more character errors while touchscreen devices had more word.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
User error,Handheld devices,Generation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The increasing number of handheld mobile devices used today and the increasing dependency on them in the workplace makes understanding how users interact with these devices critical. This study seeks to understand how user error changes based on user age as well as input content type on ruggedized handheld devices. Participants completed data entry tasks of word and character input on two different devices, a physical keypad and touchscreen device. The number of errors and types of error, corrected and permanent were collected for each participant. Based on results on the study, touchscreen devices proved to be the optimal ruggedized handheld device to minimize user error.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Text entry research has evolved over time with the growing number of mobile devices in the market. As of January of 2014, 90% of American adults own a cell phone with 58% of those phones being a smartphone (Pew Research, 2014). With such a large smartphone penetration in the consumer market, text entry research can lead to a greater understanding of speed and accuracy of text input. This knowledge can feed back into the research and development of new text input technologies. A need for text entry research is driven by the necessity for mobile text input devices in the workforce. With new technologies, customer service response times are expected to quicken there by revealing a need for technology to become more accurate and efficient. These devices must have the technological capabilities to serve the dependency placed on them in industry. As mobile text entry devices become more ubiquitous in the workforce, the operation of these devices becomes more critical. Recent research has explored the impacts of mobile and portable devices on posture, muscle activation, response time, and usability in existing products and product upgrades (e.g. Arman et al., 2014; Hsiao et al., 2014; Pereira et al., 2013; Strawderman and Huang, 2012; Werth and Babski-Reeves, 2014). This study evaluates how error rate changes based on user age as well as input content type on ruggedized handheld devices. Observing these changes can help gain a better understanding of the accuracy of text input.The two primary evaluation metrics for text input are accuracy and speed (MacKenzie and Soukoreff, 2002). Of these two metrics, accuracy is more difficult to obtain (Soukoreff and Mackenzie, 2001). To learn more about determining accuracy, many studies have created and contributed to the knowledge base of typing error categorization. The three primary categories of typing errors are substitution, omission, and insertion. These categories have been expanded in many studies as shown in Table 1. This table was developed by Kano & Read to solve character level insertion ambiguities as a way to summarize the different typing error categorization methods that were developed between 1945 and 2007. Their research focused on eliminating the ambiguities of an error falling into multiple categories which occurs as a result of the expansion of the typing error categories. A blank cell in the table represents indicates that a method does not include that type of error categorization.Physical keypad and touchscreen devices are two of the most common input methods for handheld mobile devices. While both types of devices are used for text input, keypads have physical key affordances which have been proved to be vital when typing (Paek and Hsu, 2011). When using a touchscreen, users are more prone to error without the affordances a keypad provides (Rudchenko et al., n.d.). As a result, users will perform worse on touch text entry than on a keyboard. A 1990 study asked participants to enter dates and airline flights on a keyboard and a touchscreen (both without autocomplete features). When looking at input speed, results showed that users of touchscreens took 73% longer when inputting text content in comparison to a keyboard; however, the ubiquity of devices in our daily lives could change these values today (Gould et al., 1990). In a study where participants performed tasks on an ATM with a numeric physical keypad and one with a touchscreen keypad, the input speed of older adults on a touchscreen was found to be faster than on a physical keypad (Chung et al., 2010; Rogers et al., 2005).There have been a number of studies that seek to find age-related differences when using direct and indirect input devices (Chung et al., 2010; Mclaughlin et al., 2012; Pak et al., 2002; Rogers et al., 2005). A device is defined as indirect or direct by its manner of input and output of data (Mclaughlin et al., 2012). A device where input is completed on the output screen, such as a touchscreen, is considered a direct device. Devices that separate the method of input from the output screen, such as a keyboard or mouse, are considered indirect devices.Chung et al. (2010) studied the impact of age on direct and indirect numeric keypad types. In his study, results showed that older adults perform faster when using touchscreen devices but tend to also make more errors on those devices compared to the physical keypad. The study attributes this increase in error to the lack of affordances on a touchscreen. Much of the literature concludes that the touchscreen yields faster input speeds for younger and older age groups and suggests this to be the optimal device but this is not always true. Rogers et al. (2005) found that, while for younger adults the type of task can often determine the optimal input device, older adults do not return a steady pattern. Rogers concludes that with older adults, individual differences may be the indicator impacting the optimal device for a specific task.When comparing generations currently in the workforce, two commonly studied groups are the Baby Boomer-aged employees (born between 1945 and 1963) and Gamer-aged employees (born between 1979 and 1995). Studying these two generations is important as the Baby Boomer generation retires and more organizations begin hiring the incoming Gamer generation. Learning more about the differences of the two generations becomes relevant as organizations are impacted by this change (Burch and Strawderman, 2014).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study sought to learn more about how ruggedized handheld devices are used. Significant interactions between input method and input content suggest the importance of choosing the right combination of the two to reduce user error.The lack of significant differences between the errors made by each generational group implies that age of the user will not impact user error. For organizations working to implement ruggedized handheld devices in the workforce, choosing the best device should be chosen by the task it's needed for and the quality of output that is expected from the device. Combining the input speed results from the initial study (Burch, 2014) and the significance between input method and input content, using touch devices would result in better performance overall. Both generational groups perform faster on touch devices. Even when considering a potential speed-error tradeoff, the touch device appears to be significantly better than the key device in this context. Also, of the input method and input content combinations, touch devices resulted in low total errors and significantly more corrected errors when entering character input. Since the type of input content used in the workforce is not always optional, using the touch device is still the suggested choice. Both input contents used on the touch device still have a significantly higher number of corrected errors. This combined with the quicker input speeds yields touch devices as the optimal choice.