@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-parameter prediction of drivers' lane-changing behaviour with neural network model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We conducted a lane change experiment under real road environment.Lane changing intent time window is about 5 s.Vehicle motion states, driving conditions and head movements information were chosen to predict lane changing behaviours.The improved neural network detects 85% of lane changes 1.5 s in advance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lane change prediction,Naturalistic driving experiment,Neural network model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Accurate prediction of driving behaviour is essential for an active safety system to ensure driver safety. A model for predicting lane-changing behaviour is developed from the results of naturalistic on-road experiment for use in a lane-changing assistance system. Lane changing intent time window is determined via visual characteristics extraction of rearview mirrors. A prediction index system for left lane changes was constructed by considering drivers' visual search behaviours, vehicle operation behaviours, vehicle motion states, and driving conditions. A back-propagation neural network model was developed to predict lane-changing behaviour. The lane-change-intent time window is approximately 5 s long, depending on the subjects. The proposed model can accurately predict drivers' lane changing behaviour for at least 1.5 s in advance. The accuracy and time series characteristics of the model are superior to the use of turn signals in predicting lane-changing behaviour.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Lane-changing behaviour has a significant effect on driving safety and the stability of traffic flow (Sivak et al., 2007). During the lane-changing process, the information processed by the drivers is more complicated than that processed while remaining in a lane. If drivers fail to accurately judge the appropriate lane-change time or the relative movement characteristics of related vehicles, accidents may occur and result in casualties and property damage (Petzoldt et al., 2014; Jin, 2013).Various of lane-change auxiliary systems have been developed in an attempt to ensure driver safety during the lane-changing process. Such systems operate by monitoring the related conflict vehicles with millimetre-wave radar or high-accuracy cameras. Once turn signals are recognized, the auxiliary system may assume that a lane change will be executed at some time in the near future, and the system enters its working mode. When a conflict object is detected by the auxiliary system within a given distance, warning signals are sent to remind the drivers of the potential danger (Hirose et al., 2004). However, in practice, prediction of lane-changing behaviour on the basis of turn signals is unreliable. According to the experiment conducted under realistic on-road conditions, the operation rate of drivers' turn signals is below 50% by the initiation of the lane changing behaviour, which certainly affects the warning accuracy rate and reliability of a lane-changing auxiliary system that is triggered by turn signals (Salvucci and Liu, 2002).In recent years, researchers have pursued ways to improve the performance of lane-changing auxiliary systems by identifying drivers' operation intentions. Specifically, researchers have tried to identify lane-changing intent via drivers' visual search behaviours and vehicles' motion characteristics. Based on gaze data of interest zones, Lethaus et al. (2013) predicted drivers' driving intent via compound model, and in their previous research, they have proved that drivers may pay more attention to side mirrors than to inside mirrors when executing leftward lane changes (Lethaus and Rataj, 2007). Salvucci et al. (2007) suggested that before a lane change occurred, a driver always shifted attention from the current lane to the target lane. Doshi and Morris (2011, 2009) proposed that in addition to eye movements, head movements could be used to detect drivers' lane-changing intentions, and developed a real-time on-road prediction system to detect driver's intention. Peng et al. (2013a,b) constructed an intent index system by analysing the differences between lane keeping and lane changing intent stages, and developed a method to detect drivers' lane-changing intentions using evidence theory.If drivers' lane-changing intentions could be precisely identified from their driving behaviour, rather than relying on turn signals, the performance of lane-changing assistance systems could be greatly improved. However, challenges arise in the practical application of lane-changing intent identification technologies. Although an assistance system may detect a driver's intent to change lanes, this does not mean that a lane change will definitely occur at some time in the future. Even if a driver intends to execute a lane change, he may change his mind for various reasons, such as a vehicle rapidly approaching from behind in the target lane. We call this the “intent revocation phenomenon”, and it cannot be easily predicted using the existing intent identification technologies (Lee et al., 2014; Hofmann et al., 2010).Lane-changing intent can typically be detected from a driver's eye and head movements before the execution of a lane change (Lethaus and Rataj, 2007). Based on intent identification, if we could consider vehicle motion states and the relative motion between the object vehicle and other (conflict) vehicles in a comprehensive manner, we may be able to predict lane-changing behaviour accurately before the manoeuvre.This study was conducted to develop a reasonable method for predicting lane-changing behaviour. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. First, the testing platform and experimental design are presented. Second, the procedure used to select lane changing intent and lane keeping data samples is described, along with the procedure used to determine the lane changing intent time window. Third, lane-changing behaviour predictors are identified based on eye and head movement characteristics, in combination with information on the relative motion of conflict vehicles. Finally, the use of a neural network to develop a model for real-time prediction of lane-changing behaviour is described.A total of 16 experienced drivers, nine men and seven women, were recruited to take part in our experiment. The subjects were between the ages of 28 and 50, with an average age of 41.1 years and a standard deviation of 5.85 years. Each of the subjects had got a driver's licence for at least four years and had driven a total distance of at least 80,000 km. The drivers participated in physical fitness examinations that showed that all of the subjects were free from any visual, physical, or psychological impairment and could meet the demands of the experiment. After the experiment, the subjects were reimbursed for a certain amount of their lost income.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
