@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exposure–response relationships for work-related neck and shoulder musculoskeletal disorders – Analyses of pooled uniform data sets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study explored relationships between work factors and neck/shoulder disorders.We recorded complaints/diagnoses in 33 groups (3141 workers), within which workers performed similar tasks.We assessed postures and muscular activity in sub-groups by direct measurements with technical instruments.Neck disorders were associated with head and arm posture, trapezius and forearm muscle activity, and wrist velocity.Shoulder disorders were associated with head, arm and wrist velocity, and trapezius and forearm muscle activity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Occupational exposure,Physical,Psychosocial,Velocity,Movement,Posture,Muscular activity,Wrist,Upper arm,Neck,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There is a lack of quantitative data regarding exposure–response relationships between occupational risk factors and musculoskeletal disorders in the neck and shoulders. We explored such relationships in pooled data from a series of our cross-sectional studies.We recorded the prevalence of complaints/discomfort (Nordic Questionnaire) and diagnoses (physical examination) in 33 groups (24 female and 9 male) within which the workers had similar work tasks (3141 workers, of which 817 were males). In representative sub-groups, we recorded postures and velocities of the head (N = 299) and right upper arm (inclinometry; N = 306), right wrist postures and velocities (electrogoniometry; N = 499), and muscular activity (electromyography) in the right trapezius muscle (N = 431) and forearm extensors (N = 206). We also assessed the psychosocial work environment (Job Content Questionnaire).Uni- and multivariate linear meta-regression analysis revealed several statistically significant group-wise associations. Neck disorders were associated with head inclination, upper arm elevation, muscle activity of the trapezius and forearm extensors and wrist posture and angular velocity. Right-side shoulder disorders were associated with head and upper arm velocity, activity in the trapezius and forearm extensor muscles and wrist posture and angular velocity.The psychosocial work environment (low job control, job strain and isostrain) was also associated with disorders. Women exhibited a higher prevalence of neck and shoulder complaints and tension neck syndrome than men, when adjusting for postures, velocities, muscular activity or psychosocial exposure.In conclusion, the analyses established quantitative exposure–response relationships between neck and shoulder disorders and objective measures of the physical workload on the arm. Such information can be used for risk assessment in different occupations/work tasks, to establish quantitative exposure limits, and for the evaluation of preventive measures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A large number of studies have shown that intense manual work is a risk factor for neck and shoulder disorders (Andersen et al., 2003; David et al., 2008; Edling et al., 2012; Gallagher and Heberger, 2013; Palmer and Smedley, 2007). It involves repetitive work tasks, short cycles, high velocities (movements), high force, extreme postures (positions), and lack of recovery, Further, sex/gender (Arvidsson et al., 2006; Nordander et al., 2008) and the psychosocial work environment (high job demands and low job control) are associated with the prevalence of these disorders (Andersen et al., 2007; Edling et al., 2012; Menzel, 2007).Almost all knowledge concerning work-related musculoskeletal disorders is based on self-reported or observed physical exposure (IJmker et al., 2007; Occhipinti and Colombini, 2007; Takala et al., 2010). However, such methods have serious limitations, for example, different methods are used in different studies, important characteristics such as posture, velocity and force are not sufficiently precise (Dale et al., 2011), or categorical exposure data are used. Furthermore, subjective assessments of exposure through self-reporting may not be reliable, and may lead to information bias (Hansson et al., 2001).For the past 25 years, research at our department has focused on the use of direct measurements of physical exposure with technical instruments. This is to obtain objective quantitative information expressed in physical units, regardless of the equipment or method employed. Using such methods, we have been able to establish quantitative exposure–response relationships between the physical work load (wrist angular velocity, measured by electrogoniometry, and lower arm extensor muscle activity, measured by electromyography), and the prevalence of musculoskeletal elbow and hand disorders (Nordander et al., 2013).In the present study we have investigated the hypothesis that there are also quantitative exposure–response relationships between musculoskeletal disorders in the neck and shoulders, and measurements of velocities, postures and muscular activity.In a number of cross-sectional epidemiological studies we have collected data on disorders in many different occupational groups and working situations with large contrasts in physical exposure. The results of these studies have been published previously (Arvidsson et al., 2006, 2012; Balogh et al., 2006; Balogh et al., 2004; Hansson et al., 1997, 2000a; Nordander et al., 2009, 2008, 1999; Ohlsson et al., 1995; Ohlsson et al., 1994b; Unge et al., 2007; Åkesson et al., 2012, 1997, 1999, 2000). All these studies used the same methods for data collection, concerning both physical exposure and musculoskeletal complaints and diagnoses.The present study pooled data from the previous ones. It involved an enormous amount of data. Thus, only a limited fraction, restricted to the statistically significant findings in uni- and/or multivariate analyses, is in the tables. Only complaints during the past seven days are presented, and not those during the past 12 months. The total data set and all analyses are presented in the Supplementary material.The study included twenty-four female occupational groups (N = 2324 workers) and nine male occupational groups (N = 817) engaged in industrial, office and other work (e.g. dentistry, hairdressing and cleaning). The work tasks ranged from repetitive and/or constrained, to varied/mobile tasks. Table 1a provides an overview of the occupational groups, and the measurements performed in each group.The Ethics Committee of Lund University had already approved each of the separate studies from which the data were taken for this study.We recorded complaints (i.e. pain or discomfort) in the neck and shoulders during the past 12 months and the past seven days in all workers, including those on sick-leave (participation rates 92% among the women and 95% among the men), using the Nordic Questionnaire (Descatha et al., 2007; Kuorinka et al., 1987) (Table 1a; Supplementary Table S1a). The mean age and mean employment time in the present company, doing the present kind of work, was recorded for each group.In 23 of the 33 occupational groups (Table 1b; Supplementary Table S1b), an experienced physician or physiotherapist performed a standardized physical examination of the neck and arms (participation rates 95% and 95% among women and men, respectively), and made diagnoses according to predefined criteria (Supplementary Table S2) (Nordander et al., 2009; Ohlsson et al., 1994a). We considered nine specific diagnoses, and recorded the prevalence of diagnosed disorders in the neck and right shoulder. It was not possible to blind the examiners to the kind of task, as they performed all examinations at the workers' work place. (Supplementary Table S3 shows the correlations between the prevalences of complaints and diagnoses.)Workers within each occupational group performed identical or very similar work tasks. In a sub-sample of workers in each group, we recorded physical exposure to obtain representative group means (Table 2a–c; Supplementary Table S4a-c). In most groups, we recorded the full workday (excluding the lunch break). However, in the early studies, we only monitored representative work tasks, due to temporary technical limitations. As these work tasks were performed during most of the working day, measurements were representative of each job.A large number of exposure metrics can be derived from the measurements. The properties of the metrics, e.g. distributions and correlations evaluated in previous studies (Hansson et al., 2009, 2010), guided our choices. Although mean power frequency has been suggested as “a generalised measure of repetitiveness” (Hansson et al., 1966), we chose velocity, since this metric represents the combination of the amplitude and repetition of the movement. We chose the activity of the forearm extensor muscles as a general measure of the force exerted by the hand and forearm.We performed inclinometry measurements with triaxial accelerometers fixed on the forehead in 24 groups (N = 299), and on the outside of the upper arms in 22 groups (N = 304, right side reported here) (Hansson et al., 2001, 2010; Arvidsson et al., 2012). Data loggers collected information at 20 Hz (Logger Teknologi HB, Åkarp, Sweden). Before work we recorded reference postures, defined as 0° flexion of the head and 0° elevation of the arm. For each worker, we recorded seven summary exposure measures: the distribution of angle amplitude (1st, 50th, and 90th percentiles of head flexion, positive forwards, negative backwards; the 50th and 99th percentiles of arm elevation), and the angular velocities of the head and arm (50th percentiles) over the full working day.To record the muscular load we used bipolar surface electromyography (EMG) on the right trapezius muscle, in 26 groups (431 workers), and on the forearm extensor muscles in 19 groups (206 workers) (Hansson et al., 2009, 2010, 2000b; Nordander et al., 2004; Nordander et al., 2000). We sampled data at 1024 Hz, and stored it in data loggers. To describe the muscular load, we used the root mean square value, calculated for epochs of 1/8 s. Data were normalized to the maximal EMG activity (maximal voluntary electric activity: MVE) recorded at 90° arm elevation and handgrip, respectively. We derived muscular activity in terms of ‘the static load’ (10th percentile of the amplitude distributions) and ‘the peak load’ (90th percentile). Muscular rest was defined as the fraction of time when the activity was <0.5% MVE. Hence, we calculated six summary measures describing muscular activity, for each worker.We measured right wrist posture and velocity in 30 groups (499 workers), using biaxial flexible electrogoniometers (Biometrics Ltd., Cwmfelinfach, Gwent, UK*) (Hansson et al., 1996, 2004). According to the manufacturer, the accuracy of the goniometers was ±2° over a range of ±90°. We recorded flexion/extension angles at a sampling rate of 20 Hz using data loggers (DL1001, Biometrics Ltd., and a GON-logger, Logger Teknologi HB, Åkarp, Sweden*) (Hansson et al., 2003). Positive values denote palmar flexion and negative ones dorsal extension. Neutral wrist posture (0°) was defined with the hand hanging relaxed alongside the body (Balogh et al., 2009; Hansson et al., 1996, 2004). We recorded four summary measures for each worker: the 10th, 50th and 90th percentiles of the angular distributions, and the 50th percentile of the absolute angular velocity distributions.In 21 of the 33 occupational groups, we measured Job demands, job control and job support (see overview in Table 3; Supplementary Table S5). Most often, we used a Swedish version of the Job Content Questionnaire (JCQ) (Johnson, 1986; Karasek et al., 1998; Karasek and Theorell, 1990). We transformed data collected in four groups using the Rubinowitz standardized questionnaire (Rubinowitz, 1984), and in two groups using the Copenhagen Psychosocial Questionnaire (Kristensen et al., 2005), into the JCQ (Nordander et al., 2013). We classed each worker as reporting high or low demands, control and support (Carlsson et al., 2006). We then calculated the group proportions of high job demands, low job control, job strain (high demands and low control) and isostrain (job strain and low job support).For all statistical analysis we used SPSS 22.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). We calculated the means of SD standard deviations (SD) of physical exposure across occupational groups, presented in Table 2 and Supplementary Table S4. They represent the mean of variation among workers within groups. The range of means and the SD of means across groups represent the variation among occupational groups. Table 3 and Supplementary Table S5 give corresponding data concerning self-reported psychosocial factors. We calculated correlations between group means of the various definitions of exposure, age and employment time using Spearman rank correlation (Table 4; Supplementary Table S6). These exposure parameters were considered independent variables in the regression models presented below.The response, i.e. the dependent variables, were the prevalences of complaints in the neck and right shoulder, and the disorders diagnosed in these regions, in each occupational group. Table 1 and Supplementary Table S1 present the range of prevalences, and of group means of age and employment time. Supplementary Table S3 presents correlations, by Spearman rank correlation, between these measures of response.We calculated linear exposure–response relationships between group means of physical exposure and psychosocial factors, as well as age and employment time, and group prevalence of neck/shoulder disorders, by meta-regression (Hansson et al., 2009, 2010; Nordander et al., 2009, 2013). In these analyses, we weighted each group by the number of workers examined to identify disorders, as we consider larger groups to give a more reliable estimate of prevalence. We performed univariate, weighted, linear least-squares regression on the group means of each of the exposure measures (physical as well as psychosocial, age and employment time). We determined the slopes of the regression lines (β) with regard to group prevalence of each definition of disorder (based on neck or shoulder complaints during the past 7 days, one or more diagnosed disorders and the above mentioned nine separate diagnoses). Each value of β then represents the increase in the prevalence of disorders (%) per unit exposure. For wrist angular velocity, for example, we expressed β as %/(°/s), representing the increase in the prevalence of the disorder with every 1°/s increase in wrist angular velocity. Table 5; Supplementary Table S7 report the slopes, with 95% confidence intervals (CIs).We tested the associations for interaction between exposure and sex. When no such interaction was present, i.e. when the p-value for the interaction term was not below 0.05, we present β for women and men together, including an adjustment for sex. To enable modelling of the curves, we report the prevalence at a reference exposure level within the range of the data for each value of β. Supplementary Table S7 presents exposure–response relationships separately for women and men.As we measured physical exposure on sub groups, not on all workers, there was an uncertainty in group mean of exposure. To assess the magnitude of this uncertainty we performed bootstrapping simulations. For each relationship between exposure and disorder, we simulated 1000 new sets of 33 occupational groups. The presence of a disorder in each worker was then based on resampling with replacement, the likelihood being based on the size of the group and the prevalence of the disorder (Efron and Tibshirani, 1993; Nordander et al., 2013). Exposure was randomly assigned to each individual based on a normal distribution for the group, with its mean and standard deviation. Individual exposures were also resampled with replacement. Each bootstrap simulation gave a new set of study groups, to which weighted linear regression was applied, using the number of workers in the study group as weighting. We estimated the 95% CIs for the slopes from the 1000 sets of simulated study groups (Table 5; and Figs. 1–3).Finally, we carried out multivariate linear regressions (forward procedure) for complaints and diagnoses. Then, we tested physical and psychosocial exposures, averages of age and exposure time for each group. Sex was always included in the models. The regressions were weighted by the number of workers examined in each group. We tested the final models for interactions among included factors. Table 6and Supplementary Table S8 give the slopes of the regression lines with 95% CIs, for the factors included. Statistically significant interaction terms are presented together with the group-level explained variance (adjusted R2).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The study presents quantitative exposure–response relationships between physical workload on the neck and arms, and musculoskeletal disorders of the neck and shoulders. Apart from its theoretical interest, such information may be valuable for the assessment of risk in different occupations/work tasks, the establishment of quantitative exposure limits, and for the evaluation of preventive measures.