@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Strategic threat management: An exploration of nursing strategies in the pediatric intensive care unit

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Strategic threat management of ICU nurses was studied with structured interviews.We classified and mapped strategies to threats and to the cues that evoked them.Most threats involved technology, staff, or organization.Most strategies involved staff and patient, or were cocktails of work facets (treatment, exam).Most threats were managed by strategies that reflected the threat's work facet.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Strategies,Interviews,Nursing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Part of the work of a critical care nurse is to manage the threats that arise that could impede efficient and effective job performance. Nurses manage threats by employing various strategies to keep performance high and workload manageable. We investigated strategic threat management by using the Threat-Strategy Interview. Threats frequently involved technology, staff, or organizational components. The threats were managed by a toolbox of multifaceted strategies, the most frequent of which involved staff-, treatment- (patient + technology), examination- (patient + clinician), and patient-oriented strategies. The profile of strategies for a particular threat often leveraged work facets similar to the work facet that characterized the threat. In such cases, the nurse's strategy was directed at eliminating the threat (not working around it). A description at both a domain invariant level – useful for understanding strategic threat management generally – and a description at an operational, specific level – useful for guiding interventions-- are presented. A structural description of the relationship among threats, strategies, and the cues that trigger them is presented in the form of an evidence accumulation framework of strategic threat management.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Healthcare delivery is a domain in which highly skilled workers must understand the situation well enough to adapt to changes in a way that keeps their performance high while ensuring their workload is within limits. Nursing is an integral part of that healthcare system. Nurses spend more time with patients than any other healthcare provider (DeLucia et al., 2009). They routinely engage in decision making and problem solving behavior (Tucker et al., 2002). For example, nurses in the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) switch between tasks every 40 s and face high workload due to frequently interleaving tasks (Douglas et al., 2013).Tucker (2004) found that nurses spend approximately 42 min of each 8-h shift dealing with operational failures. Previous literature has focused on classifying such obstacles that nurses face. Faye et al. (2010) identified failure modes occurring in the medication management process and rated them based on likelihood of occurrence, impact on the patient, and impact on the nurse. They found that the most critical failure modes were related to equipment, the organization, and the patient. The work-system model (Smith and Carayon-Sainfort, 1989) points to task, organization, environment, equipment/technology, and the individual as five types of performance obstacles. The System Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety (SEIPS) model describes the interaction of the work system design and these five obstacles (Carayon et al., 2006). Similarly, Itoh et al. (2009) present a human error taxonomy that identifies communication, staff, patient, task, equipment, organizational, and environmental factors as possible contributors to errors.Borrowing from the threat and error management framework (Helmreich et al., 1999), we can view obstacles or operational failures that decrease an operator's effectiveness and increase her or his workload as threats to performing a task. Operators manage threats and errors by adopting strategies that allow them to accomplish the task in spite of the presence of these operational threats. Strategies are an important part of nursing. Carney (2009) searched CINAHL and PUBMED indexed journals for the words strategy, nurse, and management in the title and found about 8% of the titles referred to strategy. However, many of the articles on strategy were concerned with organizational strategies or policy issues (e.g., Amalberti and Hourlier, 2011). Some were aimed at social interaction strategies, such as strategies to ameliorate interpersonal conflicts (e.g., Stayt, 2007) and a few at job coping strategies (e.g., sympathy burnout, Yoder, 2010; male nurse minority, Asakura and Watanabe, 2011). At a clinical level, a number refer to specific diseases or treatments (e.g., removal of catheters; Griffiths and Fernandez, 2007). However, there have been only a few studies looking at general strategies used by nurses “in the moment” to manage healthcare delivery.When involved in direct patient care, nurses adapt to events in the environment – interruptions, communications, operating technology, patient status – and engage in goal-directed, “operational problem-solving behavior” in the process (Holden et al., 2012). Holden et al. (2012) found that when faced with new problems, such as the introduction of bar-coded medication administration, nurses applied preexisting problem solving behaviors, created new behaviors, or were unable to solve the problem. Nurses reprioritize and continuously engage in problem solving and modifying their task load due to the constant change in patients' conditions (Tucker and Spear, 2006). Nurses need strategies to manage the demands produced from administrative nursing tasks and even non-nursing tasks.Henneman and colleagues (Henneman et al., 2006; 2010) have found that critical care nurses use a variety of strategies to identify, interrupt, and correct medical errors. Nurses' strategies either depended on the nurses' knowledge (i.e., of the patient, coworkers, plan of care, policies/procedures) or methods of evaluating the situation (i.e., surveillance, anticipation, double-checking, questioning, awareness of the “big picture,” and experiential knowing). Experiential knowing, for example, grew out of nurses' recollections of when they had “stopped because of some cue that something was not right” (Henneman et al., 2006, p. 74). Upon identifying an error, nurses attempted to “interrupt the error” or engaged strategies to correct it. Nurses use a variety of strategies to recognize errors and to decrease the adverse effects of those errors. Thus, while there is research on both threats and the strategies to manage them, it has been difficult to elicit such information from skilled nurses and to systematically analyze that information.One knowledge elicitation method aimed specifically at threats, strategies, and the cues that elicit them is the Threat-Strategy Interview (TSI; Durso et al., 2015). The TSI presents nurses with a specific task to which the nurses generate potential threats. Generating threats to a task came naturally to the nurses, and from this context flowed strategies used to manage a particular threat. Then, given this context of a strategy to a specific threat, nurses were able to generate the cues that led them to choose that strategy over the other strategies they had available. Anecdotally, articulating the cues often came with an introspective “aha” that suggested the nurse had brought to consciousness a connection previously tacit and part of her or his intuition (Kahneman and Klein, 2009; Klein, 1998). Through the TSI we hope to understand better Henneman's nurses when they spoke of “some cue that something was not right.” The purpose of the current study was to use the TSI to elicit strategic knowledge, create a taxonomy of nursing threats and strategy use, map threats and strategies, and develop a network describing the relationships among threats, strategies, and the cues that evoke them.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The strategic threat management employed by experienced nurses can sometimes seem like inscrutable intuition. We used a recently developed knowledge elicitation procedure inspired by the threat and error management literature to extract strategies that operators use to manage threats, including the perceptual and cognitive cues used to help select those strategies. Once extracted, many understandable and consistent relationships among threats, strategies, and cues were apparent in the nurses' strategic threat management.Discussion of strategic threat management, as captured by the TSI, seems to be relatively easy for the nurses. Even in instances that might casually be attributed to intuition, the TSI often helped to make explicit something that was implicit. Initially nurses might speak of inspecting equipment or assessing a patient but not articulate the cues that guided strategy selection. For example, one nurse spoke of deciding between sedation and analgesia. The TSI probes led her to articulate that assessing facial expressions (e.g., wide eyes indicating anxiety) was the process she used to inform that decision. Ultimately, we were able to determine the perceptual details that would make up the cues that she used to select strategies. From another example, a nurse had the epiphany that whether or not she chose one strategy over another depended on whether she could see someone in the hallway at the time.Threats most often reflected technology, staff, or organization, and rarely task, clinician, and communication. The threats were managed with a toolbox of strategies. For patient threats, the nurses always aimed to mitigate the threat. They also tended to mitigate staff threats, but employed work-around strategies as well. On the other hand, technology threats produced both work-around and mitigation strategies equally often.The strategies sometimes focused on one aspect of the work, but they were often multifaceted – a cocktail of different work resources. The prominent strategies were staff, treatment (patient + technology), exam (patient + clinician), and patient. The strategy profile depended on the type of threat being managed in a rather systematic way. Specifically, threats centering on a particular work facet tended to be mitigated by strategies that also leveraged that type of work facet once expected values were taken into account.The current methodology has limitations. One limitation of the study was that a maximum of three nurses were interviewed on each threat. Additionally, the nurses were from only two facilities. These limitations may have affected generalizability. Of course, the use of the TSI shares limitations with other structured interviews, in particular relying on retrospective and subjective reports.The single exception to the general finding that the primary facet of a strategy reflected the threat it was intended to address was the organization threat. For organization threats, nurses used strategies that affected the clinician more than would be expected by chance. When the organization failed to satisfy the nurses' needs, the nurses inspected the technology or the patient, and in so doing improved their understanding of the situation without assistance from the hospital. Holden et al. (2012) suspect that nurses simply do not have access to the necessary resources to use organizational strategies; nurses do not typically possess the resources necessary to implement second order problem solving. Tucker and Edmondson (2003) define second order problem solving as addressing underlying causes allowing organizational learning to occur. The finding that most organization management involved work-around strategies is consistent with this literature. Finally, we suspect that “organization” may prove to be too broad and nebulous a category as defined here. Unlike our other categories, the strategy profiles of the organization threats were relatively uncorrelated suggesting that the strategic management of organization threats deserves more consideration.Researchers have been paying greater attention to organizational influences, both theoretically and methodologically. There is a large and important body of research that defines work processes and the system within which work occurs (Carayon et al., 2006). For example, the Macroergonomic Analysis and Design (MEAD, Kleiner, 2006) method elicits factors of the work environment that impede safe and optimal task completion. Although such approaches help in highlighting variances that threaten system safety, there remains a need for extracting strategic knowledge from experienced operators who often manage the threats.The complexity of mapping strategies to threats became especially clear when we considered the cues used by nurses to trigger the strategies. By using a chart showing the perceptual or cognitive cue that produced evidence in favor of (or against) a strategy, the structural components of strategy selection could be represented. The cue-to-strategy mappings should not be thought of as a stimulus-response mapping, but instead as cues adding weight to the selection of a particular strategy, making the model an evidence accumulation one.Overall, the charts we constructed to show the relationship among cues, threats, and strategies, revealed a rich interconnectedness and a number of complex variations. Strategies seem to be triggered (or inhibited) by a variety of perceptual and cognitive cues. We believe these cues are considered as evidence for, or against, the applicability of a particular strategy. Some cues help the nurse identify the threat but also trigger strategies that are considered immediately in the particular situation.Not all cues are considered by experts. Further, research shows that under time-pressured situations people are less likely to sample all available information to reach decisions, thus making use of noncompensatory strategies (Payne et al., 1996). Noncompensatory strategies have been argued to be as effective as compensatory ones (Gigerenzer, 2008). It is possible that critical care nurses manage acute patient deterioration by engaging in noncompensatory strategies. Modeling strategy choice using an evidence-accumulation model could shed light on this issue.The information gathered about threats, strategies, and the cues that trigger them can prove useful in a number of ways. For example, the threat-strategy-cue structures of experienced nurses can be compared to that of novices and targeted simulation training could be initiated. The charts can also be used to predict the strategy that a nurse would choose given a particular set of cues. At a more theoretical level, there exist system approaches that intend to characterize cognitive work that rely on strategies. Thus far, while researchers (e.g., Hassall and Sanderson, 2012; Cornelissen et al., 2013) have developed formal ways of representing strategies in cognitive work analysis (e.g., Lintern, 2009; Vicente, 1999) there has been a need for coherent methods focused on extracting such strategies from experts. The results from the TSI could ultimately be embedded in cognitive work analysis.