@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Soccer players' fitting perception of different upper boot materials

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Soccer players' fitting perception of different upper boot materials were assessed.The type of leather of the upper boot influences the fitting perception.The kangaroo leather was perceived as the closest condition to the preferred fitting.The synthetic leather was perceived as the furthest condition to the preferred fitting.These results are relevant to the comfort and fit of players and purchase decision-making.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Football,Soccer,Shoes,Footwear,Comfort,Leather,Upper,Fitting,Perception,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The present study assessed the influence of upper boot materials on fitting perception. Twenty players tested three soccer boots only differing in the upper boot material (natural calf leather, natural kangaroo leather and synthetic leather). Players reported fitting perception and preference on specific foot areas using a perceived fitting scale. Ratings were averaged for every foot area. Repeated measures ANOVA was used to analyze the differences between boots. The kangaroo leather boots were perceived tighter and closer to the preferred fitting in general fitting, metatarsals area and instep area. The synthetic leather boots were perceived as the loosest and as the most distant boot from the preferred fitting in medial front area and instep area. In conclusion, the type of upper boot material influences the fitting perception of soccer players. The kangaroo leather was the material whose fitting was perceived closest to the players fitting preference.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Soccer is the most popular sport in the world (Hennig and Sterzing, 2010; Manning and Levy, 2006; Zarei et al., 2010), and soccer boots play a major role in players’ performance (Hennig and Sterzing, 2010). Comfort has been identified to be one of the most relevant variables for sport shoes design (Lucas-Cuevas et al., 2014; Nigg, 2010) and for soccer players (Hennig and Sterzing, 2014). In this sense, footwear comfort and fitting have been associated not only with injuries (Mündermann et al., 2001) but also with performance in sports (Luo et al., 2009; Nigg et al., 1999). Even though previous studies observed that players are able to cope with a certain amount of discomfort during short motor performance situations, discomfort situations are likely to affect performance if maintained over long periods of time (Sterzing and Hennig, 2008; Sterzing et al., 2009). Thus, comfort perception should be a crucial factor to take into account when purchasing a soccer boot.Fitting is one of the most important factors in comfort perception (Hawes et al., 1994; Hennig and Sterzing, 2010). Fitting can be understood as the level of matching between the foot and boot shapes (Lam et al., 2011), unveiled by the pressure distribution generated by the boot on the foot (Olaso et al., 2007). In general, soccer players demand a tighter fit, in comparison with other sports like running where shoes provide 1–2 cm of space around the toes (Kunde et al., 2009). Tight fitting is said to provide better ball handling perception (Sterzing et al., 2011) and an even distribution of pressures over the foot dorsum, what has been related to shooting accuracy (Hennig and Sterzing, 2010, 2014). However, if applied over time, excessive pressures on the foot may lead to overuse injuries and foot pain (Chuckpaiwong et al., 2008; Fernández-Seguín et al., 2014; Weist et al., 2004). All these aspects highlight the importance of purchasing a boot that fits properly due to its influence over soccer performance and injury prevention (Sandrey et al., 1996).The fit of a boot is related to the shoe-last shape and the materials used for its construction (Janisse, 1992). Certain types of leathers (e.g. kangaroo leather) have the ability to yield and accommodate different foot shapes, while still providing a strong resistance to splitting (Lees and Lake, 2003; Werd and Knight, 2010). Moreover, each material has a different break-in period, which is the period where the shoe deforms and molds to the shape of the foot (Goonetilleke et al., 2000). As a result, the different properties of the materials used in shoe construction will ultimately influence fit and comfort perception (Lees and Lake, 2003; Werd and Knight, 2010).Traditionally, leather has been the most commonly used material in soccer boot design, but during the second half of 20th century, synthetic leathers (a mixture of polymeric material and natural leather) and kangaroo leathers became very popular. Even though each type of leather is used for a different purpose, both synthetic and kangaroo leathers are nowadays widely used in the market. However, regardless of their popularity, no study to date has investigated how the different types of leathers used in boot design may influence the footwear fit perception of soccer players.Fitting has been identified not only as one of the most important aspects that influence the purchase of a soccer boot (Blackwell et al., 2006; Kaplan and Okur, 2008), but also as one of the factors most relevant to satisfaction before and after the purchase of the boot (Chae et al., 2006). In this sense, even though a given soccer boot is reported to provide great levels of functional properties such as traction or stability, a negative perception of fit would make the player to purchase a different soccer boot. As a result, it is of great interest to investigate the players’ fitting perception during the purchase of a soccer boot. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to analyze the influence of upper boot materials (natural calf leather, natural kangaroo leather and synthetic leather) on the fitting perception of soccer players during the purchase of a soccer boot on an environment simulating a footwear shop.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In conclusion, the materials used in the upper part of the soccer boot influence the players’ perception of fitting. When comparing kangaroo, calf and synthetic leathers, the kangaroo leather is reported as the material that provides the perception of fitting closest to the preferred fitting of the players. However, it is important to take into account that perception levels of fitting depend on the foot area of analysis and on the interaction between the foot and the shoe shape. Although fitting perception is a subjective attribute difficult to assess, negative fitting perception could lead to lower sport performance and increased injury rate. As a result, the selection of a soccer boot that reports the closest perceived fitting to the preferred and ideal fitting should become a priority for soccer players.