@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A systematic review – physical activity in dementia: The influence of the nursing home environment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Dementia patients (90%) who are residing in the nursing home environment remain physically passive for most of the day.Apathy negatively influences the residents' physical and cognitive well-being and therefore quality of life.The environmental elements of timed bright light and small-scale living concepts stimulate residents' physical activity.The intervention studies with background music differed strongly in scientific rigor, but showed promising results.More research is necessary to draw conclusions for a homelike interior, functional modifications, and building footprint.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Environmental ergonomics,Design for dementia,Physical activity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Most older persons with dementia living in nursing homes spend their days without engaging in much physical activity. This study therefore looked at the influence that the environment has on their level of physical activity, by reviewing empirical studies that measured the effects of environmental stimuli on the physical activity of nursing home residents suffering from dementia. The electronic databases PubMed, PsycINFO, EMBASE, CINAHL and the Cochrane Library were used for the search. The search covered studies published between January 1993 and December 2012, and revealed 3187 abstracts. 326 studies were selected as potentially relevant; of these, 24 met all the inclusion criteria. Positive results on the residents' levels of physical activity were found for music, a homelike environment and functional modifications. Predominantly positive results were also found for the small-scale group living concepts. Mixed results were found for bright or timed light, the multisensory environment and differences in the building footprint.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The design of our physical living environment influences our performances by supporting our abilities (Lawton, 1974). Especially for older persons with dementia, who have cognitive, physical and sensory limitations, the physical environment potentially supports or hinders a satisfactory life (Cohen-Mansfield and Werner, 1998). Thus, understanding the influences of the environment on their behaviour is of utmost importance for the teams that design nursing homes and comprise of architects, interior designers, care professionals and policymakers. In the literature, these environments are referred to as, for example, “healing environments” (Dijkstra et al., 2006) or “therapeutically designed environments” (Day et al., 2000).Many studies have investigated the health and behaviour-related effects of the nursing home environment on older persons with dementia (for reviews see: Day et al., 2000; Day and Calkins, 2002; Maslow and Ory, 2001; Calkins, 2009). The majority of these intervention studies aimed to moderate residents' disruptive behaviours (e.g. wandering, agitation or aggression) by reducing the environmental stimuli (Mahoney et al., 2000). However, too little stimulation implies the stimulus deprivation of and little activity by older persons with dementia during the day (Cohen-Mansfield and Werner, 1998). Nearly half of the residents in nursing homes suffer from dementia-related diseases, for example, Alzheimer's, vascular dementia or Huntington's (Silverstein and Flaherty, 2003), and this group appears to be the least active: 90% of all nursing home residents with dementia suffer from passive behaviour (Kolanowski et al., 2005).The research interest has shifted from limiting disruptive behaviours by reducing environmental stimuli, towards providing enriched environments that elicit positive behaviours (Calkins, 2009). Moreover, recent studies have shown that stimulating older persons with dementia might actually reduce disruptive behaviours (Volicer et al., 2006; Aman and Thomas, 2009). More specifically, the physical and mental activation of older persons suffering from dementia is important to prevent them from being bored, restless and apathetic (Morgan and Stewart, 1999; Lawton, 2001). In the literature, boredom and loneliness are associated with cognitive decline (Conroy et al., 2010; Wilson et al., 2007). There is also emerging evidence for the beneficial effects of physical activity on physical flexibility, coordination and strength (Warburton et al., 2006), as well as on cognitive functioning, especially of older persons with and without cognitive impairment (Colcombe and Kramer, 2003).Considering the growing consensus about the beneficial effects of physical activity on cognition, physical health, behaviour and older persons' mood, the goal of the present review was to address studies that measured the effects of environmental stimuli on the level of physical activity of older persons with dementia residing in a nursing home environment. Physical activity is defined as “any bodily movement produced by the contraction of skeletal muscles that results in a substantial increase over resting energy expenditure” (Pate et al., 1995). The recommended amount of physical activity for older persons is described in Text box 1.Text box 1Physical activity for older adultsThe recommended amount of physical activity for older adults (age ≥65 yr), as defined by the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) and the American Heart Association (AHA), is similar to the recommendations for adults, namely 30min of moderate intensity at least 5 days a week, or 20min of vigorous intensity aerobic activity at least 3 days a week (Nelson et al., 2007). For older adults, the recommendation differs on the definition of the aerobic intensity. Considering the low fitness levels of older adults, moderate intensity is defined as ‘a 5 or 6 out of 10; produces noticeable increases in heart rate and breathing,’ and vigorous intensity is ‘a 7 or 8, and produces large increases in heart rate and breathing’ (Nelson et al., 2007). The intensity of a particular activity depends on individual fitness levels, and these vary strongly amongst older adults. In addition, if older adults do not meet the recommended activity levels, they still benefit from reducing sedentary behaviour (Nelson et al., 2007).As all non-apathetic behaviour is desirable, and possibly contributes to meeting the ACSM/AHA recommendations (Nelson et al., 2007), several physical activity outcomes were included in this review, that is, performance on (i)ADLs, attending leisure activities, total amount of daily activity and reducing apathy.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
•Due to the limited number of studies that scored high on the NHMRC evidence hierarchy (National Health and Medical Research Council, 2000), we also included studies with less rigorous study designs. However, almost all studies scored relatively high on the quality assessment for mixed methods reviews by Pluye et al. (2009).Studies on the effects of timed bright light, and MSE on the levels of physical activity had the most rigorous study designs according to the NHMRC hierarchy (National Health and Medical Research Council, 2000), but the methodological quality differed, from 33% to 100% on the quality assessment of Pluye et al. (2009). The studies of music and small-scale living concepts covered almost all levels of the NHMRC evidence hierarchy, but scored overall high on methodological quality, from 67% to 100%. The two studies with whole-day bright light differed strongly in scientific rigor, i.e. a cross-sectional and RCT study, but both scored well on methodological quality, namely 67% and 100%. Studies that evaluated building footprint, functional modifications and the homelike environment scored in the lowest two levels of the NHMRC evidence hierarchy, whereas all studies scored relatively high on methodological quality, i.e. from 67% to 100%.The number of patients included in the studies varied strongly amongst the environmental elements. The qualitative studies that evaluated functional modifications included rather low numbers of residents (Ntotal = 11). Higher numbers of participants can be found for elements that are evaluated with both quantitative and qualitative studies: building footprint (Ntotal = 93; two studies that did not specify the number of participants), homelike environment (Ntotal = 54), and music (Ntotal = 67). The highest numbers of participants can be found with the elements that were (predominantly) evaluated quantitatively: timed (Ntotal = 310) and all day bright light (Ntotal = 257), multisensory environment (Ntotal = 132), and small-scale living environments (Ntotal = 1684; one study did not specify the number of participants)As the search strategy shows, we search the databases on more environmental elements than are evaluated in this review. Physical elements of the nursing home environment that we searched but that were not studied (sufficiently) on its effect on physical activity are: colour, sound and noise (other than music), way finding and spatial orientation, visual and tactual stimuli, smell and fragrance, furnishing, outdoor and gardens, decoration and patterns. Future studies to the effects of these elements on the residents' level of physical activity would provide useful knowledge to make the nursing home environment more stimulating.It is remarkable that the known positive effects of timed bright light on, for example, physical activity have not resulted in improved lighting in nursing homes: the illumination levels in today's nursing homes are often low (Lepeleire et al., 2007). The studies that evaluated the MSE and small-scale living concepts also showed predominantly positive influences on the residents' level of physical activity; we therefore we recommend adapting these concepts to the nursing home environment.We should consider the results for music with caution, as the studies differed strongly in scientific rigor. However, as the results were unanimously positive, including background, or preferably live music in the daily care for residents might be advisable for physical activation.Because of the lack of evidence for the influence of the homelike environment, functional modifications and the building footprint on the residents' level of physical activity, we cannot provide design guidelines for these environmental characteristics.