@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Physical workload, trapezius muscle activity, and neck pain in nurses' night and day shifts: A physiological evaluation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Trapezius muscle activity and workload were assessed over full day and night shifts in nurses.During day and night shifts, heart rate was very high compared to resting values.Physical workload and load on the trapezius muscle were smaller during night than during day shifts.Perception of neck pain and mental well-being at work were similar during day and night shifts.Night shifts were perceived to be as burdensome as day shifts despite the smaller physical workload.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electromyography,Shift work,Stress,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purpose of this study was to compare physical workload, electromyography (EMG) of the trapezius muscle, neck pain and mental well-being at work between night and day shifts in twenty Swiss nurses. Work pulse (average increase of heart rate over resting heart rate) was lower during night (27 bpm) compared to day shifts (34 bpm; p < 0.01). Relative arm acceleration also indicated less physical activity during night (82% of average) compared to day shifts (110%; p < 0.01). Rest periods were significantly longer during night shifts. Trapezius muscle rest time was longer during night (13% of shift duration) than day shifts (7%; p < 0.01) and the 50th percentile of EMG activity was smaller (p = 0.02), indicating more opportunities for muscle relaxation during night shifts. Neck pain and mental well-being at work were similar between shifts. Subjective perception of burden was similar between shifts despite less physical burden at night, suggesting there are other contributing factors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) commonly affect nurses (Harcombe et al., 2009; Long et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2004), possibly due to the strenuous workload (Baptiste, 2011; Heiden et al., 2013) and irregular shift schedule that are an integral part of nursing (Caruso and Waters, 2008). The financial consequences of MSDs are substantial and the direct cost of low back pain in Switzerland accounts for 6.1% of total health care expenses (Wieser et al., 2011). MSDs have a detrimental effect on occupational and private activities and thereby reduce quality of life (Scuffham et al., 2010). This might explain the relatively short careers of Swiss nurses, who work for an average of only 13.5 years in nursing (Dolder and Grünig, 2009).The most common MSDs in nurses are low back and neck pain. The prevalence of neck pain is between 50 and 60% (Harcombe et al., 2009; Warming et al., 2009), and a prevalence of even 83% has been reported (Long et al., 2012). Several studies have reported that sustained trapezius muscle activity correlates with the presence of neck pain or may predict the development of neck pain (Aaras, 1994; Hanvold et al., 2012). The commonly used method to evaluate trapezius muscle activity is surface electromyography (EMG, Mathiassen et al., 1995). The most important determinant for neck pain was reported to be a lack of rest time, demonstrated by no periods without measurable activity in EMG (Hagg and Astrom, 1997; Veiersted et al., 1993). This concept is based on the so-called Cinderella hypothesis (Hagg, 1991) which states that during a prolonged low-level activity the same muscle fibers are always active. Such prolonged low-level activities are frequently observed in the trapezius muscle (Ostensvik et al., 2009). If rest time is lacking, these so-called Cinderella fibers may become overloaded (Hagg, 1991). Early histological studies of trapezius muscle found changes at the cellular level in subjects suffering from neck pain (Lindman et al., 1991). Newer studies found evidence for the malfunctioning of single muscle cells (Sjogaard et al., 2010) but additional mechanisms, such as sensitization, are also assumed to play a role (Visser and van Dieen, 2006). The discussed insufficient rest time is strongly correlated with the type of workload and mental stress and neck pain was shown to be correlated with shift work (Elfering et al., 2008; Farina et al., 2008; Läubli and Müller, 2009).The type of workload has an effect on prolonged periods of low-level activity. During a variable load the trapezius muscle demonstrates a shift of activity (Falla and Farina, 2007), while no shift of activity occurs during a constant load. Without a shift of activity and if the duration is long enough overexertion results (Farina et al., 2008). During standardized stress tasks in laboratory experiments, Sjogaard et al. (2010) reported higher EMG levels in females with trapezius myalgia compared to females without myalgia, and the relative load was higher in females with trapezius myalgia. In an earlier study where assessments were conducted at the subjects' work places using the same case definitions, Larsson et al. (2008) found no difference in EMG measurements between cases and controls. The authors suggested that under normal working conditions at the actual workplace, cases and controls work at the same relative load, leading to the same strain for cases and controls.Mental stress increases the activity of the trapezius muscle (Nimbarte et al., 2012) and is suggested to cause prolonged low-level activity of muscles which prevents muscle relaxation and regeneration of the allostatic system (Sjogaard et al., 2000). Elfering et al. (2008) found a correlation between MSDs and the stress hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine. Time pressure also causes higher levels of trapezius muscle activity (Birch et al., 2000).Rotating shift work is a well-known risk to health (Conway et al., 2008; Costa, 1996) and the associated health risks are assumed to be caused by a disruption of the circadian rhythm (Bonde et al., 2012). Estryn-Behar et al. (2008) showed that nurses working shifts that included night shifts demonstrated a higher risk of burnout than nurses not working night shifts, while nurses with regular day work or shift work excluding night shifts did not differ for this risk. Läubli and Müller (2009) showed an association between night shifts and MSDs. In addition, shift work increases the risk of work-family conflict (Camerino et al., 2010), which in turn is associated with neck pain (Hammig et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2013).The aim of the present study was to investigate physical workload and trapezius muscle activity during night and day shifts and their association with neck pain and mental well-being at work in nurses. Based on the burden associated with the disruption in the circadian rhythm and the fact that in Switzerland nursing staff is reduced during night shifts, we assumed that night shifts would be associated with more burden than day shifts. Therefore, we hypothesized that workload and trapezius muscle activity would be greater during night than day shifts and that night shifts would be associated with more neck pain and worse mental well-being at work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
