@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comparison of firefighters and non-firefighters and the test methods used regarding the effects of personal protective equipment on individual mobility

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We compared the mobility with PPE using pilot test methods consisting of a balance test and a physical performance test.18 participants (nine professional firefighters and nine untrained males) performed the pilot test method.Significant differences between PPEs and CON for the test results from firefighters were found.The participant group with more significance for evaluation of PPE and that was physically appropriate to this test method was firefighters.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Personal protective equipment,Test methods,Mobility,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aims of this study were 1) to evaluate the current pilot test method and ascertain reliable measurements for a standard test method of mobility with personal protective equipment (PPE), such as physical performance and balance ability tests; 2) to compare two participant groups (firefighters versus non-firefighters) and to investigate whether non-firefighters are appropriate as a standard participant group in the field of PPE or not. Totally, 18 participants (nine professional firefighters and nine untrained males) performed the current pilot test method consisting of a balance test, completed prior to and after a performance test. Significant differences were found between PPE conditions and CON (the control clothing ensemble: T-shirt, shorts, and running shoes) for the functional balance test, physical performance test, heart rate, and subjective evaluations in firefighters group. Therefore, the present pilot test method is valid as a standard test method for assessing mobility while wearing PPE. Moreover, the present result shows that firefighters are more reliable than non-firefighters in testing of PPE with current test methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Firefighting is one of the most hazardous occupations and is associated with exceedingly high rates of injuries. Average of 38,660 American firefighter injuries occurred at the fire site (Karter, 2012). Therefore, firefighters require not only good physical capabilities but also sufficient mobility in their active work while firefighting at a high temperature and humidity with heavy personal protective equipment (PPE). PPE, which is composed of personal protective clothing (PPC) and accessories such as a self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA), helmet, mask, gloves and boots, is necessary to protect firefighters from various occupational hazards such as fire on the high-storied and sealed buildings. In this regard, the assessment of PPE in terms of wearer mobility, as well as protective functions, is required. Although PPE aims to protect firefighters from physical and chemical harm, firefighters can become fatigued by impeded movement due to the weight and bulky nature of the multiple layers.Therefore, studies into firefighter PPE are performed frequently. Previous studies have reported that firefighters experienced physiological strain when performing at a simulated fire site and during firefighting activities with PPE in hot and humid environments (Griefahn et al., 2003; Bakri et al., 2012). However, relatively few studies have reported on mobility with different designs and weight of PPE during firefighting activities, and Range of motion (ROM) and subjective evaluations are generally used to assess mobility in previous studies. According to previous studies, ROM of each body part was changed due to PPE designs (Coca et al., 2008, 2010; Huck, 1988, 1991), and decreased by weight of PPE and friction of wet PPE (Son et al., 2010).There are several international standards for evaluating firefighters' PPE, but these standards are merely assigned to the heat, flame, and water resistant properties of PPE (CEN TC 162, 2002; EN 469, 2005; ISO 11613, 1999). Furthermore, few test methods for assessing mobility while wearing PPE have been established (BS 8469, 2007; CEN TC 162, 2002). Without a standard method for mobility, the comparison of several types of PPE from different research groups may lead to inaccurate interpretations. Therefore, research on a standard method for assessing the mobility of PPE is required.From the 1970s, many studies have been performed on firefighting drills which consist of dynamic movement such as ladder drill, pulling a hose, rescue, forcible entry, and stair climbing. These are carried out as essential movements for firefighting (Gledhill and Jamnik, 1992; Smith et al., 2001; Williford et al., 1999). However, the previous research groups have merely studied the demands on firefighters using these movements. They reported the physiological responses of PPE wearers such as heart rate (HR) and metabolic demands. The mobility during firefighting drill was not evaluated in previous studies. Referring to survey of Japanese firefighters from Son et al. (2013), a large number of firefighters suffered injuries and restricted mobility due to failures in balance control (slips or falls) while wearing PPE. According to previous research, many firefighters have been injured by failing to control their balance (Karter, 2012). These reports suggest that a balance test with PPE is necessary. Therefore, for a standard method to evaluate mobility with different types of PPE, a combination of the physical performance test and functional balance test is required.Previous studies on PPE recruited firefighters as participants (Bos et al., 2004; Coca et al., 2010; Plat et al., 2010; Smith et al., 1997; Williford et al., 1999). Also, non-firefighters were asked to perform the experiment as subjects (Huck 1988, 1991). However, the physical demands and abilities of firefighters and untrained volunteers are not same, and firefighters are more used to working with PPE than untrained subjects. Therefore, the results of previous studies could not be compared absolutely. Regarding this, we were curious as to whether untrained males, especially students are appropriate to study of standard test method for mobility with PPE. To resolve this, comparison or evaluation of participant groups is also required.The pilot test method consisted of several measurements such as a physical performance test which was composed of a general physical fitness test and simple firefighting drills and the balance ability test, made for developing a standard test for assessing the mobility while wearing PPE in the present study. The aim of this study was to evaluate the current pilot test method and ascertain reliable measurements for developing a standard test method of mobility with PPE. The other aim was to compare two participant groups (firefighters versus non-firefighters) and to investigate whether non-firefighters are appropriate as a standard participant group in the field of PPE or not.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The present study aimed to ascertain whether mobility test methods for PPE such as physical capability and balance ability tests are suitable for investigating the effects of PPE's weight and design on mobility. We found significant differences due to weight of PPE for the present test method conducted to functional balance test (especially, ‘Timed up and go’ and ‘Arm reach’), physical performance test, HR, and subjective evaluations. Thus, the measurements for evaluation of mobility due to wearing PPE in this study are regarded as valid. Therefore, this test method is distinguishable from test methods for mobility that considered balance and physical performance. However, the postural balance test seems unsuitable for evaluating mobility due to its low effectiveness and convenience. Furthermore, the other aim of the present study was to compare two participant groups (firefighters versus non-firefighters) to establish which is more appropriate as a standard participant group. For the present results, the firefighter group is more used to working with PPE and had more significant differences for each test on most measurements. Therefore, more significant results should be obtained by studying firefighters as a standard participant group. This study provides validate and useful data for evaluating wearers' mobility with PPEs, and the present test method is needed to compare PPEs.