@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Standing on a declining surface reduces transient prolonged standing induced low back pain development

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Assessed alternative standing posture to alleviate prolonged standing low back pain.Participants stood on a declining surface and level ground for 75 min.Pain reports of those with low back pain on level ground decreased 58% on decline.Greater hip flexion, trunk center of gravity translated posteriorly on decline surface.Declining surface could help stabilize pelvis, alter the lower lumbar arc, prevent pain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Occupational standing,Standing aid,Static,Lumbar spine,Posture,Movement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
While alternating standing position on a sloped surface has proven successful at reducing low back pain during standing, the purpose of this study was to evaluate standing solely on a declining surface to isolate the influence of the postural change. Seventeen participants performed two 75-min prolonged standing occupational simulations– level ground and declining surface. Fifty-three percent of participants (9/17) were categorized as pain developers during the level ground standing condition. For these same pain developers, their average maximum pain scores were 58% lower during sloped standing. All participants showed greater hip flexion, trunk-to-thigh angle flexion, and posterior translation of the trunk center of gravity when standing on the sloped surface. These postural changes could cause the muscles crossing the hip posteriorly to increase passive stiffness and assist with stabilizing the pelvis. This study stresses the importance of hip kinematics, not just lumbar spine posture, in reducing prolonged standing induced low back pain.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The increased use of sit-stand and standing workstations has produced products that help people tolerate longer bouts of standing to prevent potential lower limb and back pain commonly associated with standing (Waters and Dick, 2015). There is a large potential market audience for these devices, as greater than 40% of people who have never reported a low back injury report while standing (Gallagher et al., 2014; Marshall et al., 2011; Nelson-Wong and Callaghan, 2010c). The Canadian Center for Health and Occupational Safety (2008), the Occupational Safety and Health Association (2012), and the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (Cohen et al., 1997) all recommend some sort of standing aid, such as a platform to elevate ones foot or anti-fatigue matting, when prolonged or static standing is an occupational risk factor. Despite these recommendations it is unknown how, why, or if these aids are successful at reducing low back pain (LBP). A working hypothesis is that when a device alters lower limb position it also alters pelvis and lumbar spine posture. A relevant example of this from sitting – decreasing the trunk to thigh angle causes the pelvis to rotate posteriorly and the lumbar spine to flatten (Keegan, 1953). While more subtle, the same mechanism is also found when changing lower limb position while standing (Dolan et al., 1988). Studying the influence of standing aids on prolonged standing induced LBP provides insight into (1) the characteristics of successful interventions and (2) the fundamental difference between prolonged standing low back pain developers (PDs) and non-pain developers (non-PDs). Thus, the purpose of this study was to assess the acute and prolonged kinematic differences between PDs and non-PDs when utilizing an intervention shown to be successful at reducing LBP during standing – a sloped standing surface.A sloped surface allows for workers to vary their posture by either placing their ankles in dorsi- or plantar flexion (Fig. 1). When using this aid during a 2-h occupational standing simulation, self-reports of LBP intensity were 59.4% less in those previously categorized as PDs when standing on level ground and the scores were similar to the non-PDs (Nelson-Wong and Callaghan, 2010b). The success of this aid was linked back to the kinematic changes induced by plantar and dorsiflexion of the ankles. Standing on a decline resulted in greater trunk flexion with respect to the vertical, posterior rotation of the pelvis (Nelson-Wong and Callaghan, 2010b), and flattening of the lumbar spine (Gallagher et al., 2013). Standing on an incline surface resulted in the opposite changes, with greater trunk extension with respect to the vertical, anterior rotation of the pelvis (Nelson-Wong and Callaghan, 2010b), and greater lumbar lordosis angle (Gallagher et al., 2013) compared to level ground standing.A limitation to the study by Nelson-Wong and Callaghan (2010b) was that participants could move freely between standing on the decline and incline. Participants spent 72% of their time standing on the decline, meaning that most of the time was spent with a less lumbar lordosis compared to level ground standing. The ability to cycle between the two postures makes it difficult to parse out the influence of standing in a modified posture and the influence of the surface on lumbar spine posture induced by moving between decline and incline have on reducing LBP while standing. Gallagher et al. (2013) only looked at the postures during incline and decline standing, but did not assess pain development. Determining whether posture and/or movement are important factors for reducing LBP will help to further design aids and also point to a potential fundamental difference between how PDs and non-PDs stand.The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of standing with the ankles continuously in plantar-flexion (referred to as standing on a decline or sloped surface) on the development of prolonged standing-induced LBP, as well as kinematics and movement variables. We hypothesized that the decreased lumbar lordosis angle induced by standing on a decline would help reduce or prevent LBP as compared to level ground. Secondly, we hypothesized that standing on a decline would induce postural changes of the hip angle, thigh-to-trunk angle, and location of the trunk center of gravity with respect to the ankle location. Lastly, we hypothesized that lumbar spine movement patterns would differ between the two groups. To evaluate these hypotheses, we used self-reports of LBP and a motion capture system to compare pain development and kinematics between standing on level ground and a sloped surface over a 75 min occupational simulation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Standing on a declining slope surface resulted in a lower of self-reported LBP reports during prolonged standing in those who develop LBP when standing on level ground. Compared to standing on level ground, the sloped surface resulted in larger hip flexion, trunk-to-thigh flexion, and smaller moment arm of the trunk center of gravity with respect to the ankle joint. This change in hip posture could result in higher passive stiffness produced by the muscles crossing posterior aspect of the hip joint to assist with stabilizing the pelvis without the use of the gluteus medius co-contraction. It appears that postural alterations facilitated through the hip joint postural changes are important for a declined standing surface intervention's success.