@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Time to onset of pain: Effects of magnitude and location for static pressures applied to the plantar foot

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduced “time to pain onset,” a measurement of sensitivity to static pressure.Time to pain onset was sensitive to magnitude and location of static pressure.Pain onset occurs earlier for higher levels of pressure and earlier at the midfoot.During standing, pain most often originated at the foot region of greatest pressure.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Standing,Pain-pressure threshold,Sensory testing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Mechanisms that cause foot discomfort during prolonged standing are poorly understood. There is currently no method for evaluating discomfort associated with low levels of static pressure that are typical during standing. Pain thresholds were measured for 20 healthy participants by applying five levels of static pressure at different plantar foot locations. A survival analysis was performed to determine the effects of pressure magnitude and foot location on the time until pain onset. Time to pain onset was significantly affected by pressure magnitude (P < 0.001); time decreased as pressure increased. Foot location was also significant (P < 0.001); greatest times to pain onset (least sensitive) were observed under the heel and fifth metatarsal head, shortest times (most sensitive) were found under the midfoot. This research presents a novel methodology for evaluating static pressure that may be applicable to product design.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Prolonged standing is a daily requirement for many workers (Tissot et al., 2005) and has been linked to discomfort and fatigue in the lower limbs (e.g., Cham and Redfern, 2001; Madeleine et al., 1998). Shoe inserts have been shown to effectively mitigate discomfort (Cham and Redfern, 2001; King, 2002), but there is no agreement on which designs of footwear and shoe inserts are most effective. In order to select footwear and inserts that enhance comfort during standing, a better understanding is needed of the mechanisms that cause discomfort.Suspected mechanisms for discomfort during standing include fatigue of leg and lower back muscles (Cook et al., 1993; Kim et al., 1994) and pooling of blood in the legs (Kraemer et al., 2000). However, the current study focused on localized pressure on the plantar (bottom) surface of the foot as a possible mechanism for discomfort during standing.There is substantial physiological evidence suggesting that plantar pressure plays a role in the development of discomfort during prolonged standing. Plantar pressure causes compression of muscles, nerves, and bones in the foot, and high plantar pressures have been linked to foot pain and discomfort (Godfrey et al., 1967; Silvino et al., 1980). During static, barefoot standing, plantar pressures on the foot average about 70 kPa, with peaks of around 140–175 kPa (Cavanagh et al., 1987; Wiggermann and Keyserling, 2010) which far exceed pressures shown to cause skin, muscle, and nerve damage. Sustained pressures greater than 4–4.7 kPa exceed capillary pressure and put tissue at risk for ischemia (Kosiak et al., 1958; Dinsdale, 1974), and have been shown to cause nerve impairment in rabbits (Rydevik et al., 1981). Extended exposure to pressure above 15–20 kPa interrupts arterial blood flow and causes cell death in canines (Hargens et al., 1981). Although the sustained pressures tested in these laboratory and animal studies do not represent the cycles of loading and unloading that occur during prolonged standing, the high plantar pressures associated with standing as compared to the relatively low pressures that cause tissue damage suggests that plantar pressure that occurs during prolonged standing may play a role in discomfort.Very little research has investigated the relationship between plantar foot pressure and discomfort (Rolke et al., 2005). The most common method for relating pain and pressure is the pain-pressure threshold (PPT), or the pressure at which pain is reported when a probe is pressed against the skin at a steadily increasing rate (Fransson-Hall and Kilbom, 1993). PPT has been studied in the second toe (Brennum et al., 1989) and the abductor hallucis of the arch of the foot (Rolke et al., 2005), but the only study to evaluate the PPT at multiple locations on the foot was Messing and Kilbom (2001) who found higher PPTs at the heel, and lower PPTs at the midfoot (i.e., the midfoot was more sensitive to pressure than the heel).Although these PPT results may provide rudimentary information regarding the sensitivity of different foot locations to pain, the conditions of the PPT test are very dissimilar to the conditions of standing. Messing and Kilbom (2001) found mean PPT values of 550 kPa in the heel, which is nearly four times greater than peak pressures commonly observed during standing (Cavanagh et al., 1987). The steadily-increasing pressure applied in PPT tests is also not representative of the relatively static pressures associated with standing. The rate at which pressure is increased in a PPT test affects pressure threshold, with faster rates resulting in higher PPTs (Jensen et al., 1986). PPT tests do not provide information about how discomfort develops over time when the foot is exposed to low levels of static pressure associated with standing.There is currently no test for measuring the effect of static pressure on discomfort in the foot. Because an increasing pressure is applied during the PPT test and the pressure corresponding to the onset of pain is the outcome measurement, PPT is incapable of testing static pressures. For a test to evaluate the effect of a given level of static pressure on discomfort, the time until the onset of pain is the necessary outcome measurement. Such a test would make it possible to evaluate the effects of relatively low pressures common during standing, and would also eliminate an inherent bias of a PPT test resulting from the rate at which pressure is increased.The study presented herein introduces a test that measures the time to pain onset (TPO) under a static localized pressure. This test was used to investigate the effect of plantar pressure on this pain threshold for various levels of pressure to the heel and metatarsal heads that are common during standing. It was hypothesized that 1) TPO decreases as the magnitude of static pressure is increased, and 2) that foot locations superficial to soft tissue such as the midfoot are more sensitive to pressure than those superficial to bone such as the heel and metatarsal heads. A secondary objective of this study was to investigate the development of pain during standing by testing whether pressure can be used to predict the location of the onset of pain, and whether surface hardness affects pain onset.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Higher levels of pressure resulted in shorter time until pain onset, and the midfoot was the most sensitive to pressure. These results suggest that reducing peak plantar pressures and limiting the pressure on the midfoot can reduce discomfort during prolonged standing. Softer surfaces were more comfortable, and redistributed peak pressures from highly concentrated areas at the heel and metatarsal heads to the midfoot. These findings suggest that for the range of pressures observed in this study, the benefits of reducing peak pressures outweighed the consequences of increased pressure at the midfoot. Although peak pressure seems to be a good predictor of discomfort in the foot, there appear to be other mechanisms affecting discomfort that are unknown.This research provides new information on how discomfort develops over time when the foot is exposed to static pressure. The results suggest that reducing peak pressure reduces discomfort, but that even loading across the entire foot is not ideal because of the sensitivity of the midfoot. This research also provides a measurement method that could be useful for developing and evaluating future footwear and insole designs. The methods may also be adaptable to other applications in which sustained pressure is applied to the body such as for seating or apparel like backpacks.