@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Latent human error analysis and efficient improvement strategies by fuzzy TOPSIS in aviation maintenance tasks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The systematic method of HEI analysis and MCDM was provided in this research.HFACS and RCA were applied to analyze latent human errors.Fuzzy TOPSIS was utilized to assess the improvement strategy of latent human errors.Sensitivity analysis was used to inspect the robustness of the results of Fuzzy TOPSIS.This is the first study to assess human errors by HFACS and Fuzzy TOPSIS.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Aviation,Human error,MCDM,TOPSIS,Fuzzy set theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purposes of this study were to develop a latent human error analysis process, to explore the factors of latent human error in aviation maintenance tasks, and to provide an efficient improvement strategy for addressing those errors. First, we used HFACS and RCA to define the error factors related to aviation maintenance tasks. Fuzzy TOPSIS with four criteria was applied to evaluate the error factors. Results show that 1) adverse physiological states, 2) physical/mental limitations, and 3) coordination, communication, and planning are the factors related to airline maintenance tasks that could be addressed easily and efficiently. This research establishes a new analytic process for investigating latent human error and provides a strategy for analyzing human error using fuzzy TOPSIS. Our analysis process complements shortages in existing methodologies by incorporating improvement efficiency, and it enhances the depth and broadness of human error analysis methodology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Human error is a major common factor in aviation accidents, it has been described as a wrong action made by a human in a wrong time and a wrong place (Wickens and Hollands, 2002). Fortunately, human error analysis has seen significant advancement with studies on the classification of operational errors (Swain and Guttmann, 1983), human information processing error types (Norman, 1988; Reason, 1990, 1997), analysis and classification of human errors (Rouse and Rouse, 1983; Wu and Hwang, 1989), human error prediction (Hammer, 1999), and even the publication of books on human errors (Dhillon, 2009; Modarre, 2009).Human errors that occur in the aviation system may be divided into two types: active human errors and latent human errors. Active human errors result in accidents directly and their influence is immediate, it also recorded in the general accident report. Latent human errors cause accidents indirectly; their adverse consequences may lie dormant within the system for a long time, only becoming evident when they combine with other factors to breach the system's defenses.In general, active errors are associated with the performance of the ‘front-line’ operators of a complex system, identifiable in an accident report and patently obvious. Latent errors lie hidden below the obvious surface, constituting an unforeseeable threat to safety in a complex system. Typically, there are one or more root problems in the system well before an operator's active error takes place, often expressed in terms of a system within which prior weaknesses have been created, such as poor design. During emergency situations, human operators are under significant stress and are prone to make mistakes. While active errors are hard to prevent, findings show that latent errors can be reduced effectively to lower the probability of emergency disaster (Reason, 1990). Therefore, this work takes up the investigation of latent error.Previous researches indicate that 70–80% of all aviation accidents are caused by human error (McFadden and Towell, 1999; Chen et al., 2009), which involve 15–20% maintenance errors (Drury, 2000). Thus, latent human error is a critical matter in aviation safety (Latorella and Prabhu, 2000; Drury, 2000). Our investigation addresses latent human error directly related to maintenance, specifically focusing on an aviation accident adopted from the Aviation Safety Council (ASC) of Taiwan. The description of the accident follows.On May 25 2002, a Boeing 747-200 (CI611) crashed into the Taiwan Strait approximately 23 nautical miles northeast of Makung, in the Penghu Islands of Taiwan. Radar data indicated that the aircraft experienced an in-flight breakup at an altitude of 34,900 feet, before reaching its cruising altitude of 35,000 feet. The aircraft was on a scheduled passenger flight from Taiwan to Hong Kong. One hundred seventy-five of the 225 occupants aboard the CI611 flight, which included 206 passengers and 19 crew members, sustained fatal injuries; the remainder were missing and presumed killed (Aviation Safety Council, 2005).According to the accident report, the main reason for the occurrence of this 2002 accident was an event that had occurred in 1980: the aircraft had experienced a significant tail strike event in Hong Kong. (A tail strike occurs when an aircraft's tail touches the ground.) The 2002 accident report indicates that a permanent repair to the 1980 tail strike was not accomplished in accordance with Boeing's Structural Repair Manual (SRM), which subsequently resulted in the 2002 crash. The ASC investigated the failure to follow the SRM and identified a series of communication and cognitive problems between Boeing Commercial Airlines and China Airlines (CAL) regarding the 1980 tail strike repair. Of note was that the Boeing Field Service Representative (FSR) would have seen the tail strike scratches on the underside of the aircraft. However, the opportunity to provide expert advice on a critical repair appears to have been lost, as there are no records to show the FSR had a role in providing advice about a permanent repair (Aviation Safety Council, 2005). Moreover, records indicate the CAL operators noted the repair manner did not follow the SRM, and that the Boeing FSR acquiesced to the decisions from CAL. Thus, both communication and cognition errors formulated the latent human error in the maintenance tasks. Many human errors occurred in the events surrounding this accident, and the accident occurrence was not dependent on one single latent human error. This event is well illustrated by Reason's Swiss cheese theory (1990), which purports that an alignment of opportunity in a series of unmatched conditions can lead to disaster. Therefore, one can speculate that to reduce the most important latent error in such an accident might produce the most efficient way to decrease the influence of human error.To analyze and help prevent human error, Rankin et al. (2000) developed a maintenance error decision aid (MEDA) for use among system operators to regularize their checking tasks. However, latent human error is not always easy to detect during these tasks. Subsequently, Stanton et al. (2005) developed a human error identification method (HEI) to identify latent human and operation errors that may arise as a result of human–machine interactions in complex and dynamic systems, and to identify the causal factors, consequences and recovery strategies associated with those errors. The concept of HEI methodology emphasizes the analysis and prediction of operation errors in human–machine interactions, using an understanding of task characteristics and action details. The analysis results of HEI methodology usually describe potential (latent) errors, their consequences, recovery potential and probability, and then offers associated design remedies or error reduction strategies. Space research investigation has been focused on latent error analysis; hence the main focus of this study was to develop an effective procedure related to the analysis of the factors in latent human error.HEI methodology can be used along with other processes to analyze the important factors of human error accident such as the Human Factors Analysis and Classification System (HFACS) (Wiegmann and Shappell, 2001, 2003), root cause analysis (RCA), the Human Error Assessment and Reduction Technique (HEART) (Williams, 1988), the Technique for the Retrospective and Predictive Analysis of Cognitive Errors (TRACEr) (Shorrock and Kirwan, 2002), and the Systematic Human Error Reduction and Prediction Approach (SHERPA) (Embrey, 1986). These methods have been widely applied to analyze the factors that have caused accidents in different fields. For example, Daramola (2014) used HFACS to analyze air accidents in Nigeria; Cacciabue and Vella (2010) used RCA in a human error analysis within the healthcare system; Noroozi et al. (2014) utilized HEART to analyze engineering maintenance procedures for pumps. Wenner and Drury (2000) applied SHELL model (Software, Hardware, Environment, and liveware) to analyze 130 ground incidents and categorized the error factors into active errors and latent errors. However, an improvement strategy based on different criteria in terms of the error-reducing time and cost is absent from the traditional HEI methodology.Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) can be used to rank the importance of error factors based on their risk priority number (RPN) value, although some studies have suggested that the evaluation process of RPN value is not appropriate for decision making (Gilchrist, 1993; Ben-Daya and Raouf, 1993). RPN is determined as the product of severity, occurrence, and detection. However, there has been no theory or evidence to validate its use. Therefore, this present research applied a multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM) method to generate an improvement strategy for reducing human errors. The advantage of using MCDM is that the decision maker can analyze an accident based on different criterion via proven equations, making it more objective than the use of RPN with FMEA.Various methodologies can be used in MCDM. Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution (TOPSIS) is a well-known MCDM method. It has been commonly used in solving decision-making problems. TOPSIS was proposed by Hwang and Yoon (1981), and the basic idea is to consider how alternatives perform when multiple criteria are taken into account simultaneously (Bai et al., 2014). It is based on the concept that the chosen alternative should have the shortest geometric distance from the positive ideal solution and the longest geometric distance from the negative ideal solution. The limitation of TOPSIS lies in its inability to solve the vagueness or ambiguity problem during decision-making process (Yu, 2002; Kannan et al., 2014). The limitation of TOPSIS lies in its inability to solve the vagueness or ambiguity problem during decision-making process (Yu, 2002; Kannan et al., 2014). To overcome this limitation of TOPSIS, it was merged with fuzzy set theory, which allows decision makers to incorporate unquantifiable information, incomplete information, non-obtainable information, and partially uncertain facts into the decision model (Kulak et al., 2005; Deviren et al., 2009; Kannan et al., 2014). Prior research has utilized fuzzy TOPSIS to solve decision-making problem in various fields such as shipping company selection (Ding, 2011), manager selection (Kelemenis et al., 2011), ranking airline carriers (Torlak et al., 2011), and weapon selection (Deviren et al., 2009).While fuzzy TOPSIS has gained popularity in decision-making analysis, scant research has used it to investigate improvement strategies for human error analysis. Previous relevant research has focused primarily on the influence of accident error factors, but ignored the improvement efficiency potential for reducing these human error factors. A disparity exists between the concepts of influence and improvement efficiency of human error factors. Therefore, to reduce this disparity, latent human error analysis and MCDM were integrated in this study. The goal of this study is to develop a latent human error analysis process which can be used to evaluate the human error factors in maintenance tasks using fuzzy TOPSIS to help generate an efficient improvement strategy for latent human error that can be used by decision makers to reduce accidents. It is expected that this research may enhance depth and broadness of methodology of human error analysis and improve system reliability.Previous studies in aviation accident analysis have typically used HFACS (Wiegmann and Shappell, 2001a, 2001b, 2003, 2004; Li et al., 2008; Daramola, 2014). HFACS was developed from Reason (1990, 1997) organizationally based model of human error and provides an organizational framework for accident analysis (Daramola, 2014). HFACS has been used as the factors database of human error for aviation maintenance tasks. It divides human error accidents into four categories based on the structure and levels of organization, including organizational influences, unsafe supervision, preconditions for unsafe acts, and unsafe acts of operators.The category “Unsafe acts” represents the majority of accident research investigations. These address the operator behaviors that result directly in accidents during maintenance procedures and form the active error in accidents. Failures at this category are further classified into two sub-categories: errors and violations (instances of willful disregard for rules that subsequently result in an accident). “Preconditions for unsafe acts” involves the psychological precursors of the active failures within the category “Unsafe acts” and form the latent error in accidents. Failures at this category are further classified into three sub-categories: environmental factors, condition of the operators, and personnel factors. The category “Unsafe supervision” is also a latent error, which traces the causal chain of events producing the unsafe acts up to the level of the front-line supervisors. The category “Organizational influences” is a latent error category in accident analysis, involving the cause of faulty decisions at the management level that directly affect supervisory practices.RCA is a process designed for use in investigating and categorizing the root causes of events in many different fields. It helps identify what, how and why accidents happened, thus preventing their recurrence (Rooney and Heuvel, 2004). For investigating human errors, RCA presents a useful method for establishing the model. The steps of RCA may be identified as follows: Step 1, data collection: without complete information and an understanding of the event, the causal factors and root causes associated with the event cannot be identified. The majority of time required to analyze the event is spent in data collection. Step 2, causal factor charting: this element provides a design structure used to organize and analyze the information; the causal factor chart is simply a sequence diagram with logic tests that describes the events leading up to an occurrence. Step 3, root cause identification: this step involves the use of a decision diagram (the root cause map) to identify the underlying reason or reasons for each causal factor. Step 4, recommendation generation and implementation: following the identification of the root causes for a particular causal factor, achievable recommendations for preventing its recurrence are generated.Here we use the Boeing air crash of 2002 (described in Section 1) as an example. First, the investigation group for assessing human error was constituted with three experts prior ro the formal analysis. Second, the failures modes of the accident were classified based on the error factors of HFACS, and the causal factors of this accident were divided into Errors and Violations. Third, a reality chart was used to show the relationship of each error factor in this accident. From the reality chart, the root cause of this accident could then be identified (Fig. 1). After the analysis of 24 incidents that relate to maintenance problems, the error factors were collected and further analysis was executed. Suggestions for improvement strategies were generated, based on the systematic analysis of this research.This study adopted fuzzy TOPSIS for conducting the MCDM analysis of human error improvement strategy selection for airline maintenance tasks. Fuzzy set theory and TOPSIS are described in this section.Due to the vagueness, imprecision, and subjective nature of human thinking, judgment, and preferences, prior research has indicated that crisp numbered data are insufficient to represent the real world system (Kannan et al., 2014). Thus fuzzy set theory (fuzzy multi-criteria decision making [FMCDM]) was developed and has been used to model the uncertainty of human judgments (Bellman and Zadeh, 1970). The fuzzy set theory applies linguistic value to represent the selection of the decision makers, and then converts the selection to fuzzy numbers to solve the FMCDM problem. In addition, previous studies have indicated that triangular fuzzy numbers (TFN) are an effective way of formulating decision issues related to subjective and imprecise information (Chang and Yeh, 2002; Chang et al., 2007; Torlak et al., 2011; Kannan et al., 2014). Hence, the fuzzy set theory was applied to model the improvement strategy selection for reducing errors during airline maintenance tasks and TFN were used to assess the selection of the decision makers.A TFN can be represented as a triplet (l, m, u). The membership functions of a fuzzy numberμA˜(x)are illustrated and defined as shown (Rouyendegh and Saputro, 2014):•l to m is increasing functionm to u is decreasing functionl ≤ m ≤ uThe linguistic variable is one in which the values are words or sentences of a natural or artificial language that is expressed in linguistic terms represented by a TFN. Using TFN, Chen and Hwang (1992) developed a set of eight different scales with up to eleven fuzzy linguistic variables. Their Scale Three with five (5) linguistic variables was used to assess the level of each TOPSIS criterion in this research (Table 1).TOPSIS was developed by Hwang and Yoon (1981). This technique is one of the classical methodologies for solving MCDM problems. The major objective of TOPSIS is to identify the positive ideal solution (PIS) and the negative ideal solution (NIS), and then to measure the distance of each alternative from the ideal solution to generate a ranking of the alternatives (Kannan et al., 2014). The PIS is that which maximizes the benefit criteria and minimizes the cost criteria, while the NIS maximizes the cost criteria and minimizes the benefit criteria. The selected alternative should be the one closest to the PIS and farthest away from the NIS. The analytic steps of fuzzy TOPSIS are summarized in Appendix A.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The purpose of this study was to develop an analytic procedure for identifying latent human error and to provide a human error improvement strategy. HFACS, RCA, and fuzzy TOPSIS were used in this study, guided by the suggestions of expert decision makers. Findings suggest that to reduce errors related to poor adaptability, the most efficient way is to solve the issue of adverse physiological states. Findings also suggest that to reduce errors related to task execution, the most efficient way is to solve the physical/mental limitations of operators. Finally, findings suggest that to reduce errors related to information cognitive skills, the most efficient way is to solve the coordination, communication, and planning problems.This research complements the shortages of the traditional human error identification methodology. Hence, this study suggests that fuzzy TOPSIS should be used to analyze additional results based on different criteria, which could ameliorate the human error accident rate and increase the safety of the operators. Furthermore, this method could be applied to improve safety in other areas such as healthcare, nuclear power plant, military, and other industries in the future.Finally, this is a pilot study for developing an improvement strategy regarding human error analysis, and the reliability of this method must be improved and validated in the future. Additional techniques for assessing the MCDM challenge will be incorporated into the research—among them, AHP will be applied in an effort to generate the most efficient analysis procedure for resolving the decision problem in the future.