@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Use of body armor protection with fighting load impacts soldier performance and kinematics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Large increases in body armor protection decrease soldier performance.Increased body armor protection did not decrease soldier mobility.Adding the fighting load carrier was detrimental to mobility.The fighting load carrier increased trunk extension during soldier specific tasks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Torso load,Gait,Obstacle negotiation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purpose of this evaluation was to examine how increasing body armor protection with and without a fighting load impacted soldiers' performance and mobility. Thirteen male soldiers performed one performance (repeated 30-m rushing) and three mobility tasks (walk, walk over and walk under) with three different body armor configurations and an anterior fighting load. Increasing body armor protection, decreased soldier performance, as individual and total 30-m rush times were significantly longer with greater protection. While increasing body armor protection had no impact on mobility, i.e. significant effect on trunk and lower limb biomechanics, during the walk and walk over tasks, greater protection did significantly decrease maximum trunk flexion during the walk under task. Adding fighting load may negatively impact soldier mobility, as greater maximum trunk extension was evident during the walk and walk over tasks, and decreased maximum trunk flexion exhibited during the walk under task with the fighting load.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During combat, soldiers wear body armor for protection against ballistic injury. Depending on the nature and threat of injury, different combinations of body armor and ballistic plates may be worn. At a minimum, soldiers wear ‘soft body armor’, a fabric based vest, in the field. The U.S. Army has two soft armor types in use: the improved outer tactical vest (IOTV, Fig. 1A) and the scalable plate carrier system (PC, Fig. 1B). The IOTV provides full coverage of the torso while allowing for mobility of the shoulder, hips, and neck. The PC affords increased shoulder, hip, and neck mobility at a lesser weight, but covers less of the torso as compared to the IOTV. To increase protection with either armor system, ballistic (hard) plates can be inserted into front, back and/or side pockets of the fabric vest, adding up to 7.3 kg of body borne load. Generally, as the protection increases, so does the body borne load. For instance, the IOTV can weigh up to 12.1 kg with front back and side ballistic plates, while PC only weighs 9.8 kg for a similar ballistic configuration (Table 1).Body armor is just one component of soldiers' total body borne load. During dismounted operations, soldiers are encumbered with a combat load that typically includes a body armor, weapon, helmet, ammunition, rucksack (i.e. backpack), and other essentials. Depending on the operation, a combat load can add between 9 kg and 60 kg of weight, in addition to the body armor worn by the soldier (FM 21-18.1990). However, during short duration missions, where enemy contact may be expected, soldiers must remain mobile and keep the body borne load to a minimum. For these missions, soldiers use a ‘fighting load’ which minimizes body borne load, but still provides the essential equipment, such as ammunition, via a fighting load carrier attached on the anterior of their body armor. To ensure optimal soldier performance and agility during such operations, the fighting load, including body armor, is recommended not to exceed 21 kg (FM 21-18.1990).In order to optimize soldier performance during dismounted operations, researchers have examined the effect that body borne loads (i.e. body armor and essential military equipment) has on soldier performance. Previous experimental evidence has shown that both a posterior load (Knapik et al., 2004) and body armor (Hasselquist et al., 2012) decrease performance on timed physical maneuvers, such as long runs, sprints, agility tasks, and obstacle courses. Holewijn and Lotens (1992) found that on average, physical performance decreased by 1% for every additional kilogram of load. Recently, Dempsey et al. (2013) found that police officers decrease performance on average 13–42% while loaded with body armor and a utility belt (∼10 kg), compared to no load, during a variety of mobility tasks. However, Peoples et al. (2010) reported no performance differences during a 5-m rush (i.e. sprinting) task between closely weighted (two and three kg difference) body armor configurations. A longer sprinting task like the repeated 30-m rushing task used by Hasselquist and colleagues (2012, 2013) found that both the addition of extremity body armor and posterior backpack loads do, in fact, decrease performance.Reductions in soldier performance may stem from significant biomechanical alterations that occur during load carriage, such as trunk and lower limb kinematic (Attwells et al., 2006; Harman et al., 2000b; Kinoshita, 1985) or spatiotemporal adaptations (Birrell and Haslam, 2010). While these biomechanical adaptations reportedly increase walking stability (Harman et al., 1999), it may also impair the mobility of the soldier, especially during complex locomotor tasks such as when negotiating or avoiding an obstacle. To date load carriage research has limited its biomechanical analysis to continuous straight-line ambulation (i.e. walking) (Attwells et al., 2006; Hasselquist et al., 2013, 2012), static standing (Rugelj and Sevšek, 2011; Schiffman et al., 2006), or vertical jump performance (Fallowfield et al., 2012). Therefore, biomechanical assessments of load carriage, especially configurations recommended for dismounted operations, during a wide range of complex locomotor tasks is warranted.Biomechanical assessments of load carriage have focused primarily on posterior torso borne, combat loads (16 kg–60 kg). Recently, Park and colleagues (2013) reported that participants increased stance time and decreased stride length to improve stability while walking with police body armor and varied anterior loads. Anteriorly loaded participants also demonstrated trunk (Rietdyk et al., 2005) and lower limb (Perry et al., 2010) kinematic adaptations to aid stability (but potentially at the detriment of mobility), when avoiding and negotiating an obstacle. Both Rietdyk et al. (2005) and Perry et al. (2010), however, examined small handheld, non-militarily relevant, anterior loads (2 kg–10 kg). Heavier anterior loads may have a significant, and potentially larger, impact on soldiers performing complex locomotor tasks. Therefore, research is needed to examine the effects of body armor and militarily-relevant anterior fighting load on avoiding and negotiating (i.e. walking over and under) an obstacle.The main purpose of this evaluation was to examine if the addition of the fighting load had a greater impact on soldiers' mobility with every increase in body armor during complex locomotor tasks. It was hypothesized that adding the fighting load would produce a significantly larger reduction in mobility with every increase in body armor. Our second purpose was to examine how increases in body armor when worn with the anterior fighting load, would impact soldiers' 30-m rushing performance. It was hypothesized that with increases in the armor protection soldiers would perform the task more slowly.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Soldier rush performance decreased with increasing body armor coverage and weight. Specifically, both average individual and total rush times were significantly longer with greater body armor weight. While rush performance was only statistically different between the lightest (IOTV light) and heaviest (IOTV heavy) armor configurations tested, soldier rush performance generally decreased as body armor, i.e. body borne load, increased. This reduction in rush performance evident with the IOTV heavy may stem from larger biomechanical adaptations that result with the addition of the fighting load for that armor configuration. For instance, a larger increase in trunk extension occurred when adding the fighting load to the IOTV heavy as compared to when adding it to the IOTV light or the PC heavy during the walk and walk over tasks. While this adaptation of trunk posture may be a necessary proactive strategy to maintain adequate stability with the heaviest armor configuration, it also may negatively impact load carrier performance. Interestingly, while the addition of the fighting load had a significant, and potentially negative impact on trunk and lower limb biomechanics during the walk and walk over tasks, substantial modifications in trunk and lower limb biomechanics were not evident with increasing body armor for those tasks. During the walk under task, however, both the addition of the fighting load and increasing body armor decreased maximum trunk flexion posture, which may negatively impact soldiers' mobility. Future research is needed to further identify how changes in load distribution (i.e. symmetric, anterior, and/or posterior), individually and collectively effect soldier performance and mobility on increasingly complex militarily relevant locomotor tasks. Furthermore, a biomechanical connection (kinematic and kinetic) between performance and mobility needs to be further documented on such tasks.