@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Matching physical work demands with functional capacity in healthy workers: Can it be more efficient?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Functional capacity and work demands can be matched in most instances for a varying group of workers.Normative values for functional capacity are validated and compared to direct workload measurements.Normative values can be considered as an efficient tool in clinical decision making, although restrictions apply.Comparing functional capacity to normative values enables clinicians to screen for imbalances between work load and capacityt.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Physical workload,Normative values,Work ability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesTo determine if functional capacity (FC) and physical work demands can be matched and to determine the validity of normative values for FC related to physical work demands as a screening instrument for work ability.MethodsForty healthy working subjects were included in this study. Subjects were categorized into four physical work demand categories (sedentary, light, moderate and heavy). FC was tested with a standardized Functional Capacity Evaluation (FCE) following the WorkWell Protocol and physical work demands were determined with an onsite Work Load Assessment (WLA) according to the Task Recording and Analyses on Computer (TRAC) method. Physical work demands were compared to FC and normative values derived from previous research.Results88% of the subjects scored higher on FCE than observed during WLA. The tenth percentile of normative values appeared valid in 98% for sedentary/light work for the subjects tested in this study. For moderate or heavy work, the thirtieth percentile of normative values appeared valid in 78% of all cases.ConclusionFunctional capacity and physical work demands can be matched in most instances, but exceptions should be kept in mind with regards to professions classified as moderate or heavy physical work, especially concerning lifting high. Normative values may be considered as an additional screening tool for balancing workload and capacity. It is recommended to further validate normative values in a broader and more extensive working population.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In health literature, much focus is given to (reduction of) work demands, but the focus on its relation to work capacity is rather limited (Heerkens et al., 2004). Functional capacity (FC), which includes the total of all physical, cognitive and emotional characteristics of the worker (Dijk van et al., 1990), and work demands need to be in balance in order to regain or maintain working successfully (Heerkens et al., 2004). This can be achieved by either increasing capacity or decreasing workload by application of ergonomic interventions. A previous study focused on interventions to reduce musculoskeletal complaints in the nursing profession and described strong effects of ergonomic interventions (Bos et al., 2006). FC can be measured with a Functional Capacity Evaluation (FCE). This is a battery of tests measuring the capacity to perform work-related activities (Soer et al., 2008). FCEs can be job-specific (Frings-Dresen and Sluiter, 2003), pathology-specific (Reneman et al., 2005; Gross et al., 2006) or can be used for the assessment of capacities for activities of daily living (Soer et al., 2009). Physical work demands (PWD) can be measured through standardized questionnaires or onsite measurement (van der Beek et al., 1992; Lindstrom et al., 1994). A disadvantage of questionnaires used for PWD measurement, is ambiguity with respect to the validity. Because in practice, patients and healthy workers estimate their PWD considerably higher than can be objectified by onsite observations (van der Beek et al., 1992; Lindstrom et al., 1994), it is recommended to assess PWD, besides by self-report, through observational methods (Winkel and Mathiassen, 1994). To determine if a worker holds sufficient FC to return to or stay at work, it is important that the FC of the worker is equal to or higher than the PWD (Dijk van et al., 1990). This comparison is important in determining whether increasing capacity of the worker or adaptation of the workplace is needed. In the study of Kuijer et al. (2006), FCE activities derived from the Isernhagen Work Systems protocol were matched to the observed PWD in workers with chronic low back pain by video and real life observations (Kuijer et al., 2006). It was concluded that seven FCE activities could directly be matched with the PWD as measured through video observation on an onsite Work Load Assessment (WLA). These activities were carrying, pushing, pulling, crouching, kneeling, static forward bending, and dynamic bending and rotating. Lifting could indirectly be matched. Disadvantages of this method, however, are that WLA are time consuming and expensive and therefore practically impossible to use for each worker or patient.Better knowledge concerning the relationship between PWD and FC enables practitioners to better advise with respect to return to or stay at work and develop better work rehabilitation programs or apply ergonomics principles more effectively. A more practical and inexpensive method to match FC and PWD is to compare FC with normative values (NVs) which were previously obtained (Soer et al., 2009). In that study, it was assumed that the FC expressed by NVs of healthy workers was sufficient to meet the PWD (Soer et al., 2009), because all subjects were healthy and working in the year prior to the study. To interpret normative values validly, however, it is essential that these NV correspond to direct measurements of PWD for healthy subjects in a broad spectrum of occupations. When the normative values for the FCE are proven valid, FCE may serve as a screening instrument for potential imbalances and WLAs to measure PWD may be redundant, in cases where studying the physical part of the work capacity is needed.This study had two objectives. The first objective was to determine if functional capacity (determined by FCE) can be matched with PWD (measured by a WLA) in healthy working subjects. The second objective was to determine the valid cut-off percentile of the NVs of FCE for healthy workers in jobs with different levels of physical work demands.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
