@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Validity and reliability of pressure-measurement insoles for vertical ground reaction force assessment in field situations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Validity and reliability of medilogic® insoles for force measurements were tested.Static tests showed a high reliability, but also a creeping of output force signal.RMSE's in field situations were in average from 6.6% to 17.7% (besides kneeling).Strongly bending of medilogic® insoles (r < 20 mm) leads to high measurement errors.Frequent calibration and correction algorithms are necessary for high validity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pressure-measurement insoles,Vertical force measurement,Work,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study aimed to test the validity and reliability of pressure-measurement insoles (medilogic® insoles) when measuring vertical ground reaction forces in field situations. Various weights were applied to and removed from the insoles in static mechanical tests. The force values measured simultaneously by the insoles and force plates were compared for 15 subjects simulating work activities. Reliability testing during the static mechanical tests yielded an average interclass correlation coefficient of 0.998. Static loads led to a creeping pattern of the output force signal. An individual load response could be observed for each insole. The average root mean square error between the insoles and force plates ranged from 6.6% to 17.7% in standing, walking, lifting and catching trials and was 142.3% in kneeling trials. The results show that the use of insoles may be an acceptable method for measuring vertical ground reaction forces in field studies, except for kneeling positions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mechanical exposures at work (e.g., lifting and manual materials handling) are associated with the occurrence of musculoskeletal disorders (Yassi and Lockhart, 2013). These exposures are common and occur in, for instance, construction work and the health care sector. The majority of previous studies have been based on subjective reports of mechanical occupational exposure (manual material handling). Recent studies indicate that previously established risk factors, such as forward-bending work posture, may be considered untenable by studies based on objective measurements of work exposures (Villumsen et al., 2015) and that subjective reports may be inadequate for assessing physical activity (Dyrstad et al., 2014). Hence, it is crucial to obtain valid and reliable measurements of exposure to learn which specific aspects of such mechanical work exposure contribute to musculoskeletal disorders.Mechanical exposures are characterized by the type of work executed, including the posture, movements, and exerted forces involved (Westgaard and Winkel, 1996; van der Beek and Frings-Dresen, 1998). Although valid and reliable methods for measuring posture and movements with accelerometers are available, there are not a sufficient number of objective assessments for forces exerted during tasks involving lifting in a field setting.The forces exerted by workers during lifting and carrying can be estimated by measuring ground reaction forces using force plates, shoes instrumented with force sensors, or pressure measurement insoles. Force plates measure ground reaction forces with a high level of accuracy in the horizontal and vertical directions (3D), but their use is limited in laboratory conditions. Shoes instrumented with force sensors may suitable for the measurement of forces in 3D at work sites. To our knowledge, the XSENS ForceShoe (XSENS North America Inc., Culver City, CA, USA) is the only commercially available system. However, due to the shoe's 3.2 cm sole height and total weight of 1.1 kg, this shoe may hinder normal working tasks and is inadequate when safety shoes are compulsory. Several researchers have used self-constructed force measurement insoles (Faivre et al., 2004; Liedtke et al., 2007; Saito et al., 2011; Razak et al., 2012); however, this approach is time consuming and requires a validation process. Therefore, commercial pressure measurement insoles may be a more practical choice (Forner Cordero et al., 2004; Forner-Cordero et al., 2006; Fong et al., 2008). Commercial systems discussed in the literature or found on the market include Footscan pressure insoles (RSscan International, Paal, Belgium), Pedar® insoles (Novel GmbH, Munich, Germany), F-Scan pressure measurement insoles (Tekscan Inc., Boston, USA), and medilogic® insoles (T&T medilogic Medizintechnik GmbH, Schönefeld, Germany).The validity, reliability or applicability differs depending on the system. Footscan pressure insoles showed high test-retest reliability but low validity during walking trials (Low and Dixon, 2010). Measured force values with Pedar® insoles increased up to 17% during 3-h walking trials (Arndt, 2003), by 43.2% during a static loading experiment and by 19% during an 8-h repeated load application (Hurkmans et al., 2006). Up to 30% lower peak forces during walking trials were observed for F-Scan insoles (Nicolopoulos et al., 2000). El Kati observed a rapid decrease in sensitivity in running trials and a frequent need for calibration with the F-Scan insoles (El Kati et al., 2010). The poor durability of the F-Scan insoles (El Kati et al., 2010; Woodburn and Helliwell, 1996) renders this system inefficient for measurements at the workplace. In general, the differences in validity and reliability compared to force platforms may be due their construction. Pedar® insoles are based on capacitive sensors, whereas the three other pressure measurement insoles mentioned above are based on resistive sensors.Medilogic® insoles were chosen because they were considered applicable for field measurements at the worksite due to their durability and because they allow for 8-h collection of the raw data for each sensor of the insoles on a data logger (with SD-card). This study aimed to examine the validity and reliability of these pressure-measurement insoles for use in simulated work tasks relevant for construction and health care work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
