@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Thermal effects on human performance in office environment measured by integrating task speed and accuracy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The speed and accuracy can be integrated into one metric of human performance by presenting the task with feedback.A larger decrease in task performance was observed due to thermal discomfort when feedback was given.Task speed was affected by thermal discomfort to a much greater extent than accuracy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human performance,Speed,Accuracy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We have proposed a method in which the speed and accuracy can be integrated into one metric of human performance. This was achieved by designing a performance task in which the subjects receive feedback on their performance by informing them whether they have committed errors, and if did, they can only proceed when the errors are corrected. Traditionally, the tasks are presented without giving this feedback and thus the speed and accuracy are treated separately. The method was examined in a subjective experiment with thermal environment as the prototypical example. During exposure in an office, 12 subjects performed tasks under two thermal conditions (neutral & warm) repeatedly. The tasks were presented with and without feedback on errors committed, as outlined above. The results indicate that there was a greater decrease in task performance due to thermal discomfort when feedback was given, compared to the performance of tasks presented without feedback.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There is a continuous and dynamic interaction between people and their surroundings that produces physiological and psychological strain on the person, which consequently lead to changes in health, well-being and performance (Parsons, 2000; Clements-Croome, 2006; Lan et al., 2010; Lieble et al., 2012), and this interaction has strong economic implications (Fisk, 2001; Mendell et al., 2002; Wargocki and Djukanovic, 2005; Wargocki and Seppänen, 2006). It is a concerted effort of researchers, engineers and practitioners to find out how to quantify the effects of indoor environmental quality (IEQ) on occupants' productivity so that they can consequently be included when calculating building costs; at present they are not considered at all. Better work performance has been assumed to be one of the indicators of improved productivity that result in increased profitability when performing such calculations as illustrated by several examples provided in the literature (Wargocki and Seppänen, 2006). Quantitative relationships have been proposed between indoor climate (ventilation rate, perceived air quality, and temperature) and human performance (Wargocki and Seppänen, 2006; Lan et al., 2011a) which can aid such predictions and calculations.There are many factors among others like level of education, skills, genders, circadian cycle, emotional states and response bias etc. that should be considered when investigating the relationship between indoor climate and human performance (Parsons, 2000; Clements-Croome, 2006; Lan et al., 2009). One of the factors is the so called speed-accuracy tradeoff effect (Wickelgren, 1977). Accuracy and speed are the two distinct aspects of human performance. Accuracy is a measure of the quality of a behavior. Measures of accuracy include number correct, percent correct, and probability of correct detections (Gawron, 2000). In human performance studies, the response time and other time-related measures have been used to attain information on the speed of work. IEQ-productivity research has usually used metrics of work speed rather than metrics of work accuracy. For studies performed in call centers, the speed of work expressed as average time per call or average handling time was used as a measure of work performance (Niemelä et al., 2002; Federspiel et al., 2004; Tham, 2004; Wargocki et al., 2004). Laboratory studies typically assessed work performance by having subjects performing (cognitive) tasks that simulated aspects of actual work and by subsequent evaluation of the speed (response time) and/or accuracy (percent errors), e.g. characters typed per unit time, number of completed addition/multiplication units per unit time etc. (Wyon, 1974; Wyon et al., 1975; Wargocki et al., 1999, 2000; Bakó-Biró et al., 2004; Witterseh et al., 2004; Lan and Lian, 2009; Lan et al., 2009, 2010).The importance of speed and accuracy may differ according to the type of task. In addition, subjects in experiments concerning measurements of work performance may have the capability to compromise accuracy for speed. It is consequently quite difficult to compare the task speed obtained under two different conditions and conclude that the condition with the lower speed is worse for performance unless we know that the error level under this condition was greater than or at least identical to that under another condition. It is reasonably safe, however to conclude that the performance is reduced in a condition in which speed is lower and there are more errors made (Wickelgren, 1977). Also in studies in which either accuracy or speed are not affected and thus do not create difficulty for interpreting the results, as in such a case either speed or accuracy can be separately used as measures of performance (Hancock and Vasmatzidis, 1998; Pilcher et al., 2002; Wargocki et al., 2004; Wargocki and Wyon, 2007a,b; Lan and Lian, 2009; Lan et al., 2009). The problem is more complicated if speed and accuracy go in two opposite directions, because within the capacity of a person, increased speed of work may eventually compromise the accuracy and vice versa (Wickens and Hollands, 2000). For example, Eysenck and Willett (1962) have shown that during high arousal level, subjects performed less well on the Tsai–Partington test by making more errors, while at the same time their speed of work increased. It is difficult to interpret such experimental results and use them, for example, to quantitatively predict the effects of indoor environmental quality on performance in real offices. Consequently, it would be useful to develop a procedure that would eliminate such interpretation dilemma, e.g. by developing the method in which the speed and accuracy are integrated into one measure defining the overall effect of environmental conditions on performance. Attempts to achieve this goal have been made in the past. For example, Bakó-Biró et al. (2004) measured separately speed and accuracy and then multiplied them with equal weights to create the overall performance index illustrating their results. Another approach was used by Tanabe and Nishihara (2004) and Tsutsumi et al. (2007) who used the correct answer speed in the addition task as a measure of overall performance which excluded errors and indicated the number of correct answers a subject could complete every minute.In this paper an approach to measure human performance with one composite index integrating speed and accuracy was proposed and the method was checked experimentally with thermal environment as the prototypical example.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
•Presenting the tasks with continuous feedback on performance was found to be a useful tool for improving the methods for measurements of the effects of IEQ on performance.A larger decrease in task performance was observed due to thermal discomfort when the tasks were presented with feedback (which integrated speed and accuracy), compared with the tasks presented without feedback on performance (in which speed and accuracy were measured separately).Task speed was affected by thermal discomfort to a much greater extent than accuracy when the performance tasks without feedback were presented.The human performance measurement approach presented in this paper provides a useful tool for quantifying the effects of indoor environmental quality (IEQ) on occupants' productivity. However, this method needs to be examined by studying the effects of other indoor environments like indoor air quality, noise. It would also be good to learn whether it is legitimate to integrate the speed and accuracy by giving equal weights to both measures.The future studies on the effects of IEQ on performance should consider using tests providing continuous feedback on performance because it would feature much better the realism of working environment where people normally adjust the pace of work based on the error rate.