@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Personal and other factors affecting acceptance of smartphone technology by older Chinese adults

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Those are younger, with higher education, non-widowed, with better economic condition are more likely to use smartphone.Cost was found to be a critical factor influencing behavior intention of older adults.Self-satisfaction and facilitating conditions significantly affect perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Chinese older adults,Smartphone,Technology acceptance,Mobile apps,Personal factors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
It has been well documented that in the 21st century, there will be relatively more older people around the world than in the past. Also, it seems that technology will expand in this era at an unprecedented rate. Therefore, it is of critical importance to understand the factors that influence the acceptance of technology by older people. The positive impact that the use of mobile applications can have for older people was confirmed by a previous study (Plaza et al., 2011). The study reported here aimed to explore and confirm, for older adults in China, the key influential factors of smartphone acceptance, and to describe the personal circumstances of Chinese older adults who use smartphone. A structured questionnaire and face to face individual interviews were used with 120 Chinese older adults (over 55). Structural Equation Modeling was used to confirm a proposed smartphone acceptance model based on Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), and the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT). The results showed that those who were younger, with higher education, non-widowed, with better economic condition related to salary or family support were more likely to use smartphone. Also, cost was found to be a critical factor influencing behavior intention. Self-satisfaction and facilitating conditions were proved to be important factors influencing perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use.Attitude towards usingBehavioral IntentionCost ToleranceFacilitating ConditionsPerceived Ease of UsePerceived UsefulnessSmartphone Acceptance Model for Chinese Older PeopleSelf-SatisfactionSenior Technology Acceptance ModelTechnology Acceptance ModelTechnology Acceptance Model 2Theory of Reasoned ActionUnified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the 21st century, network usage is increasing very rapidly and new interfaces, search engines, and features are becoming available at an unprecedented rate. The expanding power of computers and the recent growth of information technologies such as smartphones have made it possible for large numbers of people to have direct access to an increasingly wide array of information sources and services. Coupled with this explosive growth in technology is the ageing of the population. Both age-related cognitive and physiological impairments render the difficulty of daily activities (Pinto et al., 2000) and are highly relevant when interactive technology is being used (Sonderegger et al., 2016). We are now confronted with the convergence of these two major worldwide trends. In China, since 2000, the speed of population ageing has surpassed the rate of population ageing for the rest of the world. Currently, China has a larger number of older people than any other countries in the world. The number of Chinese people aged over 60 exceeded 194 million in 2010, accounting for 14.3 percent of the total population (Wu and Dang, 2013). Given that older people represent an increasingly large proportion of the population and will benefit from being active users of technology, issues surrounding aging and information technology are of critical importance (Czaja and Lee, 2009). Meeting ageing-related demands such as social security systems, health care and community services with a relatively low level of economic development is a tough challenge for China. Thus, if older adults in China are able to use technology, the economic and social burdens of families, communities and the country may be lowered significantly (Chen and Chan, 2013).ICT (Information and Communications Technology) is regarded as an effective tool to help create a successful intergenerational society (Chen and Chan, 2011). Among the various kinds of ICT products, the mobile phone is the one most generally used by older adults in daily life. In society at large, the mobile phone has become an essential component for work, education, communication, and entertainment, and it is being increasingly used within the healthcare area. Previous studies have shown that older people are aware of and willing to use various types of technology, especially mobile phones, which have the potential to improve the quality of life for older people (Plaza et al., 2011).According to the 32nd Statistical Report on Internet Development in 2013 released by CNNIC (China Internet Network Information Center, 2014), the growth of netizens has entered into a steady state, and mobile phones have become the primary source of new netizens. The popularity of 3G, the development of improved wireless networks and innovation of mobile phone applications has greatly facilitated the rapid growth of mobile phone netizens. The CNNIC investigation showed that in 2013, 89.2% of the population was using mobile phones in China. Furthermore, among the age group 45–64, 51% of the population were using smartphones, which suggested that many adults who are at the early stage of ageing are now using smartphones.Mobile phones enable older adults to keep in touch with others all the time and at different locations so that they do not need to stay at home waiting for news or communications with friends and family. This can encourage them to lead a more active social life as they can potentially go out at will and still be in touch with family and friends. In addition, mobile phones can provide a sense of safety and security for older people when they are at home alone or when they go out alone (Kurniawan, 2008). Mobile phones, especially smartphones, increasingly play an important role in the homecare of older adults. Current research of mobile phone usage among older adults is covering an increasing variety of clinical domains (Joe and Demiris, 2013). There exists a golden opportunity to utilize smartphone technologies to help manage the health of older adults and to improve their quality of life and well-being.Venkatesh concluded that, like anyone else, older adults accept and adopt technology when it meets their needs and expectations (Venkatesh et al. 2003; Conci et al. 2009). However, Verdegem and De Marez (2011) reported that technology innovations often fail to be fully utilized because of not enough attention is given to user acceptance. Wilkowska and Ziefle (2011) showed that the more carefully and sensitively the cognitions and mindsets of users are addressed and included in the concepts and designs of communication and information equipment and systems, the higher the chance of broad user acceptance and the adoption of new technologies. It is very much the issue of user acceptance that determines usage behavior and wider use of technologies. In order to ensure that older adults are able to adapt to new information environments, the factors that influence their acceptance of technologies such as the smartphone, and the difficulties that they experience when using smartphones and mobile apps need to be explored.Technology products and services, especially the use of the Internet and mobile phones, that older people have reported using were primarily in the home and related to domestic matters (Mitzner et al., 2010; Ziefle and Röcker, 2010). Mobile phone technology acceptance by older adults has recently receiving considerable attention and models have been proposed to predict factors that influence acceptance and adoption from different perspectives. Renaud and van Biljon (2008) used structured interviews to qualitatively confirm the factors affecting the acceptance and adoption of technology by older users. Their interviews employed usage scenarios as well as a mobile phone design activity. Conci et al. (2009) showed that intrinsic motivations play an important role albeit always mediated by utilitarian motives. Verkasolo et al. (2010) generally found that perceived enjoyment and usefulness can explain intention to use smartphone applications for both users and non-users. With regard to usability problems, Ehmena et al. (2012) pointed out that it was essential to consider abilities and deficiencies of the older population as part of the development process for technological devices. Also, Teh et al. (2014) offered fresh insights for mobile device manufacturers and application developers to focus their design efforts around the three aspects of intuitiveness, convenience and usefulness, as needed in different ways by users from different age groups. In China, research on this topic is just beginning, Deng et al. (2014) investigated the adoption of mobile health services by middle-aged and older people, and the results revealed that perceived value, attitude, perceived behavior control, technology anxiety, and self-actualization need positively affected the behavior intention of the older users. Zhou and Rau (2014), using explorative analysis, studied the acceptance of new functions on smartphones, with particular focus on the mobile phone functions, and concluded with ten important functional requirements reported by participants. Overall, the research concerning smartphone technology acceptance has just started in China and, as yet, is insufficient, such that, there is a lack of research that explores and confirms the determinants of behavior intention for smartphone usage from a structured perspective among older Chinese people.The present study aimed to investigate the critical factors which may have significant impacts on smartphone technology acceptance and behavioral intention among older adults in China using confirmatory factor analysis. It explored both the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that influence the acceptance of older adults of smartphones and mobile apps. Considering the relatively low per capita income level, education status and traditional cultural background that exists in China, this study aimed to develop a Smartphone Acceptance Model for Chinese Older People (SAMCOP) based on the theory and constructs of the technology acceptance model (TAM) (Davis, 1986) and incorporating the following three additional hypothesized factors: “Facilitating Conditions (FC)”, “Self-satisfaction (SS)” and “Cost Tolerance (CT)”. Through the study, the basic personal circumstances of Chinese older adults who are smartphone users will also be described.The factors influencing usage of technology have been studied extensively. Several models have been proposed to explain technology acceptance behavior, including the theory of reasoned action (TRA) (Fishbein and Ajzen, 1975), the technology acceptance model (TAM) (Davis, 1986), the technology acceptance model 2 (TAM2) (Venkatesh and Davis, 2000), and the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) (Venkatesh et al. 2003). More recently and specific to the older population of Hong Kong, Chen and Chan (2014) proposed a gerontechnology acceptance model called the “Senior Technology Acceptance Model (STAM)”. From all of these theoretical models, a series of determinants for technology acceptance by older adults, for example, social influence, self-efficacy and facilitating conditions were found.Two common constructs proposed in TAM, TAM2 and STAM are perceived usefulness (PU) and perceived ease of use (PEOU). Perceived usefulness is defined as the subjective belief of prospective users that a particular system will increase their job performance within an organizational context (Davis, 1989). Perceived ease of use is defined as the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system will be free from effort (Davis, 1989). TAM suggests that people will form a behavioral intention (BI) in relation to which they have a positive attitude (AT), and/or which they believe will improve their job performance (PU) and achieve various instrumental rewards (such as pay increase or promotion) without necessarily activating the positive attitude. Perceived ease of use is also hypothesized to have a significant effect on attitude, the influence of which is based on intrinsic motivation whereby the easier a system the greater should be the user's self-efficacy and perceived control. However, although TAM exists as a reliable acceptance theory, it sometimes suffers from inadequate explanatory power since technological, cultural, usage-context and longitudinal behavioral process will affect the validity of the constructs in TAM (Sun and Zhang, 2006; Schepersa and Wetzels, 2007; Johnson et al. 2014). The ability of the original TAM to predict self-reported behavior intention and actual use is limited (Taylor and Todd, 1995; Bagozzi, 2007). However, a number of studies have shown the effectiveness of extending TAM by incorporating new constructs to increase the explanatory power of TAM (Dishaw and Strong, 1999; Hsu and Lu, 2004; Liu et al. 2010). Thus, in this study it is proposed to extend TAM with the addition of relevant constructs specific to the use of smartphones and mobile apps. Chen and Chan (2014) have shown that TAM can be effectively modified for use for older adults and that the TAM constructs, such as PU, PEOU and AT, are critical for older people as well as for the young (Braun, 2013; Chen and Chan, 2014). The hypotheses related to factors PU, PEOU and AT in the proposed smartphone acceptance model were developed as follows:H1.1-H1.2: Perceived usefulness (PU) has significantly positive influences on attitude towards using (AT) and behavioral intention (BI).H2.1-H2.3: Perceived ease of use (PEOU) is significantly positively associated with attitude towards using (AT), behavioral intention (BI), and perceived usefulness (PU).H3: Attitude towards using (AT) directly predicts behavioral intention (BI).The unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) (Venkatesh et al. 2003) identified three determinants (performance expectancy, effort expectancy, and social influence) that affect behavioral intention directly, two determinants (behavioral intention and facilitating conditions) that influence usage behavior directly, and four incorporated moderators (gender, age, experience, and voluntariness of use). UTAUT also identified self-efficacy and anxiety as indirect determinants since their influences on technology usage were fully mediated by PEOU (Venkatesh et al., 2003). In the study of Venkatesh et al. (2003), Facilitating Conditions (FC) was defined as the degree to which an individual believes that an organizational and technical infrastructure exists to support the use of the system. However, in UTAUT, facilitating conditions had no direct influence on behavioral intention but had direct influence on actual usage behavior. In China, limited by education and social services system, most older people do not have the knowledge and ability or sufficient learning opportunities to manipulate technological products. Thus, resource and technology facilitating conditions may be a potential solution to promote smartphone technology acceptance in China. In this study Facilitating Conditions (FC) was regarded as an extrinsic motivation factor, and the hypotheses related to Facilitating Conditions (FC) were:H4.1–4.3: Facilitating conditions (FC) positively affects perceived ease of use (PEOU), perceived usefulness (PU), and behavioral intention (BI).Self-Satisfaction (SS) is the degree to which a product/service gives the user satisfaction with his or her achievements (Park et al. 2013). For example, user perception of having an individual and distinct personality, achieving something new and difficult which requires great effort, and belief in oneself and one's abilities reflected by a product/service, all of these can generate great motivation through self-satisfaction. Self-related positive affect may mediate the effects that physical activity has on life satisfaction (Rejeski and Mihalko, 2001). In mainland China, the effect of individual self-esteem and self-related life domain satisfaction is stronger in older people than in the young (Zhang and Leung, 2002). In this study, Self-Satisfaction (SS) was regarded as a positive factor with regard to usage intention and as an intrinsic motivation factor. The related hypotheses were developed as follows:H5.1–5.3: Self-Satisfaction (SS) has a positive effect on smartphone acceptance, increases the degree of perceived ease of use (PEOU), perceived usefulness (PU), and behavioral intention (BI).Several studies have considered the socio-economic issues (job status, occupation and income) that confront older adults, and which may influence their adoption of technology products and services (Ho and Kwok, 2003; Bina and Giaglis, 2005). Recently, the Senior Technology Acceptance Model (STAM) proposed by Chen and Chan (2014) also indicated that the economic factor was a critical factor for acceptance of gerontechnology among Hong Kong Chinese seniors. With regard to the economic situation in mainland China, per capita income is relatively low compared with other developed countries, people, especially older people, are greatly concerned with the costs of products and services, and their willingness to bear costs is by considering their income in relation to their idea of the value of the products/services. In this study, Cost Tolerance (CT) was considered to be a direct factor determining the behavioral intention of the older people when using smartphone technology. The hypotheses related to Cost Tolerance (CT) were:H6.1–6.3: Cost tolerance (CT) has a positive effect on smartphone acceptance, and higher cost tolerance increases the degree of perceived ease of use (PEOU), perceived usefulness (PU), and behavioral intention (BI).Also, mediating factors, such as demographic characteristics, were assumed to mediate acceptance towards smartphones. All of the constructs and hypotheses considered in the proposed Smartphone Acceptance Model for Chinese Older People (SAMCOP) are shown in Table 1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
