@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Walking the line: Understanding pedestrian behaviour and risk at rail level crossings with cognitive work analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cognitive work analysis (CWA) is applied to pedestrian use of rail level crossings.A conceptual model of pedestrian behaviour at RLXs is proposed.The use of CWA findings for understanding pedestrian risk at RLXs is demonstrated.The CWA findings are used to recommend design improvements for improving safety.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rail level crossings,Pedestrians,Cognitive work analysis,Constraints,Systems approach,Risk,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Pedestrian fatalities at rail level crossings (RLXs) are a public safety concern for governments worldwide. There is little literature examining pedestrian behaviour at RLXs and no previous studies have adopted a formative approach to understanding behaviour in this context. In this article, cognitive work analysis is applied to understand the constraints that shape pedestrian behaviour at RLXs in Melbourne, Australia. The five phases of cognitive work analysis were developed using data gathered via document analysis, behavioural observation, walk-throughs and critical decision method interviews. The analysis demonstrates the complex nature of pedestrian decision making at RLXs and the findings are synthesised to provide a model illustrating the influences on pedestrian decision making in this context (i.e. time, effort and social pressures). Further, the CWA outputs are used to inform an analysis of the risks to safety associated with pedestrian behaviour at RLXs and the identification of potential interventions to reduce risk.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Across Australia, over the ten years between June 2002 and July 2012, there were 92 collisions between trains and pedestrians at rail level crossings (RLXs, Australian Transport Safety Bureau, 2012). In the state of Victoria, 17 fatalities and six serious injuries resulted from pedestrians having been struck by trains over five years between 2009 and 2013 (Transport Safety Victoria, 2014). Pedestrian fatalities at RLXs represent close to three times those of road vehicle occupants.In Melbourne, Australia, RLX infrastructure operates in one of three ways. The first type of design provides static warning signs and indications to inform users that a rail crossing is present, but provides no indication of whether a train is approaching. The second type of RLX provides an alert that a train is approaching (through active warnings such as flashing lights and bells), whilst the third type provides active warnings and physical barriers (such as pedestrian gates and boom barriers, and road boom barriers) intended to prevent road users accessing and traversing the crossing while a train is approaching. The latter types of risk controls are generally considered to be the most effective in minimising collisions, at least for road vehicles (e.g. Wigglesworth and Uber, 1991). However, even with the widespread use of physical barriers, collisions still occur.Modern safety science advocates a systems approach to the analysis and design of complex safety-critical domains (Leveson, 2004; Rasmussen, 1997; Salmon and Lenné, 2015; Wilson, 2014). Such an approach views accidents as emergent properties of the interactions within a system, rather than focusing on individual components which, even if addressed well, may not prevent future occurrences due to the variability in performance within modern complex systems and their dynamic nature. A review of the existing RLX literature found that no previous research has taken a systems approach to RLX safety based on criteria derived from a review of systems theory (Read et al., 2013).Within the peer reviewed literature studies focussing on pedestrian behaviour at RLXs are sparse. Those available have tended to take a normative approach to understanding behaviour by focusing on the tasks pedestrians should perform to be safe, and comparing actual behaviour to this optimal performance. For example, studies have examined the effects of installing new safety measures through statistical analyses to determine the effects on pedestrian behaviour (e.g. Farradyne and Sabra Wang and Associates, 2002; Siques, 2002). An exception to this is recent work by Stefanova et al. (2015) who used focus group data to identify factors contributing to pedestrian errors and violations at RLXs. They used Accimap (Rasmussen, 1997) to represent the systemic factors influencing behaviour in two violation scenarios. While this work took a systems approach, to date the majority of studies have employed survey, interview or focus group methods, rather than collecting naturalistic data. Further, no published studies have taken a formative approach to understanding pedestrian behaviour at RLXs meaning that our understanding is limited to describing existing behaviour rather than all of the possibilities for behaviour available.This article is a direct response to this key knowledge gap, describing an application of the cognitive work analysis (CWA) framework undertaken to investigate pedestrian behaviour at RLXs. CWA enables analysts to identify and represent the constraints of a complex system, capturing the breadth of potential system functioning and the possibilities for action available to decision makers (Rasmussen et al., 1994; Vicente, 1999). It is proposed that utilising this framework will provide an innovative perspective on pedestrian behaviour in the RLX context.CWA has been applied to many varied complex systems including nuclear power generation (e.g. Burns et al., 2008), military command and control (e.g. Jenkins et al., 2008), air traffic control (e.g. Ahlstrom, 2005) and submarine systems (Stanton and Bessell, 2014). CWA has also been applied to road transport (e.g. Birrell et al., 2012; Cornelissen et al., 2012) and rail transport (e.g. Olsson and Jansson, 2005; Roth, 2008; Stanton et al., 2013) and has recently been applied in the RLX domain (Salmon et al., 2014; Salmon et al., 2016). CWA has also been recently applied in the pedestrian footpath context (Stevens and Salmon, 2014); however, this did not consider pedestrian behaviour at RLXs specifically. CWA is growing in popularity as means for understanding sociotechnical systems and was chosen for application to this area due its unique constraints-based approach, its maturity as a systems analysis and design framework and its previous application in related areas.Multiple methods of data collection were used to inform the CWA including document analysis, input from subject matter experts, naturalistic covert observations of behaviour, elicitation of verbal protocols during a naturalistic walking study and critical decision method interviews. The verbal protocols were used to derive data about the content and outcome of thinking processes undertaken by participants, a purpose for which this method is considered reliable and valid (Walker, 2004) and the critical decision method interviews elicited retrospective data about participants' decision making processes. The reliability of the critical decision method has also been previously established (Plant and Stanton, 2013).Approval for the research and all associated data collection activities was obtained from the Monash University Human Research Ethics Committee and other relevant ethics committees prior to data collection commencing. Approval for access to coronial records was obtained from the Justice Human Research Ethics Committee prior to these records being accessed.Publicly available documentation regarding RLX infrastructure design and operation were sourced and analysed including the Australian standard for traffic control devices at RLXs and the Victorian rail industry standard for pedestrian infrastructure at RLXs. Further, 37 coronial inquest reports of non-intentional pedestrian deaths occurring at RLXs in Victoria between 2000 and 2012 were sourced from the National Coronial Information System managed by the Victorian Department of Justice and analysed.In order to observe RLXs from a train driver's perspective and gain familiarisation with the train driving task at RLXs a familiarisation ride was undertaken in a train cab for approximately four hours. Further, a number of RLXs in metropolitan Melbourne were visited to gain familiarisation with RLX functioning and the various physical layouts and features present.Seven RLX sites located in metropolitan Melbourne were selected for naturalistic observations. The sites were selected based on the features of the crossing (e.g. infrastructure, equipment, types of warnings present) as well as incident history. The features of each site are described in Table 1. The site selection process ensured that a range of RLX features were represented including automatic gates, automatic gates with locked emergency gates, pedestrian boom barriers, pedestrian mazes, RLXs adjacent to stations and crossings adjacent to road RLX (exposing pedestrians to features such as flashing lights and road boom barriers, etc.). At three RLX locations (sites 2, 3 and 6), two sets of pedestrian gates operated independently enabling users to access an adjacent train station with an island or center platform when a train is approaching from the far track (i.e. a track that they need not cross to reach the train station). These RLXs were all adjacent to a road RLX. One RLX (site 3) had additional countermeasures implemented including a latch on the emergency gate to prevent pedestrians being able to open the gate from the approach side of the RLX, a ‘red man standing’ (RMS) display (similar to a road pedestrian signal however instead of showing green it extinguishes when no train is approaching), and an ‘another train coming’ (ATC) display (to indicate to waiting pedestrians that the gates remain closed because another train is approaching).All sites had been identified within a list of the top 20 unsafe RLXs in Victoria, ranked according to the total number of incidents (collisions and near misses between pedestrians and trains) that had occurred since 2005 (G. Sheppard, personal communication, May 10, 2013). The ranking for each RLX is shown in Table 1. This data is collated by the agency that owns the railway land and infrastructure in Victoria.All observations occurred on weekdays and were planned to occur in the mornings and early afternoon, based on an analysis of occurrence data that indicated the time of day when the majority of collisions and near misses occur. At some locations the planned observations were unable to be undertaken due to operational requirements restricting access to some rail signal boxes and other unforeseen delays.A structured, paper-based form was used to record the behaviour of each user observed. The form enabled recording of the following items: date and time of the observation, system state encountered by the user (e.g. warnings not activated, warnings activated as the user approached, warnings activated as traversing crossing, etc.), the behaviour of the user in relation to each physical object present at the RLX (e.g. the fence, gate, boom barrier, etc), a description of the path taken by the user and their behaviour, including information about the person if it may have affected their behaviour (such as a mobility impairment) and a representation of the user's path through the RLX, including the starting point and destination, overlaid on an aerial map of the crossing.The observations were conducted in a covert manner to avoid influencing the behaviour of RLX users. Observations were undertaken from signal boxes with windows overlooking the RLX in question, or from a vehicle parked close to the RLX. Users to be observed were selected using a convenience sampling method. That is, not all users were observed as it was not possible to record the behaviour of all users. Further, due to the unpredictable flow of users through the crossing it was thought to be overly restrictive to limit the observations by using a random process of, for example, selecting one in five users that approached the crossing. Instead, once the behaviour of the previous pedestrian was fully documented, the next pedestrian approaching was selected for observation.The protocol required that the user be selected when approaching the RLX, but not yet on the RLX. The person was then observed while they crossed and until they exited the crossing and moved away from the area. Where a group of people were approaching the RLX, one person in the group was selected to observe (based on which person within the group could be viewed most clearly when the observation was begun) with the effect of other pedestrians on their behaviour documented. In addition to pedestrians, cyclists who chose to use the designated pedestrian crossing were observed.For reliability analysis purposes, an independent observer, trained in the observation protocol concurrently recorded user (pedestrian or cyclist) behaviour over three hours (approximately 10% of total observation time) at the first observation site. Ratings of 28 pedestrian crossing users were gathered during that period. Inter-rater reliability calculations were performed on two aspects of the observations for each of the 28 users observed: the classification of the system state and the classification of behaviour in relation to each physical object present. Between the raters there were 1264 agreements (e.g. both raters recorded that the user walked within the fencing/enclosure or both raters did not check the box that the user walked within the fencing/enclosure) and 93 disagreements (e.g. one observer recorded that the user walked within the fencing/enclosure however the other observer did not). A percentage agreement score of 93.15% was obtained. The calculations took into account situations where the physical object was not present during the observation providing no opportunity for behaviour in relation to the object. This was achieved by excluding ratings of objects not available from the analysis (i.e. was not counted as an agreement nor disagreement). This avoided calculations being biased towards agreements. Once the satisfactory level of inter-rater agreement was obtained, the remaining observations were conducted by a single observer alone.In total, 370 crossing users were observed over approximately 30 h of observations at the seven sites. Table 2shows that state of the RLX warnings and the position of the user. In the majority of cases the warnings were not activated during the time the observed user traversed the RLX.Participants were recruited through a weekly online university newsletter, through pamphlets distributed at local community centres and businesses and via advertisements on social media platforms. Fifteen participants (6 males, 9 females) were recruited to take part in the study (five at each study location). Participants were aged between 19 years and 62 years (M = 34.2 years, SD = 14.2 years).Participants' experience with using RLXs generally and at the specific study location at which they participated varied across participants. The majority of participants (10) had moderate experience using RLXs (using them ‘often’ or ‘sometimes’), while four participants reported that they used RLXs ‘always’. One participant stated that they used RLXs ‘rarely’ but no participant reported having no prior experience using RLXs. In relation to experience with the particular RLX site, only two participants had traversed the route more than 20 times, two reported walking the route between two and 10 times previously, five participants had traversed the route only once and six participants had never previously traversed the route. In summary, the majority of participants were experienced users of RLXs but did not have particular experience using the RLX at the study location that they attended.A paper-based demographic questionnaire was completed by participants. A laptop computer was used to display a video showing a forward facing view of a pedestrian walking on a footpath in an urban area to enable the researcher to demonstrate the verbal protocol methodology and enable participants to practice and gain feedback from the researcher.Three RLX locations in the south-eastern suburbs of Melbourne were selected by the researchers and for each, a pre-determined route that incorporated two RLXs (once on each side of the road). The locations were Centre Road in Bentleigh (site 3 from the observation study), McKinnon Road in McKinnon and Murrumbeena Road in Murrumbeena. All sites had automatic gates and were adjacent to train stations and road RLXs.The routes were designed to be completed in approximately 20 min, given differences in normal walking speeds. Route completion times for Bentleigh were between 10:35 and 15:46; for McKinnon were between 14:05 and 23:54; and for Murrumbeena were between 9:51 and 15:05. All participants wore Imging HD video recording glasses and a microphone and dictaphone to record the forward view and the verbal protocols.A structured form was used to conduct post-walk critical decision method interviews with participants. This was used by the researcher to conduct the semi-structured interview and to record participants' responses. The interviews were audio recorded.Participants met the researcher at a public place near to the study site for which they had been recruited. Participants were provided with an information sheet broadly describing the aims of the research and completed a consent form. Participants were told that the research was investigating pedestrian behaviour in urban environments to avoid participants focussing more attention on RLX than they would in their everyday walking behaviour. Next, participants were provided with instructions on how to provide concurrent verbal protocols and they were subsequently asked to practise providing verbal protocols while watching a video recording of a pedestrian's perspective while walking in an urban environment. The researcher provided feedback to the participant regarding the quality of their verbal protocols until it was felt they were able to provide protocols of sufficient quality for the study. Participants were then shown the pre-determined route and were asked to memorise it. When participants were comfortable with the verbal protocol procedure and the route the recording equipment was fitted and activated. Participants were then asked to negotiate the study route whilst providing a continuous verbal protocol.Once participants had completed the route they met the researcher at the point of origin and were asked to engage in a critical decision method interview (Klein et al., 1989). At this point, participants were informed that the research was focussed on the RLXs and were asked to select a decision associated with encountering an RLX during the walk that they found to be challenging, difficult or unusual. Once a decision was selected, the researcher and participant developed a timeline of the events associated with the decision and the researcher used prompt questions to gain a deep understanding of how the decision-making process undertaken by the participant including, for example, the information they used, their goals, the options they considered and how they selected or rejected various options.The verbal protocols and critical decision method interviews were transcribed verbatim in Microsoft Word.To provide some further context about the RLX environment, Fig. 1provides a labelled still image taken from the forward facing camera worn by a participant in the walk-through study while traversing the RLX at Centre Road, Bentleigh (site 3 in Table 1). The RLX is adjacent to a road RLX and to a train station (with access to the station available via a path on the left in the middle of the two sets of gates). The figure shows part of the flashing light assembly on the right hand side, as well as the fencing used to direct pedestrians towards the footpath. It also shows the holding line which is delineated through the application of tactile ground surface indicators (TGSIs). The emergency escape gate, with signage indicating it is not to be used for access onto the crossing, is also shown. Although not shown in the figure because no train is approaching, this RLX incorporates automatic gates and active displays that show a red man standing symbol (when warnings activate) and/or an indication of another train approaching when gates remain closed between trains.Fig. 2is a photograph of the RLXs at Eel Race Road, Carrum (site 5 in Table 1). This RLX has no automatic gates. The ‘maze’ fencing configuration is intended to slow user speed on approach and to encourage them to look both ways along the track before crossing. Within the holding line is text advising pedestrians to ‘wait here’. Here the holding line and markings to delineate the crossing pathway are provided as painted lines rather than TGSIs. This RLX is adjacent to a road RLX, meaning that audible bells, flashing lights and boom barriers activate when a train is approaching.As CWA is a framework, rather than a standardised methodology, it is important to consider how it would be best applied to address safety issues at RLXs such as those identified in Figs. 1 and 2. Furthermore, following the guidance of Rasmussen et al. (1994) and Naikar (2013) the attributes of the system under investigation should be considered, such as the extent to which the constraints on behaviour can be considered to be intentional (i.e. rely on formal and informal rules enforced by society) or causal (i.e. rely on the laws of physics).While both types of constraints are present at RLXs, the constraints on pedestrian behaviour in this context are primarily intentional with behaviour tending to be governed by actors' personal intentions, shaped by formal rules (legislation) and social norms. The majority of the rules are intended to restrict users from traversing of the RLX while warning devices are activated. While gates are often used to physically restrict pedestrians, pedestrians retain considerable flexibility in the way in which they can approach, traverse and exit the crossing. For example, pedestrians can choose to cross on the roadway walking around or ducking under the road boom barrier to avoid stopping at the pedestrian gate.In contrast to most other domains where CWA has been applied, pedestrians are members of the public, rather than workers or employees of an organisation. There are no barriers or restrictions to entry (i.e. licensing) for pedestrians and there is little control over behaviour, beyond the RLX infrastructure and limited supervision and enforcement activities undertaken by rail staff and the police. It has been noted, for example, that enforcement of road rules at RLXs does not occur regularly or is not perceived to occur consistently (Davey et al., 2008; Lobb et al., 2001).Having noted that the constraints on pedestrian behaviour are primarily intentional, the engineered and physical environmental aspects of the RLX system (barriers, warnings, etc.) could be categorised as primarily casual. When these aspects of the RLX are considered alone it could be classified as an automated system governed by the laws of nature. Electrical processes are used to detect trains and provide warnings, and mechanical processes are used to operate barriers to control pedestrian (and road user) access onto the RLX.There are also key causal constraints operating on the functioning of the train. Of particular influence is the interface between the train wheel and the rail which constrains the braking and acceleration capacity of the train. Further, trains cannot deviate laterally from the tracks. Given these constraints, in an emergency situation such as a pedestrian on the track when the train is approaching, train drivers often cannot take evasive action through sudden braking or turning to avoid a collision. This limitation, and the fact that the RLX is railway property upon which road users are given permission to cross, are the underlying reasons for legislation and rules that give right of way to trains. The behaviour of train drivers is also constrained by organisational rules and processes. As employees they are subject to procedures, performance monitoring, and are given professional training, etc. According to Rasmussen's continuum of work domains, the work domain of the train driver could be categorised as a mechanised system governed by instructive rules of conduct. However, unlike the description of that type of domain provided by Rasmussen et al. (1994), the casual constraints affecting braking mean that the system is tightly coupled where there is risk of collision, because there is little opportunity for recovery.An additional consideration for the analysis was its overall purpose. The context of the analysis was to identify and understand the risks to safety associated with pedestrian behaviour at RLXs and to identify potential design solutions that could be implemented at a relatively low cost in the short-term. Many CWA design applications aim to design computer-based interfaces to support decision making using the CWA-based design approach of ecological interface design. For this work, such an approach was determined to be beyond scope as such an interface would require the development and adoption of personal devices by pedestrians. Specifically, a display showing pedestrians their field of safe travel, personalised to their particular abilities and circumstances would potentially be very effective. Such an approach may be valuable in the future if wearable technology becomes widespread and there can be integration with more general walking navigation software.Spatially, the boundaries of the analysis were drawn in relation to both the rail line and the footpath/road. For the rail line, consideration was given to the approach to the RLX prior to the whistle board (a sign indicating to train drivers that they must sound their whistle as they are approaching an RLX) being visible to the train driver on each approach. For the road and footpath, consideration was given from the point just prior to where the RLX is visible to pedestrians. Although this geographical area would encompass many functions and tasks (e.g. pedestrians negotiating road intersections on approach to the RLX, train drivers responding to rail signals, etc.), only functions relevant to the RLX itself were analysed in detail.All five phases of CWA were used to investigate the constraints influencing pedestrian behaviour at RLXs. Table 3describes the key data sources used to undertake each phase. However, it should be noted that developing the CWA outputs is an iterative process meaning that the earlier phases were often updated based on the findings of the latter phases of analysis.The work domain analysis described in this article was informed by a broader abstraction hierarchy representation developed for all road users at RLXs (Salmon et al., 2016). The current analysis incorporates more detail about the infrastructure available to pedestrians and the functions associated with pedestrian traversal of the RLX. The outputs of all latter phases were developed by a single analyst and reviewed by another analyst for accuracy and completion. Given that reliability and validity of CWA outputs have been found to be improved with input from multiple analysts (Cornelissen et al., 2014), key elements of the outputs were also reviewed in a focus group session involving six road and rail industry subject matter experts to ensure accuracy and completeness of the analysis. The comments offered were generally minor (e.g. relating to terminology, level of detail for the description of objects, functions and tasks and minor omissions). In addition, the subject matter experts provided valuable comments and insights into what they considered to be higher risk situations, tasks and contextual factors affecting pedestrian safety at RLXs. The comments were incorporated into the analysis outputs.In the work domain analysis phase of CWA the system is described according to various levels of abstraction and decomposition. The resulting system representation identifies the constraints on behaviour within the work domain of interest. As part of the work domain analysis phase of this research an abstraction hierarchy (AH) was developed to identify the system constraints on pedestrian behaviour at RLXs. Given the different sources of regularity within the domains making up the overall RLX system (as discussed in Section 3.1), and following the guidance for representing the AH for intentional systems (Burns et al., 2005; Hajdukiewicz et al., 1999), consideration was given to the type of system being described and how it should be represented. Given the presence of multiple purposes that are not necessarily shared across the system (e.g. pedestrian purpose versus RLX purposes), the fact that collisions may result from conflicting purposes, and the open boundary of the RLX system, the use of multiple hierarchies to model the system was considered appropriate (Burns et al., 2005). For example, the purposes of both pedestrians and trains involve traversing the RLX to reach their specific destination, while the purpose of the engineered infrastructure and physical environment is to control this interaction.Accordingly, the AH was modelled according to the three key domains present: the pedestrian domain, the infrastructure/physical environment domain, and the train domain (see Fig. 3). The multiple hierarchies acknowledge differences at the first four levels of abstraction but they interact at the physical objects level.One of the benefits of the AH is that is makes explicit the conflicts and trade-offs occurring at the more abstract levels of the system as well as at the physical level. For example, within the infrastructure/physical environment domain there are protective purposes which are in conflict with other functional purposes such as to ‘provide access across rail tracks’ (which is important as otherwise the railway would isolate communities or parts of communities and inhibit social and economic growth). The ongoing problem of crashes at RLXs suggests that the infrastructure domain is not always successful and is sometimes surpassed by the ‘reach destination’ purpose of the pedestrian domain.At the values and priority measures level of abstraction the nodes are relatively similar across the three domains but there a differences in their meaning. For example, the pedestrian and train domain share the value of maximise positive subject experience. However, this may be quite different across and within domains. For example, some pedestrians may find it a positive experience to walk around a barrier and cross the RLX as they were able to make their own decision and did not have to wait. A positive experience for another pedestrian may be to wait behind the barrier because this reduces anxiety about whether or not it is safe to cross. For a train driver, a positive subject experience is likely related to their level of anxiety about whether a pedestrian might step out in front of the train as it is approaching. Further, for the infrastructure domain the descriptions of the values are more formal as this reflects formal organisational reporting that is undertaken to determine whether the infrastructure is performing its functions to an acceptable level.At the purpose-related functions level it is again emphasised that the infrastructure maintains separation between pedestrians and the train, as well as, alternatively maintaining traffic flow across the RLX. Interestingly, the functions within the pedestrian and train domains are similar. For example, both engage in control of locomotion with pedestrians having control of speed and direction, and trains only being controlled in relation to speed. Both work domains require hazard detection. An unexpected finding in the pedestrian domain was the function of ‘assistance provision’. This was found to be quite unique to the pedestrian context, with people outside of their vehicles there is considerable opportunity for direct verbal and non-verbal communication and for assistance or helping behaviours to occur. Data that informed this inclusion in the AH included the verbal protocols from one participant who stopped at the mid-enclosure of the RLX and engaged in a discussion with another pedestrian, giving them route guidance. Another participant described during the critical decision method interview that she had considered overtaking another pedestrian while traversing the RLX as the other pedestrian, who was elderly, was walking relatively slowly. The participant chose to remain behind the other pedestrian and when asked whether her actions may have changed had the warnings activated while she was traversing, she responded ‘if she was still there I would help her’. Furthermore, a number of eyewitness reports referenced in the reports of the Coroners Court of Victoria included content about the witness and other bystanders, upon realising that a collision was likely, taking action in an attempt to assist (such as calling out to another person or running towards the RLX to render assistance).Turning attention now to the lower levels of Fig. 3, the object-related processes and physical objects, it can be seen that the physical objects are shared between domains but the affordances they provide differ depending upon the domain. For example, rail tracks enable locomotion for trains and provide path guidance for them, but for pedestrians they inhibit/obstruct the path of pedestrians in areas adjacent to the RLX footpath. Further, the rail tracks enable the electrical process of train detection which is based on through track circuit activation.Also many of the infrastructure/physical environment objects have affordances for pedestrians. In particular, many objects are linked to inhibit/obstruct path. There are varying ways in which this is achieved which is not necessarily indicated by the means-ends links in Fig. 3. For example, the nature of a gate or barrier as a constraint is very different from signage, although both are intended to have the same effect. In other words, it should be kept in mind that all means-ends links are not equal in terms of the effectiveness in providing the affordance/constraint.Finally, it is important to note the inclusion of road users within the work domain analysis. Rather than intending to create an actor-dependent representation, this inclusion acknowledges that other users can constrain behaviour through blocking the path ahead, through providing path guidance (based on observations that pedestrians often followed another walking in front), or through obstructing the visibility of other objects such as the train, or warning signs. Other road users may also warn of the need to stop, by stopping themselves and thus drawing attention to the requirement to stop.The work domain analysis has provided a representation of the functional structure of the RLX domain, with a focus on pedestrian safety. The remainder of the analysis was focussed on the pedestrian domain of the multiple domain representation in Fig. 3, taking account of the physical objects from the infrastructure/train domains that are used by pedestrians.The control task analysis phase of CWA considers the activities that must occur in the work domain for the system to achieve its purpose/s (Vicente, 1999). To analyse the activity in the pedestrian domain firstly, a contextual activity template (Naikar et al., 2006) was created (see extract in Fig. 4). As suggested by Naikar et al. (2006), functions are represented in each row in the contextual activity template, and different situations are represented in the columns. The situations were identified through considering the geographical position of pedestrians when approaching, traversing and exiting the RLX as well as the possible status of the RLX warning devices (e.g. bells not activated, gates and booms closing, gates and booms closed, etc.). The figure shows the situations relevant to the pedestrian's positions when they are in line with the fencing that funnels pedestrians towards the RLX and when they are in line with the holding line (a line that delineates the point of safety behind which a pedestrian is expected to wait if a train is approaching).The contextual activity template matrix identifies the situations in which it is possible for functions to be performed (indicated by the dashed boxes) and those in which the function is typically performed (indicated by circles and whiskers). In total, 45 situations were identified for the four functions to be performed in – seven geographical areas (on approach, at fencing, at holding line, on tracks, at mid-enclosure, at final enclosure, post-RLX, in refuge area) and five states of the warning systems (bells not activated, bells activated, gates/booms closing, gates/booms closed, gates booms opening).It can be seen in Fig. 4 that the ability for some functions to be performed does not change based on the situation. For example, assistance might be provided at any situation, and this is not typically done during any particular situation. Potentially, this function becomes more important when warnings are activated and gates are closing or closed, as these represent high risk times for a collision if a pedestrian is on the tracks and in need of assistance. Similarly, monitoring for, and detecting hazards does not differ substantially across different situations. This is typically done across all situations, even when a pedestrian might be stopped at a closed gate. For example, pedestrians observed during data collection activities would often watch trains as they passed while waiting at the gate.The functions that do change across situations are speed control and direction control. The contextual activity template suggests that these functions typically occur in most situations, except where gate activity means that they are likely to have had to stop. Speed control cannot occur when the pedestrian is at the holding line and the booms or gates are opening because there is some time delay between the gates beginning to open and pedestrians being able to move forward and through them. Further, road rules state that a pedestrian must not cross RLXs where a gate, boom or barrier at the crossing is opening or closing. However, directional control is still possible at this point and indeed pedestrians may turn as they prepare to begin to walk through the opening being created as the gates move.Speed control is particularly interesting in the situation of the bells having activated. A pedestrian may have approached the RLX with little thought about the RLX, reach the holding line and suddenly, on the onset of the bells, be required to make an important decision about whether they will traverse the RLX or wait. While the road rules prohibit crossing when the bells are activated (where the user is not already on the RLX) interestingly, with a pedestrian at this point in the flow of movement, it may be unintuitive to stop. Further, pedestrians may not be aware of the content of the road rules. Indeed, observations suggested that a number of users, on hearing the bells, instead began to rush across the RLX. Potentially the stress associated with the sudden onset of the bells activates the physiological fight or flight response with a natural response being to rush or run across. Potentially a more gradual transition from safe state (no warnings) to unsafe state could improve this response.Decision ladders were developed to identify the constraints on decision making for key control tasks. Decision ladders outline the information processing activities (represented by boxes) and resultant knowledge states (represented by circles) that, if followed from the bottom left to the bottom right of the ladder, represent the process of novice decision making (Vicente, 1999). As expertise develops, shortcuts can occur which means that actors progress through the decision ladder without going through each information processing activity and experiencing every knowledge state. The shortcuts can be in the form of leaps or shunts. Shunts occur where an information processing activity is connected to a state of knowledge (box to circle) and leaps connect two states of knowledge (circle to circle). An example of a leap would be an alert being directly associated with knowledge of the system state. It is not possible to link information processing activities directly to one another as this omits the resultant knowledge state.The format of the decision ladders follows the guidance provided by Elix and Naikar (2008) and Jenkins et al. (2010). It is intended to be a template showing the possible knowledge states based on the data collected within the studies undertaken. A template decision ladder enables leaps and shunts to be mapped on to the template to illustrate instances of rule-based and skill-based behaviour.An example decision ladder is presented in Fig. 5. The decision ladder is associated with the speed control function, for the context of an RLX with automatic gates where gates do not operate independently (i.e. all gates at the RLX operate in synchrony). The decision ladders contrast the decision making of pedestrians in three of the CAT situations: when at the fencing, bells not activated (indicated by the letter A); at the fencing, bells activated (indicated by the letter B); and at the fencing, gates closing (indicated by the letter C).In Fig. 5, the differences across the situations (indicated by the letters A to C) are shown for the left-hand side of the decision ladder only as there was no difference in options that users could select in relation to speed control – only speed up, maintain current speed or slow down/stop. Nor were there differences in the action execution relating to these options across the three situations.In terms of what alerts pedestrians to the need to make a decision about their speed, the key differences relates to the different stages of the warnings being activated. The leap shown in Fig. 5 (shortcut A) linking the ‘alert’ knowledge state and the ‘execution’ knowledge state represents a scenario where the bells activate and the pedestrian immediately comes to a stop. This is the intended effect of the bells and road rules which require that pedestrians do not enter an RLX when the bells are activated. However, as noted previously, given that pedestrians are already in motion, and have reached the fencing area, the actual skill-based behaviour observed was that on the onset of the bells pedestrians increased their speed to reach the other side of the RLX prior to the train arriving.In relation to gathering information and cues from the environment, there was some information that was the same across situations, such as whether or not a train was identified. This was included even for situations when the bells are not activated, as the lack of a warning may not necessarily mean that no train is approaching and our data showed that many pedestrians checked for trains even when the warnings were not activated. A train could be approaching in the distance (and not yet have activated the warnings) or there could be a fault in the warning equipment. Where the user tries to look for the train but there is not sufficient sighting distance (due to a platform or curve in the field of field from their location) they may select to slow down or stop to enable them the opportunity for a longer look up and down the tracks. Interestingly, while users slowing down and checking for trains was a relatively typical behaviour identified during data collection, the engineered system and road rules are more focused on users detecting and complying with warnings.An interesting insight from the decision ladder analysis is that much of the information about the train is not made available to pedestrians in any formal way. For example, information about the length of time the warnings have been active for, the presence of another train, the distance or time to arrival of the train at the RLX, and the type of train is not currently available to pedestrians.In relation to knowledge of the system state, in this domain this includes consideration of the objective state of the RLX (i.e. is a train approaching, are the warnings working) as well as the relationship between the system and the capabilities of the pedestrian or the impacts on the pedestrian's intentions (i.e. is there time to get through the gate before it closes). This relates back to the affordances of the work domain (i.e. the means-ends relationships between physical objects and object-related processes). While the work domain is actor-independent and affordances are stable properties of objects, affordances are somewhat actor-dependent because what an object affords in a dynamic interaction with an actor depends on the actor's capabilities such as their height or strength (Gibson, 1979). In relation to RLXs, the edge of the closing gate affords locomotion/the opportunity to enter the RLX until it reaches a point where the gap is too small for the user to fit through. Further, the speed capability of the user will affect whether they are afforded the opportunity to enter the RLX, depending on the distance the user is from the gate when it begins to close. The shortcut connecting ‘system state’ and ‘execution’ in Fig. 5 (shortcut B) is intended to illustrate a situation where a user realises the system state – that there is time for them to get through the gate before it closes – and executes the action of increasing their speed to enter the RLX.For the three different situations the system states are different as the urgency of decision making increases across them. At the fencing/enclosure the user is very close to the tracks. When the bells are not activated (situation A) the user may search for information about whether or not trains are approaching and whether or not the warnings may begin to activate in the near future. They generally (except for rare cases of the warnings failing) have time to continue to gather information and monitor the environment. However, when the gates are closing (situation C), users have to gather information quickly so as not to lose the opportunity to make the decision. Further, given this decision making is dynamic, users are likely to have previously been alerted to the need to make a decision by RLX warnings such as the bells while they were on approach to the RLX. Therefore, they would have begun to gather information to assist in their understanding of the system state.In the strategies analysis phase of CWA, all of the possible strategies for achieving the control tasks are identified. For this analysis, the strategies analysis diagram and flowchart (Cornelissen et al., 2013a) was used to extract all possible strategies from the work domain analysis. These tools are used to exhaustively describe all of the activities that the system permits in its current configuration.To develop the strategies analysis diagram a set of verbs were identified to apply to the physical objects in the work domain analysis. Further, a set of criteria or contextual factors that influence the selection of a particular strategies were identified. For example, a particular strategy may only be valid under some circumstances or may be preferred under certain circumstances but not in others. The verbs and criteria identified were added to the work domain analysis to create the strategies analysis diagram.Subsequent to the development of the diagram, strategies analysis flowcharts (Cornelissen et al., 2013b) were derived from the diagram, for each target state and for each task documented in the speed control decision ladder. This enabled the flowcharts to reflect both the selection between options, as well as the actions involved in task execution. The flowcharts were based on the key situations identified from the contextual activity template. These key situations included when the pedestrian was on approach to the RLX, and was prompted to make a decision by the activation of various warning devices. An extract from the flowchart developed for the ‘tasks’ in Fig. 5 ‘How can reduce speed/stop be achieved?’ and ‘How can increase speed be achieved?’ in situation B (at fencing when bells activated) is provided in Fig. 6. Therefore, these strategies are relevant once the decision to reduce speed/stop or to increase speed has been made.The flowcharts describe all the actions (verbs) that can be undertaken with each physical object, relevant to the affordances they provide. They also identify the situations (criteria) when this strategy is more likely to be chosen by a pedestrian and the values and priority measures (which reflect the goals in the decision ladder), which would influence the selection of the strategy. Finally, the flowchart notes which other functions are related to this strategy to acknowledge that behaviour cannot generally be categorised into one function but these functions occur in parallel in a constant and iterative flow. For example, reading across the top line of Fig. 5 a pedestrian might ‘stop’ (verb) at the ‘painted holding line’ (physical object) which provides a ‘safety boundary’ (object-related process) when the line is ‘present’ (as these are not present at all RLXs) and ‘visible’ (the line may be faded) and/or where no ‘gate is provided’ (criteria). This strategy would be more likely to occur when the relevant value or goal chosen is ‘maximise own safety’. In contrast, where there task is to increase speed, the first strategy identified was to ‘run’ (verb) on the ‘footpath’ (physical object), which affords a ‘surface for locomotion’ (object-related process). This could be done when the follow criteria are satisfied: ‘no train approaching’, ‘train is far away’, the pedestrian is ‘feeling reckless’, the footpath is ‘quiet/not congested’, where the pedestrian ‘intends to catch the train’, or there is ‘adverse weather’. This strategy would be more likely to be selected where the goal chosen is ‘efficiency’, ‘positive subjective experience’ or ‘maximise compliance with social norms’.Across all of the flowcharts speed control, the most common criteria that were found to influence strategy choice, apart from the presence of various physical objects were:•Adverse weather (i.e. extreme heat, cold, wind, wet);Congestion at the RLX;Perceiving the situation as being safe or unsafe;Being in a hurry;Intending to catch the approaching train;Being unfamiliar with the RLX and/or the surrounding area;Using a wheelchair or mobility aid;Crossing with a bicycle, trolley, pram or push chair;Carrying heavy bags or luggage; andAccompanying small children or pets across the RLX.This highlights the need to design for many types of contexts, especially for those that might lead to pedestrians choosing a strategy that is unsafe in the circumstances.The fourth phase of CWA, social organisation and cooperation analysis (SOCA), uses the outputs from the previous phases of analysis and enables the analyst to allocate current or potential functions to the various human and non-human actors.Table 4uses the information from the decision ladder and indicates which actors (i.e. the warning system, pedestrian or train driver) currently provide alerts, which actors can know what information, and which actors can know or determine which system states. It demonstrates that there is information in the system that is held by some actors and not others. Key areas for improvement are highlighted in grey.The first two issues highlighted in the table acknowledge that pedestrians are not aware of what train is approaching (i.e. ‘is it the train I want to catch?’) and what the train's intention is (i.e. ‘is it stopping at the station’). Potentially, a display could be provided to pedestrians to provide them with information about the train service approaching the RLX and whether it is stopping at the station or running express.The next highlighted row of the table relates to the system state ‘is there time to traverse the RLX before the warnings begin?’ (i.e. before the bells begin to ring). In this case, no actor currently holds this information. The warning system does not know that a train is approaching until it reaches the sensor that activates the automated warning system, and the warnings also have no information about pedestrians approach or their characteristics (i.e. how long it will take them to cross). Pedestrians do not receive prior warning of train approach, although they may see a train approaching in the distance (prior to the sensor point) and make some prediction for themselves about when the warnings will begin.Finally, the automated warning system may not be ‘aware’ that it has failed if certain types of failure modes occur. For example, if the track circuit has been activated by something other than a train, such as through vandalism, the warning system will operate as if a train has been detected. Further, pedestrians would not be aware of the state of the automated system (i.e. failed or not), as the warning systems are designed to fail to a ‘safe mode’, which means that it will display the same warnings when in a failed state as when a train is approaching. If the warnings are not activated and a train is approaching (known as a ‘wrong side’ failure), the pedestrian would be unlikely to be aware of this until they are physically on the RLX where it is likely to be too late. The train driver may be aware of failure, but only if they check for the activation of the flashing lights, boom barriers and pedestrian gates on approach and notice failures in these warnings. Even then, due to the constraints of train braking, the train driver is unlikely to be able to take evasive action other than to sound the train whistle. Interestingly, there is nothing designed for the train driver to support them to identify RLX failures in advance.The final phase of CWA is worker competencies analysis whereby consideration is given to the competencies (skill-, rule- or knowledge-based) that are required to successfully undertake recurring tasks within the domain. For this study, we used the information from the strategies analysis flowcharts to identify the competencies required. For example, for the first strategy shown in Fig. 6, which is to stop at the painted holding line which provides a safety boundary, the following competencies were identified:•Skill-based: Ability to stop; Ability to see the painted line & distinguish it from the background of the footpath.Rule-based: Relate to convention of road markings indicating stop – knowledge that a horizontal line across a path indicates stop.Knowledge-based: Understand that the line indicates a safe place/safety boundary which will not be reached by the train.While a large number of competencies were identified in this phase of the analysis, an illustrative selection is shown in Table 5. The competencies identified in the table were chosen to represent those most likely to be associated with risk. That is, if these competencies are not held by the user, it could make it difficult for them to safely interact with the RLX. In terms of skill-based competencies, these were associated with ability to perceive warnings and hazards and physical competencies associated with traversing the RLX either on foot or using a mobility device or wheelchair where required. For rule-based competencies, they related to using past experience to judge time of arrival of the train or to negotiate passing or overtaking other road users according to social norms (i.e. not passing too close, maintaining the Australian convention of overtaking on the right-hand side, etc.). In relation to knowledge-based behaviour, the competencies included knowledge that might be considered desirable. For example, that the emergency escape gate can be used to exit the track if the gates close in front of a traversing pedestrian. This reduces panic and uncertainty about appropriate behaviour. However, knowledge that these gates can also be used to gain access to the track when a train is approaching could be considered undesirable as using the gates in this manner can lead to collisions.Given the diverse backgrounds, attributes and experiences of pedestrians using RLXs (e.g. children, the elderly, people with disabilities, tourists, etc.) individual users will hold different competencies. Furthermore, as they gain experience with RLXs (including particular RLX sites), users will move through the three levels of cognitive control in different ways. They may begin as novices using knowledge-based processing to engage in deliberative reasoning about the situation, the options available and to select an option to execute, eventually gaining expertise and engaging more frequently in skill-based processing whereby cues in the environment are used to directly trigger the execution of associated behaviours. Designing for all of these individual differences and varying situations is a difficult task and demonstrates the necessity of applying a systems-based approach to this domain so that the cognitive constraints of the wide range of users can be considered alongside the ecological constraints of the domain to identify mis-matches and issues that can lead to collisions. The risks to safety and potential design solutions will be discussed later in this paper. First, a conceptual model of pedestrian behaviour is proposed based on the findings of the five-phase CWA, and drawing particularly upon the strategies analysis phase.Conducting the five phase analysis using CWA provides a significant amount of information and insight about RLXs and how they are experienced and used by pedestrians. From this analysis we have drawn together the key aspects to provide a conceptual model of pedestrian behaviour at RLXs based on Rasmussen's (1997) model of migration towards the boundary of acceptable performance (see Fig. 7). Our model proposes slightly different boundaries to Rasmussen's to ensure fit with the context of pedestrian behaviour. Fig. 7 includes the boundary of inefficiency (similar to the original ‘boundary to economic failure’), boundary to unacceptable workload, boundary of compliance (‘perceived boundary of acceptable performance’ in the original model) and boundary of safety (titled ‘boundary of functionally acceptable performance’) in Rasmussen's original model. Fig. 7 also includes an additional boundary which emerged from the data which emphasised the social pressures on behaviour at RLXs. This boundary was titled the boundary of socially unacceptable behaviour.Rasmussen's model shows that within these boundaries are the degrees of freedom for behaviour (at the centre of the diagram). The terms within the centre of Fig. 7 are taken from the goals in the decision ladder (Fig. 5) and the dotted lined boxes hold the strategies that are more likely to be selected for each goal chosen, in relation to which boundary they indicate movement towards. The strategies are described quite specifically, relating to particular contexts or situations as relevant, as opposed to the more generic descriptions of strategies provided in the strategies analysis flowcharts. The arrows from each goal show which boundaries the associated occurrence of the strategies indicate the system is migrating towards. For example, when the chosen goal is efficiency the associated strategies can include running through the gate while it is opening or closing, lifting the boom barrier and overtaking other users. These behaviours can push the system towards the boundaries of compliance and safety, and beyond these to the point where an accident occurs.A number of strategies identified in the strategies analysis phase of the CWA are not included in Fig. 7 as they relate to normal variability in user behaviour that is not obviously associated with migration toward a system boundary. For example, the strategies of ‘walk on footpath’, ‘walk through open gate’, ‘step over railway tracks’ and ‘walk within/through pedestrian refuge (when caught on tracks and warnings begin to operate)’ could be considered evidence of the system operating as normal or as designed. Of course, it should be noted that there are interactions and interrelations amongst the strategies, the values and the boundaries that are context specific and may not be explicitly illustrated within Fig. 7. For example, the strategy to overtake other road users (i.e. a slow moving pedestrian) may be chosen for an efficiency goal and could lead to a movement towards the safety boundary in a congested RLX situation if it results in an unexpected interaction or collision between the two road users which leads to delays in traversing the RLX or a pedestrian to trip or fall on the tracks. However, overtaking another road user in a non-congested situation can be a normal expression of performance variability which has an efficiency gain for the user and aligns with social norms if additional users also wish to overtake the slow moving pedestrian. Further, what is considered socially unacceptable may be perceived very differently for pedestrians of different age groups and cultural backgrounds and may depend on whether there are bystanders present to observe the behaviour.Regardless, the proposed conceptual model reinforces the importance of considering the differences in goals and how they influence behaviour. For example, focusing on compliance as a desirable goal may lead to users being concerned to avoid being fined (and checking whether staff are at the railway station who might fine them) rather than being concerned for their own safety and checking for warnings and trains. A key future research requirement is to collect data that would enable judgement on where pedestrians and different RLXS currently sit within the model and to what extent the different pressures influence behaviour.With the CWA outputs and conceptual model of pedestrian behaviour at RLXs it is possible to analyse the risks associated with pedestrian behaviour at RLXs and to recommend design improvement opportunities. The intention of the following section is to demonstrate how the findings of CWA can be used in a structured manner to inform the understanding of risks to safety, which is an important aspect of risk assessment process for managing risks in safety-critical industries. Risk assessment should involve the identification of all potential risks and therefore CWA's formative nature is very useful for this purpose. Firstly, the strategies identified in the conceptual model of pedestrian behaviour (Fig. 7) that were associated with movements towards the boundary of compliance and safety were identified and classified into precursor behaviours (behaviours that can result in a risk event occurring). The risk event of collision with resulting fatal or serious injuries is also identified.For each of the strategies identified in Table 6, it is possible to provide a deeper understanding of behaviour by reviewing the other phases of CWA. The analysis findings can also be used to identify design improvement opportunities that will reduce risk. This is an important part of the risk analysis process as it ensures that improvements are identified for further investigation.Table 7provides an example of how the outputs from the different phases of analysis can contribute to understanding pedestrian strategies that contribute to risk at RLXs. The example strategy used is walking on the road to traverse the RLX because the pedestrian footpath is congested with other users. This relates to the risk precursor (see Table 6) of a pedestrian using an area other than the designated pedestrian path and then being caught in an unprotected area when a train approaches. As it is possible for pedestrians to cross in using the road safely, even when trains are approaching, the table includes CWA findings associated both with the initial decision to use the road to traverse the RLX as well as how the design could be improved to mitigate the likelihood that the user is subsequently struck by a train. That is, to consider whether it is possible to support choice and variability in terms of paths selected but then provide additional information to assist pedestrians to safely cross using alternative paths. In addition to describing the findings from the five phases of analysis, the table also identifies related design improvement opportunities that were prompted by the findings.Table 7 demonstrates the large amount of information and insight offered by CWA. It shows how strategies are affected by work domain constraints, situational constraints, constraints on decision-making, contextual constraints and constraints relating to the skill-, rule- and knowledge-based competencies of RLX users. Some key aspects from the table include that the road affords pedestrians to walk on it, that other users represent an obstruction to locomotion (leading to pedestrians avoiding the designated path through the RLX) and that the perception of safety of the road environment can influence decision making. Further, it shows that once on the RLX, if the warnings activate, there are no physical barriers in place to protect pedestrians (i.e. there is no gate to block their path or any information to guide them to a safe place). Therefore, their ability to respond to visual and auditory warnings becomes important to ensure they negotiate the RLX safely.Table 7 also describes design improvement opportunities relating to the findings from each phase of analysis for the walk on the road strategy. Some of the design improvements identified included interventions to better manage pedestrian traffic flow such as pavement markings to indicate lanes for direction of travel. These should be continuous from the train platform (where present) and adjacent footpaths to provide coherent wayfinding for pedestrians. Further a railway employee could be present at the RLX during peak times to supervise the RLX and provide guidance and assistance to users where necessary. It is intended that this role would have a customer service rather than enforcement focus. Another design solution identified was to change the road shoulder from an asphalted surface, which enables pedestrians to move from the footpath to the road, to a surface that would be difficult or undesirable for pedestrians to walk on. For example, this area could become a trench filled with water (similar to a moat separating the road and pedestrian footpath) or a muddy area that appears unappealing to traverse.The proposed interventions could be evaluated for their potential effectiveness using the CWA outputs to understand how the RLX system would be changed by their implementation and the consequences of this. For example, an unintended consequence of implementing the moat idea might be that pedestrians continue to use this road shoulder area to access the road and could slip or fall leading to injuries. Consequently, there would need to be consideration of whether this idea could be implemented in a way that this would be minimised, or if the design intention could be provided through some other means. In addition to evaluation using the CWA outputs, other methods such as mock-ups, prototypes and simulation should be used to determine the effectiveness of the proposed interventions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The aim of this paper was to apply the five phases of the CWA framework to RLXs with a focus on understanding the constraints imposed on pedestrian behaviour along with associated risks. Previous research has found that the application of all phases is beneficial for understanding complex sociotechnical systems (e.g. Jenkins et al., 2008; McIlroy and Stanton, 2011). The analysis presented represents the first attempt at analysing pedestrian behaviour at RLXs with all five phases of CWA.The CWA provided a comprehensive understanding of the possibilities for pedestrian behaviour in this context through identifying the constraints within which behaviour is possible. Coupled with naturalistic data sources including walk-throughs and covert observations, the CWA outputs enabled exploration of aspects of pedestrian behaviour often ignored in existing literature such as social interaction at the RLX (for example, a pedestrian may feel pressured to walk through the emergency escape gate to access the tracks because another pedestrian has held it open for them out of etiquette). Further, it enabled the identification of emergent functions within the RLX domain such as the ‘assistance provision’ function identified in the pedestrian domain of the AH. Such emergent features within the domain may not be captured if only building the outputs based on formal specifications of the system such as design documents and standards.A contribution of the analysis is therefore an in-depth analysis of pedestrian behaviour at RLXs and the factors influencing it. It is concluded that decision making at RLXs is not straightforward as may first appear, and that there are many options, strategies, and influencing factors to be considered. It is questionable whether existing design processes cope with the complexity of the RLX system.Based on a synthesis of the CWA outputs a model of pedestrian behaviour was proposed based on Rasmussen's (1997) model of migration towards the boundaries of safe performance. The proposed model summarises the various pressures on the performance of the RLX system, capturing the inherent complexity associated with pedestrian behaviour and decision making in this context. It is proposed that the model could also be used in conjunction with the CWA outputs to display the situations in which certain goals are more likely to be chosen and the competencies associated with particular behaviours. There may also be individual differences in goal selection with some individuals more likely to select certain goals more consistently. However, rather than focusing on changing individual attitudes and beliefs the whole system design needs to be able to respond to these individual and situational differences to maintain safe performance. Potentially, the strategies identified in the model could be used as indicators for determining whether the RLX system, or an individual RLX, is moving close to a particular boundary. Coupled with a means of collecting real-time data about pedestrian behaviour at RLXs, based on the strategies, could provide a sophisticated means for identifying RLXs that are drifting towards the safety boundary and prioritising the implementation of interventions to avoid accidents.The strategies were also used as a basis for identifying the risks associated with pedestrian behaviour at RLXs. Further, to demonstrate the value of the five phases of CWA to understand strategies, an in-depth review of one strategy associated with increased risk at the RLX ‘walk on road (to avoid other users)’ was undertaken. This led to the identification of recommendations for design improvements. The risk analysis assisted to demonstrate how CWA could be integrated with safety critical risk assessments. It is suggested that a similar process could be used to understand risk and to prompt the development of design improvement ideas in other domains.In conclusion, CWA has proven to be highly useful in understanding pedestrian behaviour at RLXs and the associated risks and has enabled the identification of practical design recommendations to prevent future pedestrian deaths and injuries. It offers a comprehensive analysis of the system from multiple perspectives and the interrelations of those perspectives. Further applications of CWA in the RLX context both for pedestrians and users generally are urged, in particular across different countries and jurisdictions.