@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Greater physical fitness is associated with better air ventilation efficiency in firefighters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Firefighters who performed the simulated work circuit (SWC) in less time ventilated less air at a given work intensity.The fastest firefighters on the SWC performed longer on the graded walking test.Firefighters with better peak oxygen consumption also performed better on the SWC.Firefighters who performed the SWC in less time had a greater oxygen extraction rate in the vastus lateralis muscle.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Firefighting,Work efficiency,Near infrared spectroscopy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Firefighting is a hazardous task associated with a heavy workload where task duration may be limited by air cylinder capacity. Increased fitness may lead to better air ventilation efficiency and task duration at a given heavy work intensity. This study compared performance, air ventilation and skeletal muscle oxygen extraction during a maximal graded walking test (GWT), a 10 METS (metabolic equivalent) treadmill test (T10) and a simulated work circuit (SWC). Participants (n = 13) who performed the SWC in a shorter time had significantly lower air cylinder ventilation values on the T10 (r = −0.495), better peak oxygen consumption (r = −0.924) during the GWT and significantly greater skeletal muscle oxygen extraction during the SWC (HbDiff, r = 0.768). These results demonstrate that the fastest participants on the SWC had better air ventilation efficiency that could prolong interventions in difficult situations requiring air cylinder use.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Firefighting tasks in emergency conditions impose high physiological and psychological demands. Unlike many other professions, workload demands during interventions are unpredictable, making planning impossible, a situation that renders the job potentially hazardous. Generally, firefighters who possess good physical capacity will use different and possibly more economical techniques for a given task (von Heimburg et al., 2006). Thus, by maintaining an optimal fitness level, they could reduce the physiological demands of tasks which, in turn, could improve the safety of citizens, the firefighters themselves and their teammates. According to the United States Fire Administration (2011, 2012), 50 and 45 firefighters died in 2011 and 2012, respectively, from stress/overexertion, including 48 and 39 from heart attacks, the most frequent cause of death.Several studies have demonstrated that firefighting tasks require high energy expenditure which, under certain conditions, approaches maximum individual physical capacity (Baker et al., 2000; Bos et al., 2004; Gledhill and Jamnik, 1992). Michaelides et al. (2011) pointed out that fitness represents a significant portion (60%) of the outcome score in an ability test of specific firefighting skills. It has been shown that various physical and physiological qualities are required to perform adequately during firefighting. Firefighting tasks are highly associated with muscle strength and endurance (Gledhill and Jamnik, 1992; Harvey et al., 2008; Henderson et al., 2007; Michaelides et al., 2011; Rhea et al., 2004; Sheaff et al., 2010; Williford et al., 1999), aerobic (Perroni et al., 2010) and anaerobic metabolism (Gledhill and Jamnik, 1992; Michaelides et al., 2011; Rhea et al., 2004; Sheaff et al., 2010; Williford et al., 1999). Moreover, wearing a self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) on top of fire-protective clothing increases physical demands of the occupation (Baker et al., 2000; Dreger et al., 2006; Eves et al., 2005; Louhevaara et al., 1995). Extreme heat from fire situations also makes firefighting more physically demanding (Bruce-Low et al., 2007; Petruzzello et al., 2009; Smith et al., 1997). Finally, it has also been shown that firefighting entails considerable psychological stress, with important physiological side effects, especially cardiovasculer ones (Guidotti, 1995).As can be expected, physical fitness is important to perform duties and meet the physical demands of firefighting, particularly when an air cylinder is used. The firefighter's objective is primarily to perform as efficiently and economically as possible while ventilating the least amount of air at a given work intensity, because the autonomy time of intervention in fires frequently depends on air cylinder capacity. It is likely that increased physical fitness can lead to better air ventilation efficiency and, hence, to longer autonomy, somewhat reducing the physiological pressure imposed on firefighters and possibly allowing them to complete critical tasks.The purpose of this study was 3-fold: 1- Verify if the fastest firefighters during a simulated work circuit (SWC) ventilate less air at given workload intensities, 2- Determine whether the fastest firefighters during an SWC perform better on a maximal graded walking test (GWT) up to exhaustion, and 3- Find central or peripheral physiological parameters, if any, which better correlate with performance during an SWC.Thirteen male firefighters took part in this study (age 28.4 ± 5.1 years; height 175.5 ± 4.5 cm; weight 84.4 ± 9.0 kg; peak oxygen uptake (VO2peak) 47.8 ± 5.1 mlO2 kg−1 min−1). Participants completed a physical activity readiness questionnaire that helped to identify the risk factor(s) of any health problem facing physical activity practice (Jamnik et al., 2007). Firefighters, found to be at moderate or high risk of cardiovascular, pulmonary or metabolic disease according to criteria of the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM), were excluded from the study (Thompson et al., 2010). Participants older than 44 years were excluded to meet ACSM criteria. Before presenting to the laboratory, they were asked not to practice any intense physical activity during the 48 h preceding each test. They were also asked to refrain from consuming tobacco and caffeine, at least 2 h before the tests and from, alcohol or drugs, at least 24 h before the tests. The study was approved by the UQTR Research Ethics Committee. Finally, all study subjects had already participated in simulated fire fit test in the gym during their training and/or hiring.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
