@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A theoretical framework for negotiating the path of emergency management multi-agency coordination

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We explore human–environment interaction in multi-agency coordination.We offer a framework facilitating emergency management multi-agency coordination.We extend the theory of core-task analysis in a new high reliability environment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Emergency management,Multi-organizational core-task analysis,Boundary spanning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Multi-agency coordination represents a significant challenge in emergency management. The need for liaison officers working in strategic level emergency operations centres to play organizational boundary spanning roles within multi-agency coordination arrangements that are enacted in complex and dynamic emergency response scenarios creates significant research and practical challenges. The aim of the paper is to address a gap in the literature regarding the concept of multi-agency coordination from a human–environment interaction perspective. We present a theoretical framework for facilitating multi-agency coordination in emergency management that is grounded in human factors and ergonomics using the methodology of core-task analysis. As a result we believe the framework will enable liaison officers to cope more efficiently within the work domain. In addition, we provide suggestions for extending the theory of core-task analysis to an alternate high reliability environment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Managing disasters in the context of environmental change represents an increasing global challenge (Comfort and Kapucu, 2006; Van Scotter et al., 2012). Disasters are becoming increasingly regular occurrences that, if not managed well will continue to disrupt and threaten individual lives, communities, organizations and indeed economies. Modern day disasters require agencies to transition from independent agencies and assemble into temporary supra-organizations (in which their “routine” expertise evolves to encompass a multi-agency management capability and in which routine and emergency actions need to be combined and applied appropriately to respond to situational demands that change over time) that collectively address problems that are beyond the capacity of any single agency (Janssen et al., 2010; Meyerson et al., 1996). These temporary supra-organizations operate in an environment that is inherently complex and dynamic (Walker et al., 2014). This supra-organization typically includes members drawn from many tens of public and private agencies who never or very rarely interact together. This involves not only the traditional emergency services but also non-emergency agencies including the military, non-government organizations and those form critical infrastructure such as energy, water, communications and transport agencies (Scholtens, 2008; Schraagen and Van de Ven, 2008). Not only must members of these diverse agencies interact with people, roles and areas of expertise that they are unfamiliar with, they have to do so (i.e., when disaster strikes) under high risk, high stress conditions. The crucial role these emergent supra-organizational agencies play in facilitating effective and expedient disaster recovery highlights the importance of systematically researching the factors that influence the development of effective multi-agency actions and using this to inform the creation of effective comprehensive emergency management. This issue takes on even greater significance when key organizational contributions are made by agencies not typically regarded as emergency response agencies (e.g., critical infrastructure agencies).These agencies with differing social histories, organizational cultures, operating practices, crisis management experience and areas of expertise come to have a role in disaster response because the demands of the situation require their expertise (e.g., lifeline companies and building contractors collaborate with emergency management agencies to support response and recovery). However, relationships of this nature are not the norm and if a disaster brings together diverse agencies this means that, in the absence of prior development activities, they are likely to act in an autonomous manner. This increases the likelihood that their interaction will be characterized by frequent conflict (e.g., as cultures and operating practices collide) regarding objectives because organizations act based upon their particular needs and ways of operating and not the collective management of complex multi-faceted needs (e.g., Paton and Auld, 2006).To counter this dysfunctional outcome and achieve effective coordination (that will be required over weeks or months) agencies have to span several organizational boundaries to provide linkages that facilitate information sharing, cooperation and decision making (Harrald, 2006; Janssen et al., 2010). Information sharing is a necessity to satisfy the information requirements of the multiple agencies involved in the relief efforts in a struggle to inform the situation awareness essential for agency interpretation of information from diverse sources (Curnin and Owen, 2013) in order to develop the shared situational awareness required to facilitate inter-agency cooperation in complex, multi-faceted environments. Particular agency stakeholders are fundamental to the success of agencies informing their situation awareness and facilitating the linkages across organizational boundaries. These stakeholders working at the boundaries of organizations are often deemed to be practicing ‘boundary spanning’ activities. In emergency management these stakeholders are habitually called liaison officers (Helsloot, 2005; Perry, 2003; Wolbers and Boersma, 2013). However, multi-agency coordination in emergency management and specifically the role of liaison officers is problematic due to a myriad of social, organizational and technological complexities (McMaster and Baber, 2012).Globally, both natural and man-made disasters such as the World Trade Centre attacks in 2001, the European heat wave in 2003, Hurricane Katrina in 2005, the Haiti earthquake in 2010 and the Fukishima nuclear incident in 2011 give prominence to the vulnerability of society to suddenly-occurring events whose scale, complexity and duration transcend the management capability of any one organization. In an Australian context and as one of the most bushfire11For the purpose of this paper the Australian term of bushfire shall be used which is comparable to the term of forest fire in Europe and wildfire in North America.prone areas in the world, Australia has also been affected by recent disasters such as the 2009 Black Saturday bushfires in the state of Victoria. Being able to manage the devastating impact of these complex, multi-faceted long-duration disasters is of paramount importance due to the increased susceptibility of societies to experiencing such events (Comfort et al., 1999). Crucial to this process are the lifelines (e.g., utilities, roads etc.) that can be disrupted or damaged by hazard events.Communities have an increasing reliance on the effective functioning of public services to maintain a quality of life and encourage economic growth (Boin and McConnell, 2007). However, this dependence is impacted during disasters when significant damage to critical infrastructures (e.g., loss of power, water, sewerage, telecommunications, etc.) deprives citizens of basic services, and thus their capacity to recover normal functioning, often for considerable periods of time. In an effort to mitigate the impact of these disruptions on affected communities, and facilitate societal response and recovery form hazard consequences, agencies involved in emergency management arrangements require a coordinated approach to facilitate recovery from events that have created widespread loss of utilities, infrastructure and services. However, the problem of multi-agency coordination in emergency management is not well understood and certainly not well theorized. The lack of rigorous, systematically developed theory has meant that response management has tended to be ad hoc.A consequence of the ad hoc nature of response has been that the importance of coordination in emergency events is more often highlighted by coordination failure. Several articles (see Comfort and Kapucu, 2006; Wise, 2006) and post-event inquiries (e.g. Moynihan, 2007; Teague et al., 2010) have highlighted these problems and identified the need for improvements to multi-agency coordination in emergency management.Emergency management multi-agency coordination can occur concurrently at several hierarchical levels within organizations to address operational, tactical and strategic demands (Paton and Owen, 2013). Australian emergency management arrangements follow similar concepts used in other countries such as the National Incident Management System (Walsh et al., 2011) used in the US and the gold–silver–bronze command structure (Pearce and Fortune, 2006) adopted in the UK. In an Australian context the operational level typically occurs locally and activation ensues at the onset of an incident. The tactical level will result at a regional level and is often invoked for multiple incidents within the same locality. Finally, strategic arrangements transpire at a state or national level for multiple incidents over numerous jurisdictions and offer critical direction to the overall emergency events. Multi-agency and multi-jurisdictional issues arise at all these levels.Multi-agency coordination in emergency management can take place informally in temporary locations at the incident site (e.g., between fire, police and critical infrastructure representatives) or in a structured environment such as an established emergency operations centre. At a strategic level temporary supra-organizations invariably assemble at a designated emergency operations centre. This theoretical framework has focused on strategic level emergency operations centres as a deficiency in the situation awareness of agencies at this strategic level can filter down and affect a decision making capability which can impact actions at the tactical and operational level. Ultimately strategic emergency management arrangements are instrumental in facilitating and safeguarding community welfare and mitigating the consequences of risk to the affected citizens (over the whole recovery and reconstruction phases of disaster response). Mitigation strategies can only succeed with effective multi-agency coordination among the diverse agencies involved. Because effective coordination requires a comprehensive overview of what has happened and what will happen and that will need to be responded to, liaison officers at a strategic level are therefore crucial in facilitating the prescribed multi-agency coordination efforts and sustained them over time against a backdrop of changing demands and organizational involvement.Liaison officers are a key enabler in fostering functional linkages between organizations that are required to gain situation awareness of complex, multi-faceted events (Harrald, 2006; McGuire and Silvia, 2010). In spite of this crucial role little is known about how liaison officers are selected, trained or how they influence inter-agency coordination or what factors and capabilities they contribute to the effectiveness of disaster management (Janssen et al., 2010).In fostering linkages across organizational boundaries liaison officers are confronted with a conglomerate of constraints in the multi-agency environment. These include but are not limited to role clarity and cultural differences between agencies (Marcus et al., 2006), information uncertainty (Doyle et al., 2014; Van de Walle and Turoff, 2008), fast action requirements (Janssen et al., 2010), and inter-organizational (Harrald, 2006) and inter-jurisdictional complexities (Paton and Auld, 2006). These challenges can be associated with the dynamic, complex and often uncertain domain where multi-agency arrangements are undertaken in a strategic level emergency operations centre. Therefore exploration of this phenomenon required an appropriate methodological framework suited to high reliability environments.Core-task analysis adopts a systemic notion of human activity where the situated actions are conceived from an ecological, human–environment interaction perspective with the aim of identifying the core-task of a specific working practice (Norros, 2004). Core-task analysis takes into account three interrelated dimensions that the workers must take into account to achieve their activities in the work domain: (1) dynamism; (2) complexity and (3) uncertainty. In order to manage these dimensions workers require collaboration, skill and knowledge. The core-task analysis framework described by Norros (2004) has six core-task work demands as a result of the interaction of collaboration, knowledge or skill with any two of the three dimensions.This methodological framework has been applied in other high reliability domains such as nuclear power plant operations and the piloting of large vessels. Consequently, for this theoretical framework it was deemed a suitable methodology to apply the activities of liaison officers in emergency management multi-agency arrangements. The development of this theoretical framework specifically drew upon the three types of resources that human actors can respond with to manage the environmental constraints. These resources are illustrated in the core-task analysis methodology as collaboration, skill and knowledge. The activities suggested in this theoretical framework were aligned to one of these three resources in respect to how the activity was associated with collaboration, skill or knowledge.This paper will propose a theoretical framework based on earlier empirical data collection and analysis that will be briefly outlined next. The following section will also provide the rationale behind our framework and describe the individual activities, their interdependencies and rationale why they may facilitate multi-agency coordination. Finally the paper will comment on the recent elaboration of the core-task analysis methodology and in particular a new issue that was characterized as dialogical communication (Norros, 2014). The paper will define how this may be adapted to emergency management and particularly hastily formed groups involving multiple agencies with differing objectives.Our earlier empirical research was conducted over a two year period within three strategic level emergency operations centres in Australia and is documented in four other papers (Curnin and Owen, 2014, 2013; Curnin et al., 2014a, 2014b). The empirical data collected included forty-three individual interviews, thirty-nine hours of observational studies and three focus group interviews across three states. Significantly twenty-two hours of observations were conducted during real-time catastrophic bushfire conditions that required the activation of a strategic level emergency operation centre. This collection of ‘live’ data that is often extremely difficult to collect during large scale emergency events (McMaster and Baber, 2012) provided a rare insight into liaison officers work in the emergency operations centre. The aforementioned four papers each contain a detailed methodology section encompassing comprehensive explanations of the specific samples chosen, analytical techniques performed and inter-rater reliability testing as to ensure validity of the results. A synopsis of the four papers is provided in Table 1.The theoretical framework presented in this paper is embedded in human factors and ergonomics and explicitly draws upon the methodology of core-task analysis (Norros, 2004). It outlines the interdependency of the specific activities (indicated by the arrows in Fig. 1) of liaison officers working in a strategic level emergency operations centre and why these activities should be implemented in the preparedness and response phases of a disaster. The theoretical framework encompasses facets of a typology and framework modelled on core-task analysis based on our earlier empirical data collection and analysis. It also positions the activities to address the information and socio-cultural constraints identified in our previous research. The activities described in this theoretical framework are grouped within the descriptors of knowledge, skill and collaboration as described by Norros (2004). This section is divided into two sectors based upon the preparedness and response phases of emergency management that the activities are located.In the preparedness phase of an emergency management event liaison officers may have the opportunity to be involved in multi-agency exercises or undertake orientation visits to the emergency operations centre where they may be deployed. Drawing upon the activities linked to collaboration and knowledge and applying them in exercising and/or orientation visits to the emergency operations centre can assist to initiate inter-agency collaboration. It can also address some of the socio-technical complexities encountered in this domain.Liaison officers have to actively engage in multi-agency exercising and orientation visits to the emergency operations centre in an effort to forge organizational linkages with other agency liaison officers. In addition, experience gained from previous operational deployments can assist with creating networks between agencies.Fostering relationships with stakeholders from other agencies can commence trust building between the parties involved. Performing this activity in the preparedness phase can lay the foundations for trust building and provide legitimacy for the liaison officer that is often difficult to attain within hastily formed temporary organizations, especially in the response phase of a disaster. Trust building is challenging during emergency management multi-agency coordination as it invariably involves agencies from public and private sectors that differ socially and structurally. Emergency services are often structured hierarchically and operate within command and control arrangements. This is in contrast to non-emergency agencies that may operate along the concept of horizontal management among subordinates as opposed to vertical management between superiors.Typically in an emergency event one agency will be the lead agency such as the police or fire service. These agencies are structurally hierarchical in nature with a clear command and control arrangements. This is often in contrast to agencies that do not perceive emergency management as a core function (e.g., critical infrastructure agencies) and do not typically operate within a command and control environment and may use decision and management processes and procedures that are flatter, more organic, and less prescriptive. Subsequently, in temporary supra-organizations with multiple public and private organizations striving to collaborate, networking with other agencies will allow the opportunity for liaison officers to clarify their and their agencies role within the emergency operations centre. Parting with this knowledge requires mastery of the emergency management structures and in particular a comprehensive understanding of the liaison officers own agency's intent and limitations in an emergency management context.Having mastery of the emergency management structures incorporates three facets: (1) knowledge of the liaison officers own agency; (2) knowledge of other agencies; and (3) knowledge of the work domain arrangements. If liaison officers have a comprehensive understanding of their own agency's structures and intentions in an emergency management context then they can provide a clear explanation of their practices and limitations when forging organizational alliances. Knowledge of their own agency can aid in legitimising the liaison officers presence in the temporary supra-organization and enhance trust building and subsequent collaboration. This is a necessity in this domain where the emergency services often work together in routine operations thus attaining familiarity that is gained over time which can foster a sense of trust. This is in contrast to non-emergency agencies that may not have worked with each other or operated in an emergency management context previously and therefore have to swiftly establish a basis for trust (Meyerson et al., 1996). The preparedness phase of emergency management is an appropriate environment to initiate inter-agency collaboration.Knowledge of other agencies intents, limitations and potential resourcing requirements can be gleaned from forging organizational alliances but also assist in the activity of legitimate enabler as will be described in Section 2.2.4. An understanding of the structural arrangements in the work domain can assist the liaison officer to ‘think outside the box’ as defined in Section 2.2.2. Knowledge of the specific work domain arrangements and in particular increasing the liaison officer's familiarity with the various information systems can address the technical complexities associated with multi-agency coordination and impacts the activity of information expert that will be discussed in Section 2.2.1 and also occurs in the response phase.Nevertheless, during prolonged emergency events and based on operational requirements there may be a need to rotate multiple liaison officers through the emergency operations centre due to fatigue management issues and potential workforce limitations within agencies. Consequently it may not be possible for all liaison officers to have engaged in preparedness phase proceedings such as exercises or orientation visits to the emergency operations centre. Therefore liaison officers may not have had the opportunity to forge organizational alliances which allows for the transfer of knowledge between agencies and ultimately assists with mastering the emergency management structures. In these circumstances liaison officers may have to initiate activities associated with the preparedness phase ‘on the fly’ in the response phase. Quickly forging linkages in the response phase requires the liaison officer to provide clarity of their practices and emphasize the likelihood of future interaction with other agencies during networking which may assist in fostering problem-solving relationships in the future.In the response phase stakeholders need to legitimize their presence and consequently facilitate multi-agency coordination in the temporary supra-organization. This requires activities based upon skill and collaboration.Liaison officers need to fulfil the activity of information expert to provide timely and relevant information across organizational boundaries so the agencies involved in the response efforts can share their coordination needs. Liaison officers must draw upon their skills to accurately collate, analyse and disseminate information within their agency and to other agencies within the temporary supra-organization. There is a requirement for all agencies involved in multi-agency coordination to have a situation awareness of the event. However, it is not always a requirement for agencies to have the same situation awareness for all the elements in a system and the development of shared situation awareness is important within the supra-organizational context. This is especially the case in complex and collaborative temporary supra-organizations when different agencies may have differing objectives. In these circumstances liaison officers seek to inform their and therefore their agency's distributed situation awareness of the event. The concept of distributed situation awareness is applicable to strategic level emergency operations centres as each agency's awareness is unique but complementary (not shared) and thus each of the liaison officers are instrumental in the development and maintenance of other agencies situation awareness (Salmon et al., 2008). The complexity of this activity clearly highlights the need for training and organizational development in the preparedness phase. This reinforces the benefits of including a feedback loop from the response phase to the preparation phase as illustrated in Fig. 2. It will be difficult to anticipate all the issues that need to be accommodated in distributed situation awareness prior to events, but learning from events can expedite this process. This process can also be facilitated by information experts.The activity of the information expert is intrinsically linked with the activity we term, mastery of emergency management structures. The liaison officer requires knowledge of their own agency's intent and limitations as well as that of other agencies involved in the response efforts to inform their own agency's distributed situation awareness and that of other agencies involved in the multi-agency coordination efforts. Furthermore, liaison officers require knowledge of the specific information systems used within the emergency operations centre to expedite the collation, analysis and dissemination of information. However, the ability to access information systems necessitates that the constraints associated with privacy and security barriers be addressed by governments in the preparedness phase (Kruchten et al., 2008; Reddick, 2011; Vogt et al., 2011). Legislative changes addressing these information sharing barriers could improve information flow potentially increasing the liaison officer's ability to negotiate collaboration with greater ease. In performing the task of information expert the liaison officer must take into account the temporal constraints and dynamism of the work domain that requires adaptability and flexibility with an ability to think laterally.In a strategic level emergency operations centre there is often a requirement to access information from a variety of sources using multiple cognitive artefacts. In the fast action environment of a disaster the traditional means of organizing that are based upon routines can be non-existent. Liaison officers require the ability to work under time pressures and address high risk, high consequence demands that are often present in an emergency management environment in an effort to ensure information quality (Gryszkiewicz and Chen, 2012; Mishra et al., 2011). However, the flow of information (in terms of quantity and quality) needed to provide continuous situation awareness can cause increases in cognitive workload which can be problematic (Raj et al., 2011; Tsang and Wilson, 1997). Therefore liaison officers require the ability to ‘think outside the box’ and access information from the most appropriate source. This requires mastery of emergency management structures in an effort to comprehend the most appropriate source for the particular situation. The challenges accompanying the requirements for quality information can also lead to information inconsistency resulting in conflict between stakeholders. Consequently, the liaison officer requires the skill of conflict resolver.The skill of conflict resolver can be facilitated with the activities of engagement champion and forging organizational alliances. Familiarity with other stakeholders gained in preparedness phase events may assist in easing any conflicting situations. Due to the temporal constraints associated with strategic level emergency operation centres, liaison officers must have the ability to provide a rapid decision making capability in high risk, dynamic decision environments (Faraj and Xiao, 2006). An inability to provide a timely decision can result in tension between the parties involved resulting in conflict. Therefore liaison officers require the attributes of a legitimate enabler.The activity of legitimate enabler entails the liaison officer to have rapid access to a decision or the authority and empowerment to make a decision to commit to their agency's actions. This is enacted by having mastery of emergency management structures. Liaison officers require an understanding of other agencies and their own agency's limitations and potential resourcing requirements so they can potentially pre-empt other agencies requests and give a rapid answer. Anticipating resourcing requests from other agencies and providing a rapid decision can assist in providing the liaison officer with legitimacy within the emergency operations centre thus enabling collaboration between the agencies which can strengthen organizational alliances. Collectively these activities can address some of the socio-cultural and socio-technical complexities identified when working within emergency management temporary supra-organizations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
