@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comparison of subjective comfort ratings between anatomically shaped and cylindrical handles

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Anatomically shaped handle based on the hand shape in an optimal power grasp posture.Comparison between anatomically shaped tool handle and optimal cylindrical handle.Anatomically shaped handle provides higher comfort ratings than cylindrical handle.Handle shape has significant impact on user subjective comfort rating.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tool handle,Handle shape,Comfort rating,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Most authors have provided diameter recommendations for cylindrical handle design in order to increase performance, avoid discomfort, and reduce the risk of cumulative trauma disorders. None of the studies has investigated the importance of determining the correct handle shape on the subjective comfort ratings, which could further improve the handles' ergonomics. Therefore, new methods based on a virtual hand model in its optimal power grasp posture have been developed in order to obtain customised handles with best fits for targeted subjects. Cylindrical and anatomically shaped handles were evaluated covering ten subjects by means of an extensive subjective comfort questionnaire. The results suggest large impact of the handle shape on the perceived subjective comfort ratings. Anatomically shaped handles were rated as being considerably more comfortable than cylindrical handles for almost all the subjective comfort predictors. They showed that handle shapes based on optimal power grasp postures can improve subjective comfort ratings, thus maximising performance. Future research should consider real conditions, since the comfort ratings can vary based on the specific task and by the tool selected for the task.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ergonomic studies are wide-ranging, including the measurements, evaluations and analyses of workplaces, tools or even processes (Kaljun and Dolšak, 2012; Polajnar et al., 2012; Shuxing et al., 2008). Several authors have researched the topic of handle design in order to define the optimal size of a tool handle since a correctly designed handle can provide safety, comfort, and increased performance. Different authors have used different criteria for determining the optimal cylindrical handle: subjective comfort ratings (Hall and Bennett, 1956; Yakou et al., 1997); finger force measurements (Amis, 1987; Chen, 1991); muscle force minimisation (Sancho-Bru et al., 2003) and hand anthropometry (Blackwell et al., 1999; Garneau and Parkinson, 2011; Grant et al., 1992; Johnson, 1993; Oh and Radwin, 1993; Seo and Armstrong, 2008; Yakou et al., 1997). A few studies have also used two or more criteria: finger force measurements and muscle activity (Ayoub and Presti, 1971; Blackwell et al., 1999; Grant et al., 1992); subjective comfort ratings, finger force measurements and the electromyographic efficiency of muscle activity (Kong and Lowe, 2005). The broad variety of criteria used for determining optimal cylindrical handles has also dictated the uses of different methods. The recommended diameters of the cylindrical handles therefore vary from 25 mm to 60 mm, and above.The mechanical behaviour of the skin and subcutaneous tissue is very important during grasping tasks as they are in direct contact and the forces and moments are transferred from the tool to the whole hand-arm system. Skin and subcutaneous tissue have non-linearly viscoelastic properties, where the skin is stiffer than the subcutaneous tissue (Wu et al., 2007). Both have low stiffness regions at small strains followed by a great increase in stiffness when increasing the strain. It has been shown, that higher contact pressures than those allowed for specific times can result in discomfort, pain, and ischemia. A power grasp produces very uneven distribution of forces and can yield to a contact pressure of the fingertip of 80 kPa, which is excessive loading for skin and subcutaneous tissue (Gurram et al., 1995; Rossi et al., 2012). It has also been shown that foam materials can effectively reduce the contact pressure (Fellows and Freivalds, 1991). The finite element method has also been utilised for successfully modelling, comparing, and evaluating material choice during the design phase of a product (Novak, 2012).In our previous research we thereby investigated and proposed hyper-elastic foam materials for a tool handle based on the finite element method that took into account the non-linear behaviour of fingertips' soft tissue, as they can lower the contact pressure whilst maintaining a low deformation rate of the tool handle material for maintaining a sufficient rate of stability of the hand tool in the hands (Harih and Dolšak, 2014). Many powered hand tools also produce vibrations that are transferred from the handle to the hand. Deformations of skin and subcutaneous tissue whilst holding the tool and the vibration induced by the tool can lead to a disorder called “Hand-arm vibration syndrome” that may cause vascular, sensorineural and muscosceletal disorders (Bernard et al., 1998; Youakim, 2009).It has been also shown, that objects that follow the shape of the hand result in much lower local contact pressures of the soft tissue, which can prevent discomfort and several disorders (Wu and Dong, 2005). However some authors have argued that a higher contact area can lower the subjective comfort ratings as a higher contact area triggers more pressure sensors in the soft tissue (Goonetilleke and Eng, 1994; Xiong et al., 2011). Therefore the designer has to find the optimal contact area that can increase the subjective comfort ratings, and attempt to lower the risk of hand tool related musculoskeletal disorders. This study only evaluated the effects of increasing the contact area between the tool handle and the hand on the subjective ratings of discomfort, and did not attempt to evaluate how increasing the contact area affects injury risks.Many researchers have paid a lot of attention to hand tools in terms of perceived discomfort. Comfort is strongly correlated to user performance and injury frequency (Kinchington et al., 2012; Kuijt-Evers et al., 2007; Mundermann et al., 2001). Subjective comfort is affected by physical, physiological, and psychological factors and is a subjectively defined feeling that differs from subject to subject (De Looze et al., 2003). The uses of hand tools are mostly accompanied by feelings of discomfort that can be considered as a contradiction of comfort. Therefore designers have to optimise the size and shape of the handle in order to reduce the discomfort (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004). The feeling of discomfort whilst using a hand tool can reduce the efficiency of the task and the user's satisfaction (Fellows and Freivalds, 1991). A poorly designed tool handle can also cause cumulative trauma disorders of the hand and forearm if the task continues over a longer time period (Eksioglu, 2004).Different predictors that have an influence on subjective discomfort-comfort rating while using a hand tool have been identified in previous papers (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004). Based on a developed taxonomy, predictors can be combined into three factors: functionality, physical interaction and adverse effects on soft tissues, and lastly adverse effects on the skin (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2007). It has been shown that the functionality of a hand tool is one of the more important comfort and productivity predictors. The reduction of discomfort is mainly possible by optimisation of the functionality of the hand tool and the physical interaction between the hand and the handle. Kong et al. (2012) showed that increasing the required grip force also changes the subjective comfort rating from comfort to discomfort. The appearance of the hand tool does not make a direct contribution to the perceived discomfort but it can lead to user satisfaction whilst using the tool, and has a decisive impact on buying decisions. Therefore the designer also has to consider the aesthetics of the hand tool (Kaljun and Dolšak, 2012; Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004).As comfort ratings when using hand tools are subjectively defined, it is also preferable to use subjective measurement methods such as hand tool testing of targeted populations and questionnaires, when evaluating a hand tool (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2007). Subjective methods have clear disadvantages such as time error and context effects (Annett, 2002). The time error effect can be attributed to the time between the presentation of the standard and the variable stimulus when the standard is held in memory and the context effects account for the multidimensionality of the ergonomics ratings. However objective methods (such as grip force and pressure measurements, electromyography, biomechanical hand models, finite element analyses, etc.) can only predict the physical aspects on the perceived comfort and do not directly correlate to the subjective comfort rating value (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2007).Aldien et al. (2005) provided rough guidelines regarding pressure discomfort (PDT) and also pressure-pain threshold (PPT), where PPT is higher than PDT and the values differ according to the area of the hand. In addition different subjects have reported different values due to the subjective perception of the load on the hand. A PDT limit of 188 kPa was reported by Aldien et al. (2005), however Fransson-Hall and Kilbom (1993) had estimated the value to be 104 kPa. The wide-ranges of the PDT limits indicate that the connection of contact pressure on the perceived subjective comfort rating is still not clearly defined.According to the finite element simulations performed in by Wu and Dong (2005), it was shown that the surface curvature has a big influence on the resulting contact pressure on the fingertip when in contact with an object. Those objects that follow the shape of the hand and the skin's surface result in much lower contact pressures and local deformations of the skin and subcutaneous tissue that can prevent discomfort and several disorders.Previous studies have focused on cylindrical or elliptical shapes of the handles, and have provided mathematical models for diameter determination and design recommendations, as previously presented. None of them provided methods for determining the optimal shape of the handle in order to investigate its importance and also to improve the handle's ergonomics. Nevertheless some authors have argued that the handles should vary in size between the hand and finger sizes, as the maximum voluntary finger contraction force is diameter-dependent (Kong and Lowe, 2005). In recent papers regarding this topic authors have also proposed, that further research into this topic should consider the shape of the hand during the optimal power grasp posture, in order to evaluate the importance of the shape on perceived comfort and for optimising the shapes of the handles across different populations (Garneau and Parkinson, 2011).The lack of correct handle shape determination and optimisation provides extensive room for the investigation and improvements in tool handle design. The aims of this study were to develop a mathematical method for customising tool handles to the shapes of particular users’ hands and to compare to the shape of the users' hands with handles that were cylindrical.According to developed hand grasp taxonomy, grasps can be divided into precision grasps and power grasps (Cutkosky, 1989; Napier, 1956). A heavy wrap power grasp was considered accordingly during this study as this kind of grasp is mostly used and best-suited for use with powered and non-powered hand tools, and provides maximal functionality, grip strength, and stability (Cutkosky, 1989).Some previous studies have considered anthropometric data for obtaining an optimal handle diameter (Garneau and Parkinson, 2011; Kong and Lowe, 2005; Seo and Armstrong, 2008). Therefore the obtained mathematical models could also be used for determining the optimal handle diameter for a customised handle.The equation for determining the optimal diameter of the handle with a single diameter from the study of Seo and Armstrong (2008) can be extended into Eq. (1) for a variable diameter of the handle regarding the index and middle fingers (Garneau and Parkinson, 2009).(1)Dopt|1,2=Oopt|1,2π=Dgrip|1,2·π−(LF|1,2+LF|T2)πwhere LF|1,2 – fingertip lengths of the index and middle fingers (Fig. 1); LF|T– length of the thumb (Fig. 1); L1,2,3,4 – length of the hand from the wrist crease to the fingertip end for the index, middle, ring, and little fingers (Fig. 1); Dgrip|1,2 – inside grip breadth – diameter of the circle where the tips of the index or middle finger and thumb are in contact (Fig. 2– left); Dopt|1,2 – optimal diameter of the handle for the index and middle fingers (Fig. 2 – right).It was assumed that the optimal handle diameter can also be obtained for the ring and little fingers with the relationship of the length of the index finger to the ring and little fingers – Eq. (2).(2)Dopt|3,4=L3,4L1·Dopt|1In our study ten male subjects with no hand injuries or disorders and with a mean age of 21.6 (standard deviation 3.6) were used to obtain a custom-shaped handle for each subject. Participants were informed about the study and written consents were obtained. Afterwards anthropometric measurements of subjects' hands were performed and were used in Eqs. (1) and (2) in order to calculate the optimal diameters of the handles for each subject.The obtained results were compared to the equation for optimal handle diameter obtained by Kong and Lowe (2005). They considered a constant handle and the optimal handle diameter handle could be obtained using the calculated NHS (normalised handle diameter) of 61.8% (Eq. (3)).(3)Dopt=L2·NHSπDespite the fact that their study only considered a constant diameter for the handle, it was obvious that the optimal handle diameter is calculated as the length from the wrist crease to the middle fingertip – L2, as was also used in this paper. Therefore the control calculation of Dopt can be directly compared to the optimal handle diameters Dopt|2 calculated in this study. The resulting diameters for cylindrical handles were almost equal despite the authors using different methods for diameter determination. Therefore it can be assumed that the resulting diameters have been verified.As no methodologies exist for the development and manufacturing of anatomically shaped customised handles, a standardised methodology was developed for obtaining anatomically shaped customised handles and for evaluating and comparing them with cylindrical handles.The calculated diameters in the previous section were used for manufacturing customised cylindrical pre-handles with variable diameters out of hard polyurethane, for each subject. Anthropometric measurements were performed on each subject in order to obtain the sectional size according to each finger width. Manufactured optimal cylindrical handles with variable diameters were tested with by the corresponding subjects and it was shown that the calculated diameters were correct, as there was an overlapping of the tip of thumb with the fingertips of index and middle fingers, as calculated (Fig. 3).An outer hand mould was manufactured whilst softly holding the optimal cylindrical handle with variable diameters in order to maintain the diameters and the shape of the power grasp posture with non-deformed skin and subcutaneous tissue. The outer hand moulds were manufactured by two Physiotherapists at The Institute of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine, University Medical Centre Maribor. Orthotic material Orfilight® (Orfit Industries, Belgium) was used with a thickness of 2.5 mm and micro perforation that had great ability for moulding to anatomical contours. A rough shape of the extended subject’s hand was cut-out of a 45 × 60 cm plate. The cut-out shape was activated in a hot water bath with an ideal activation temperature of 65 °C. The mould was shaped on the dorsal side of the subject’s hand when softly holding the optimal cylindrical handle with variable diameters. The hand was in a neutral position according to ergonomic recommendations. The basic shape of the mould was accomplished within the activation time. After the hardening, smaller corrections were made with a hot air gun. After the shape of the mould was declared as satisfactory, straps were added for the hand and hand-opening fixations (Fig. 4).Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) was performed at the Radiological Department of the University Medical Centre Maribor. The MRI machine was a GE medical systems Signa HDxt 3.0T. The subjects scanning position was HFDR (Head First-Decubitus Right) with the extended hand (Fig. 5). The used coil was a one channel HD Knee/Foot Coil that allowed the best positioning of the hand during the scanning. Before the scanning, an optimal cylindrical handle with variable diameters was used to finely adjust to the correct size of the outer hand mould for each subject. The optimal cylindrical handle with variable diameters was removed during the scanning in order to obtain the shape of the non-deformed skin and subcutaneous tissue. The outer mould and the hand were fixed with foam, which prevented any movement of the hand during scanning (Fig. 5). The slice thickness was set at 1 mm to avoid unnecessarily small anatomical structures and surface details. The scanning time was about 15 min. Every subject was told to hold his/her hand in an open position touching the mould during the scanning in order to maintain the proper diameters and shape of an optimal power grasp. The scanned images were provided in the DICOM format.A professional medical imaging and editing software Amira® 5.3.3 (Visage Imaging) was used for the segmentation and 3D reconstructions of the DICOM images. Segmentation was performed using a threshold technique as only the surface of the hand was needed and no differentiation in anatomical structure of the hand was necessary. Preliminary 3D reconstructions showed that the model was anatomically accurate and the produced outer surface highly detailed. In order to obtain a smoother surface a “resample” module was added to the segmentation and the 3D reconstruction process. The result was a smooth 3D representation of the subject's hand in power grasp posture (Fig. 6).The .STL file for each subject obtained in Amira® software was imported into commercial CAD software CATIA® V5R20. A mathematically defined surface model was generated within a Surface reconstruction module. The surface model was then converted into a mathematically defined volumetric model using a Close Surface tool in the Part Design module. An elliptical cylinder was modelled in order to obtain the customised shaped handle for power grasp posture. The size and the position of the cylinder were determined so that the cylinder fully overlapped the palmar empty volume created by the hand during the optimal power grasp posture (Fig. 7).In order to obtain the customised handle, the Boolean operation “Remove” was used that removed the cylinder model volume, which was in overlap with the hand model volume. Despite resampling during the 3D reconstruction, the resulting handle was full of small surface details that were the result of the surface details of the scanned hand. These anatomical details were so small that their contribution to handle comfort and contact area was assumed to be negligible. Therefore it was, from in regard to manufacturing and aesthetic considerations, reasonable to add additional smoothing to the 3D reconstructed hand in order to obtain a smoother and aesthetically more appealing handle. Additionally the sharp edges were rounded to avoid any chances of injury (Fig. 8).In order to compare and evaluate the anatomically shaped customised handle with the cylindrical handle, the customised handles were manufactured using a rapid prototyping technique.The subjects were each provided with an informed consent form and a description of the measurements procedure. They were told to stand comfortably with their elbows at ninety degrees and wrists in neutral positions. They were asked to perform the task of gripping the handle with their preferred normal grip force whilst applying a push force of 50 N on the handle, which was mounted onto a force gauge. In this way standardised and more generalised simulations of a common task were performed using hand tools. This was assumed as most tasks that require power or pistol grip produce normal forces on the hand's surface. The same task was also performed by each subject with a corresponding cylindrical handle. The utilised general task provided exactly the same task for each subject. Based on this generalised task each subject corresponded to his/her distinctive physiological response and subjective rating of the handle, and was therefore task independent. The major limitation of the generalised task was its generality, which did not consider the use of the handle on real tools and real tasks.In order to compare and evaluate the newly-developed and manufactured customised shaped handles and the circular handles, a questionnaire was adapted containing a variety of questions relating to handle comfort and performance, based on the paper of Kuijt-Evers et al. (2007) (Table 1). The subjects rated the handle comfort descriptors on a scale containing 7 discrete levels (from 1 = totally disagree to 7 = totally agree) (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2007).In order to evaluate the different areas of the handle, we extended the subjective comfort rating questionnaire to include comfort – discomfort predictors for six distinctive anatomical areas of the hand: the thumb, the index, middle, ring and little fingers, and the palm, in order to evaluate the subjective comfort ratings (Table 2).The overall subjective comfort ratings were evaluated by the subjects (Table 3).After the data had been collated it was edited and the mean values of the standard deviations were calculated in order to evaluate and discuss the results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
