@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The influence of body mass on foot dimensions during pregnancy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study used a time-series approach to measure women’s feet during pregnancy.After 20 weeks of pregnancy, occurrence of pregnant women’s foot discomfort generally increased.During pregnancy, women’s foot size increased, whereas the height of arch decreased.Body mass accounted for more than 90% of the variation (R2) in foot dimensions during pregnancy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pregnancy,Foot dimensions,3-D scanner,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, a time-series approach was used to measure women's feet to accurately analyze changes in foot size and body mass during pregnancy. One-hundred women who were pregnant for the first time were asked to respond to questions on subjective complaints of foot discomfort listed in a questionnaire. Among these 100 women, a sample of 30 was obtained and used to measure the women's feet from the twentieth week of the gestation period until labor. The data (from 5 of the 30 women) were used to establish a prediction model for the influence of body mass on changes in foot size during pregnancy. The results indicate that the women subjectively complained that their shoes were too tight, resulting in foot discomfort. From the twentieth to the thirty-eighth week of pregnancy, the average increase in foot length, width, and back foot surface was 0.86 cm (3.6%), 0.25 cm (2.6%), and 18.36 cm2 (11.9%), respectively. The height of the arch decreased by an average of 0.52 cm (−24.2%). Body mass accounted for more than 90% of the variation (R2) in foot dimensions during pregnancy and, thus indicated satisfactory predictive ability. The prediction model developed in this study can serve as a reference for clinical applications and shoe design to prevent women from experiencing extreme discomfort in their feet during pregnancy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During pregnancy, because of the normal accumulation of fluid and fat, a woman's body mass increases by an average of 10–16 kg (Alvarez et al., 1988; Hytten and Chamberlain, 1991; Wetz et al., 2006; Ochsenbein-Kplble et al., 2007; Gaymer et al., 2009). Increased body mass enlarges the contact area between the arches of the feet and the ground (Fabris et al., 2006). This enlargement consequently increases plantar pressure (Hills et al., 2001; Drerup et al., 2003; Fabris et al., 2006; Karadag-Saygi et al., 2010) and results in foot discomfort and other foot symptoms (Robinson et al., 2010). From a physiological perspective, increased body mass during pregnancy may cause an increase in foot volume, which is closely related to foot length, foot width, and height of the arch (Nyska et al., 1997; Bird et al., 1999; Foti et al., 2000; Wetz et al., 2006; Gaymer et al., 2009). The enlarged contact area between arches and the ground may also change the foot structure and decrease the arch height (Nyska et al., 1997). From the perspective of foot orthopedics, an accumulation of soft tissues is responsible for the increased foot swelling and foot volume that occurs during pregnancy (Alvarez et al., 1988). The negative effect of ill-fitting shoes on muscles and bones was reported to overburden the toes, forefeet, arches, and ankles, and can lead to foot conditions and foot pain (Xiong et al., 2009).Although previous research has suggested that pregnancy changes foot dimensions, accurate measurements of these dimensions are lacking. In general, the dimensions and shape of pregnant women's feet exhibit swelling that becomes evident after 13–35 weeks of pregnancy (Alvarez et al., 1988; Gabriel et al., 2013). In a previous study, the feet of pregnant women were measured once every 3 months and a significant increase in foot length, width, and volume was observed. However, long intervals between measurements render the accurate assessment of changes problematic (Wetz et al., 2006).Foot swelling, particularly at the later stages of pregnancy, causes a poor fit between a pregnant woman's feet and her shoes, and results in foot discomfort. Furthermore, pregnant women are susceptible to foot diseases (Gilbert, 2002) and may experience it difficulty in choosing suitable shoes, which may hinder their ability to walk and conduct daily activities (Fabris et al., 2006; Ribeiro et al., 2011). Because foot comfort depends on the fit between a person's feet and shoes, several researchers have attempted to design shoes that reduce the burden and impact on feet to enhance foot comfort (Light et al., 1980; Chen et al., 1994; Hodge et al., 1999).The impact of shoes on the feet of pregnant women is a factor that may be easily overlooked (Cernekova and Hlavacek, 2005). Shoes are not currently designed to prevent or reduce foot discomfort experienced by pregnant women; in other words, most pregnant women wear shoes that do not fit properly, resulting in foot discomfort (Bamigboye and Hofmeyr, 2006). Therefore, foot pain may be correlated with shoe design (Broch et al., 2004). As previously mentioned, previous research has indicated that an increase in foot length, width, and volume occurs during pregnancy, and that the measurement of these changes is complicated by the lengthy interval between measurements. In the current study, a time-series approach was used to measure these changes, assess the relationship between foot shape and body mass during pregnancy accurately, and explore how changes in foot dimensions lead to foot discomfort.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
