@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An integrated biomechanical modeling approach to the ergonomic evaluation of drywall installation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Work sampling, computer simulation, biomechanical modeling were integrated.A sensitivity analysis was conducted to demonstrate robustness.The integrated approach provided an applicable examination of physical loads.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Work sampling,Monte-Carlo simulation,Biomechanical model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Three different methodologies: work sampling, computer simulation and biomechanical modeling, were integrated to study the physical demands of drywall installation. PATH (Posture, Activity, Tools, and Handling), a work-sampling based method, was used to quantify the percent of time that the drywall installers were conducting different activities with different body segment (trunk, arm, and leg) postures. Utilizing Monte-Carlo simulation to convert the categorical PATH data into continuous variables as inputs for the biomechanical models, the required muscle contraction forces and joint reaction forces at the low back (L4/L5) and shoulder (glenohumeral and sternoclavicular joints) were estimated for a typical eight-hour workday. To demonstrate the robustness of this modeling approach, a sensitivity analysis was conducted to examine the impact of some quantitative assumptions that have been made to facilitate the modeling approach. The results indicated that the modeling approach seemed to be the most sensitive to both the distribution of work cycles for a typical eight-hour workday and the distribution and values of Euler angles that are used to determine the “shoulder rhythm.” Other assumptions including the distribution of trunk postures did not appear to have a significant impact on the model outputs. It was concluded that the integrated approach might provide an applicable examination of physical loads during the non-routine construction work, especially for those operations/tasks that have certain patterns/sequences for the workers to follow.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is widely accepted that there are three types of external ergonomic exposure assessment strategies: subjective judgment, systematic observation, and direct measurement. These three methods are listed in general order of increasing precision (David, 2005; Li and Buckle, 1999; Van der Beek and Frings-Dresen, 1998). Subjective judgment comes from reviews of experts or self reports of workers. It usually provides only limited information on workplace exposure to physical and psychosocial risk factors for musculoskeletal disorders. When a certain occupational task involves movements of different body parts such as manual material handling during construction work, it is imperative to evaluate the required posture, muscle exertion forces, and joint moments through workplace observations, or direct measurements, or a combination of both. It has been reported that video observation and direct measurement could provide similar levels of accuracy and reliability (Leinonen and Ma, 1996). Although direct measurements are generally considered as the most accurate method to assess exerted forces, it is often problematic to conduct direct measurements in field studies, especially within the construction industry due to potential interference with the work.The internal exposure of the musculoskeletal system can be best evaluated through biomechanical models, varying from two-dimensional static linked segment models to three-dimensional dynamic models (Van der Beek and Frings-Dresen, 1998). In order to more accurately assess the magnitude of physical loads during construction, biomechanical modeling requires proper estimation of input variables including anthropometric data, joint angles, external forces, and internal muscle parameters (Winkel and Mathiassen, 1994). The difficulty of application of direct measurements may suggest that a combination of other methods of measurement be chosen, with an ultimate goal of a representative sample of work and actual variation of exposure being captured (Tak et al., 2007).Drywall installation is a typical type of strenuous construction work, which exposes workers to various ergonomic hazards, including handling of heavy and bulky materials, repetitive screwdriving motions, and awkward postures. The body parts most commonly injured are the axial skeleton and shoulder, where back sprains, simultaneous sprains to the back and neck, and shoulder strains occur frequently (Chiou et al., 2000; Hsiao and Stanevich, 1996; Lemasters et al., 1998; Lipscomb et al., 1997, 2000). Previous biomechanical analyses of drywall installation examined the physical stress and postural stability during lifting of the drywall panels (Pan and Chiou, 1999; Pan et al., 2002/2003). The authors realized many practical limitations to conducting accurate, non-invasive and reasonably priced ergonomic assessments at the worksite due to the dynamic nature of construction activities. Therefore, future study was needed to identify the most reliable exposure assessment methods, evaluate possible ergonomic solutions, and recommend the safest, biomechanically sound handling methods for construction workers and other related laborers (Pan and Chiou, 1999).With the development and application of PATH (Posture, Activity, Tools, and Handling), an observational work sampling-based approach to direct observation (Buchholz et al., 1996), it has become practical to quantify the percent of time that construction workers are exposed to awkward postures, various tasks and activities, and manual handling (Buchholz et al., 2003; Forde and Buchholz, 2004; Fulmer et al., 2004; Paquet et al., 1999, 2001, 2005; Rosenberg et al., 2006). PATH has also been used in other industrial sectors that involve non-repetitive job activities including retail, agriculture, and healthcare industries (Earle-Richardson et al., 2005; Kurowski et al., 2012; Pan et al., 1999; Park et al., 2009).The joint angle and load ranges that are represented by the PATH data are categorical rather than continuous. However, the Monte-Carlo simulation method, which is used to generate random numbers from a defined distribution, can be utilized to extract discrete values from the categorical PATH data for biomechanical analysis of the low back and shoulder (Tak et al., 2007). The Monte-Carlo method has also been successfully used both to capture the trunk muscle activity during torso bending (Mirka and Marras, 1993) and to simulate variability in muscle moment arms and physiological cross-sectional areas for prediction of shoulder muscle force (Chang et al., 2000; Hughes and An, 1997).The objectives of this study were to first describe a hybrid model integrating work sampling, computer simulation, and biomechanical modeling to conduct the ergonomic analysis of drywall installation (Yuan, 2006, 2013a, 2013b; Yuan et al., 2007). The required muscle contraction forces and joint reaction forces at the low back and shoulder during a typical eight-hour drywall installation workday were estimated utilizing Monte-Carlo simulation to convert PATH categorical data into continuous variables as inputs for three-dimensional static biomechanical models. Then, a sensitivity analysis (See appendix) was conducted to examine the impact of some quantitative assumptions that have been made to facilitate the modeling approach, so that the robustness of this modeling approach could be demonstrated and the impact of drywall storage position and size on the physical demands for drywall installers could be evaluated later (Yuan and Buchholz, 2014).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The application of computer-aided simulation to convert observational work sampling data into continuous variables as inputs for biomechanical modeling permitted estimation of the physical loads on the low back and shoulder during drywall installation. The results of the average muscle contraction and joint reaction forces at the lumbar spine (L4/L5) and shoulder (GH and SC) exemplified the strenuous physical requirements for such an operation. Specifically, the average of L4/L5 disc compression forces during lifting a whole drywall sheet is close to 7000 N and is above the limit of the NIOSH maximum permissible limit. The results of the sensitivity analysis demonstrated the robustness of this modeling approach and might provide an applicable examination of physical loads during the non-routine construction work, especially for those operations/tasks that have certain patterns/sequences for the workers to follow.With the difficulty to conduct direct measurement for field studies of ergonomic exposure assessment, the approach presented in this study has provided important insights into more comprehensive evaluation of different exposure parameters.