@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cycling at varying load: How are experiences of perceived exertion integrated in a single measurement?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Participants scaled perceived exertion (PE) for systematically varied cycling intensities (steady, ascending or descending).Scalings were altered by the order of the intensity changes.Alterations were more pronounced for ascending than for descending intensities.Practitioners should mind that scalings for ascending work intensities can be overestimated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scaling,Perceived exertion,Category partitioning procedure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
How are experiences of perceived exertion (PE), associated with varying load, integrated in a single measurement? In search of an integrating pattern of scalings of PE, 209 participants were randomly assigned to 7.5-min pedalling trials on a bicycle-ergometer. Intensities were either kept constant at 25 W, 50 W, 75 W, 100 W, 125 W, or were systematically varied after 2.5 and 5 min whereby the overall load was kept constant at either 50 W, 75 W or 100 W. Systematically varied intensities were either continuously increased or decreased by steps of 25 W. A nearly linear relationship between steady presented intensities and session scalings of PE confirmed the validity of the Category partitioning (CP) procedure. Scalings obtained in sessions with systematically varied loads were altered by the order of the intensity changes. The influence was more pronounced in sessions with increasing loads than in sessions with loads in decreasing order.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Valid and realistic measurements are the basis for the optimisation of work processes in the service of the workers' health. Following DIN EN ISO 10075-1 (2000), as long as mainly physical work is addressed, work load (referred to as stress) is measured in physical units. The resulting work-related strain, defined as the effect of stress on the individual, which depends on each individual's pre-existing condition, can be assessed by measuring perceived exertion (PE).PE, defined as the perceived intensity of strain experienced during physical exercise (Robertson and Noble, 1997), can reliably be measured, if the underlying work load is kept constant during the monitored period. This has been repeatedly confirmed by experiments using category rating scales (Borg, 1962; Borg et al., 1985; Borg et al., 1987) or the Category partitioning (CP) procedure (Müller et al., 1995). Both methods have been mutually validated (Müller et al., 1995) and verified by simultaneous registration of heart rate (Borg et al., 1985, 1987; Kakarot et al., 2012; Stamford, 1976). Fleishman, Gebhardt and Hogan (1984) confirmed the reliability and validity of scalings of PE for a variety of occupational and manual material handling tasks.Unlike controlled experiments, daily work situations are usually characterized by changing load intensities. Furthermore, workers cannot repeatedly be asked for strain assessments without disturbing the work flow and altering the working process. Relying on only few but global descriptions of PE, comprising different work steps, practitioners need to know how varying loads are integrated into a single measurement and whether these measurements give a reliable and realistic picture of the underlying strain. Since workers regularly do not know that they have to scale PE for a period with varying loads, it is to question if all work steps gain the same attention by the worker. In this case, all loads should be equally weighted. However, scalings could also be most influenced by the final load (e.g. Do et al., 2008) or by an average of the peak and end load (e.g. Fredrickson and Kahneman, 1993).Session category rating scales are known to work for monitoring episodes of aerobic (Foster et al., 2001; Herman et al., 2006; Sweet et al., 2004) and resistance exercise (Day et al., 2004; Sweet et al., 2004). To our knowledge, only a single study up to now (Kilpatrick et al., 2012) addressed the question of how experiences of PE, associated with systematically varied load intensities, are integrated in a single measurement. Results revealed that presenting ascending as well as descending intensities resulted in higher session scalings of PE than presenting the same physical load steadily. However, since only the differences between the ascending and the steady conditions proved statistically significant, but not those between the descending and the steady conditions, the authors presumed that session scalings are most strongly influenced by the highest presented intensity.The dominating position of the highest load intensity in the study by Kilpatrick et al. (2012) could probably be attributed to their experimental procedure. Before session scalings, the authors asked for predicted (before work) and in-task scalings of PE (for each of the presented intensities). Such prior scalings change the scaling attitude from just describing the actual perceived intensity of the given stimulus to a comparative analysis of prior given and present loads (Müller et al., 1995; Petrov and Anderson, 2005; Podlesek, 2010). Since participants remember the scalings they have already given when they are asked for session PE, it is to be questioned whether session scalings of PE reflect the unbiased perception of strain for the entire experiment or result from conscious judgement and calculations based on the judgements given before.Findings of Hutchinson and Tenenbaum (2007) indicate that the cycling intensity is moderating the influence of the attention focus on scalings of PE. Scalings were found to be mainly lower if dissociative thoughts are involved (thoughts diverting attention away from internal sensations and toward external distracting stimulation) and to be increased by associative thoughts (thoughts seeking to monitor sensory input). Especially at high intensities attention was focused on the associated overwhelming physiological sensations, dominating focal awareness.We expected session scalings of PE in our study, where they were for the first time assessed with the CP procedure, to increase with the average stress presented within a session. The general aim of our study was to explore whether scalings of PE are altered by the presentation of the loads, when participants are only asked to scale session PE, not to predict PE before or assess PE during the task. Due to the findings of Hutchinson and Tenenbaum (2007) we expected differences between session PE in ascending/descending and steady conditions to increase with increasing average intensities.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Session scalings of PE for planned intensity variations have been found to be influenced by the presentation order of the intensities, whereby PE was more pronounced for ascending than for descending presented intensities. Further experiments are needed to shed light on the underlying reasons for the significantly higher session scalings of PE in series with ascending presented intensities. Practitioners, who analyse work strain with session scalings of PE, should mind that session scalings for ascending work intensities can be increased compared to steady or descending intensities with the same average intensity.