@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of overhead work configuration on muscle activity during a simulated drilling task

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine influences on muscular demand in a drilling task.Encourage bilateral tasks.Forward force exertions require less muscular demand.During upwards exertions avoid reaching.Complete tasks seated when possible.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Shoulder,Fatigue,Bilateral tasks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Overhead work is a known catalyst for occupational shoulder injury. Industrial workers must often adopt awkward overhead postures and loading profiles to complete required tasks, potentially elevating injury risk. This research examined the combined influence of multiple overhead working parameters on upper extremity muscular demands for an industrial drilling application.Twenty-two right-handed males completed 24 unilateral and bilateral overhead work exertions stratified by direction (upward, forward), point of force application (15, 30 and 45 cm in front of the body), and whole-body posture (seated, standing).The dependency of electromyographic (EMG) activity on several factors was established. Significant two-way interactions existed between point of force application and direction (p < 0.0001) and direction and whole body posture (p < 0.0001). An average increase in muscular activity of 6.5% maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) occurred for the contralateral limb when the bilateral task was completed, compared to unilateral tasks, with less than a 1% MVC increase for the active limb.These findings assist evidence-based approaches to overhead tasks, specifically in the construction industry. A bilateral task configuration is recommended to reduce glenohumeral stability demands. As well, particularly for tasks with a far reach distance, design tasks to promote a forward directed exertion. The considerable inter-subject variability suggests that fixed heights are not ideal, and should be avoided, and where this is not possible reaches should be reduced.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Exertions are frequently performed in an overhead position in occupational settings. Overhead work is generally defined as working with the hands above the acromion, or over 60° shoulder flexion or abduction (Grieve and Dickerson, 2008). These postures reduce work capacity and joint strengths, while concomitantly increasing inaccuracy and task completion time (Grieve and Dickerson, 2008). Overhead work is prevalent in several occupational settings, including manufacturing and construction (Forde and Buchholz, 2004). Often geometric workspace constraints require workers to frequently adopt awkward and overhead postures to complete required tasks (Bjelle et al., 1979; Chaffin, 1973), with overhead work exposure frequencies ranging from 6 to 21% within a construction population, based on an observation of construction ironwork (Forde and Buchholz, 2004).Myoelectric activity has frequently been used to quantify physical demands associated with overhead work. For instance, amongst experienced welders the supraspinatus is susceptible to fatigue during overhead work, and has the greatest strain, determined by the increase in EMG signals present during tasks involving overhead positions (Herberts and Kadefors, 1976). Specific to a drilling task, close overhead reaches have reduced biceps brachii and anterior deltoid activation (Anton et al., 2001). Increased muscular activity also results from farther overhead work locations when force is directed upwards (Chopp et al., 2010); however, when hand force was produced in other directions in this study (backward, forward, or downward), a modest forward reach (15–30° in front of the body) required lower overall muscular demand than directly overhead. This demonstrates the complex interactions present in the muscular demands of overhead work.There is a greater risk for injury risk during overhead work. A strong relationship has been demonstrated between working with the arms above shoulder height (approximately 90° of elevation) and the development of pain and injury (Bernard, 1997; Grieve and Dickerson, 2008; Herberts et al., 1981; Punnett et al., 2000; van Rijn et al., 2010). In particular, subacromial impingement syndrome, which results from a reduction in the acromiohumeral interval width of the shoulder, is recognized as the predominant injury resulting from these awkward overhead postures (Miranda et al., 2005; Svendsen et al., 2004; van Rijn et al., 2010). Impingement accounts for approximately 50% of clinically diagnosed shoulder dysfunctions (van der Windt et al., 1995) and leads to several additional shoulder pathologies, including rotator cuff tears, subacromial bursitis, and SLAP lesions (Braman et al., 2014).Research on overhead work has largely focused on unilateral tasks, and thus provides little insight into how bilateral strategies influence exposures. Occupational activities are often performed using both arms, particularly in the construction industry. The non-dominant limb generally acts as a whole-body stabilizer, while the dominant limb completes gross movements (Wang and Sainburg, 2007). The modification of exposure on both limbs in overhead work for bilateral tasks is unstudied, and therefore it is unknown if there is additional overexertion risk present, or a shifting of risk.The purpose of this research was to compare muscular demands during unilateral and bilateral overhead simulated industrial drilling. It was hypothesized that a reduction in average muscular demands during the bilateral tasks would occur in the dominant arm, due to symmetric distribution of the required loads. Several scenarios were evaluated with the intention of developing evidence-based recommendations for overhead drilling to keep shoulder muscular demands as low as possible.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Muscular demands during overhead work depend on a variety of factors, as identified in this work. Bilateral tasks generate non-uniform changes in muscular activity on the active limb. Specifically, an increase in activation occurred for the dominant upper trapezius and decreases in the dominant middle deltoid and supraspinatus muscles. Therefore, bilateral techniques may reduce glenohumeral stability challenges; however the compensatory increase in upper trapezius activity may have implications on scapular dyskinesis. Additionally, the interaction between direction and point of application show an upward exertion, with a far reach requiring the highest muscle demand.