@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ergonomic evaluation of the operating characteristics of the 6MF-30 portable pneumatic extinguisher

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We measured HR, EMG and the degree of fatigue of 14 subjects operating the 6MF-30.The effects of carrying posture on HR and EMG data were significant.The effects of carrying posture on the degree of fatigue were significant.The strap of the 6MF-30 lessens physical stress.The optimal carrying posture adopted when using 6MF-30 includes the oblique strap.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Portable pneumatic extinguisher,Ergonomics,Heart rate,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The 6MF-30 portable pneumatic extinguisher, which is one of the most widely used pieces of equipment for fighting forest fires in China, can produce great physical discomfort for the wearer. To mitigate the physical discomfort associated with the use of the 6MF-30, the operating characteristics of this machine were ergonomically evaluated. Fourteen subjects were instructed to operate the 6MF-30 portable pneumatic extinguisher using three different carrying postures (oblique strap, vertical strap and no strap) two different motions (stationary and swinging) during a simulated firefighting task. Dependent measures included heart rate (HR), electromyography (EMG) data and a subjective assessment (measured as the degree of fatigue in the left arm, right arm and waist). The EMG data were acquired from the palmaris longus and the biceps brachii of the left arm of each subject. Variance analysis indicated that the effects of the carrying posture on the HR (p < 0.001), the EMG data of the left arm (the p value of the palmaris longus is 0.001 and the p value of the biceps brachii is 0.015), and the degree of fatigue of the left and right arms (p < 0.001) were significant, while the effects of motion on all of the dependent measures, and the effects of carrying posture on the degree of fatigue of the waist were not significant. The effect of an oblique strap on the whole-body load is minimal, and the use of the equipment without a strap produced significantly greater physical discomfort for the wearer than did the oblique strap and the vertical strap. The results suggest that the strap of the 6MF-30 can help Chinese forest firefighters to lessen physical stress when operating the 6MF-30, and the use of the oblique strap should be adopted as the standard position.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The portable pneumatic extinguisher is a model of fire extinguisher that is used in China to extinguish low-intensity forest fires (where the fire height is less than 1.5 m and the fire intensity is less than 3140 kJ/m) of class A (the definition is provided in GB 4351.1). This equipment is widely used for wildfire suppression in China, and it has been used as the primary extinguisher in several large Chinese forest fires (Wei and Wang, 2006). Most forest firefighting departments in China possess large numbers of portable pneumatic extinguishers that are made in China. The design defects of these extinguishers can lead to certain negative effects, such as vibration, noise, excessive heat and so on. These effects can produce a physiological load on the users of the equipment. Moreover, uncomfortable carrying postures may lead to an increased physiological load. The same problems that occur with the use of portable pneumatic extinguishers also exist with other portable forestry machines.A chainsaw is one type of portable forestry machine. The effects of the dynamic and static characteristics of chainsaw use on the fatigue of arm muscles have been studied using Chinese anthropometric data (Li et al., 1997, 1998a, 1998b). The optimization of the man–machine interface with chainsaws has been studied, and the optimal value of the man–machine interface within the geometrical parameters of chainsaws has been acquired from Chinese anthropometric data (Li et al., 2000). The results of these studies have helped to make chainsaws more suitable for Chinese users. The ergonomic effects of chainsaw use have been studied in the context of Chinese anthropometry, but the ergonomic evaluation of portable pneumatic extinguishers has not been researched, and consequently, we did not find any relevant literature. Most of the studies on portable pneumatic extinguishers conducted by Chinese scholars have concentrated on the mechanical characteristics of these extinguishers (Xin et al., 2011). Hand tools such as screwdrivers, pliers and scrapers are also portable instruments. The comfort/discomfort factors associated with using hand tools (according to users) have been studied. These results can aid in the design of comfortable hand tools (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004). The electric screwdriver is a powered hand tool. The factors contributing towards hand-arm stress while operating an electric screwdriver have also been evaluated (Chang and Wang, 2000). Hand tools and portable pneumatic extinguishers cause similar physical stress problems when used. The task of firefighting for Chinese people who operate portable pneumatic extinguishers is hard labour, and the ergonomic effects of these extinguishers produced in China need to be evaluated to mitigate the physiological load.Many ergonomic studies were based on the physical employment tests of firefighters. A critical wildfire-fighting task was used (Lord et al., 2012; Netto et al., 2013). While these tests may be appropriate for Australian fire crews, they may not be suitable for Chinese firefighters because the portable pneumatic extinguisher is only widely applied to wildfire fighting in China. The tests should consider the influence of the specialised product. The subjective discomfort ratings, heart rate, and muscle fatigue were significantly influenced by body posture (Jung et al., 2010). Therefore, body posture should be considered when carrying portable pneumatic extinguishers.In this study, operating characteristics of the 6MF-30 portable pneumatic extinguisher that is produced in China were evaluated using indices (i.e., heart rate, surface electromyography, and a subjective assessment) to determine a reasonable portable method and mode of operation. The operating characteristics included carrying posture and motion. The task involved simulated firefighting using the 6MF-30 portable pneumatic extinguisher. The 6MF-30 is available on the market and has been widely used for wildfire suppression in China. Currently, the relevant product manual or standard does not regulate the carrying posture associated with the use of the 6MF-30. We believed that the product strap is an important factor for carrying posture when we obtained the machine. Finally, three carrying postures with respect to the strap were selected. These are common postures when manipulating the machine. In addition, motion was used as a factor in this study. A more comfortable posture and motion can lessen the physical stress experienced by Chinese forest firefighters using the machine.Forest firefighters are generally male, because forest firefighting involves a considerable degree of gruelling work. Fourteen healthy male volunteers from Beijing Forestry University in China aged between 19 and 26 years (mean = 22.8 years) participated in the experiment. Their mean height and weight were 1.74 m (1.62–1.84 m) and 67.1 kg (57.9–83.1 kg), respectively. None of the subjects had a history of musculoskeletal injuries. All subjects were requested to abstain from strenuous exercises during the 24 h prior to the experiment. All of the subjects signed informed consent documents.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The different carrying postures adopted when using the 6MF-30 resulted in significant differences in the HR and EMG data and the degree of fatigue. When the subjects operated the 6MF-30 without the support of a strap, the physiological load was larger compared with other circumstances and the degree of fatigue was greater. The strap of the 6MF-30 can help lessen firefighters' physical stress, and a more suitable strap for Chinese people operating the portable pneumatic extinguisher should be included in the design of the extinguisher. The oblique strap had a smaller effect on the HR compared with the vertical strap. However, the effect of the oblique strap on the EMG data of the left arm was larger than that of the vertical strap. Moreover, the fatigue of the left arm was greater when using the oblique strap compared with the vertical strap, while the opposite result was observed for the right arm. Therefore, the carrying postures adopted should include the use of an oblique strap. The study is suitable for Chinese forestry firefighters because we used Chinese anthropometic data in the analyses.