@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of culture (China vs. US) and task on perceived hazard: Evidence from product ratings, label ratings, and product to label matching

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Chinese participants perceived less hazard in response to warning labels than did US participants.Perceived hazard in response to products did not differ as a function of culture.Likelihood of injury and control affected matching performance differently across culture.Warning design should take into account that risk perceptions vary with culture and context.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Warnings,Culture,Risk,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the current study, 44 Chinese and 40 US college students rated their perceived hazard in response to warning labels and products and attempted to match products with warning labels communicating the same level of hazard. Chinese participants tended to provide lower ratings of hazard in response to labels, but hazard perceived in response to products did not significantly differ as a function of culture. When asked to match a product with a warning label, Chinese participants' hazard perceptions appeared to be better calibrated, than did US participants', across products and labels. The results are interpreted in terms of constructivist theory which suggests that risk perceptions vary depending on the “frame of mind” evoked by the environment/context. Designers of warnings must be sensitive to the fact that product users' cognitive representations develop within a culture and that risk perceptions will vary based on the context in which they are derived.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
“Economic globalization” refers to “the increasing economic interdependence of national economies across the world through a rapid increase in cross-border movement of goods, service, technology, and capital” (Karacan and Ergin, 2011, p. 53). As part of this process, trade between the US and China rose from $2 billion in 1979 to $562 billion in 2013. China is the United States' biggest source of imports and its third-largest export market (Morrison, 2014). In this case, the borders that are being crossed are not only physical, but cultural. One concern associated with the import and export of products is whether those products are appropriately labeled given the target population. Do product perceptions vary with culture? Do warning labels convey the same level of risk to members of different cultures? Do warning labels accurately reflect the level of risk that product users associate with a given product?Perceptions of hazard in response to warning label components (colors, symbols, and signal words) have been shown to vary as a function of language spoken (e.g., English-only vs. Spanish (Wogalter et al., 1997); English vs. Chinese vs. bilingual (Luximon et al., 1998)). For English-speaking participants in the US, research indicates that the color red tends to communicate higher levels of hazard followed by orange and then yellow (e.g., Braun and Clayton-Silver, 1995; Bresnahan and Bryk, 1975; Chapanis, 1994; Dunlap et al., 1986; Leonard, 1999). However, some studies suggest that black communicates greater hazard than red (e.g., Lesch et al., 2009). For signal words, DEADLY communicates greater hazard than DANGER, and DANGER communicates greater hazard than WARNING (Wogalter et al., 1998). Regarding WARNING and CAUTION, the ANSI standards (ANSI Z535.4, 1998) suggest that WARNING indicates a situation which, if not avoided, could result in death or serious injury while CAUTION is to be used to indicate a situation which, if not avoided, may result in minor or moderate injury. However, research has not consistently supported the distinction (e.g., Kalsher et al., 1995; Wogalter et al., 1998, 1995).In a study examining Chinese perceptions of hazard for signal words and sign shape, Yu et al. (2004) found that, while the relative strength of the signal words was similar for Chinese vs. western cultures (as observed by Wogalter and Silver, 1990), the Chinese tended to provide lower ratings of perceived hazard. We (Lesch et al., 2009) also found that Chinese participants consistently assigned lower levels of perceived hazard to warning components and configurations than did US participants, but the relative ordering of warning components and configurations was fairly consistent across culture.Models within cultural psychology propose different mechanisms and modes of transmission for cultural influences. Differences between Western and East Asian nations have been conceptualized in terms of traits such as individualism vs. collectivism (Schwartz, 1992; Triandis, 2001), independent vs. interdependent self-concepts (Markus and Kitayama, 1991), or analytic vs. holistic cognitive styles (Nisbett, 2003). It has been suggested that a heuristic-based and holistic cognitive style (i.e., experience-based, emphasizing the embeddedness of form and content) is more readily accessible to members of Asian cultures while an analytical cognitive style (i.e., rule/logic-based) is more readily accessible to members of Western cultures (e.g., Morris and Peng, 1994). Participants of Chinese and Korean descent appear to rely on readily accessible exemplars and intuition rather than abstract rules for tasks that assess categorization, conceptual structure, and deductive reasoning (Lechuga and Weibe, 2011). In the attribution of causality, Morris and Peng (1994) found that American participants attributed more to an actor's internal properties, whereas Chinese perceivers attributed more to situational context.According to the “psychometric” approach to risk perception (Slovic et al., 1986), different countries/cultures each have a unique hazard profile which can be described in terms of a set of qualitative characteristics including whether the hazards are voluntary, chronic, catastrophic, common, fatal, immediate, ascertainable, controllable, or novel. Factor analysis has been used to reduce this set of risk characteristics to two higher order dimensions (e.g., Slovic et al., 1980). The first, Unknown Risk, has been found to be primarily determined by the extent it is “unknown” (i.e., to those exposed as well as to “science”), but also by “unfamiliarity”, “involuntariness”, and the “delay of effects”. The second, Dread Risk, has been found to be most strongly determined by “severity of consequences”, “dread”, and “catastrophic potential”. Consistent with this approach, it has been found that participants' ratings of severity of injury, likelihood of injury, and familiarity are predictive of ratings of perceived hazard (Wogalter et al., 1999). As severity of injury and likelihood of injury increase, perceived hazard increases; whereas, as familiarity increases, perceived hazard decreases. Whether severity of injury or likelihood of injury is found to be the best predictor of perceived hazard appears to depend on the types of items examined. For example, Slovic et al. (1979) found that, for technologies (i.e., nuclear power) and activities (i.e., recreational activities), likelihood of injury is the strongest predictor.Schmidt and Wei (2006) used a psychometric approach in their study of risk perceptions in Austria and China. They obtained evidence for three main risk factors (catastrophic risk, uncertainty, and relevance) that were broadly consistent with those identified in earlier risk perception studies. Additionally, risks such as nuclear energy, auto accidents, and smoking appeared in similar relative positions within the factor space as observed in earlier studies (e.g., Slovic, 1987; Slovic et al., 1986, 1980, 1987). However, Austrian and Chinese lay people differed in terms of their perceptions of controllability – Chinese lay people viewed the risks as being far more controllable than did Austrian lay people. The Chinese participants also believed people were better informed, that the risks are less voluntarily chosen, that there is a longer delay before the effects of the risks become observable, and that the risks have a higher catastrophic potential. Furthermore, Chinese lay people felt personally more affected by the risks than did Austrians, but judged future generations to be less affected.According to cultural theories of risk (e.g., Douglas and Wildavsky, 1982), the meanings of risks are socially constructed through collective-level processes of selective attention. Cultures view specific activities as dangerous in order to protect their social structure and worldviews (see Boholm, 2003). Four basic sociological forms have been defined based on grid-group theory: egalitarianism, individualism, fatalism, and hierarchism (Douglas, 1978). Consistent with cultural theory, Xie et al. (2003) found that respondents from China, a country characterized by high power distance (inequality in power distribution in which more power translates into more privilege) and strong hierarchical cultural roots, were more concerned about risks that threaten established forms of social relations and less concerned about technology risks.These approaches to risk suggest stable worldviews on the part of the perceiver. However, evidence in judgment and decision-making demonstrates that cultural differences vary with task and situational factors such as attentional load, time pressure, and choice format (e.g., Briley et al., 2000; Chiu et al., 2000; Knowles et al., 2001). These findings, as well as findings that bi-culturals can easily switch from one cultural style of judgment to another cultural style, have been used by Weber and Morris (2010) to argue that cultural styles are not fixed worldviews, but evoked frames of mind in which meaning is constructed based on internal cultural representations from memory as well as external structures in the environment. According to this approach, living in a culture instills a person with cognitive representations (schemas, categories, rules, procedures, goals, etc.) that guide judgments and decisions by constraining attention, search for evidence, as well as inference. These representations will be activated to the extent that they are applicable and accessible in a given context. According to this view of cultural influences, the important question is not “Does culture matter?” but “When does culture matter?” (see Weber and Morris, 2010).The current study attempted to answer this question by comparing and contrasting performance on three different tasks as a function of culture: (1) perceived hazard in response to warning labels (additional analyses of these data were presented previously in Lesch et al., 2009), (2) perceived hazard in response to product names, and (3) a matching task in which participants viewed a product name and an array of twelve different labels and selected the warning label which they believed best represented the level of hazard associated with the given product. While considerable research has focused on isolated variables that affect hazard perception, comparatively little research has examined interactions among these variables or the relation between perceived hazard derived from different sources (i.e., products and warning labels). How do judgments of risk vary across these tasks and as a function of culture of the product-user? Are judgments of risk calibrated (i.e., closely aligned) across task and across culture? That is, are judgments of risk similar regardless of culture of the participant or the method used to obtain the risk judgment? As regards calibration across culture, prior evidence suggests that Chinese participants perceive lower levels of hazard associated with warning labels (e.g., Lesch et al., 2009; Yu et al., 2004) and are generally found to be less risk averse than western participants (Hsee and Weber, 1999; Weber et al., 1998; Weber and Hsee, 1998). As regards calibration across task, it was hypothesized that US participants' perceptions would be better calibrated than Chinese participants' perceptions due to more extensive regulation of product-labeling in the US as compared to China (and, consequently, greater exposure to co-occurrences between labels and products). It was also hypothesized that performance across tasks might reflect a greater reliance on a holistic cognitive style by Chinese participants and a greater reliance on an analytical cognitive style by US participants.Alternatively, a constructivist view of risk (e.g., Weber and Morris, 2010) suggests that cultural differences will occur in some tasks, but not others, depending on the “frame of mind” evoked by the environment/context. While all the tasks require judgments of perceived hazard, the matching task is likely to evoke other considerations (or schemas or other cognitive representations) regarding which hazards should be warned against. If different frames of mind are evoked for each culture, as a function of task, then different patterns of performance would be expected.To increase our understanding of how judgments of hazard are formed across tasks and culture, ratings of severity of injury, likelihood of injury, control, and familiarity were obtained and used to predict performance on the different tasks. Earlier research, with Western populations, indicates that perceptions of hazard tend to decrease with increased perceived control and familiarity and increase with increased likelihood of injury and severity of injury (e.g., Wogalter et al., 1999). However, other research suggests that Chinese perceptions of control may differ from those of more western populations (e.g., Schmidt and Wei, 2006).Every year countless numbers of people are injured while using products. Increasing our understanding of cross-cultural conceptions of risk will not only improve product safety, but should also facilitate interactions among nations in terms of foreign affairs and policy, more generally. To do so, perceived hazard was examined as a function of task (label rating, product rating, matching) and culture (China vs. US).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
