@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Lumbar compression forces while lifting and carrying with two and four workers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Carrying while stepping up a platform results in higher compression forces compared with lifting.100-kg four-worker lifts result in lower compression forces than 50-kg two-worker lifts.Increasing the number of workers does not result in higher variability of the compression force.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Team lifting,Team carrying,Compression force,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Team lifting and carrying is advised when loads exceed 25 kg and mechanical lifting is not feasible. The aim of this study was to assess mean, maximum and variability of peak lumbar compression forces which occur daily at construction sites. Therefore, 12 ironworkers performed 50-kg two-worker and 100-kg four-worker lifting and carrying tasks in a laboratory experiment. The 50-kg two-worker lifts resulted in significantly higher mean (Δ 537 N) and maximum (Δ 586 N) peak lumbar compression forces compared with the 100-kg four-worker lifts. The lowest mean and maximum peak lumbar compression forces were found while carrying on level ground and increased significantly when stepping over obstacles and up platforms. Lifting 100 kg with four workers in a rectangular line up resulted in lower compression forces compared with lifting 50 kg with two workers standing next to each other. When loads are carried manually routes should be free of any obstacles to be overcome.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the construction industry, lifting loads is a frequently occurrence (e.g. Paquet et al., 2005; Hartmann and Fleischer, 2005). Manual material handling (MMH), in terms of lifting (e.g. da Costa and Vieira, 2010; Lötters et al., 2003; Kuiper et al., 2005; Hoogendoorn et al., 1999; Griffith et al., 2012) and carrying (Health Council of the Netherlands, 2012) is associated with an increased incidence of work-related back disorders. To prevent work-related back disorders as a result of lifting, the maximum load mass to be lifted by one worker has been set at 25 kg in the Netherlands, and the maximum load for manually lifting is set at 50 kg when lifted by two workers (Dutch Labour Inspectorate, 2012). Loads above 50 kg should always be lifted mechanically (Dutch Labour Inspectorate, 2012). However, mechanical transportation is not always feasible and when not available the loads should be lifted by more workers (team lifting), while not exceeding 25 kg per worker.In concrete reinforcement tasks, previous field studies (Visser et al., 2014; Buchholz et al., 2003) have observed a variety of MMH tasks, including single-worker and team lifts and carrying. No differences were found for the duration of MMH (21% and 24% of the workday) when lifting maximally 50 kg or maximally 100 kg was allowed (Visser et al., 2014). Although most lifts were performed by one ironworker, 23%–37% of the lifts were performed by two or more ironworkers. However, in these field studies, the spinal loading during these MMH tasks were not quantified. In addition, physical workloads are also influenced by the worksite characteristics, such as obstacles (Haslam et al., 2005; Koningsveld et al., 2005) especially for carrying tasks.Team lifting has been the subject of several studies (Dennis and Barrett, 2003a,b, 2002; Marras et al., 1999; Mital and Motorwala, 1995; Lee, 2004; Lee and Lee, 2001; Sharp et al., 1997). Of these studies, two compared the peak lumbar compression forces of single-worker- and two-worker lifts. The peak lumbar compression force was found to be lower for the two-worker lifts compared with the single-worker lifts (Dennis and Barrett, 2002; Marras et al., 1999). Similar results were found for carrying tasks (Marras et al., 1999). Studies on lifting with more than two workers did not report spinal loading, but did report that the maximal acceptable weight of lift (MAWL) was not different between two-worker lifts and four-worker lifts (Lee, 2004; Sharp et al., 1997). The effect of four-worker lifts on the spinal loading is, however, still unknown. With increasing the number of workers lifting a load, the coordination between worker may be influenced (Marras et al., 1999). This results in a variability of spinal loading because differences in coordination might result in unequal mass distribution with higher spinal loads for the worker at the heavier end (Dennis and Barrett, 2003b). Variability in spinal loading can also occur when a team has to step over an obstacle or up an elevated surface while carrying a load. The variability of spinal loading as a result of the number of workers during lifting tasks and the obstacles during carrying tasks might predict occasional excessive peak lumbar compression.The aim of the present study was to quantify the spinal loading during the above mentioned lifting and carrying tasks in ironwork. Therefore, above tasks have been simulated in the laboratory and spinal loading was estimated. The weight of the handled materials was chosen based on the maximum weight that is allowed by the Dutch Labour Inspectorate to be handled: single-worker 25 kg, two-worker 50 kg, and four-worker 100 kg. All tasks were repeated 6 times to be able to quantify the variation in peak spinal loading over multiple trials. For every task, the mean, maximum and variability in peak lumber compression force was calculated.Based on the few previous studies regarding team lifting (Dennis and Barrett, 2002; Marras et al., 1999) it is expected that team lifting will result in slightly lower mean peak compression forces. However, team lifts could also result in higher variability in peak loading over multiple repetitions, resulting in a higher maximum peak compression force. For the carrying tasks, stepping over an obstacle and up a platform is expected to result in higher mean, maximum and variability of peak compression force compared with ground level carrying. However, based on previous research (Marras et al., 1999) it is expected that carrying results in lower mean and maximal peak compression forces compared to the lifting tasks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
