@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Lumbar postures, seat interface pressures and discomfort responses to a novel thoracic support for police officers during prolonged simulated driving exposures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel thoracic support for police officers was developed and tested.The thoracic support reduced seat back contact pressure area at the low back.The thoracic support increased seat back contact pressure area at the upper back.Normalized lumbar postures were more flexed with the thoracic support.Frequent secondary tasks (MDT usage) may reduce the rate of discomfort development.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Occupational driving,Low back pain,Thoracic support,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A high prevalence of low back pain has been reported among professional drivers, including mobile police officers. The purpose of this investigation was to develop and evaluate a novel thoracic support designed for mobile police officers. Fourteen participants (7 male, 7 female) attended two 120-min driving simulations using a Crown Victoria Interceptor seat and the same seat equipped with a surface mounted thoracic support. Time-varying spine postures, seat pressures and ratings of discomfort were measured. Averaged discomfort values were low (less than 10 mm of a possible 100 mm) for both seating conditions. The postures in the thoracic support condition were more similar to non-occupational driving without occupational equipment than the Crown Victoria seating condition. The reduction in pressure area at the low back with the thoracic support has the potential to reduce discomfort reporting in officers compared to a standard vehicle package.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The in-vehicle space has become a mobile work environment for many professions. A link has been demonstrated in the literature between low back pain reporting and prolonged occupational driving exposures (Alperovitch-Najenson et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2005; Krause et al., 2004; Okunribido et al., 2007; Pietri et al., 1992; Porter and Gyi, 2002). Mobile police officers are considered prolonged occupational drivers based on annual mileage, which can exceed 40,000 km among some groups of officers (Gyi and Porter, 1998). Workers who drive in excess of 20 h a week are reportedly six times more likely to be absent from work with back pain than those who drive less than 10 h per week (Porter and Gyi, 2002). The reduction in lumbar lordosis that occurs during sitting (De Carvalho et al., 2010; Keegan, 1953; Dunk and Callaghan, 2005) has been associated with increased intradiscal pressure (Makhsous et al., 2003; Andersson et al., 1974) and increased tension on the posterior elements of the spinal column (Andersson et al., 1974; De Carvalho et al., 2010). During sitting in an automotive seat, previous research has demonstrated that lumbar lordosis decreases by an average of 43° compared to standing (De Carvalho et al., 2010).In addition to prolonged occupational driving exposures, many modern mobile occupations require workers to complete office-based tasks within the vehicle's occupant compartment space. Approximately 50 percent of a police officer's shift is spent seated in a vehicle (Brown et al., 1998; McKinnon et al., 2011) and up to 33 percent of this in-vehicle time is spent performing data entry or retrieval activities on a dash board mounted laptop or mobile data terminal (MDT) (McKinnon et al., 2011). The introduction of MDTs in cruisers increases access to information (Agrawal et al., 2003), which in turn increases officer productivity (Hampton and Langham, 2005). However, use of these mobile devices also increases the potential for discomfort reporting. During lab simulated driving, the introduction of a typing task on an MDT increased discomfort reporting and increased posterior pelvic inclinations compared to driving alone (Gruevski et al., 2013). In a survey of municipal officers from a Canadian police force, the mean discomfort associated with in-vehicle computer use was 64 mm with 100 mm representing extreme discomfort (Donnelly et al., 2009).There is evidence to suggest that in-vehicle lumbar supports are effective at increasing lordotic postures (De Carvalho and Callaghan, 2011a; Reed and Schneider, 1996; Andersson et al., 1974), reducing muscle activity (Kingma and van Dieën, 2009; Andersson et al., 1974) and reducing discomfort reporting among drivers (Chen et al., 2005). In a study conducted by Porter and Gyi (2002), drivers with seats that featured an adjustable lumbar support had fewer days absent from work with low back pain than drivers without a low back support. However, the mandatory equipment worn by officers (duty belt and Kevlar vest) makes a traditional lumbar support an infeasible ergonomic intervention for this population. In a recent investigation, the lumbar support was the seat feature that caused the greatest discomfort among surveyed officers with a mean rating of 50.9 mm out of a possible 100 mm (Donnelly et al., 2009). The duty belt and protective vest worn by officers create a unique interface between the seat and occupant that further increases the potential for discomfort reporting. The duty belt, side arm, radio and body armour were identified as causing the highest perceived discomfort of all equipment worn by officers throughout an 8-h shift (Donnelly et al., 2009). Interface pressure has been previously hypothesized as the objective measure with the strongest link to discomfort reporting during seated exposures (De Looze et al., 2003). It is possible that an intervention that reduces the seat back pressure in the location of the duty belt may also mitigate discomfort reporting in this region.An Active Lumbar Support (ALS) seat was developed to accommodate the mandatory equipment worn by officers and successfully reduced discomfort reporting in both field and laboratory simulated driving environments (Donnelly et al., 2009). The ALS seat is a modified Crown Victoria seat with foam structural modifications to the thoracic region, a shortened seat pan and a mechanical component that translates in both superior/inferior and anterior/posterior directions (Donnelly et al., 2009). However, previous work has not examined if a thoracic support can induce changes to mitigate lumbar discomfort, improve lumbar lordosis or reduce interface pressures of the duty belt worn by police officers.Assessing a novel thoracic intervention to provide support to the lumbar region and reduce discomfort while accommodating the body armour and duty belt was the focus of this investigation. The purpose of this study was to evaluate changes in lumbar spine posture and discomfort induced by a novel thoracic support during prolonged lab simulated driving. It was hypothesized that the thoracic support condition will lead to changes in posture and seat back contact to reduce low back discomfort, reduce seat pressure in the location of the duty belt and increase lumbar lordosis compared to a Crown Victoria seat alone.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A prototype thoracic support specifically designed for mobile police populations was developed and tested. The support was found to reduce seat back contact area in the location of high discomfort reporting and increase contact area in the upper back. This redistribution of contact area has the potential to reduce discomfort reporting among officers. The postures in the thoracic support condition were more similar to non-occupational driving than the Crown Victoria seating condition while discomfort responses were low in both seating conditions. As the study was a lab-based simulation, future design iterations of the thoracic support would benefit from in field testing among officers, with longer exposure times to the seating intervention.