@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quantitative evaluation of the impact of night shifts and alcohol consumption on construction tiling quality

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We designed five tiling tasks to evaluate the impact of night shift and alcohol.Participants executed the tasks in four statuses (e.g., inebriation, night shift).Night shift had a larger impact than did alcohol.Tiling quality was decreased, by 31.31% (night shift) and 23.82% (alcohol).Both factors potently affected the ability to execute basic and advanced tasks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Night shift,Alcohol,Tiling quality,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The adverse effects of night-shift work and alcohol consumption on performance have received considerable attention. However, how night shifts and alcohol affect productivity in workers has not been quantified. This paper describes the experiments featuring multiple tiling tasks and patterns. The tiling quality performed by the graduate student participants in four different statuses was objectively evaluated by an edge-detection computer program. The results indicate that both night shift and alcohol significantly reduce the quality in general, and the effects of the factors on position and alignment-angle qualities were dissimilar in distinct areas due to tile patterns and size. Both night-shift and alcohol conditions affected the basic (−34.01% and −25.79%) and advanced tiling abilities (−40.14% and −26.16%), and night shift had a larger impact than alcohol. These results provide jobsite managers with usable information regarding how night shifts and alcohol affect workers' abilities to execute basic and advanced tasks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Using night shifts (approximately 10 PM to 6 AM) is the most common approach employed to accelerate construction projects (Jun and El-Rayes, 2010). Night shifts have been suggested to provide more favorable work conditions than day shifts, such as reduced travel congestion, work interference, idle-machinery times, and temperatures (Arditi et al., 2007). However, the potential adverse effects of nighttime construction on worker productivity, safety, and health have also been widely reported (Hinze and Carlisle, 1990; Jun and El-Rayes, 2010; Price, 1986).Night shifts disrupts a person's circadian rhythm and makes people drowsy and tired (Gillberg et al., 2003; Jay et al., 2006a), and thus impairs cognition and alertness (Åkerstedt and Wright Jr., 2009; Ohayon et al., 2010). Consequently, several studies have concluded that night shifts reduce performance and increase accident risks (Åkerstedt and Landström, 1998; Ullman et al., 2004). Night shifts have been reported to potently affect attention, memory, reaction times, decision making, motor skills, and higher-order cognitive processing in the workplace (Dorrian et al., 2005; Harrison and Horne, 2000; Jay et al., 2006b). These factors may explain the findings that night-shift workers make more errors and are less efficient at their work than are day-shift workers (Costa, 1996). Moreover, night shifts can also cause health, social, and family problems (Wright et al., 2013), which lead to a chronic reduction in competence at work.Dorrian et al. (2003) determined that performance in the Psychomotor Vigilance Task deteriorated at a rate corresponding to the subjective sleepiness ratings provided by participants during a week of simulated night shifts. Andorre-Gruet et al. (1998) reported that supervisory activity was lower during night shifts than during day shifts in the control room of a chemical plant. Åkerstedt and Landström (1998) have summarized the studies related to the effects of night-shift work. Browne (1949) demonstrated that telephone operators connected calls considerably more slowly at night than they did during the day. Bjerner et al. (1955) observed that the number of errors in gas-meter readings at a gas company was higher at night than it was during the day. Hildebrandt et al. (1974) determined that train drivers failed to operate safety-alert devices more often at night than they did during the day.Construction workers are consistently ranked the highest among workers in all occupations and industries in terms for illicit-drug use and heavy alcohol consumption (Larson et al., 2007). The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (2007) reported that the highest rates of heavy alcohol consumption occurred in the construction industry (15.9%); the rate was nearly twice the average of that in all industries (8.8%) combined in USA. Pidd et al. (2006) investigated alcohol consumption in Australia and found that the construction industry has a higher percentage of workers who drank amounts that were risky in the short- and long-term than do all industries. Regarding the long-term risk levels, the percentage in the construction industry (12.0%) is second only to that in the hospitality industry (14.6%). Alcohol abuse is the primary problem in the construction industry (Maloney, 1988), with the prevalence of alcohol dependence and abuse being roughly 25% in construction workers in USA (Mandell et al., 1992); approximately 12.4% of construction workers engage in heavy alcohol use in USA (Gerber and Yacoubian Jr., 2001). Moreover, approximately 19.1% of construction workers in Australia exhibit alcohol-related problems (Banwell et al., 2006), and nearly 20% of the construction workers consume alcoholic energy drinks regularly.According to a survey conducted by Cheng et al. (2012), a high percentage (28.6%) of construction workers habitually consume alcoholic energy drinks, because construction work can be physically exhausting. Unlike in some Western countries in which alcoholic energy drinks are marketed to young adults, in Taiwan, alcoholic energy drinks are frequently targeted at manual workers and marketed as nutritional supplements that can combat drowsiness and fatigue at work. The two most popular energy drinks, Whisbi and Paolyta B, which contain alcohol as well as vitamin and caffeine, are approved and regulated by the Food and Drug Administration of Taiwan as “medicine,” and are therefore sold at pharmacies. Most construction workers questioned stated that consuming energy drinks can help relieve fatigue or eliminate drowsiness (Chang et al., 2009), which can explain why the workers consumed these energy drinks before or even during work. According to a report of The Council of Labor Affairs in Taiwan (1998), approximately 14% of all construction workers drank alcoholic beverages before work, and 22% of the workers drank the beverages during work.Much like night-shift work, alcohol consumption in the workplace severely harms workers' physical and psychological wellbeing, diminishes job performance and productivity, and increases safety risks (Dave and Kaestner, 2002; Patussi and Mezzani, 2004). The other alcohol-related problems prevalent in the workplace are absenteeism (i.e., being either late or absent), increased use of sick leave, an increase in behavioral problems, and poor relationships with coworkers (French and Zarkin, 1995; Maloney, 1988).The harmful effects of alcohol consumption on a person's work performance have been widely studied and demonstrated. Drinking alcohol adversely affects perceptual–cognitive and psychomotor abilities (Brumback et al., 2007) and also impairs information processing, memory, reasoning, visual-searching capability, attention, caution, reaction times, perception of space and movement, verbal expression, motor coordination, and recognition skills (Kim et al., 2007; Oxley et al., 2006).Brumback et al. (2007) summarized the impact of alcohol at moderate-to-heavy BAC levels. BAC levels above 0.05% markedly impair performance in certain motor tasks such as tracking, tapping, reaction, and swaying. Dawson and Reid (1997) reported that performance on a tracking task decreased by 11.6% at a BAC level of 0.10%. Struik et al. (1988) indicated that information processing, perception, and motor abilities were substantially diminished at BAC levels exceeding 0.15%.As discussed in this section, numerous studies have evaluated the effects of night-shift work and alcohol consumption on people's work efficiency and cognitive behavior; however, no study has focused on quantifying the effect of these factors on work quality, particularly in the construction industry. One reason that such quantitative analyses are lacking is that reliably measuring performance in real-life settings can be challenging (Gillberg et al., 2003). Furthermore, to quantify the impact of physiological statuses on productivity, studies must focus on using a simple and safe construction task whose quality can be measured objectively. Understanding how night shifts and alcohol consumption affect various quality measures of tasks of distinct types can help in managing construction work and workers and in avoiding poor work quality and unsafe working conditions caused by inappropriate work assignment.In this study, our objective was to use experiments to quantify the impact of night shifts and alcohol consumption on tiling quality and task-executing ability. The tiling task, which was chosen because of its simplicity and safety, can be readily simulated and also repeated when cemented tiles are replaced with Velcro-attached tiles. Tiles of distinct patterns and sizes were designed and the quality of work was assessed based on the precision of tile alignment; this assessment included three measures that represented basic and advanced task-executing abilities.To evaluate the impact of night-shift work and alcohol consumption on work quality and efficiency, we designed four experiments, each including the same set of five tiling tasks in five specified areas and three tiling patterns. Each participant was required to participate in all four experiments under distinct statuses: (I) normal, (II) inebriation, (III) night shift, and (IV) inebriation in night shift (Table 1). The participants completed each of the experiments on separate days to avoid experiencing residual effects of previous experiments.In the normal status, participants completed the experiment during daytime without having consumed any alcoholic beverage. In the night-shift status, the participants started the experiments at 1:00 AM, after not having slept for at least 12 h prior to the experiments. Participants were required to not sleep for a minimum of 12 h to mimic the sleep deprivation caused by night shifts. Consider a night shift worker who works from 10:00PM to 6:00AM, and sleeps from 8:00AM to 2:00PM. By the middle of the shift, the worker will have not slept for 12 h, and will have not slept for more than 12 h by the end of the shift. To create the inebriation status, participants were asked to consume a 40%-alcohol Vodka drink 1 h before the experiments; the amount consumed was designed to reach a BAC level of 0.07% (Section 2.4). After the tiling tasks were completed, work quality was determined by photographing the tiles that were fixed and comparing them with a standard tiling alignment by using a computer program.The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (2013) evaluated the impairment caused by alcohol overdose based on BAC levels, which are expressed as a percentage of alcohol in the blood. In our experiments, we chose the BAC level of 0.07% as the inebriation status, which was reported to produce the adverse effects of impaired coordination, balance, attention, and memory. The Institutional Review Board of Taipei Veterans General Hospital approved the protocol of these experiments.Ten graduate students (eight males and two females) from the construction engineering and management program of National Chiao-Tung University volunteered to participate in the experiments. The average age of the students was 24.1 years (SD = 1.10 years). The average height and weight were 169.60 cm (SD = 6.48 cm) and 63.3 kg (SD = 14.74 kg), respectively. All students provided written informed consent before the experiments and were paid for their participation. Each participant completed the entire experiment (including preparation and rest times) over four nonconsecutive days, working for approximately 1.5 h in the normal and night-shift statuses and for 3 h in the case of the inebriation status.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The adverse effects of night-shift work and alcohol consumption on work performance have received considerable attention. Although working night shifts and consuming alcohol-containing beverages such as energy drinks are common in the construction industry, how night shifts and alcohol affect productivity in construction workers has not been quantified. We designed experiments involving five tiling tasks and three patterns (staggered brickwork, checkerboard, and diamond). The quality of the tiling work completed by the participants under four statuses (normal, inebriation, night shift, and inebriation in night shift) was evaluated objectively by using an edge-detection computer program and three measures of tiling-work quality: position, gap, and alignment angle.The results of our analysis indicate that work quality was adversely affected by both night-shift work and alcohol consumption. Whereas gap quality was affected by both factors in all of the five work areas, the effects of the factors on position and alignment-angle qualities were dissimilar in distinct areas. This difference may have arisen primarily from the use of distinct patterns and tile sizes. The long tiles enlarged the position deviation and thus increased discriminability. Although long tiles also enlarged the deviation in alignment angles, they did not increase discriminability as they did in the case of position deviation; this is because maintaining two neighboring regression lines at the same angle was too challenging for most participants. Moreover, because fewer long tiles than short tiles were required for tiling, the opportunities to correct the alignment were diminished when using the long tiles. By contrast, the use of more square tiles than other tiles resulted in statistically significant differences in the alignment-angle measure. However, the use of large numbers of square tiles also often led to ragged alignment because of the ripple effect, and this diminished the statistical significance in the position measure.Comparing the differences between the front end and the corresponding later areas of the same pattern (e.g., Area 1 vs. Area 5 and Area 2 vs. Area 4) showed that the impact of alcohol measured for the front areas was weaker than that in later areas, which was because the effect of alcohol increased over time as the alcohol was absorbed gradually.The position measure represents the basic task-executing ability, whereas the gap and alignment-angle measures represent advanced abilities. Both night-shift and alcohol conditions affected the basic and advanced abilities, and night shift had a larger impact than did alcohol: basic and advanced abilities were decreased maximally by 34.01% (partial eta squared = 0.543) and 40.14% (partial eta squared = 0.861), respectively, in the case of the night-shift condition, and by 25.79% (partial eta squared = 0.509) and 26.16% (partial eta squared = 0.742), respectively, in the case of alcohol.The primary limitation of this research was the small number of participants. Many who were approached did not join the study because they were unwilling to participate in all four experiments, which took four nonconsecutive days to complete. The number of participants could be increased if the experiments can be redesigned to fit into nonconsecutive time slots within a single day.In addition, finding night-shift workers to participate in these experiments was difficult because of the time involved. We attempted to reduce the effect caused by the difference between the students and night-shift workers by simplifying the tiling tasks and deliberately depriving the participants of sleep. However, although literature has indicated that sleepiness is common among night-shift workers, and the experiments described herein simulated such conditions by requiring participants to not sleep for at least 12 h before the experiments began, other common symptoms, such as accumulated fatigue induced by long hours of work and circadian misalignment, were not simulated in the experiments. Moreover, the participants in this study were graduate students, whose physical abilities and procedural knowledge, skills, and memory may differ from those of construction workers.Lastly, we used Velcro instead of cement so as to allow the tiles to be readily attached and detached, but Velcro by its nature does not permit continuous adjustment. In future experiments, Velcro could be replaced with magnets.