@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling people with motor disabilities to empower the automatic accessibility and ergonomic assessment of new products

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model motor disabilities of people through regression analysis.We propose a novel hybrid regression method able to handle small sample sizes.We estimate the probability density function of each disability parameter.We examine the validity of the regression results using new measurements.The proposed analysis leads to the development of accurate virtual user models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
User modeling,Virtual User Model,Regression analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Virtual User Models (VUMs) can be a valuable tool for accessibility and ergonomic evaluation of designs in simulation environments. As increasing the accessibility of a design is usually translated into additional costs and increased development time, the need for specifying the percentage of population for which the design will be accessible is crucial. This paper addresses the development of VUMs representing specific groups of people with disabilities. In order to create such VUMs, we need to know the functional limitations, i.e. disability parameters, caused by each disability and their variability over the population. Measurements were obtained from 90 subjects with motor disabilities and were analyzed using both parametric and nonparametric regression methods as well as a proposed hybrid regression method able to handle small sample sizes. Validation results showed that in most cases the proposed regression analysis can produce valid estimations on the variability of each disability parameter.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is important to realize that people with disabilities are not a tiny minority of the population. Around 640 million people worldwide live with a disability (Enable, 2008). Many strategies have been undertaken worldwide to enforce accessibility for people with disabilities. For instance, the European Commission has launched a number of initiatives (Klironomos et al., 2006; Bühler and Stephanidis, 2004), such as the eEurope 2002, the eEurope 2005, the EDeAN network and the DfA@eInclusion Coordination Action (Šimšík and Galajdová, 2008) to promote the “Design For All” (DfA) principles that will lead to more accessible services and systems. The Commission has also advocated the use of standardization to improve the effectiveness and uptake of DfA. It mandated CEN, CENELEC and ETSI to include the “Design for All” concept in relevant standardization initiatives. Digital Human Modeling (DHM) can significantly support designers and developers on staying compliant with the aforementioned strategies, as it reduces the need for physical prototypes, and also enables the incorporation of ergonomics science and human factors engineering principles earlier in the design process.DHM and simulation has gained importance in the past few years (Phillips and Badler, 1988; van der Meulen and Seidl, 2007; Porter et al., 2004; Lind et al., 2008; Feyen et al., 2000) and allows designers to easily observe and evaluate the interaction of the designed product with a virtual user having specific needs and/or preferences. Simulation offers designers the opportunity to explore how a new system would behave before the real prototype is developed, or how an existing system would perform if altered, thus, reducing development time and costs. Moreover, there are cases where simulation is the only method of verifying that a design concept is acceptable to a prescribed population, since hardware prototypes are not available (Chaffin, 2001).The core concept of this paper is to empower the accessibility and ergonomics of new products by introducing a novel user modeling technique for people with disabilities, based on statistical analysis. The main goal of the paper is the development of accurate Virtual User Models (VUMs) representing specific disabled population groups. Measurements were initially obtained from a total of 90 subjects having the following disabilities: Parkinson's disease, stroke, multiple sclerosis and cerebral palsy. Statistical analysis was performed on these measurements using both parametric and nonparametric regression analysis, as well as a proposed hybrid regression method able to handle small sample sizes by using both real and virtual samples along with information found in the literature. The accuracy and validity of the final regression results were assessed using a new set of measurements coming from 72 different subjects with the same four disabilities.In recent years, the advent of new tools for musculoskeletal simulation has increased the potential for significantly improving the ergonomic design process and ergonomic assessment of designs (Rasmussen et al., 2012). Garg and Kapellusch (2009) summarized the possibility of 2D and 3D biomechanical models for the prevention of work-related musculoskeletal disorders. Musculoskeletal models consist of a set of body segments connected by joints with speciﬁed degrees-of-freedom (dof) and spanned by muscles and ligaments with speciﬁed origins, insertions and pathways (Damsgaard et al., 2006). Indicative is the work of Lee et al. (2009) that introduced a highly-detailed biomechanical model of the human upper body. Its dynamic skeleton comprises 68 bones with 147 jointed degrees of freedom while its muscle model incorporates 814 muscles, each of which is modeled as a piecewise uniaxial Hill-type force actuator. Other significant efforts on biomechanical modeling can be found in (Sifakis et al., 2005; Lee and Terzopoulos, 2006; Sueda et al., 2008; Sartori et al., 2013; Pontonnier et al., 2014).Inverse kinematics plays a key role in the simulation of articulated figures for accessibility assessment purposes and ergonomics. Often these figures contain more than a hundred degrees of freedom, making it almost infeasible for the animator to manipulate every joint to control the figure's posture. With the assistance of an inverse kinematics algorithm, the animator merely gives the desired location of certain chosen points on the body and relies on the algorithm to automatically compute a set of joint angles that satisfy the end-effector constraints (Tolani et al., 2000). Likewise, inverse-dynamics (Kuo, 1998; Blajer et al., 2007) plays also a key role in accessibility assessment of virtual prototypes through simulation, as it enables the computing of the internal joint forces and moments associated with a measured motion (Wagner et al., 2007). Inverse dynamics computes the muscle activation based on a specific task and, although this puts many restrictions on the model, it is computationally much more efficient than forward dynamics (Damsgaard et al., 2006).Special populations of individuals, including people with disabilities and older people, may have capabilities that are quite different even from what is published in some ergonomics guides for people with functional limitations (Chaffin, 2005). Thus, there is an imperative need for research on the development of predictive and valid models providing accurate results regarding the functional limitations of people with disabilities. The two main approaches employed in statistical user modeling are content-based and collaborative (Zukerman and Albrecht, 2001). In the content-based approach, the behaviour of a user is predicted from his or her past behaviour, while in the collaborative approach, a user's behaviour is predicted from the behaviour of other “similar” people. When trying to identify how functional limitations vary over a population having a specific disability, in order to develop accurate VUMs representing people with disabilities, the collaborative approach seems most suitable.Statistical analysis can lead to realistic assumptions about the users' functional limitations and can be a powerful tool for the identification of possible associations between disability parameters. For instance, linear regression modeling revealed that demographic and stroke pathology factors like age, sex, premorbid disability, side of stroke and stroke type as well as visuospatial neglect are not associated with balance disability after stroke, while weakness and sensation are strongly related with balance disability (Tyson et al., 2006). Langenderfer et al. (2006) tried to simulate variability in musculoskeletal parameters on glenohumeral external rotation strength in healthy normals, and in rotator cuff tear cases using a Monte Carlo model. The goal was to determine if variability in musculoskeletal parameters could quantifiably explain variability in glenohumeral external rotation strength. The model predicted measured joint torques for healthy normals, subjects with supraspinatus tears, and subjects with infraspinatus–supraspinatus tears with small error.Moreover, regression models may also lead to forecasts about a person's health state. Khaleeli et al. (2008) used ordinal logistic regression to predict progression in primary progressive multiple sclerosis. Regression analysis identified the following independent variables that predicted progression: male sex, shorter disease duration, slower timed walk at baseline (best overall predictor), deterioration in expanded disability status scale score and reduction in brain volume over 2 years. Vaneckova et al. (2012) used non-parametric and multiple regression models to identify the most reliable predictors of multiple sclerosis and its changes over 9 years. The results of the study revealed corpus callosum atrophy as an accurate predictor of future disability accumulation. Multivariate parametric regression models have also been developed to predict short-term disability in multiple sclerosis (MP) patients using the Expander Disability Status Scale (EDSS) and multimodal sensory EP (mEP) to optimize decisions concerning treatment (Margaritella et al., 2012).Some research efforts focused on the variability in the capability of an individual based on the disability severity. For instance, Carpinella et al. (2007) examined the quantitative description of locomotor symptoms in subjects with mild Parkinson's Disease and results showed a tendency to bradykinetic gait, with reduction of walking speed and cadence. Steultjens et al. (2000) assessed the relationship between joint range of motion (ROM) and disability in patients with osteoarthritis of the hip or knee and even the results showed a clear relationship between joint ROM and disability, it does not apply to all actions of the knee or hip joints. Various scales have been proposed to describe the severity of each disability and be used for functional outcome prediction. In general, such a scale consists of several variables for observing the signs and symptoms, and each variable is categorized for scoring. For instance, the Stroke Impairment Assessment Set (SIAS) (Chino et al., 1996) rates performance on scales of 0–5 or 0–3. SIAS total scores proved useful for stroke outcome prediction (Tsuji et al., 2000). However, a typical limitation of severity scales is that scores can be translated into a range of values, not a single value. In SIAS, for instance, when passive shoulder abduction is limited to less than 45°, a score of 0 is given. A score of 1 means that the joint can be abducted from 45° to 90°, a score of 2 indicates abduction from 90° to 150°, and a score of 3 indicates that abduction of the shoulder beyond 150° is possible.Many efforts have been presented regarding the simulated accessibility assessment of designs using virtual humans. An indicative case is the HADRIAN tool (Marshall et al., 2010), which uses virtual user representations based on measurements of physical characteristics and capabilities of 100 real individuals (Gyi et al., 2004). However, HADRIAN uses these 100 virtual humans as personas and performs accessibility assessment for each of these virtual personas independently. A design may be found accessible or inaccessible for a specific persona. But as this persona represents a single real person and not a population group, the assessment result cannot be generalized, in order to consider the specific design as generally accessible or inaccessible.As increasing the accessibility of a design is usually translated into additional costs and increased development time, due to modifications needed to cover user needs, the need for specifying an accessibility level is crucial for designers and developers. For instance, a car designer may want a new car interior to be accessible at least for 80% of people with Parkinson's disease. The use of VUMs representing specific disabled population groups in simulation conditions can enforce the whole accessibility assessment process, as it can offer designers the opportunity to identify the percentage of the population for which their design is accessible even before the real prototype is developed. However, in order to have realistic simulation results, VUMs representing people with disabilities have to be based on analysis of disability parameters measurements coming from real users.When trying to simulate user interaction with a product to assess its accessibility, a VUM representing an accurate “instance” (i.e. the user's health status at a specific time) of a real corresponding user with disabilities is needed. Information regarding the progression of the disability or actions that have to be performed for the treatment of the patient is usually out of scope when the goal is the automatic simulated accessibility assessment. However, despite the fact that many different approaches have been proposed in the literature regarding statistical analysis of measurements coming from people with disabilities, most of them are focused on the progression of the disabilities and mainly aim to enable accurate predictions that will help physicians with the treatment of patients. This paper proposes a methodology based on statistical analysis that attempts to overcome the aforementioned limitations, focusing on the identification of variability of each disability parameter over the disabled population. Well-established parametric and nonparametric regression methods are used in conjunction with a novel hybrid approach that is able to handle small sample sizes by using both real and virtual samples along with information from the literature. The result of the regression process consists of the estimation of the probability density function (pdf) of each disability parameter. Experimental results showed that the proposed approach enables valid generalizations regarding the characteristics of specific population groups even when the sample size is small, and, thus, has potential to lead to the development of valid and accurate VUMs representing various population groups. More specifically, in 91% of the examined cases (total 117 disability parameters of four disabilities: stroke, Parkinson's disease, cerebral palsy and multiple sclerosis were examined), the proposed analysis led to a valid estimation of the corresponding pdf. Moreover, in 42% of the examined cases, the proposed hybrid regression was found to have greater accuracy than the traditional parametric and nonparametric methods.The proposed regression analysis for disability modeling focuses on the identification of variability of each disability parameter over the disabled population. Even if well-established parametric and nonparametric regression methods can be used for this purpose, the validity of the produced estimations is questionable when the sample size is small. Thus, the approach presented in the following paragraphs uses parametric and nonparametric regression in conjunction with a novel hybrid approach that is able to handle small sample sizes by using both real and virtual samples along with information from the literature. The result of the regression process consists of the estimation of the pdf of each disability parameter.Parametric regression includes the estimation of the parameters of a pdf directly from raw measurements of a disability parameter, coming from real users with disabilities, based on the assumption that data follow a specific distribution. In our regression analysis mechanism, we support parametric regression covering the following set of common distributions: Normal (Frees, 1993), Exponential (Ross, 2009), Lévy (Fama and Roll, 1971), Uniform (Casella and Berger, 2001), Gamma (Mittlböck and Heinzl, 2002) and Gaussian Mixture (Sung, 2004). The pdf of each of the supported distributions is presented in Table 1.Depending on the preferred accuracy of the parametric regression results, an appropriate sample size of raw measurements is needed (Eng, 2003; Daniel and Wayne, 1995; Snedecor and Cohran, 1989).While in parametric regression it is initially assumed that the pdf of a disability parameter follows one of the supported types (described in Table 1), nonparametric regression is not based on any initial assumptions regarding the form of the distribution. Instead, the pdf is constructed only from information derived from measurements coming from real people with disabilities. As in nonparametric regression the real measurements must supply both structure of the model as well as the model estimates, a larger set of measurements is needed compared with parametric regression. Noether (1987) examined the problem of determining the number of raw measurements required to conclude to accurate nonparametric regression results and also proposed a formula for calculating the appropriate sample size of these raw measurements. In our regression analysis mechanism for disability modeling, two common types of nonparametric regression are supported: a) Kernel regression (Li and Lin, 2006) and b) Local Polynomial Multiple Regression (Fox, 2002).An issue of great importance in regression analysis is the size of the sample. In order to have valid regression analysis results, the sample size has to be as large as possible. On the other hand, the task of taking measurements from disabled people is very difficult and requires many resources, resulting in typically limited amounts of available real measurements. Estimating the pdf of a disability parameter using a limited set of subjects could result in great variance. In order to cope with this problem, we introduce the concept of hybrid regression that exploits both information found on the literature regarding the probability distributions followed by disability parameters along with real measurements and a set of virtual measurements. An approach for generating virtual measurements is proposed, and the whole set of measurements (both real and virtual) is then used in the EM algorithm (Lin, 2010) for the estimation of pdf parameters as follows:Letybe a disability parameter. According to the proposed hybrid regression method, the probability distribution followed by the disability parameteryis defined using an ε-contaminated class of priors, namely Γ. The contaminated class controls the balance of the determinate priors,π0'sand other possible priors, q's, through an ε-level of weight (Berger, 1985). The ε-contaminated class is formulated as:(1)Γ={π(y|D)=(1−ε)π0(y|D,βX,σ2)+εq(y)},where D is our initial data set and ε denotes the level of uncertainty.For the definition ofq, we perform parametric regression with all the supported types (presented in Section 2.1) on the real measurements, Yi's, and we choose the pdf with the smaller Mean Squared Error (MSE).Let also variableYbe the response of the simple linear regression model(2)Yi=β0+β1Xi+εi,whereXiare the predictor values,β0is the intercept,β1is the slope andεiare independent and identically distributed random variables fromN(0,σ2).Our initial data setDconsists ofnmeasurements(Yi,Xi),i=1,...n, where:•eachYiis a single real measurementXi's are calculated as follows:○When there is available information in the literature regarding the pdf of the specific disability parameter, we use this pdf to get random measurements. In most cases, information found in the literature reports that a disability parameter follows a Gaussian pdfN(μlit,σlit2)(based on experiments conducted using a number of subjects). In order to use this information while also keeping a relevance betweenYi's andXi's, we select random samples (Xi's) from the reported Gaussian distribution that meet the following formula:When there is no available information in the literature regarding the pdf of the specific disability parameter, we calculate theXi's using the following formula:The data set coming from the real measurements is generally small and, as it has already been mentioned, this may result to inaccurate estimation of the pdf of disability parametery. The use of an ε-contaminated class of priors, Γ, can be a very valuable tool toward addressing the small sample regression problem, as it firstly enables data augmentation (DA). According to the DA technique (Albert and Chib, 1993; Kang, 2007; Tanner, 1996), a new sample setDAconsisting of m pairs(YjA,XjA)is used to augment the present observations.Data setDAis constructed as follows:•XjA's are random samples from the pdf ofXi's. As it has already been mentioned, this pdf is Gaussian with known parameters coming from the literature. When there is no information available in the literature the pdf parameters are calculated as follows:and(6)σX2=1n∑i=1n(Xi−μX)2•YjA's are random samples ofΓ, assuming thatπ0is a Gaussian distribution withandand(10)β00=Y¯−β10X¯At this stage, we have created a set of virtual samplesDA, which can be used in conjunction with the initial setDfor the fine tuning of the parameters ofΓ, which describe the distribution of disability parametery.We then re-defineπ0by performing Gaussian parametric regression on the real measurements (Yi's).The maximum likelihood estimate taking into account both the original and the virtual sample sets (DandDA, respectively) (Lin, 2010) is given by:(11)βMLE,π=argmaxβ∏i=1nπ(yi|D)∏i=n+1n+mπ(yiA|D)Using the EM algorithm for parameter estimation, under the normality assumption, the functionQin the E-step of the EM algorithm has the following form (Lin, 2010):(12)Q=−n2ln(2πσ2)−12σ2∑i=1n(yi−β0−β1xi)2−12σ2∑i=n+1n+m(E[yiA]−β0−β1xiA)2The M-step of the EM algorithm is used to find the valuesβ', or(β0',β1'), that maximizeQ(β'|β). The E-step and M-step of the EM algorithm are executed iteratively until the following condition is achieved (after k iterations):(13)Qk−Qk−1<10−4The combination of ε (uncertainty) and m (number of virtual samples) that results to the minimum MSE is used to form the final Γ. More specifically, the following values are examined for ε: 0, 0.01, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, 0.25, 0.30, 0.40, 0.50 while m is tested for the following values: 0,0.25⋅n,0.5⋅n,0.75⋅n,n,1.5⋅n,2⋅n,2.5⋅n,3⋅n,4⋅n. The MSE is calculated for all possible combinations of the aforementioned ε and m values and the combination of ε and m with the smallest MSE is selected as the most suitable.Moreover, the resultedβ0kandβ1kare used for the optimization of the Gaussian distributionπ0. More specifically, Eq. (7) now becomes(14)μYA=Y¯A=β0k+β1kX¯Aand Eq. (8) becomes(15)σYA2=MSE(D)=1n∑i=1n(yi−β0k−β1kxi)2The pseudocode that describes the proposed hybrid regression method is presented in Table 2.The normalized likelihood is used for choosing the most suitable regression analysis type (among themsupported types) for a specific disability parameter. For its calculation, the leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) method (Kohavi, 1995) is used, as described by Lian (2009). More specifically, using an initial set ofnmeasurements,Yi,i=1,...n, the subset ofn−1measurements,Y1={Y1,...,Yn−1}, is used for the pdf estimation by applying a specific regression type and then the likelihoodpˆjk(Y2),j=1,...,m,k=1,...,nof the one measurement excluded from the initial set,Y2={Yn}, is calculated using the estimated pdf. This procedure is repeated, until each of the measurements is used once as validation data,Y2. Then, the mean value,pˆ¯j(Y2),j=1,...,m, of the resultednlikelihoods is calculated. The aforementioned process is performed for each of the supported regression types and the resulted mean likelihoods are then normalized to sum to 1 as follows:(16)Normalized(pˆ¯j(Y2))=pˆ¯j(Y2)∑k=0mpˆ¯k(Y2),j=1,...,mThe regression type with the highest normalized likelihood is finally selected as the most suitable for the pdf estimation of the specific disability parameter.In order to identify how step length varies over people with multiple sclerosis, 20 subjects were examined. There is available information in the literature reporting that step length of people with multiple sclerosis follows a Gaussian distribution withμ=0.53(in m) andσ=0.09(in m) (Gutierrez et al., 2005).By using the proposed hybrid regression method, as presented in section 2.3, a pdf of type given by Eq. (1) results. More specifically, in this case, π0 is a Gaussian with μ = 0.47737 and σ = 0.0932385, and q is also a Gaussian with μ = 0.480526 and σ = 0.104503, as Gaussian results to the smallest MSE (Table 3). Finally, ε = 0.4 and m = 4n (where n = 20), because this combination of ε and m results to the smallest MSE (Table 4).The plot of the estimated pdf is presented in Fig. 1. Although the pdf resulted from hybrid regression has the form of a Gaussian mixture, the normalized likelihood (described in section 2.4) is greater than in the case of Gaussian mixture parametric regression, as it is also greater than in all other supported regression types (Table 5). This can be justified by considering that, in hybrid regression, information found in the literature is also taken into account and the sample size is larger, due to the virtual samples.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
