@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of indoor slippers on plantar pressure and lower limb EMG activity in older women

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Walking with slippers can increase foot contact area at foot landing.Wearing slippers can redistribute pressure over the plantar of the foot.The EMG differences between the slippers and barefoot were not significant.Soft slippers with a more compliant footbed result in a higher perception of comfort.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Slippers,Plantar pressure,Electromyography,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Open-toe mule slippers are popular footwear worn at home especially by older women. However, their biomechanical effects are still poorly understood. The objective of this study is to therefore evaluate the physical properties of two typical types of open-toe mule slippers and the changes in plantar pressure and lower limb muscle activity of older women when wearing these slippers. Five walking trials have been carried out by ten healthy women. The results indicate that compared to barefoot, wearing slippers results in significant increases in the contact area of the mid-foot regions which lead to plantar pressure redistribution from metatarsal heads 2–3 and the lateral heel to the midfoot regions. However, there is no significant difference in the selected muscle activity across all conditions. The findings enhance our understanding of slipper features associated with changes in biomechanical measures thereby providing the basis of slipper designs for better foot protection and comfort.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Footwear is intended to provide comfort for wearers and offer the first line of protection to the feet. The design features and fit not only contribute to changes in the plantar pressure and dynamic balance during walking, but also influence the development of children's feet. Improper footwear has been linked to foot pain and deformity, and even risk of falls in older people (Helfand, 2003; Janisse, 1995; Menant et al., 2008). Past studies on shoe features have indicated that midsole material hardness, height of the heel collar and outer sole slip resistance are important variables that affect the balance control and postural stability during outdoor walking (Hornbrook et al., 1991; Perry et al., 2007). It is also suggested that wearing footwear that is light in weight and offers minimal support such as flip flops or sandals affects the arch development in children (Carl and Barrett, 2008; Chard et al., 2013; Choi et al., 2013). There is a lower prevalence of flat-feet and a higher rate of normal arches among habitually unshod children compared to habitually shod children (Sachithanandam and Joseph, 1995). Nevertheless, prolonged use of less supportive footwear such as thong style flip-flops that are typically constructed from a rubber template and loosely secured to the feet has been linked to heel pain and other conditions, such as overuse injuries of the tibialis anterior and toes in young adults (Chard et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2013). Due to their flexible thin sole and lack of support, flip-flops also cause an altered gait and unusual stresses as compared to walking in barefoot and/or traditional closed-toe footwear (Shroyer et al., 2010).Due to age-related deterioration of somatosensory feedback and problems with cutaneous mechanoreceptors in the sole of the feet of the elderly, postural stability tends to be affected by the hardness of the footwear sole materials as more rigid soles suggest greater postural stability. While thick and soft soles tend to better accommodate foot posture in older people, they may impair stability by reducing foot position awareness and mechanical stability, thus leading to a high risk of imbalance and falls (Menz et al., 2006; Menant et al., 2008; Qu, 2015). Inappropriate footwear can therefore cause discomfort, foot pain, tissue injury and ulceration due to high plantar pressure, which in turn, may cause gait and balance disturbances, which are predispositions of falls in older people (Mickle et al., 2010). On the other hand, footwear for the elderly must be appropriate for the location and activity being undertaken, which would assist the force transfer of the foot during the gait cycle and during stance and even accommodating foot deformities to reduce pain and discomfort (Helfand, 2003). To enhance comfort, footwear worn indoors tends to be softer and less supportive than those worn outdoors. Despite the fact that footwear can provide support for the lower extremity muscles and foot protection from injuries (Menant et al., 2008; Murley et al., 2009; Perry et al., 2007), many older people may prefer walking barefoot or in socks for comfort at the risk of a ten-fold increase in falling (Koepsell et al., 2004; Menant et al., 2008; Mickle et al., 2010). However, up to now, there has been a scarcity of scientific work which can offer solutions to older people for comfortable and safe footwear that can be worn at home. Biomechanical studies on indoor footwear of different design features compared to barefoot walking are very scarce.As compared with thong style footwear, open-toe slip-on mule slippers (i.e. one strap across the distal-dorsal foot) are a popular type of household footwear because of their convenience and comfort, which is especially true for older women. They are primarily flat in shape and made of leather, foam rubber, textiles, plastic or leather and are loosely secured to the feet. However, their lack of fixation and rigidity fail to control heel motion and maintain postural stability. Further evaluation of footwear characteristics for older people has also indicated that due to age-related loss of muscle strength and alteration of muscle activity, inappropriate footwear which leads to increased muscle activity patterns elicits greater metabolic cost, and potentially increases the risks of fatigue and fall (Candow and Chilibeck, 2005; Hortobágyi et al., 2011; Marques et al., 2013; Mickle et al., 2010). To the best of our knowledge, there is a lack of investigation on the effects of indoor slippers on plantar pressure and lower limb muscle activity in older people. Previous studies on flip flops or sandals (Price et al., 2013, 2014) have mainly focused on gait modification and the joint range of motion in young adults. These studies have discussed lower limb muscle activity, but the influence of footwear features and material properties on muscle activity and plantar pressure has not been investigated. An understanding of the impact of footwear on plantar pressure and the lower limb muscle activity is very important in terms of the consideration of material and design of indoor slippers for older people. Hence, the purpose of this study is to evaluate the effects of two typical types of open-toe slip-on mule slippers with different material properties on plantar pressure and the lower limb muscle activity of older women when they are walking as compared to a barefoot condition.We hypothesize that the design features of slippers and their material properties are associated with changes in plantar pressure patterns and level of muscle activity as compared to the barefoot condition during walking. Walking in slippers made of either soft or hard footbed material would yield different values of plantar pressure and muscle activity as compared with the barefoot condition. Soft footbed material with higher compressibility would allow better pressure-attenuating capability but also require higher muscle activity to maintain postural stability as compared to more rigid footbed materials.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
