@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Stimulated recall methodology for assessing work system barriers and facilitators in family-centered rounds in a pediatric hospital

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Parents and healthcare team members who reviewed video records of their bedside rounds participated in the analysis of work system barriers and facilitators in family-centered rounds.The stimulated recall methodology was positively received by parents and healthcare team members.The stimulated recall methodology allowed the identification of a wide range of work system barriers and facilitators in family-centered rounds.Stimulated recall methodology can be used to improve healthcare work systems and processes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Work system,Bedside round in a pediatric hospital,Stimulated recall and participatory ergonomics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Human factors and ergonomics methods are needed to redesign healthcare processes and support patient-centered care, in particular for vulnerable patients such as hospitalized children. We implemented and evaluated a stimulated recall methodology for collective confrontation in the context of family-centered rounds. Five parents and five healthcare team members reviewed video records of their bedside rounds, and were then interviewed using the stimulated recall methodology to identify work system barriers and facilitators in family-centered rounds. The evaluation of the methodology was based on a survey of the participants, and a qualitative analysis of interview data in light of the work system model of Smith and Carayon (1989, 2001). Positive survey feedback from the participants was received. The stimulated recall methodology identified barriers and facilitators in all work system elements. Participatory ergonomics methods such as the stimulated recall methodology allow a range of participants, including parents and children, to participate in healthcare process improvement.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Patient-centered care, defined as “care that is respectful of and responsive to individual patient preferences, needs, and values, and ensures that patient values guide all clinical decisions” (page 49), is one of the six dimensions of healthcare quality identified by the US Institute of Medicine (2001). Engaging patients in care is critical for quality of care as well as patient safety. Hospitalized children who often rely on their parents and other family members to participate in care are at high risk for a range of safety problems (Landrigan, 2005), including medication errors and preventable adverse drug events (Kaushal et al., 2001). Thus, engaging both pediatric patients and their families during care processes is critical for improving the quality and safety of care (Committee on Drugs & Committee on Hospital Care, 2003). In the inpatient setting, family-centered rounds (FCR) is a complex care process where “the patient and family share in the control of the management plan as well as in the evaluation of the process itself” (Sisterhen et al., 2007). FCR are one type of daily, bedside, multidisciplinary rounds where care providers meet to communicate and make daily and discharge care decisions by engaging family members in the rounding process (Committee on Hospital Care & Institute for Patient- Family-Centered Care, 2012; Gurses and Xiao, 2006). However, various system barriers such as disruption of workflow, decreased efficiency, and rounding team size can hinder family engagement in FCR (Carayon et al., 2011). Human factors and ergonomics (HFE) has been suggested as a key discipline for assessing and improving safety in the pediatric inpatient setting (Scanlon et al., 2006), as well as improving care processes and enhancing family-centered care (Wilson, 2010). HFE methods can be used to identify the system factors that hinder or facilitate patient-centered care, in particular in pediatric hospitals. In this research, we use the work system model of Smith and Carayon (1989, 2000) to characterize the barriers and facilitators to family engagement in the specific process of FCR.Various HFE methods have been developed to assess work system barriers and facilitators, such as surveys, interviews and observations (Wilson and Corlett, 2005). Participatory ergonomics methods aimed at engaging ‘workers’ in the analysis of their activities allow the HFE professional a deeper level of analysis: the workers can reflect on their activities and provide in-depth information about their thoughts and opinions. Falzon, Mollo and colleagues (Faye and Falzon, 2009; Mollo and Falzon, 2004) have developed a range of ‘confrontation’ methods where individual workers review and assess videotapes of their own activities (individual auto-confrontation) or their colleagues' activities (allo-confrontation), or a group of workers reviews and assesses their own activities or the activities of others (collective confrontation). When work is collaborative and involves multiple people on a team, the members of the team can review the videotapes of their team activities and identify work system barriers and facilitators to team cooperation, coordination and communication. This type of collective confrontation uses the stimulated recall methodology familiar to qualitative researchers (Derosier et al., 2008; Dershimer and Conover, 1989).Stimulated recall (or confrontation) methodology has been used in many domains, including manufacturing (Derosier et al., 2008; Mollo and Falzon, 2004), farming (Mollo and Falzon, 2004), health care (Antonsson et al., 2008; Hansebo and Kihlgren, 2001; Mollo and Falzon, 2008; Skovdahl et al., 2004), education (Dershimer and Conover, 1989; Lyle, 2003), and consulting (Lyddon et al., 2006). For instance, Faye and Falzon (2009) used individual auto-confrontation to assess automotive manufacturing worker self-monitoring of performance and characterize strategies developed by workers. Another study involving a group of oncology practitioners making therapeutic decisions used allo-confrontation to understand the effects of collective confrontation on individual decision-making activities and collective knowledge construction and development (Mollo and Falzon, 2008). Mollo and Falzon (2004) used both auto-confrontation and allo-confrontation methods to assess saffron producers' technical knowledge based on their actual work practices. The strengths of stimulated recall methodology include ecological validity (Derosier et al., 2008; Lyle, 2003; Mollo and Falzon, 2004), assessment of non-observable cognitive processes (Dershimer and Conover, 1989; Elderkin-Thompson and Waitzkin, 1999; Faye and Falzon, 2009; Lyddon et al., 2006; Lyle, 2003; Skovdahl et al., 2004), enhancement of worker knowledge regarding their own work activities (Antonsson et al., 2008; Dershimer and Conover, 1989; Hansebo and Kihlgren, 2001; Mollo and Falzon, 2008), and assessment of the collaborative process through collective confrontation (Lyddon et al., 2006; Mollo and Falzon, 2008). The weaknesses of stimulated recall include time needed to implement the methodology (Dershimer and Conover, 1989; Mollo and Falzon, 2004), challenges in facilitating knowledge sharing among participants (Dershimer and Conover, 1989; Mollo and Falzon, 2004; Skovdahl et al., 2004), possible discomfort experienced by participants (Hansebo and Kihlgren, 2001; Lyle, 2003), and possible biases introduced by interviewers (Lyle, 2003).In this study, we implemented and evaluated the use of a stimulated recall methodology for collective confrontation in the context of FCR. The objective of the stimulated recall methodology was to identify work system barriers and facilitators in FCR from the viewpoint of the rounding participants. Stimulated recall that combines directed content analysis with video-recording review allows participants to identify cognitive processes that are not physically observable (Faye and Falzon, 2009; Mollo and Falzon, 2004). In our study, stimulated recall allowed families and healthcare team members to become analysts of their own activity. When families and healthcare team members analyze their own activity, they can reflect on their own practices during FCR and identify not only what they do, but also the work system factors that either facilitate or hinder family engagement during FCR.The work system model developed by Smith and Carayon (Carayon, 2009; Carayon and Smith, 2000; Smith and Carayon-Sainfort, 1989) and its extension to healthcare and patient safety (SEIPS or Systems Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety model) (Carayon et al., 2006, 2014) were used as the conceptual framework for identifying system barriers and facilitators. The aim of this paper was to demonstrate how the stimulated recall methodology can be used to assess work system barriers and facilitators to family engagement in the FCR process.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
