@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The inter-rater reliability of Strain Index and OCRA Checklist task assessments in cheese processing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Inter-rater reliability was good to excellent for OCRA Checklist risk assessments.Inter-rater reliability was moderate to good for Strain Index risk assessments.Individual assessment task variables were less reliable than risk indexes.The SI and OCRA Checklist are reliable methods for practitioners and researchers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Exposure assessment,Inter-rater reliability,Upper extremity musculoskeletal disorders,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purpose of this study was to characterize the inter-rater reliability of two physical exposure assessment methods of the upper extremity, the Strain Index (SI) and Occupational Repetitive Actions (OCRA) Checklist. These methods are commonly used in occupational health studies and by occupational health practitioners. Seven raters used the SI and OCRA Checklist to assess task-level physical exposures to the upper extremity of workers performing 21 cheese manufacturing tasks. Inter-rater reliability was characterized using a single-measure, agreement-based intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). Inter-rater reliability of SI assessments was moderate to good (ICC = 0.59, 95% CI: 0.45–0.73), a similar finding to prior studies. Inter-rater reliability of OCRA Checklist assessments was excellent (ICC = 0.80, 95% CI: 0.70–0.89). Task complexity had a small, but non-significant, effect on inter-rater reliability SI and OCRA Checklist scores. Both the SI and OCRA Checklist assessments possess adequate inter-rater reliability for the purposes of occupational health research and practice. The OCRA Checklist inter-rater reliability scores were among the highest reported in the literature for semi-quantitative physical exposure assessment tools of the upper extremity. The OCRA Checklist however, required more training time and time to conduct the risk assessments compared to the SI.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There are many semi-quantitative and observational physical risk assessment tools available to occupational health researchers and practitioners (Takala et al., 2010). The analyst should select a method based on the practicality, validity, reliability, and purpose of the risk assessment (David, 2005; Kilbom, 1994; Li and Buckle, 1999; Takala et al., 2010). Most semi-quantitative and observational tools are practical alternatives to more intensive (in terms of cost, labor, and time) biomechanical instrumentation (i.e., direct measures) (David, 2005; Kilbom, 1994). The most comprehensive semi-quantitative assessments aim to precisely quantify worker exposure to physical musculoskeletal disorder (MSD) risk factors, such as the Strain Index (SI), the Occupational Repetitive Actions (OCRA) methods, or the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Lifting Equation. However, a common limitation with most of these tools is that their underlying models assume that the job exposures under evaluation result from simple task completion (Garg and Kapellusch, 2011).Simple tasks are typified by repetitive, single-exertion work activity performed with limited postural variability. Yet, most repetitive industrial tasks are complex, i.e., they are comprised of subtasks (or work elements) which vary in their force, frequency and postural demands (Bao et al., 2009b). Several authors have reported the validity and reliability of risk assessments completed using semi-quantitative measures (Bonfiglioli et al., 2013; Garg et al., 2012; Occhipinti and Colombini, 2007; Spielholz et al., 2008; Stephens et al., 2006; Stevens et al., 2004; Waters et al., 1998), but these studies have not characterized how task-complexity affects assessment results. Additionally, the inter-rater reliability of OCRA Checklist assessments has not been characterized using standard statistical techniques. The purpose of the present study was to characterize the inter-rater reliability of SI and OCRA Checklist assessments of simple and complex cheese production tasks. The present study included these two exposure assessment tools because they comprehensively model physical exposure to upper extremity (UE) MSD risks differently, and occupational health professionals across the globe advocate for their use (Kapellusch et al., 2013; Occhipinti and Colombini, 2012). Additionally, the choice of the SI and OCRA Checklist for use in the present study was based on the type of work assessed, the research questions addressed and the author's experience with these assessment tools.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
