@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The use of virtual reality and physical tools in the development and validation of ease of entry and exit in passenger vehicles

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Inconsistent entry strategies were observed in a CAVE virtual environment.The CAVE needs development to support design for ease of entry and exit.Representation of vehicular hard points is necessary for optimising entry and exit.Various combinations of methods are required at different stages of vehicle development.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Entry exit,Automotive,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ease of entry and exit is important for creating a positive first impression of a car and increasing customer satisfaction. Several methods are used within vehicle development to optimise ease of entry and exit, including CAD reviews, benchmarking and buck trials. However, there is an industry trend towards digital methods to reduce the costs and time associated with developing physical prototypes. This paper reports on a study of entry strategy in three properties (buck, car, CAVE) in which inconsistencies were demonstrated by people entering a vehicle representation in the CAVE. In a second study industry practitioners rated the CAVE as worse than physical methods for identifying entry and exit issues, and having lower perceived validity and reliability. However, the resource issues associated with building bucks were recognised. Recommendations are made for developing the CAVE and for combinations of methods for use at different stages of a vehicle's development.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Entering and exiting a vehicle are complex motions that require control and strength (Gransitzki, 1994). These motions create high biomechanical stresses from bending, turning, twisting, stretching and leaning (Bhise, 2011). Previous research has shown that car designers and engineers need to pay particular attention to the ease of entry and exit for several reasons. This is firstly because vehicle entry is the initial interaction the customer has with the vehicle and is a key influence on purchasing decision (Causse et al., 2012; Tetlock, 1983; Zhan et al., 2013). Secondly, entry and exit requires attention due to the number of problems drivers have getting in and out of cars. In a large postal questionnaire survey of older and younger drivers in Great Britain, 25% of older drivers and 14% of younger drivers reported problems entering cars, while 32% of older and 18% of younger drivers reported problems getting out of cars (Herriotts, 2005). Thirdly, minimising the demands and stresses that occur on entry and exit can improve customer satisfaction (Herriotts and Johnson, 2013). However, car design is a compromise between several vehicle attributes and entry and exit may not always be prioritised in the trade-off between packaging, styling, safety and other aspects (Koester and Hamilton, 1994). For example to improve off-road capability the step up height for a sports-utility vehicle (SUV) may be higher than optimal for customers when entering the vehicle; or the low roof of a sports car may cause customers to stoop or to drop down into the vehicle as priority is given to sports car styling and aerodynamics.A variety of methods are used to assess the suitability of a design for the customer. These are described below in the vehicle development process. At the beginning the ergonomist sets dimensional targets to support ease of entry and exit. These targets are based on a numerical understanding and benchmarking of current and competitor vehicles. This initial data is then used to generate a “buck”, an early basic physical model of the target vehicle (Fig. 1). This can then be used for expert reviews and for user trials with participants representing the target population to validate and develop ease of entry and exit (Andreoni et al., 2004; Sternini and Cerrone, 1995). As the design develops, the quality and fidelity of the buck increases, followed by the production of a prototype vehicle, at which point the entry and exit condition can be validated with confidence. This traditional process is heavily reliant on physical properties that are expensive and time consuming to produce (Ait El Menceur et al., 2008; Laughery, 2005; Siegel and Söderman, 2005). In addition, traditional user trials with significant sized groups of people are cost and time intensive (Pudlo et al., 2006). However, this process has been validated in numerous car companies and is known to result in vehicles that accommodate the range of drivers and passengers (Herriotts and Johnson, 2013).The vehicle development process is under increasing pressure as product life cycles are shortening and automotive manufacturers today are faced with the challenge of bringing new products to market in shorter intervals (Bernard et al., 2012; Schrader et al., 2002). To achieve these aims, it is critical to evaluate the customer experience very early in the vehicle design process, which can also reduce the costs of design changes as the development cycle progresses (Laughery, 2005; Monnier et al., 2006). There is a general trend in design and engineering to reduce the total development costs and time by using computer aided engineering technologies. A robust virtual tool can reduce the need for expensive physical prototypes (Hanson et al., 2006; Jayaram et al., 2001). Furthermore, with virtual prototyping more design iterations are possible within a shorter time (Wang, 2002).Digital vehicle models and digital human models are used to assess the ergonomics of vehicles during the early phases of design, providing simulation of the physical interactions between target customers and the vehicle (Chateauroux and Wang, 2010). Digital Human Modelling (DHM) uses digital manikins that can be changed in size and shape to represent the target range of users. DHM is used throughout the automotive industry to evaluate driving position, vision, reach and posture, but has not traditionally been used for entry and exit. There has however been a recent focus on research into DHM for entry and exit (e.g. Chateauroux and Wang, 2010; Cherednichenko et al., 2006; Kawachi et al., 2005; Monnier et al., 2006; Reed and Huang, 2008). With DHM the manikin can be moved as a real person moves, but cannot reliably register discomfort or satisfaction. As entry and exit is a dynamic process, and as human behaviour is so complex, people vary in the movement strategies used when getting in and out of a vehicle. Currently DHM tools cannot predict these complex strategies.Monnier et al. (2006) presented a DHM system for evaluating entry and exit using motion capture to digitise the movements of 23 people entering and exiting four different car models. They then identified the movement strategies used and significant vehicle parameters before applying an algorithm to simulate motion and subjective discomfort ratings for individuals and the subject population. However, Monnier et al.'s (2006) system lacks validation and further work is required on the discomfort prediction, which currently excludes dynamic parameters. Moreover, the system initially requires data capture from real people using bucks or cars, which may limit the benefits. Other authors have also had difficulty in using DHM to predict real world behaviour. Reed and Huang (2008) developed a framework for control of complex motions in DHM, such as entry and exit. While the authors were able to model different entry strategies using the framework, it lacked the ability to predict subjective responses. Reed and Huang (2008) concluded that for DHM to be a valid tool there must be a documented relationship between kinematic or dynamic variables and subjective responses. This has not yet been validated for complex movements such as entry and exit.In addition to DHM, Virtual Reality (VR) CAVEs are now being used in automotive design. A VR CAVE is a semi-immersive environment where images are projected on to three walls and the ceiling (Fig. 2). A user wears 3D glasses to enable depth perception in the environment (Cruz-Neira et al., 1992). When the user moves in the CAVE, his or her head position is tracked in order to present the images in real-time and to provide the correct perspective (Rebelo et al., 2010). A CAVE has the advantages of a large field-of-view, freedom to look around, and a lack of intrusion from the interface (Cruz-Neira et al., 1992). However, accurate depth perception is essential for ergonomics assessments and subjective perceptions of distance have been reported to be less in virtual environments than those in the real world (Klein et al., 2009; Renner et al., 2013). This has been attributed to differences in measurement methods, technical factors (e.g. limited field of view, low rendering quality), compositional factors (e.g. rich or sparse virtual environment, use of texture) and human factors (e.g. experience with VR, sense of presence). Research to understand the impact of these differences on applications of virtual environments is lacking (Renner et al., 2013). Additionally, convergence/accommodation conflict can occur where visual objects in the CAVE appear at a variety of stereoscopic depths despite being presented on the screen at the same accommodation plane (Baitch and Smith, 2000). In addition to depth perception issues, this conflict can lead to visual discomfort or simulator sickness (Chen et al., 2013; Häkkinen et al., 2006; IJsselsteijn et al., 2000).The use of CAVEs has been analysed in a number of applications including driving simulators (Kim et al., 2005; Mollenhauer et al., 2004) and other aspects of automotive ergonomics including reach and visibility (Reuding and Meil, 2004). Reuding and Meil (2004) conducted a study to investigate the reliability of the CAVE for in-vehicle reach and visual task performance by comparing data against those obtained from a physical buck. They concluded that to obtain reliable results the CAVE must be used as a comparative tool, i.e. design option A vs. design option B, due to differences in performance between the CAVE and the real world.While VR CAVEs are the subject of academic research (e.g. Juan and Perez, 2009; Repperger et al., 2003; Whalstrom et al., 2010) little work has been done on their acceptability for entry and exit work by automotive industry professionals. For entry and exit activities to occur in a virtual world there must still be some hardware (e.g. steering wheel, pedals, and seat) as a participant cannot achieve a driving position in free space. The use of this hardware poses potential issues, such as depth perception differences between virtual and real objects as a result of accommodation conflicts in which the accommodation of the virtual image is always at the virtual display whereas accommodation of the physical object will be closer (Drascic and Milgram, 1996). Hardware may also cause obscuration of the virtual world, issues due to registration accuracy and accommodation errors, as found in previous research into the use of haptic devices represented in virtual environments (Olsson et al., 2012). Even the presence of the participant's own body in the virtual environments can cause occlusion issues (Bouguila et al., 2000), for example, the hand could obscure the virtual image of the cant rail, but the cant rail cannot obscure the hand, as it obviously would in the real world. Occlusion is considered by Drascic and Milgram (1996) as the strongest indicator of depth because of its dominance over all other cues. That is, despite any ambiguity in the environment, in the real world objects which are far away cannot obscure those which are closer. The impact of these issues on the use of CAVEs for optimising entry and exit is unknown. Finally, research in the field of virtual reality in automotive design has often focussed on validity (e.g. Dymott et al., 2003; Lorenz et al., 2008), which is only one criterion for the success of a measure (Wilson, 2005). Ergonomists have previously been criticised for accepting a method too readily without considering its merits (Annett, 2002). Other criteria include utility, resources and system stability (Reuding and Meil, 2004) which are important to the success of any method.Importantly, the nature of the design process changes from concept to prototyping, therefore it is likely that more than one method has use for optimising entry and exit. To the knowledge of the authors, no work has analysed against a range of criteria, methods which may have use for optimising ease of entry and exit, nor looked at which tools should be used at different stages of the vehicle development process. Use of the methods is dependent upon their acceptability to industry practitioners.•To understand the utility of the CAVE for optimising vehicle entry and exit in comparison to a real car and to a “buck” – the current industry standardTo investigate industrial practitioners'/stakeholders' perceptions of methods for optimising entry and exitTo identify when in the vehicle development process tools for optimising entry and exit should be used.As mentioned, little previous work has been conducted to investigate the utility of a CAVE for optimising ease of entry and exit. Therefore, the first study aimed to compare the entry experience of occupants using a CAVE 3D immersive stereoscopic environment with the corresponding real production car. That is, study 1 aimed to determine if a virtual reality CAVE is a valid tool for assessing ease of vehicle entry. Although the study focussed on ease of entry, the authors believe that the issues raised in the ease of entry study should be representative of both entry and exit.As the current approach for optimising entry and exit within Jaguar Land Rover relies on vehicle bucks, this condition was also included in the study as a second comparison to the CAVE. While the buck is typically geometrically accurate to the design intent at the time of its construction, it uses materials which differ to the real car (e.g. wood rather than metal or plastic mouldings) – Fig. 1. Thus, it was pertinent to assess the validity of both the CAVE and the buck as tools for optimising ease of entry and exit.It is known that people enter cars using a number of strategies but that individuals display stability of strategy within a vehicle (Ait El Menceur et al., 2008; Johansson, 2002; Rigel, 2005) and could change their strategy when entering a vehicle with a different geometry (Ait El Menceur et al., 2008; Cherednichenko et al., 2006). This stability of strategy would therefore be expected across a real car and a valid model of that car; i.e. CAVE or buck. The stability of entry method was used as an indicator of tool validity. In fact, many other measures (e.g. number of contact points) would be impossible to record consistently across the three different properties, particularly as the visualisation of the CAVE is regenerated based on the head position of the person wearing the tracked glasses and impact would therefore not be visible to an observer.It was hypothesised that the ingress strategy of each participant remains the same across the physical vehicle and CAVE conditions for Car A, and the vehicle buck and CAVE conditions for Car B, and that individuals' ingress strategy remains the same within a condition.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study has shown that a physical representation of a design (a buck) can yield consistent and valid entry strategies, which were not observed in a CAVE 3D immersive environment. This was attributed to the lack of physical geometry in the CAVE which is present in bucks and in real cars. Industry stakeholders from an automotive company also rated the CAVE worse than physical methods for identifying entry and exit issues, and having lower perceived validity and reliability than physical methods. The digital methods were in general weaker for communicating issues, indicating the importance of the experience of entry and exit for supporting the design process. However, there is a time and cost associated with building bucks. To best optimise entry and exit various combinations of methods are required at different stages of the vehicle development process. While the CAVE has proven use in other applications (e.g. driving simulators, exterior vision) it requires development before it can be used to provide the customer experience of entry and exit.