@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Vibration and impulsivity analysis of hand held olive beaters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analysis of the vibrational behaviour of three hand held olive beaters.Analysis of frequency weighted and unweighted acceleration signals at the handles.The obtained impulsiveness and crest factors were similar to industrial tools.Different weighting curves are useful for the beaters vibration analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
HAV,Impulsivity,Olive harvester,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To provide more effective evaluations of hand arm vibration syndromes caused by hand held olive beaters, this study focused on two aspects: the acceleration measured at the tool pole and the analysis of the impulsivity, using the crest factor. The signals were frequency weighted using the weighting curve Whas described in the ISO 5349-1 standard. The same source signals were also filtered by the Wh-blfilter (ISO/TS 15694), because the weighting filter Wh(unlike the Wh-blfilter) could underestimate the effect of high frequency vibration on vibration-induced finger disorders. Ten (experienced) male operators used three beater models (battery powered) in the real olive harvesting condition. High vibration total values were obtained with values never lower than 20 m−2. Concerning the crest factor, the values ranged from 5 to more than 22. This work demonstrated that the hand held olive beaters produced high impulsive loads comparable to the industry hand held tools.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The problem of the high vibration levels to the hand-arm system using vibrating tools and machines has been well known for many years. Epidemiologic aspects of the relationship between vibration exposure and human response have been investigated (Gemne, 1997; Bovenzi, 1998; Lundborg et al., 1998; Bovenzi, 2005).The prolonged use of hand held vibrating equipment can lead to the hand arm vibration syndrome (HAVS) that refers to a combination of neurological, muscular, circulatory, bone and joint disorders (Griffin et al., 2003). Power or pneumatic drills in industry, chainsaws, beaters, brush cutters in agro-forestry may be the cause of HAVS. It is not completely well known how vibration causes the condition of the HAVS. Neurological and circulatory diseases are, for example, probably due to slight but repeated injuries to the small nerves and blood vessels in the fingers (Stoyneva et al., 2003).The main parameters interested in the HAVS evaluation (as requested by the European Directive 2002/44/EC) are the vibration magnitudes (expressed as vibration total values) and the daily exposure time. The vibration total values are calculated using the ISO 5349-1, 2001 standard, to frequency weight the signals through the weighting curve Wh.Many investigations have been addressed to study the magnitude of the vibration total values and the duration of the exposure (or both of them) in different work environments (Pyykkö et al., 1976; Palmer et al., 2000; Gerhardsson et al., 2005; McDowell et al., 2008; McCallig et al., 2010). Acceleration peaks generated by tools may also be further parameter influencing the harmfulness exposure to vibration.It can be critical the presence of high peaks in the acceleration signal (i. e. the impulse character of vibration in some occupations), because high-frequency components may be hazardous in the aetiology of vibration syndrome. The vibration impulsivity could create shock waves in tissues and these waves may be transmitted at higher velocity and to larger body areas than non impulsive vibration (Pyykkö, 1986; Starck, 1984).In the case of the whole body vibration evaluation, the ISO 2631-1, 1997 standard states that the r.m.s. (root mean square) method is the basis for measurements for crest factors (CF) less than 9. In cases where the basic evaluation method may underestimate the effects of vibration (high crest factors, occasional shocks, transient vibration), alternative measures should also be determined. The standard proposes two alternative measures: the running r.m.s. or the fourth power vibration dose value.The crest factor is not considered in the hand arm vibration exposure, also if some studies were addressed to understand if it was appropriate to evaluate the severity of the hand transmitted vibration as peaks or r.m.s. accelerations (Louda et al., 1994; Ye et al., 2012).Some investigations on the peaks presence in acceleration signals were conducted. These works were mainly addressed to the industrial sector (Engstrom and Dandanell, 1986; Starck and Pyykkö, 1986; Riedel and Münch, 1998; Burström and Sörensson, 1999; McDowell et al., 2008), while few researches on the agro-forestry area (Schäfer et al., 1984; Nakamura et al., 1998) were carried out. This is mostly due to the misperception that the farmers and the agro-forestry operators use few vibrating equipment and, whereas they use them, the exposure time is negligible. In the last years, instead, new tools generating high acceleration levels and impulsiveness, comparable to the construction and mining sectors, have been manufactured: among these equipment there are the hand held olive shakers driven by a little two stroke (or pneumatic or electric) engine.The hand held olive harvesters have a low weight (from 2 to 15 kg, the electrics are the lightest). The main causes of the elevated vibration levels caused by these machines are their lightness, the high tangential velocity of their sticks tips and the pole features (material, diameter and length, Manetto et al., 2012).The beater mass must be low because the operator inserts the beater sticks into the foliage about 30–40 times/minute for more than 4 h/day.The high tangential velocity of sticks tips is also necessary to detach the olives. These fruits have a negligible mass (e.g. the fruits of the Leccino cultivar have an average mass of 1.4 g) but a great force is necessary to detached them from the branches (the average fruit removal force for the Leccino is 2.8 N), as Lavee et al. (1982) studied.The result of the two components (tool lightness and high detachment force) is the high acceleration level, which fixes around 15–25 ms2 (Monarca et al., 2007; Pascuzzi et al., 2009; Cerruto et al., 2009; Aiello et al., 2010; Çakmak et al., 2011; Deboli et al., 2014).It is therefore interesting to analyse the vibrational behaviour of these machines not only considering the vibration total level, but also the frequency analysis of the signals, as requested by the Annex F (Informative) of the ISO 5349-1.This standard requires to report (unweighted) one-third-octave band r.m.s. acceleration amplitudes on the frequency range of the measurement system, in addition to frequency weighted magnitudes. Unfortunately nobody applies this standard request.Aim of this work was to analyse the acceleration signals in field operations using three different types of electric hand held olive shakers used by ten male operators.These hand held harvesters have an electric engine and are called beaters: they have a head with oscillating carbon fiber sticks and the harvesting is obtained by direct impact of sticks on olives or by vibration transmitted to the willowy branches.The values analysis was carried out weighting the signals with both the standardized frequency weighting filter Wh(ISO 5349-1) and the band limiting weighting filter Wh-bh. The latter is a weighting filter with a flat frequency range between the cut-off frequency of 6.3 Hz and 1250 Hz. The Wh-blfilter is a band limiting component of Wh, to verify the real frequency distribution of the vibration energy content. Dong et al. (2004), Bovenzi (2012), Brammer and Pitts (2012) and Pitts et al. (2012) found that the standardized frequency weighting filter Whcould underestimate the effect of high frequency vibration on vibration-induced finger disorders. It could be therefore interesting to analyse vibration signals in a wider range of frequency, without filtering action.The high velocity of the beater sticks during the work and the machine lightness were moreover foreboding of impulsive loads caused by the sticks impacts against the willowy branches.The tested beaters were of three different manufacturers (technical characteristics are reported in Table 1): they were all electric machines, beater type, battery powered (12 V) with an head equipped with oscillating sticks (Fig. 1). Only the beater #3 featured an electronic control to decrease the number of beats per minute when it was in the idling state. The olive beaters do not have handles. The terms ‘front’ and ‘rear’ used in this article, refer to the operator's hands position on the beater pole (Fig. 3(b)).The electric beaters were initially used in laboratory in the idling state to acquire some functional parameters (acceleration and velocity) along a single stick, as peak values.A mono-axial accelerometer (Brüel & Kjær 4374, miniature piezoelectric charge accelerometer 0.65 g of mass), fixed with cyanoacrylate adhesive, was placed 1 cm from the tip of a stick (Fig. 2), with the X axis along the vertical line and three acquisitions of 20’ each were performed. Combining the peak acceleration with the fundamental frequency of the stick motion, the tip stick speed was then obtained.The field tests were carried out during an olive harvesting campaign in Northern Italy, in a site located at Verzuolo (Cuneo, Italy), property of the Environment and Agriculture Institute ‘P. Barbero’, with Leccino olive variety. The coordinates of the orchard are 44° 35′ 45,60″ N and 7° 29′ 4,56″ E.Ten healthy men, who were regularly exposed to vibration, were involved in the olive harvesting. The mean age of the subjects was 40.8 years (range 27–63 years), the weight 81 kg (range 65–95 kg) and the height 177 cm (range 170–184 cm).According to the EN ISO 20643, 2008 standard, two tri-axial accelerometers ICP (Integrate Current Preamplifier) by PCB (SEN020 model, 1 mV/g sensitivity, 10 g mass) were fastened on the harvester pole (EN ISO 20643/A1, 2012) by metallic screw clamps.The signals from accelerometers were stored on the laptop using a National Instruments data acquisition card (NI 9234). Later the data were processed using the LabView software (National Instruments, 2012).The rear accelerometer was fixed near the power switch positioned at the end of the pole, where there is the hand of the right-handed operator. The front accelerometer was positioned according to operator's anthropometric characteristics (Fig. 3(b)).Axes directions are reported in Fig. 3(a). The measurement chain was previously calibrated.DC-shift presence (as suggested by Maeda and Dong, 2004 and Paddan, 2004) was verified. The 1/3 octave analysis did not reveal any low frequency energy.Three series of five consecutive tests were carried out for each examined beaters and for each operator, both at front and at the rear hand position in the idling state and during the field work.In the idling state all measurements were carried out with the beaters switched on and hold by the operator without working.The vibration total values analysis was performed both at idling and work conditions because, as the CEN/TR 15350 , 2013 states, the fruit harvesters are used for 1/7 of their time in an idling condition (ignition, displacement, rest) and for 6/7 at the full load (work condition).The acceleration were acquired for each beater and for each hand position (front and rear), of the ten operators and then separately analysed The acquisition time for each test was at least 2 min, to obtain a stabilized signal.The vibration data were processed in order to obtain the one-third octave bands and these signals were therefore weighted using the weighting curve Whas descrbed in the ISO 5349-1 standard.The vibration total value (ahv) was calculated as the square root of the sum of the squares (r.m.s.) ahwx, ahwyand ahwzalong the individual axes (Eq. (1)):(1)ahv=ahwx2+ahwy2+ahwz2The previous one-third octave bands were also weighted by the Wh-blfilter (as explained in the ISO/TS 15694 , 2004 standard) to obtain the flat weighted ahx, ahyand ahzaccelerations (Fig. 3(a) for the reference coordinate system).The vibration total value (ahf) for each tri-axial accelerometer was then calculated using the following formula (McDowell et al., 2008; Bovenzi, 2012) (Eq. (2)):(2)ahf=ahx2+ahy2+ahz2Considering the high acceleration values of these machines and their lightness, the crest factor CFh (h is for hand), was calculated for the field tests.The crest factor is defined as the ratio of peak values to the average r.m.s value and indicates how extreme the peaks are in a waveform. High crest factors are a sign of the presence of peaks and impulses.The ISO 5349-1 does not refer to the crest factor, also if it declares that the impulsiveness is one of the factors influencing the probability of white–finger symptoms. The ISO/TS 15694, instead, gives information for the calculation of the crest factor using the accelerations filtered by the Wh-blcurve.Moreover crest factor of unweighted accelerations were studied by some Authors (Schäfer et al., 1984; Nakamura et al., 1998; Riedel and Münch, 1998). For these reasons the crest factor of the flat weighted acceleration, CFh, was calculated.The crest factor of the flat weighted acceleration, CFh is obtained by dividing the peak value of flat weighted acceleration (ahF,PV) by the r.m.s. value of the flat weighted acceleration measured in the same time period T (ahF,RMS,T) (Eq. (3)):(3)CFh=ahF,PVahF,RMS,TThis quantity combines the peak value of the signal with the energy equivalent r.m.s. value and therefore describes the impulsiveness of the flat weighted signal.The r.m.s. values and the peaks were calculated along each axes, each hand position and for all the beaters and the operators. Afterward, the CFh was obtained.All the acquired data were organized into spreadsheets and then processed using the IBM SPSS Statistics 21 software package. Front and rear hand position data were separately analysed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work the vibration produced by three beaters used by ten operators in idling condition and during the olive harvesting campaign were acquired and analysed.Their vibration total values were high in both idling and full load conditions, but especially in the latter and at the front hand position the acceleration were never lower than 20 m−2.The exposure to the hand-arm vibration is nowadays evaluated through the ISO 5349-1 standard, based on the vibration measurement using the frequency weighting Wh, which heavily cut the acceleration data at the medium and high frequencies: as a consequence there is the hazard to underestimate the hand arm vibration risk when using some machines, as the beaters, which produce high acceleration values at the medium/high frequencies.For this reason we used also the Wh-blfilter (as explained in the ISO/TS 15694 standard) to obtain flat weighted acceleration and to verify if impact and shocks events were present.In all the examined beaters high differences were found between the Wh-blflat weighted and the Whweighted acceleration values: their averaged ratio was never less than 2.The frequency analysis of the flat weighted signal in this work was also useful to define the vibration behaviour of the beaters. In fact, the tested beaters had a similar harvesting volume rate (about 120 kg/h of olives), but they had a different vibration behaviour. The hand arm system of the operator using the beater #3 was solicited to acceleration values in the frequency range 63–1200 Hz, higher than the other two examined beaters. This information may be useful for the manufacturer to redesign the machine.Moreover, this work demonstrated that the hand held olive beaters may produce high impulsive loads: in fact the crest factor values ranged from 5 to more than 22, comparable to the industrial hand held tools.