@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prevalence and predictors for musculoskeletal discomfort in Malaysian office workers: Investigating explanatory factors for a developing country

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
High prevalence of MSD discomfort was reported in a population of Malaysian office workers.Predictive models for MSD discomfort in Malaysia were similar to those in developed countries.Cultural influences may explain differences in relative importance of MSD discomfort predictors.MSD risk management should address cultural differences to be maximally effective.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Musculoskeletal disorders,Risk,Discomfort,Office workers,Prevalence rate,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) are a major occupational health issue for workers in developed and developing countries, including Malaysia. Most research related to MSDs has been undertaken in developed countries; given the different regulatory and cultural practices it is plausible that contributions of hazard and risk factors may be different. A population of Malaysian public service office workers were surveyed (N = 417, 65.5% response rate) to determine prevalence and associated predictors of MSD discomfort. The 6-month period prevalence of MSD discomfort was 92.8% (95%CI = 90.2–95.2%). Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC) analyses was used to compare a range of models and determine a model of best fit. Contributions associated with MSD discomfort in the final model consisted of physical demands (61%), workload (14%), gender (13%), work-home balance (9%) and psychosocial factors (3%). Factors associated with MSD discomfort were similar in developed and developing countries but the relative contribution of factors was different, providing insight into future development of risk management strategies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) are a major work-related problem, comprising a third of all compensable diseases in North America, the Nordic countries and Japan (Punnett et al., 2005), similar figures are reported in other countries (Australian Safe and Compensation Council (ASCC), 2006; Linaker et al., 2011). High financial and social costs have been reported despite a significant focus on reducing the incidence of MSDs (Linaker et al., 2011). Occupational influences on MSD development are significant, up to 37% of all back pain has been linked to workplace exposures; however, large variations between countries have been identified (Punnett et al., 2005). Analysis undertaken as part of the global burden of disease study (Driscoll et al., 2014), estimated that disability adjusted life years (DALYs) for low back pain were 331 in Australia compared to 482 in South East Asia, where a large reliance on highly intensive argicultural practices contributes significantly to these differences; further insights are required to understand why these differences occur and the role of work organisation in the development of MSDs. These figures also do not include informal workers nor cumulative exposures and so are considered indicative of risk rather than absolute figures. This study aims to address the knowledge gap regarding MSD discomfort in the context of a developing country.A number of frameworks describe the multifactorial nature of MSD development with contributions from physical and psychosocial workplace factors (e.g. National Research Council, 2001; Bongers et al., 2006; Karsh, 2006). However, most of these frameworks have been constructed in developed countries where formalised compensation and insurance schemes operate and significant attempts have been made to reduce the large numbers of MSDs over the past two decades. Developing countries typically have less formal systems and risk management aimed at reducing MSD hazard and risk factors is relatively recent and in its early stage of development.The contribution of physical and psychosocial factors to the development of MSDs is well accepted with a strong evidence base to support contributions from a range of workplace hazards (NRC, 2001; Oakman and Chan, 2015; Widanarko et al., 2015). In particular, interactions between physcial and psychosocial factors have been linked with increased development of musculoskeletal symptoms (Widanarko et al., 2012, 2015). Although the relative contribution of factors may vary between workplaces, evidence suggests that even in physically demanding work, psychosocial factors are an important predictor of MSD development (Gerr et al., 2014).Office work has been linked with high rates of MSD prevalence (van den Heuvel et al., 2006; Janwantanakul et al., 2008), through exposure to physical and psychosocial stressors in the workplace. Prevalence rates of MSD in office workers have been reported from 19% to 84% (Blatter and Bongers, 2002; Harcombe et al., 2009), this large variation is expected given the vastly different working environments and measures used across the different studies (Marras et al., 2009). In Malaysia, three studies were identified which had investigated MSDs in office workers (Premalatha and Noor Hassim, 1999; Abdul Rahman and Atiya, 2009; Mahmud et al., 2014). Work-related upper limb disorder (WRULDs) prevalence rates for office workers were reported as 33% in public (Abdul Rahman and Atiya, 2009) and 31% in private sector employees (Premalatha and Noor Hassim, 1999). Another study by Mahmud et al. (2014) analysed MSD complaints and whether a training program had reduced the number of complaints by body area but did not report an overall prevalence rate.The importance of work organisation and culture on MSD development (Carayon et al., 1999; Janwantanakul et al., 2009) suggests a need for studies to be culturally specific, particularly in cases where different organisational or religious practices operate. An important factor in developing effective risk management strategies is the identification of relevant hazard and risk factors. We argue that as Malaysia is a developing country, identifying relevant predictor models are needed to explore the most relevant factors in predicting MSD discomfort. To date little exploration of MSDs in office workers based in developing countries has been undertaken. The aim of the current study is to estimate the prevalence of MSD discomfort in Malaysian public service office workers. Secondly, a model describing relevent predictors—psychosocial and physcial—of MSD discomfort will be developed. These findings will contribute towards a body of knowledge needed to inform development of intervention strategies to reduce MSD discomfort in developing countries such as Malaysia.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
