@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Design and evaluation of small, linear QWERTY keyboards

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A miniature keyboard is vital for small devices to shrink the size of the devices and expand the display area.The number keys of small linear keyboards should be separated from the letter keys.Small linear keyboards with square-shaped keycaps had better accuracy than keyboards with rectangular-shaped keycaps.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Keyboard design,Miniature keyboard,Ergonomic keyboard,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Miniature keyboard design is motivated by the need for smaller mobile devices with maximum user display area. Thus, this study developed four miniature keyboard designs which varied from conventional keyboard design in terms of their configuration and layout. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the input speed, accuracy, comfort, likability and learnability of four miniature keyboards. Sixteen fast typists and 16 slow typists were recruited to use these four miniature keyboards. The results showed that the rectangular-shaped keycaps of 3 letters with separated keycaps of numerals obtained the best proficiency speed, highest comfort and greatest user acceptance among the four keyboards. Moreover, the keyboards with square-shaped keycaps had better input accuracy compared to rectangular-shaped keycaps. Finally, the proposed keyboards were smaller than current keyboards, and the performance for all of the small keyboards was worse than that of the conventional keyboard.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rapid advances in information technology have resulted in new methods of data entry (e.g., cell phone keyboards and touch screens) and new forms of language (e.g., short message service). Users increasingly want to use text intensive software on mobile devices (Sandnes and Aubert, 2007); however, smaller devices inevitably employ smaller displays (Ziefle, 2010; Hashimoto et al., 2003) and keyboards (Colle and Hiszem, 2004), which reduce usability. When users obtain information from portable devices, they prefer the largest possible display area and the smallest keyboard that provides good usability and typing speed (Yoshitake, 1995; Pereira et al., 2013). Ha et al. (2004) indicated that existing entry methods on mobile communication devices suffer from poor typing efficiency and impose a cognitive processing burden on users. To meet the challenges posed by miniaturization of these devices, many designers have developed variants of conventional QWERTY keyboards, including changes to the layout or integration of multiple keys on a standard-sized keyboard (Sheng, 1985). However, more research on the usability of miniature keyboards is needed.Ease of use has become a critical design factor for input devices (Beddoes and Hu, 1994; Lee and Zhai, 2004). More specifically, users prefer and expect high input speed and ease of learning for new technologies, and show a marked aversion to products that are perceived as overly cognitively demanding (Sanders and McCormick, 1993; Sandnes and Aubert, 2007). Because one key per character is considered the minimal design specification for the 36 characters (26 letters and numerals 0–9) that are needed for English entry, the state-of-the-art in miniature keyboards shrinks the keys to fit them into a limited space. However, there are two limitations for these miniature keyboards. First, they demonstrate a greater reliance on thumbs, which might result in physical discomfort (Baker et al., 2007; Olszewska et al., 2009) and often lead to a reduction in input efficiency (Colle and Hiszem, 2004; Harada et al., 1996). Another limitation is that most people are comfortable with the QWERTY design and find it very difficult to accept other layouts (Beeching, 1974; Gopher and Raij, 1988). Consequently, some researchers have proposed maintaining a QWERTY-based system as these devices reduce the time typists use for searching (Sandnes and Aubert, 2007; Bi et al., 2010). However, to the best of our knowledge, no system has been developed with a combination of QWERTY layout and miniature keyboards. Investigating miniature keyboards with a QWERTY layout yields useful insights into the input devices required to improve entry methods.Because humans' limit of short-term memory is 7 ± 2 items (Miller, 1956), combining an appropriate number of characters (e.g., less than seven) on a single keycap strengthens the relationship among these characters. That is, the relationship of characters on the same keycap provides additional hints for users to help them memorize the positions of characters (Sanders and McCormick, 1993) and, thus, to improve input efficiency (Bürdek, 2005).Therefore, we proposed four multi-character keyboards that do not follow the conventional one-to-one alphanumeric-symbol-to-key ratio for small devices. Although the proposed keyboards have a reduced number of keys, they still maintain the QWERTY layout so that they are familiar to users. Accordingly, the present study evaluated four miniature keyboards on input efficiency, accuracy, comfort, likability and learnability for users.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
