@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluation of overhead guide sign sheeting materials to increase visibility and safety for drivers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We compared three retroreflective sheeting materials used for overhead guide signs.Diamond Grade sheeting provides the highest sign visibility for drivers at night.We didn't find statistical difference between Diamond Grade and High Intensity.High Intensity is considered an alternative solution for DOTs with limited budgets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Overhead guide sign,Retroreflectivity,Retroreflective sheeting,Safety,Cost analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Overhead guide sign visibility must increase to improve driver safety on roadways. Two methods increase overhead guide sign visibility: sign illumination and use of retroreflective sheeting materials. This paper compares three types of retroreflective sheeting: Engineering Grade (type I), Diamond Grade (type XI), and High Intensity (type IV). A field experiment was conducted at night using licensed drivers to determine the optimum retroreflective sheeting material that increases sign visibility and legibility. Results showed that, of the three types of retroreflective sheeting, Diamond Grade (type XI) sheeting requires minimum illuminance to be visible, followed by High Intensity (type IV) sheeting. Cost analysis, including labor, maintenance, and material cost components of the three retroreflective sheeting materials, showed that High Intensity (type IV) could increase sign visibility and legibility at night for Departments of Transportation with limited budgets, consequently increasing driver safety on roadways.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Drivers of all ages often experience increased driving difficulties at night compared to daytime driving. Driver-related issues that may affect road visibility include driver's visual acuity, contrast sensitivity, distance judgment, and color discrimination (Lagergren, 1987). Guide signs, which are typically green in the United States, are located along a roadway to notify drivers of destinations and exit information.According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's (NHTSA) Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS), a total of 32,719 people were killed in motor vehicle traffic crashes in the United States in 2013 (NHTSA, 2014). Although only 25% of all motor vehicle travel occurs at night, approximately 50% of all traffic fatalities occur during nighttime hours (FHWA, 2008).As required in the 2009 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (MUTCD), overhead guide signs must be illuminated or retroreflective (FHWA, 2009). In the United States, Departments of Transportation (DOTs) in several states are considering adding external light sources to current overhead guide signs or replacing current signs' sheeting with retroreflective sheeting to increase sign visibility and legibility for drivers at night.This paper presents results of a field study that evaluated three types of retroreflective sheeting materials used for overhead guide signs: Engineering Grade (type I), Diamond Grade (type XI), and High Intensity (type IV). Sheeting evaluation included cost analysis for the sheeting materials. The objective of this paper was to determine the optimal, most cost-effective retroreflective sheeting that increases overhead guide sign visibility and legibility for drivers, thereby increasing roadway safety at night. The motivation behind this research was to assist DOTs in finding the best choice of retroreflective sheeting materials for overhead guide signs to increase sign visibility and legibility for drivers at night, consequently increasing overall safety on roadways.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Human frequency data collected when participants read legends of tested signs supported statistical analysis results in which Diamond Grade (type XI) retroreflective sheeting ranked first based on increased visibility and legibility at night. High Intensity (type IV) sheeting ranked second, and Engineering Grade (type I) ranked third. Engineering Grade (type I) sheeting is not recommended for use for overhead guide signs. The difference of least square means did not show statistical difference between Diamond Grade (type XI) and High Intensity (type IV) retroreflective sheeting types.For DOTs with limited budgets, High Intensity (type IV) could be a solution to increase overhead guide signs visibility and legibility at night, thereby increasing driver's safety on roadways.