@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Center of pressure and total force analyses for amputees walking with a backpack load over four surfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Examined amputee gait with and without a backpack load, over multiple surfaces.COP and total force were similar when walking with and without a backpack load.Transtibial amputees had more deviations in COP on the intact limb.High functioning amputees are not limited by a backpack load on the tested tasks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Center of pressure,Backpack,Load carriage,Amputee,F-Scan,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Understanding how load carriage affects walking is important for people with a lower extremity amputation who may use different strategies to accommodate to the additional weight. Nine unilateral traumatic transtibial amputees (K4-level) walked over four surfaces (level-ground, uneven ground, incline, decline) with and without a 24.5 kg backpack. Center of pressure (COP) and total force were analyzed from F-Scan insole pressure sensor data. COP parameters were greater on the intact limb than on the prosthetic limb, which was likely a compensation for the loss of ankle control. Double support time (DST) was greater when walking with a backpack. Although longer DST is often considered a strategy to enhance stability and/or reduce loading forces, changes in DST were only moderately correlated with changes in peak force. High functioning transtibial amputees were able to accommodate to a standard backpack load and to maintain COP progression, even when walking over different surfaces.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
People in professional, military, and recreational settings often carry a weighted backpack; however, the additional weight can result in injuries such as stress fractures, knee pain, and lower back pain (Knapik et al., 1996). Understanding how load carriage affects locomotion is important, especially for people with disabilities who may use different walking strategies to accommodate to the extra weight.Previous research has shown that weighted backpack loads affect level-ground walking kinematics and kinetics in able-bodied populations. Load carriage increased double support time (Birrell and Haslam, 2009; Castro et al., 2013; Harman et al., 2000; Simpson et al., 2012); increased ankle, knee, and hip flexion during stance (Birrell and Haslam, 2009; Polcyn et al., 2002; Simpson et al., 2012); decreased pelvic rotation (LaFiandra et al., 2003); increased forward trunk lean (Caron et al., 2013; Polcyn et al., 2002); increased head lean (Attwells et al., 2006; Caron et al., 2013); and increased peak vertical and anterior–posterior ground reaction forces (GRFs). Many gait studies on backpack loads reported absolute GRF or “GRF normalized to bodyweight” (not including the backpack) (Birrell et al., 2007; Tilbury-Davis and Hooper, 1999; Wang et al., 2012). Some of these studies suggested that GRF increases were proportional to increases in backpack load (Birrell et al., 2007; Tilbury-Davis and Hooper, 1999; Wang et al., 2012); however, other studies did not find this GRF-load relationship (Castro et al., 2013; Harman et al., 2000; Simpson et al., 2012). For some studies, medial–lateral GRF did not change as backpack load increased (Harman et al., 2000; Lloyd and Cooke, 2000; Polcyn et al., 2002), but others observed an increase in medial–lateral GRF, suggesting that individuals were less stable while carrying a load (Birrell et al., 2007). Supporting this idea, Qu (2013) reported increased medial–lateral instability, indicated by larger local divergence exponents, when walking with a backpack load on a treadmill.Center of pressure (COP) has been used to examine postural stability (Moghadam et al., 2011; Roerdink et al., 2011; Ruhe et al., 2011) and walking stability (Chisholm et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2011; Kendell et al., 2010; Lemaire et al., 2006; Pascolo and Marini, 2006; Schmid et al., 2005). In able-bodied gait, the COP begins at the heel and smoothly progresses anteriorly and laterally until mid-stance, before progressing anteriorly and medially during push-off. Any additional directional changes in the medial–lateral or anterior–posterior COP trajectory may indicate that an individual is less stable (Kendell et al., 2010; Lemaire et al., 2006; Schmid et al., 2005).Many devices can record COP progression, including force plates, pressure mats, and insole sensors. Force plates and pressure mats are typically constrained to a level laboratory walking surface. A grid of insole pressure sensors can be secured inside the shoe, providing a plantar pressure profile that can be used to calculate COP and total force from any walking surface. To characterize COP progression from insole sensors, six parameters (Table 1) can be extracted to quantify the smoothness or stability of stance phase during walking (Lemaire et al., 2006). Previous research demonstrated that these COP parameters for people with a transtibial amputation were generally greater (less stable) on their intact limb while walking over level ground, uneven ground, slopes, and stairs, and were least stable while walking up stairs (Kendell et al., 2010).Individuals with transtibial amputation display asymmetries and compensations while walking over a variety of surfaces; including, level-ground (Kovac et al., 2010; Vanicek et al., 2009), uneven ground (Curtze et al., 2011; Gates et al., 2012), and slopes (Fradet et al., 2010; Vickers et al., 2008). Carrying a backpack load may magnify these compensations and increase the risk of injury (Knapik et al., 2012). Previous research demonstrated that individuals with transtibial amputations walking with a backpack load over level ground make similar temporal-spatial gait parameter alterations as able-bodied individuals (Doyle et al., 2014; Schnall et al., 2014). Prosthetic limb knee and hip joint flexion increased during weight acceptance and greater prosthetic ankle dorsiflexion was found when walking with a backpack load (Doyle et al., 2014). Schnall et al. (2014) reported individuals with transtibial amputation exhibited similar kinematic compensations as able-bodied when carrying loads, but individuals with a transtibial amputation had greater ankle dorsiflexion on the prosthetic limb and forward trunk lean/excursion. However, the amputee load carriage literature has focused on level ground walking.The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of a backpack load on transtibial amputee gait while walking over level ground, uneven ground, and slopes. This paper focuses on insole plantar pressure analysis, including quantifying the smoothness or stability of the COP path and pressure profile, temporal spatial parameters, and total force. An increase in COP parameters and asymmetries between intact and prosthetic limbs were expected while walking with a backpack load.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study provided insight into how individuals with a transtibial amputation accommodated to a backpack load when walking over multiple surfaces. Consistent with our hypothesis, COP parameters on the intact limb were generally greater than the prosthetic limb, which demonstrated increased compensation for the loss of ankle control and propulsion on the prosthetic side. However, limb asymmetries were not greater when walking with a backpack load, compared to without a backpack. To improve walking performance and address long-term health issues related to overuse, gait training programs could focus on reducing limb asymmetries to minimize compensations observed on the intact side.Our results did not strongly support the hypothesis that COP parameters would increase when walking with a backpack load. Few COP parameter changes were found when walking with a backpack, compared to no backpack, and the differences between backpack conditions were small for this high functioning amputee population (K-level 4). COP progression was similar between backpack conditions, suggesting participants were able to maintain smooth, stable progression with and without a backpack load. The data provided in this paper could be used as a baseline to assess amputee gait performance when carrying a backpack load.The backpack load resulted in increased total force for all walking surfaces, which has implications for selecting an appropriate prosthetic foot to support the added weight. In this paper, a longer double support time was the primary strategy to maintain stable gait while carrying a backpack load.Overall, the backpack load was not a limiting factor for performing these real-world activities. Study outcomes indicated that high functioning individuals with transtibial amputations are able to accommodate to a standard backpack load and maintain similar COP progression, even when walking on different surfaces.The authors have no conflicts of interest to report.