@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessing the performance of winter footwear using a new maximum achievable incline method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We assess footwear slip resistance on ice by the maximum slope angles subjects could stand and walk.The maximum slope angles were objective and ecologically valid measures of slip resistance.We tested footwear performance while standing and walking uphill, downhill, and on cross-slopes.This human-centred measure of slip resistance did not require controlling of individuals' gait characteristics.One outsole design significantly outperformed the others on the smooth, wet ice.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Slips and falls,Footwear,Slip resistance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
More informative tests of winter footwear performance are required in order to identify footwear that will prevent injurious slips and falls on icy conditions. In this study, eight participants tested four styles of winter boots on smooth wet ice. The surface was progressively tilted to create increasing longitudinal and cross-slopes until participants could no longer continue standing or walking. Maximum achievable incline angles provided consistent measures of footwear slip resistance and demonstrated better resolution than mechanical tests. One footwear outsole material and tread combination outperformed the others on wet ice allowing participants to successfully walk on steep longitudinal slopes of 17.5° ± 1.9° (mean ± SD). By further exploiting the methodology to include additional surfaces and contaminants, such tests could be used to optimize tread designs and materials that are ideal for reducing the risk of slips and falls.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Slips and falls are one of the most prevalent and injurious types of accidents on-the-job and in public spaces. The direct cost of falls in the United States is estimated at $30 billion per year (Stevens et al., 2006). Winter conditions increase the likelihood of pedestrian slips and falls as precipitation and cold temperatures create hazards and obstacles (Gard and Lundborg, 2000). In winter-experiencing environments, foot slippage is estimated to account for 43% of all falls (Lund, 1984) with ice and snow contributing to two-thirds of outdoor pedestrian injuries (Rolfsman et al., 2012). Medical care costs of slipping injuries are also estimated to be the same as that of all traffic injuries in the same period (Björnstig et al., 1997).Slip-resistant footwear can reduce the risks of slips and falls (Abeysekera and Gao, 2001). Slip resistance is generally measured as the coefficient of friction (COF) between the footwear sole and underfoot surface as slips occur when the COF is lower than that required for the momentary intended activity (Grönqvist et al., 2001). During gait, force plates are commonly used to measure the ground reaction forces and then the COF is calculated as the ratio of the horizontal and vertical components of the force (Strandberg and Lanshammar, 1981). This ratio represents the friction that is utilized. The maximum utilized friction during normal gait is often referred to as the required COF (Chang, 2012). Slips are more likely to occur when the required COF exceeds the maximum possible COF at the footwear-surface interface, commonly termed the available COF. Therefore, the measure that most critically determines whether slips can be resisted is the available COF and methods that are used to assess footwear slip resistance attempt to estimate the available COF.The major challenge in the assessment of footwear slip resistance is that the measurement of available COF is not straightforward (Chang et al., 2001a,b). The COF available at any given instant is dependent on the contact surface area and characteristics of the interface (including the adhesional and hysteretic properties of the footwear sole), the applied forces, and moving speed. Contaminants at the interface further increase the complexity in estimating the available COF as it is further affected by properties of the contaminant layer such as its viscosity and thickness (Grönqvist, 1995). The validity of mechanical methods for estimating available COF therefore depends on their ability to simulate human gait over appropriate test surfaces (Chang et al., 2001b).According to current international standards for testing footwear slip resistance (ASTM F2913-11; ISO 13287:2012), footwear is rigidly mounted to a test rig and the ground reaction forces recorded by load cells are used to calculate the COF while standardized test surfaces such as quarry tile or stainless steel are dragged against the stationary footwear sole. Test specifications for foot angles, sliding velocities, and normal loads are meant to reproduce those observed when a slippery surface is encountered during normal gait (Wilson, 1990). It is understood that larger output COF (i.e. greater available COF) values are indicative of greater footwear slip resistance. However, there are major limitations to this method, and as such, there remains no standard threshold COF criteria for labelling footwear as slip resistant (Grönqvist et al., 2001).One important limitation is how well the specified mechanical test parameters reflect the range of gait characteristics of actual users, which vary with such factors as age, sex, and weight (Chumanov et al., 2008; Lockhart et al., 2005; Wu et al., 2012). These parameters also vary when walking in slippery conditions, transitioning between high and low friction areas, or on different terrain such as slopes, cross-slopes, and uneven surfaces (Bunterngchit et al., 2000; Dixon and Pearsall, 2010; Heiden et al., 2005; McVay and Redfern, 1994). Types of activity, such as walking, running, turning, or load carrying, will also affect the COF required to resist slips (Fino and Lockhart, 2014).Standard tests are further limited by how accurately the surfaces over which the footwear is tested reflect the surfaces on which they are intended or actually used. The standardized test surfaces described in the current standard test methods (ASTM F2913-11;ISO 13287:2012) do not include any winter surfaces or contaminants such as snow or ice, presumably due to the transient nature of such surfaces. Therefore, the ability of the standard tests to reflect slip resistance in winter conditions is particularly poor. It is however, possible to fit standard test rigs with winter surfaces, for example a frosted ice surface can be used in conjunction with the SATRA STM 603 Slip Resistance Testing machine. The caveats to using such a surface are that the repeatability of such tests and the winter conditions it represents have yet to be established; and the testing methods have not been accepted into standard guidelines.Despite the epidemiological data indicating the frequency and severity of slip and fall injuries in winter, few have studied footwear slip resistance or gait biomechanics on winter surfaces because of how difficult it is to produce and maintain consistent winter test conditions. Gao et al. (2008a,b) used a short, 2.7 m ice walkway inclined at 0°, 6°, and 8° to compare lower extremity muscle activity during gait on ice at −10 °C to gait on a reference, non-ice ramp. In studies of footwear slip-resistance, Gao et al. (2003, 2004, 2008b) conducted experiments using a stationary mechanical portable step simulator device, developed at the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health (Grönqvist et al., 1989), on surfaces including ice to show the effects of abrasion, sole material, hardness, and roughness on relative COF of a variety of footwear. Bruce et al. (1986) measured the COF of winter anti-slip devices by attaching subjects in series to a load cell and a winch that dragged the subjects across a hockey rink. More commonly, evaluations of winter footwear performance have utilized subjective ratings of slipperiness, during which participants or observers rank different types of footwear while participants use them on outdoor winter surfaces (Gao and Abeysekera, 2002; Gard and Lundborg, 2000).Outside of winter testing, adjustable inclined surfaces have been used in the past to determine the slip resistance of footwear and/or flooring materials (Jung and Schenk, 1990; Perkins and Wilson, 1983). Although testing is carried out on sloped surfaces, the underlying assumption is that the relative differences in slip resistance will translate to walking on level ground. The maximum slope angles on which subjects are able to step, typically facing downhill, without slipping are used to assess slip resistance of the footwear-surface combinations. The tangents of the maximum slope angles are used as estimates of the available COF (James, 1999; Brungraber et al., 2003). Some users also prefer direct walking tests to mechanical tests (James, 1999) and these adjustable incline tests have the advantage of providing objective outcomes while involving real users. Ramps used in these tests have previously been small-scale with subjects taking few steps or walking with unnatural gait, such as shuffling with small steps forwards and backwards or stepping in place (Jung and Schenk, 1990; Skiba et al., 1986). Test surfaces on these ramps are often indoor industrial floors with contaminants such as water, oil, and soap (Brungraber et al., 2003). To the authors' knowledge, there have been no published works involving a large-scale adjustable ramp that allows for sustained walking on winter test conditions.In order for footwear designers and manufacturers to optimize the slip resistant properties of winter footwear and appropriately inform consumers of footwear performance, it is imperative that methods of footwear assessment be relevant and reliable. The primary objective of this study was to use the maximum incline angle that participants were able to maintain balance while standing and walking to assess the slip resistance of a range of footwear on ice. Additionally, results of this new method were compared to those of the current standard mechanical test (ASTM F2913) using an ice tray attachment in order to determine the utility of the new method.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
