@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel approach for fit analysis of thermal protective clothing using three-dimensional body scanning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel approach was developed to determine the air gap in protective clothing.Both the overall and local air gap distributions were analyzed.The air gap unevenly distributed over the body with the largest air gap in legs.The air gap depended on the body parts, fabric properties, and garment size.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Protective clothing,Fit analysis,Three-dimensional body scanning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The garment fit played an important role in protective performance, comfort and mobility. The purpose of this study is to quantify the air gap to quantitatively characterize a three-dimensional (3-D) garment fit using a 3-D body scanning technique. A method for processing of scanned data was developed to investigate the air gap size and distribution between the clothing and human body. The mesh model formed from nude and clothed body was aligned, superimposed and sectioned using Rapidform software. The air gap size and distribution over the body surface were analyzed. The total air volume was also calculated. The effects of fabric properties and garment size on air gap distribution were explored. The results indicated that average air gap of the fit clothing was around 25–30 mm and the overall air gap distribution was similar. The air gap was unevenly distributed over the body and it was strongly associated with the body parts, fabric properties and garment size. The research will help understand the overall clothing fit and its association with protection, thermal and movement comfort, and provide guidelines for clothing engineers to improve thermal performance and reduce physiological burden.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Clothing is commonly made of fabric and covers over the three-dimensional (3-D) human body. Due to the specific geometry of human body shape and unique fabric properties, the space developed between these two surfaces and the overall contour formed along the body represents the garment fit. As the garment fit depends on many factors, such as individual perceptions, clothing fashion style, function, it is hard to define it (Ashdown et al., 2004; Song and Ashdown, 2010). Garment fit is crucial for the performance of protective clothing. In thermal protective clothing, the air gap thickness between clothing layers and the body affected the thermal damage to the skin (Song and Lu, 2013). Garment style and fit influenced thermal protection, as the inappropriate fit of the clothing style reduced its protection (Mah and Song, 2010b). In the effort to improve the protective performance of protective clothing, various garment design approaches were employed. The overall modification of protection was associated with the air gap distribution. Protective clothing often required a stringent conformity to body dimensions, as garments that were out of proportion to the wearer might result in accidents or impair efficiency and safe work performance (Robinette, 1986; Hsiao et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2011). For example, a crotch length that was too long might prevent a worker from moving quickly or might tear and leave him vulnerable to hazardous materials (Keeble et al., 1992). The garment fit had great influence on the air gap size and distribution (Kim et al., 2002; Song, 2007), which greatly affected the heat and mass transfer in the microclimate under clothing and range of mobility (Huck et al., 1997; Kim et al., 2002; Mah and Song, 2010b). To design well-fitted protective clothing and provide guidelines on the selection of protective clothing, fit analysis of protective clothing is necessary.Current methods of analyzing garment fit calculated the difference between linear garment measurements and linear body measurements. Although these were useful for evaluating simple garment fit issues, they were not adequate to investigate the multifaceted relationship between the body and clothing. The 3-D body scanner captured three dimensional nature of human body and provided valuable information to analyze the garment fit (DesMarteau, 2000). Kim et al. (2001) investigated wearing ease, the distance between the body and the garment at critical locations using merged cross-section slices between the body scan and clothed scan. Loker et al. (2005) examined fit by superimposing scans made with and without clothing. The linear distances between the body scan and the clothed scan can be calculated. Two-dimensional and three-dimensional data such as circumference slices, surface areas, and volumes between the body and the clothed scan can be used to provide comprehensive and objective analyses of fit. The 3-D body scanning was introduced to measure the air volume of clothing microclimate quantitatively (Daanen et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2007; Havenith et al., 2010). The air volume was an integrated index to represent the overall garment fit, however, it was not sufficient to provide information in particular locations. The quantitative analysis performed by 3-D body scanning technology provides an approach to characterize complicated 3-D garment fit.In US army, the air gap distribution for military garment was investigated using 3-D body scanning (Kim et al., 2002). The method used for measuring the air trapped between clothing and skin was as follows. The initial nude scan and clothed scan were conducted consecutively and superimposed. Once the two scans were aligned, cross-sections were conducted. Two vectors in the same direction, which originated at the centroid of the initial scan cross-section, were extracted. Subtracting the two vectors obtained the distance between the scan pair surfaces at a given point along their contour lines. Data obtained from the study demonstrated that 3-D whole body digitizing provided a unique view into the size and distribution of air gaps in a common clothing ensemble worn by U.S. Army soldiers (Kim et al., 2002). It was noted that the arm was moved forward or backward to decrease shadow region at torso, which had effect on the air gap distribution at adjacent positions. Song has investigated the average air gap size at the locations where a burn prediction occurred in single layer protective clothing exposed to flash fire (Song, 2007). The less drapable Kevlar®/PBI coveralls presented larger mean air gap sizes than Nomex® IIIA coveralls with the same style and size. A procedure using a 3-D body scanner to measure the size and distribution of air gaps between a female mannequin and a garment was developed to investigate the garment style and fit on thermal protection (Mah and Song, 2010a, b). The findings demonstrated that air gap sizes were not evenly distributed over the mannequin, and depended on garment style and fit, as well as body contour. There were a great number of smaller air gaps over the mannequin than larger ones. The principle of air gap measurement was the same with previous study of Kim et al., i.e. the magnitude difference of two vectors with the same direction originated from the centroid of nude body scan. Due to the irregular profile of human body, this principle might cause significant error in concave or convex area such as chest and pelvis regions. Recently, Psikuta et al. (2012) measured the air gap size and distribution, and the contact area of daily wear clothing by Geomagic software. However, the method used in air gap determination was not provided.The purpose of this study was to conduct systematic exploration on fit analysis of thermal protective clothing using 3-D body scanning technology. It was also the intention of this study to develop a new approach to characterize the 3-D fit relationship between protective clothing and human body. In this study, a proposed approach using 3-D body scanning to characterize fit of selected clothing was developed. The air gap size and distribution for these clothing were statistically analyzed. The air volume was employed as an index to depict the spatial relationship between the clothing and human body. The effects of garment design features including fabric properties and garment size on fit were also investigated.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An approach for comprehensive processing of 3D body scanning data was developed to characterize the air gap size and distribution of selected thermal protective clothing worn by industrial workers. It was found that air gap developed between human body and clothing based on body parts, fabric properties, garment size, and garment design. The air gap unevenly distributed over the body surface. Larger size of air gap was observed in legs and abdomen. The air gap in chest, pelvis and arms was relatively small. The air gap of convex area was smaller than that of concave area. Coverall made of stiffer fabric tended to develop larger air gap size. The air gap increased with the increasing of garment size. The proposed approach could provide both information on overall air gap distribution and the air gap for localized body areas. The data obtained could be correlated to thermal comfort and protection, and thus provided information on the design of thermal protective clothing to improve thermal performance and reduce physical burden.Further studies are required to improve the data post processing to reduce misalignment and error of void filling. Thermal protective clothing always composes of multilayer fabrics. The outer layer might compress the inner layer and influence the overall garment profile (Lee et al., 2007). To characterize the air gap between clothing layers is an important issue in the future works.