@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The Helmet Fit Index – An intelligent tool for fit assessment and design customisation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel method is proposed to objectively compare fitting accuracy of helmets.The Helmet Fit Index (HFI) provides a fit score on a scale from 0 to 100.The index is a suitable indicator of fit when compared to subjective assessments.Females and Asian people experienced lower fit scores than males and Caucasians.The index can be used for helmet design optimization and customisation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
3D anthropometry,Helmet,Fit assessment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Helmet safety benefits are reduced if the headgear is poorly fitted on the wearer's head. At present, there are no industry standards available to assess objectively how a specific protective helmet fits a particular person. A proper fit is typically defined as a small and uniform distance between the helmet liner and the wearer's head shape, with a broad coverage of the head area. This paper presents a novel method to investigate and compare fitting accuracy of helmets based on 3D anthropometry, reverse engineering techniques and computational analysis. The Helmet Fit Index (HFI) that provides a fit score on a scale from 0 (excessively poor fit) to 100 (perfect fit) was compared with subjective fit assessments of surveyed cyclists. Results in this study showed that quantitative (HFI) and qualitative (participants' feelings) data were related when comparing three commercially available bicycle helmets. Findings also demonstrated that females and Asian people have lower fit scores than males and Caucasians, respectively. The HFI could provide detailed understanding of helmet efficiency regarding fit and could be used during helmet design and development phases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Poor helmet fit to the wearer's head has been reported to decrease its safety benefits during a crash event (Romanow et al., 2014; Rivara et al., 1999a; Thai et al., 2015a). Poor helmet fit may be attributed to two main causes. First, the helmet could be worn incorrectly, with the helmet either worn back to front, or tilted forward or backward. The chin strap could also be unfastened. A Canadian observational study reported that 15% of bicycle users wear their helmets incorrectly (Hagel et al., 2010). Wearing under- or over-sized helmets is also considered to be inappropriate, and has been shown to be a frequent problem, especially among children and young people (Thai et al., 2015a). Second, helmet sizes and shapes available to the public might not be suitable for the full range of head morphologies (Thai et al., 2015a). Indeed, for some users, there is either a large gap between the inner liner and the head, or a low coverage of the skull area with significant unprotected regions of the head. Rivara et al. (Rivara et al., 1999a). found that during crash events, children with head injuries had large open gaps between their head and the helmet, compared with those without head injuries.While the poorly informed usage of bicycle helmets is partly rectifiable through school-based education programs, government and helmet manufacturer advertising, or appropriate store advice and user information, the mismatch between head shapes and helmet liners primary relates to the design of helmets, particularly its liner.Helmets are developed and tested on standard mannequin heads called headforms (Ball, 2009; Zhuang et al., 2010), which aim to represent the full range of head dimensions, geometries and shapes within a specific population. Although two headform standards have been developed in the past (ISO/R1511:1970 and ISO/DIS 6220:1983), neither of these have been adopted as international standards. Many countries adopted the guidelines presented in the draft ISO/DIS 6220:1983 as a reference for the development of their standards. For instance, Standards Australia developed the AS/NZS 2512.1:2009 Methods of testing protective helmets Part 1: Definitions and headforms (Australian/New Zealand Standard, 2512a) based on this draft (Australian/New Zealand Standard, 2512b). Remarkably, the ISO draft was itself founded on the first set of test headforms produced by the UK Transport Road Research Laboratory in the 1950s (Zhuang et al., 2010; British Standards Institution and BS EN960:2006, 2006). That said, designing bicycle helmets based on anthropometric measurements obtained from the 1950s British workforce might not encompass the variations of head shapes present in today's world.Reviewing current design approach, helmet designers are inclined to create foam liners with significant offset distances from the standard headform surfaces. This approach ensures the highest proportion of users are accommodated within the smallest numbers of helmet sizes, as measured by the conventional one, two or three shell systems that are offered by most manufacturers. Foam pads are then added to the helmet to fill the gaps between the liners and wearer's head. An adjustment system may also be connected to the shell in order to resize the helmet over the head circumference of the wearer. While this approach noticeably improves comfort and allows minimum air circulation, it does not reduce front-to-back, side-to-side, or rotational movements that result from poor helmet fit (Thai et al., 2015a, 2015b).Recognizing poor head-fit in helmet design (Robinette and Whitestone, 1994), researchers have used three-dimensional (3D) scanners to compute the Standoff Distances (SOD) between a person's head and the inside surface of a helmet (Meunier et al., 2000; Perret-Ellena et al., 2014; Cadogan et al., 1994; Alemany et al., 2012). For example, Meunier et al. (Meunier et al., 2000). introduced new computational techniques to align and position the scanned head and helmet. They developed color-coded illustrations to display the problem areas (i.e., SOD) between the head and helmet scans, which gave designers the objective assessment for design modification to improve helmet fit. Although a tested helmet was deemed to fit a person's head when the SOD was at least 12.5 mm, no maximum upper limit for the parameter was set. A critical element of helmet fit is needed to ensure that it closely follows the shape of the head without leaving significant gaps between the helmet liner and the head.These considerations are addressed by the Helmet Fit Index (HFI) described in (Perret-Ellena et al., 2014), which estimated the ‘fit score’ of bicycle helmets for unique human head shapes. The HFI formulae set the SOD as optimum when spanning between 4 and 8 mm. Two other parameters are included in the formulae. They are, the Gap Uniformity (GU), which is the standard deviation of the gap distribution, and the Head Protection Proportion (HPP), which is calculated as the proportion of the head under helmet protection. Based on a 3D anthropometric study presented in (Perret-Ellena et al., 2015), a set of reverse engineering tools and computational techniques were developed to evaluate the fit of a helmet to an individual's head. The method developed in (Perret-Ellena et al., 2014) demonstrated that the HFI could be a valuable tool for statistical analysis of fit for a defined population and for the comparison of different headgear models with respect to fit. This paper develops further the HFI concept by: (i) establishing if the subjective feel regarding helmet fit correlates with the proposed index; and (ii) assessing if dissimilarities exist between gender and ethnic groups regarding helmet fit. Guidelines on how the HFI could be used by helmet manufacturers are discussed.The survey conducted in this research took place at multiple sites in the metropolitan area of Melbourne, Australia, and spanned over an eight month period in 2014. Interview venues included five local bike shops and RMIT University research laboratory. The study was approved by RMIT University's Human Research Ethics Committee. The inclusion criteria were cyclists, over 18 years of age, who were familiar with the use of bicycle helmets. Recreational and commuter cyclists were recruited through either advertisement (online forums, Melbourne bicycle and triathlon clubs), or directly at the survey sites.The target sample size was 125 participants. The sampling distribution plan was primarily drawn on the Australian Cycling Participation report (Munro, 2013). The report estimates the cycling activity (measured in the past week, month and year) across Australia according to gender and age groups. For each stratum, data were presented as “population proportion who rode in the past seven days”. Expected frequency distribution and its corresponding expected count for the study were then calculated based on these proportions and the 2011 Australian census data (Census et al., 2011) (Table 1). Census data are presented in five years groups (e.g. 15–19 years, 20–24 years) and therefore had to be extrapolated for age groups 18–29 of relevance to this study.Participants were asked to complete a self-administered questionnaire including demographics (gender, age and ethnicity, mass and height), cycling type (recreational, competition, commuter), helmet use, helmet fit requirements (helmet fit user ideal and helmet fit user importance) and helmet fit assessments. The survey required about 10 min to complete. Questions regarding helmet fit requirements were recorded on a ten-point scale with the following specific definitions:•Helmet fit user ideal. On a scale from 1 to 10, please rate your ideal degree of pressure on your head when wearing a bicycle helmet. If 1 is a very loose feeling and 10 very tight, what value would best describe your fit requirement?Helmet fit user importance. On a scale from 1 to 10, please rate the importance of achieving your ideal fit in a bicycle helmet model. When purchasing a new helmet, is it essential that it matches your ideal degree of pressure on your head (10), or would you buy one that does not (1), but satisfies other parameters?Before completing the survey, participants were provided with three helmet models of two sizes each. They were asked to choose their preferred size for each helmet model and to assess its overall fit over five regions of the head, namely the front, top, right, left and back. The fit was assessed on a ten-point scale, where 1 was very uncomfortable and a poor fit feel (large gaps, pressure points/areas), and 10 was an excellent fit and comfortable.Table 2lists the twenty qualitative variables recorded for each individual participant on a ten-point scale.An Artec Eva™ (Palo alto, CA, USA) 3D scanner was used for the anthropometric study. During the scanning process, participants were asked to sit straight and look at a fixed point on the wall with his/her usual facial expression. The posture position and scanning techniques were in accordance with the requirements of ISO 20685:2010(E) 3-D scanning methodologies for internationally compatible anthropometric databases (International Organization for Standardization, 2010a). Participants were asked to wear a wig cap on their heads and over their ears to avoid hair irregularities on the scanned geometry (Fig. 1).The scanned mesh was then exported to Geomagic Studio 12® (rock Hill, SC, USA) for further processing. Hair bumps and fabric folds were removed, and angles between individual polygons were minimized to smooth out the scan. The deviation analysis tool was used to ensure that the modification of the mesh had not excessively distorted the original scanned head shape. The maximum deviation distance for non-hair bumps or fabric fold areas was set to ±50μm (Fig. 2).Three commercially available bicycle helmet models in two different sizes each were chosen for the study. They were selected according to their price range from high, medium to low (Met Kaos – high price (Helmet A), Met Crossover – medium price (Helmet B) and Netti Lightning – low price (Helmet C)). Even though the medium and high price range helmets originated from the same manufacturer, their liner geometries and shapes were different.The selected helmet models were digitized using an advanced white light 3D scanner (HDI Advance from LMI Technologies, Delta, BC, Canada), which has a high level of scan accuracy (45μm per single scan) when dealing with more complex geometries. Foam pads and the adjusting system were removed either (i) physically before the scan or (ii) digitally during the post-processing procedure. The scanned images were merged, repaired and “cleaned up” using Geomagic Studio 12® (Fig. 3). The clean-up process involved: (a) repairing the mesh to remove spikes and non-manifold triangles; (b) filling the holes with curvature continuity constraints with the adjacent geometry; (c) reconstructing the fillets and sharp edges; and (d) re-wrapping the mesh with new vertices for uniform spacing. Each final mesh comprised approximately two million triangles.Furthermore, in order to perform the gap analysis on the inside surfaces of the helmet's liner; a simplified representation of the helmet was created to keep only the regions supposedly in contact with the cyclist's head. Fig. 4(a) illustrates the final inside surface of the same helmet after careful trim and accurate area selection.The fit analysis was performed both globally and locally as we predicted the fit to be dissimilar throughout the whole head shape. Consequently, the inside mesh of the helmet liner was further divided into five regions, namely front, top, right, left, and back as showed in Fig. 4(b). The regions were defined by simple visual demarcation of the helmets geometry.An intermediate scan of the participant wearing the helmet was used to position the helmet and head scans accurately. Participants were scanned a second time with the selected helmet model fitted on their heads. During the scan, participants were asked to reproduce the same seating posture and facial expression as during the first scan described in Section 2.3a).All three scans (Fig. 5) were then aligned using the n-points manual registration and the global registration algorithms within Geomagic Studio 12®. The alignment process was split into two stages: (i) align the head scan and the intermediate scan (Fig. 6) using the face polygons of the participant; and (ii) align the helmet scan with the intermediate scan (Fig. 7) using the helmet surfaces.After the two-stage alignment process has been completed, the intermediate scan was removed, and the head and helmet scans were now aligned accurately (Fig. 8). This alignment allowed for objective evaluation of the gap between the head and helmet.In this analysis, the gap distribution between the head mesh and the inside of the helmet was calculated. Two parameters were determined: (i) the Standoff Distance (SOD), which was defined as the average minimal distance between the head shape and all the points that defined the inside mesh of the liner; and (ii) the Gap Uniformity (GU), which was the standard deviation of the gap distribution defined as the dispersion from the average.A distance analysis tool available in CATIA V5R21 (Dassault Système, Vélizy-Villacoublay, France) was used to measure the gap between the head and the inside liner meshes. The gap was first analyzed for any negative values that would indicate interference between the two meshes. Interference can be caused either by inaccurate alignment between the meshes, or by the hair thickness of the participant. The participant's hair was likely to be compressed under the helmet's weight during fit. Extra hair thickness, which was assumed to be uniform across the whole head, was considered during the gap analysis. Outlier points were removed from the gap analysis result, and the head scan was offset by the negative maximum deviation. Distance analysis was then recalculated, and the SOD and GU were recorded. Fig. 9shows the gap analysis with color texture maps before and after the hair thickness was offset. In addition, similar deviation analyses were conducted in the five local regions, and the SOD and GU were recorded. Fig. 10shows the gap analysis of the right region.To provide maximum protection to the wearer, the helmet should cover as much skull area as possible. However, for some human head shapes, commercially available helmet models might provide only minimal total coverage area and reduce its intended protection capability. The AS/NZS 2512.1:2009 Methods of testing protective helmets Part 1: Definitions and headforms (Australian/New Zealand Standard, 2512a) defines a test line around the head to which the helmet is supposed to extend. Dimensions for the test line were based on the Bitragion coronal and inion arcs, and the mid-sagittal arc. We added the dimensions of the head length, breadth and circumference to define an area that should be under the helmet protection for each participant (magenta area in Fig. 11(a)).By projecting the boundary edges of the inside liner onto the test area, we were able to determine the proportion of the head mesh under helmet protection (green area in Fig. 11(b)). This fit parameter was named the Head Protection Proportion (HPP).The Helmet Fit Index (HFI) provides a fit score for a particular helmet model and a human head. The index is defined on a scale from 0 (excessively poor fit) to 100 (perfect fit). The probability density function, f, of an exponential distribution is used to generate the index and is described as follows:(1)f(x;λ)={λ∗exp(−λx)x≥0,0x<0.where λ>0 is the parameter of the distribution called the rate parameter; x is defined as a function of the SOD, GU, and HPP.The probability density function was established on the exponential distribution rather than the log-normal distribution. This is because its right tail is relatively short and may be considered as having moderate skew (i.e. few outliers). A distribution with fewer outliers will produce more statistically significant results.The SOD optimal value should be greater than zero to allow for thermal control throughout the helmet and the addition of thin foam paddings for comfort. However, previous research showed that an excessive standoff distance would decrease the helmet protective function during a crash (Rivara et al., 1999b). For this reason, we considered the SOD to be optimum when it was in the range between 4 and 8 mm.GU is a critical parameter when analyzing the dispersion of the distance distribution. Seemingly, the fit is optimized when the standoff distance is uniformly distributed over the whole liner surface, which is equivalent to a lower deviation from the mean. Hence, the gap becomes more uniform when the GU approaches zero. Likewise, fit improves when the HPP approaches 1, which corresponds to a higher coverage area of the head provided by the helmet.The fit parameter x, is defined as:(2)x={a∗(|SOD−6|−2)+b*GUHPPfor4>SOD>8b*GUHPPfor4≤SOD≤8Where a and b were calculated as coefficient parameter, a=2/3and b=6/5.Based on the calculations for x from twenty participants reported in the previous pilot study (Perret-Ellena et al., 2014), and some test results published for 1D anthropometric studies using 1st and 99th percentile head measurements of males and females (Zhuang and Bradtmiller, 2005; International Organization for Standardization, 2010b), we anticipated that x rarely exceeds the 30 point value. A high value for x represents an extremely low fit. Therefore, it was decided to assign 0.1 to λ and multiply the function by 1000 to define the HFI function as shown in Fig. 12(e.g. with x=30, HFI=5).(3)HFI:[0;∞)→(0;100]x↦100*exp(−0.1x)Replacing x in Eq. (3) and rounding up to two decimal points gives:(4)HFI={100∗exp(0.13−|SOD−6|15−0.12GUHPP)for4>SOD>8100∗exp(−0.12GUHPP)for4≤SOD≤8Similarly, an HFI score was developed for local regions based only on the local SOD and GU. The proposed equation is expressed as follows:(5)HFIlocal={100∗exp(0.13−|SOD−6|15−0.12GU)for4>SOD>8100∗exp(−0.12GU)for4≤SOD≤8Table 3summarizes all fifty-seven quantitative variables generated for each participant. HFI was defined for six regions (one overall and five locals) based on two or three parameters (SOD, GU and HPP (only for global)) and for three different helmet models.The qualitative parameters (Table 2) were analyzed as ordinal variables (except for the ordered logistic regression where Fim and Fid were analyzed as continuous predictor variables), leading to the use of medians for the description of central tendency, and range and interquartile range for the description of dispersion. The space between the ten options on the ten-point scale proposed could not be equidistant and was hence problematic to model on a continuous scale. Confidence Intervals (CI) were calculated for both medians and means, and for HFIs mean differences.The first objective of the statistical models was to determine if the quantitative data (HFIs) were appropriate estimates of the qualitative data (Fit assessment scores FXG). Data for each helmet were first analyzed independently using ordered logistic regression where relationships between the independent variables (age, gender, Fim, Fid and HFIs) and dependent variables (FXG) were assessed. Odds ratios (OR) for a higher score in perceived helmets fit for the three helmets, given the independent variables, were determined where suitable. The data for the three helmet models were then compared using within-subject studies (statistical tests to determine difference between related groups) both at the subjective level and the objective level to evaluate how the helmets performed regarding fit. A Friedman test was run to determine if there were differences in the subjective assessment of helmet fit for each of the three helmet models. A one-way repeated measures ANOVA was conducted to determine whether there were statistically significant differences in the global HFI scores for the three selected helmet models. Lastly, a hypothesis test for a proportion was run to establish the capability of the HFI to select the best and worst perceived fitted helmet, given the three distinct models.The second objective of the statistical models was to assess whether there was differences in terms of helmet fit for diverse groups (gender and ethnic background). Where such differences existed, we determined where these dissimilarities occurred. Independent samples t-tests were run to assess gender disparity. One-way ANOVA with custom contrasts or Kruskal–Wallis tests were computed to investigate if any significant inequalities regarding helmet fit existed between Caucasians (Australasian and European) and Asians. All statistical analyses were conducted using IBM SPSS Statistics 22 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). The statistical significance α level was set to 0.05.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
