@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of slanted ergonomic mice on task performance and subjective responses

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper compares the performance of slanted mice with a conventional mouse.Task completion times of the slanted mice are longer than the conventional mouse.Subjective discomforts of the slanted mice are severe than the conventional mouse.The slanted mice have disadvantages in task performance and subjective responses.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Slanted mouse,Ergonomic mouse,Mouse evaluation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The biomechanical benefits (e.g., muscular activity) of slanted ergonomic mice have been comprehensively identified; however, their effects on task performance and subjective responses have not been fully investigated. The present study examined the effects of two slanted mice (slant angle = 30° and 50°) in comparison with a conventional mouse (slant angle = 0°) in terms of task performance (task completion time and error rate) and subjective responses (perceived discomfort score and overall satisfaction score). Experimental results showed that all of the task and subjective measures worsened as the slant angle of the target mice increases. For example, the task completion time (unit: ms) and overall satisfaction score (unit: point) of the 30° slanted mouse (time = 0.71, satisfaction = −0.09) and 50° slanted mouse (time = 0.73, satisfaction = −0.79) significantly deteriorated than the conventional mouse (time = 0.65, satisfaction = 1.21). The slanted mice seem to compromise biomechanical benefits with task performance and subjective responses.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The computer mouse is commonly used with graphic user interfaces. Using a computer mouse comprises one- to two-thirds of total computer usage time (Cook et al., 2000; Lee et al., 2008). In addition, the most frequently used input device among computer users is the computer mouse (Cook and Kothiyal, 1998; Jensen et al., 2002; Muller et al., 2010).The conventional computer mouse has been identified as a risk factor for upper extremity musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs) and localized pain. The conventional mouse requires a user to pronate the forearm and to extend the wrist during operation (Gustafsson and Hagberg, 2003). The pronation of the forearm may result in the development of WMSDs (Zipp et al., 1983; Hagberg, 1997; Liao and Drury, 2000). The extension of the wrist increases carpal tunnel pressure (CTP), which would be a potential risk factor for carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) (Keir et al., 1999; Fogleman and Brogmus, 1995; Bower et al., 2006; Mogk and Keir, 2007). In addition, the conventional mouse may lead to micro lesions in the low-threshold motor units because they have been continuously activated while using a computer mouse (called Cinderella Hypothesis; Crenshaw et al., 2007). Therefore, prolonged awkward posture and monotone movements can induce localized pain and discomfort on upper extremities (Muller et al., 2010; Cook and Kothiyal, 1998; Hedge et al., 2010).Slanted ergonomic mice have been introduced to reduce the negative effects of the conventional mouse in terms of arm posture, muscular activity, and CTP. The key feature of the ergonomic mice is the slanted angle of the top surface from the left side to the right side. The slant surface, contacted with the palmar side of the hand, can significantly reduce forearm pronation and wrist extension (Muller et al., 2010; Chen and Leung, 2007; Hedge et al., 2010) as well as reduce demands on muscle recruitments in the upper extremities and CTP at the wrist (Gustafsson and Hagberg, 2003).The slant surface of an ergonomic mouse can restrict performance during mouse usage tasks and can affect the level of subjective preference. Gustafsson and Hagberg (2003) reported that use of a vertical mouse (slant angle = 90°) decreased productivity by 24% in comparison with a conventional mouse. Furthermore, their subjective preference results showed that most of the participants preferred the conventional mouse more than the vertical mouse. Similarly, Scarlett et al. (2005) has revealed that use of a vertical mouse showed worse completion time and error rate than a conventional mouse by 10% and 20%, respectively.Although the slant angle of a computer mouse seems to negatively affect the task performance and subjective preference, its effects haven't been comprehensively studied yet. Chen and Leung (2007) studied the relationship between slant angle and upper extremity muscle use, and suggested that the optimal slant angle is between 20° and 30°. However, they did not consider performance or subjective measures in the determination of optimal slant angle, although the results on physiological measures (e.g., EMG) may be different from performance and subjective measures (Niesen and Levy, 1994; Gustafsson and Hagberg, 2003). Therefore, to understand the benefits of the slanted ergonomic mouse in comparison with the conventional mouse, the effects of slant angle on task performance and subjective responses should be examined.The present study investigated the effects of two slanted ergonomic mice (slant angle: 30° and 50°) on task performance and subjective responses in comparison with a conventional mouse (slant angle: 0°). To compare the performance and subjective responses among the target mice, an experiment consisting of two mouse-intensive tasks (pointing and dragging) was conducted with 40 participants.Forty participants in their 20s were involved in this study. Twenty of them were male and 20 were female. The average ages for male and female were 23.2 (SD = 2.6) and 21.7 (SD = 1.8) years, respectively. The dominant hand of all participants was the right hand. No participant had any muscular symptom or discomfort on the experimental day. The average hand lengths of male and female were 18.1 (SD: 7.5) cm and 17.2 (SD: 7.7) cm, which are similar to those of Korean male (mean: 18.6, SD: 8.1) and female (mean: 17.5, SD: 7.8) in their 20s. None of them had experience using a slanted mouse before this experiment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
