@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exploring physical exposures and identifying high-risk work tasks within the floor layer trade

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Most (91%) floor layers met caution risk levels of physical exposures daily.Prolonged awkward postures and high force exposures occurred in multiple body parts.Besides kneeling, poor neck and low back postures are common in floor layers.Upper extremity exposures occur from 10 to 30% of the work day.Hand, wrist, and shoulder exposure levels differ by the type of material installed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Musculoskeletal disorders,Observational assessment,Construction trades,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionFloor layers have high rates of musculoskeletal disorders yet few studies have examined their work exposures. This study used observational methods to describe physical exposures within floor laying tasks.MethodsWe analyzed 45 videos from 32 floor layers using Multimedia-Video Task Analysis software to determine the time in task, forces, postures, and repetitive hand movements for installation of four common flooring materials. We used the WISHA checklists to define exposure thresholds.ResultsMost workers (91%) met the caution threshold for one or more exposures. Workers showed high exposures in multiple body parts with variability in exposures across tasks and for different materials. Prolonged exposures were seen for kneeling, poor neck and low back postures, and intermittent but frequent hand grip forces.ConclusionsFloor layers experience prolonged awkward postures and high force physical exposures in multiple body parts, which probably contribute to their high rates of musculoskeletal disorders.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WRMSD) are a leading cause of injury and disability in the United States (U.S. Bureau of Labor and Statistics, 2009). Between 2003 and 2007, flooring contractors had the highest average WRMSD rate of 87.3/10,000 of employed workers involving days away from work compared to all other construction groups and far above the private industry rate of 42.0/10,000 workers (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2009). The past literature pertaining to floor layer injuries has primarily focused on the knee (Kivimäki et al., 1992; Village et al., 1993); kneeling and squatting postures, common in floor laying tasks, has been associated with knee osteoarthritis, meniscal tears, and knee bursitis (Coggon et al., 2000; Kivimäki et al., 1992; Yuan et al., 2011). With greater use of interventions and changes in work practices and policies, WRMSD have decreased in all industries over the past 10 years, although construction declines have lagged behind all other industries (Spector et al., 2011).In construction, the levels of physical exposures experienced during work tasks differ depending on the trade examined due to the highly variable schedules of workers and their job tasks. Floor layers perform more similar work tasks than many trades with each job requiring the same steps to install the material. General work tasks involve the preparation of floor surface, installation of materials, and finishing of floors with transition or base materials. However, the physical demands may differ between workers depending upon the amount of time spent in the general tasks as well as the material installed on the floor (Jensen et al., 2000b). Few studies have completed time studies of floor layers work tasks (Bhattacharya et al., 1985; Jensen et al., 2010; Kivimäki et al., 1992; Thun et al., 1987) and all of these studies focused solely on exposures of the knee to install flooring material.Floor layers spend long periods of time in awkward postures and with contact stress on the knee while kneeling and squatting to install materials (Ditchen et al., 2010; Jensen et al., 2000a; Manninen et al., 2002; Reid et al., 2010; Rytter et al., 2009b; Seidler et al., 2008). These workers also handle heavy loads, manipulate tools and materials during installation, and complete tasks involving hand repetition and force simultaneously, such as transporting materials and removing old flooring. The combination of repetitive manipulation, lifting heavy loads, and exerting high levels of force with awkward postures of the upper body, low back and lower extremity may increase the risk for WRMSDs in body parts other than the knee (Hartmann and Fleischer, 2005; Holmström and Engholm, 2003). It is important to assess physical exposures for all body parts within job tasks of floor layers across materials to understand the potential increased risks for WRMSDs in workers of this trade. Examining differences in exposures within material may shed light on opportunities for developing interventions.The purpose of this study was to explore the duration of time and intensity levels of observed physical exposures within floor laying tasks. Physical exposures were examined between different types of material and within different body parts (low back, knee, neck, shoulder, and wrist). Measured physical exposures for floor layers were compared to suggested threshold for exposures associated with increased risk for WRMSDs. The goal of the analysis was to determine whether the daily physical exposures of floor layers exceeded acceptable thresholds of exposures.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
