@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessment model for perceived visual complexity of automotive instrument cluster

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In-vehicle instrument cluster was divided into component for developing perceived visual complexity estimation model for each.Estimation model was developed based on objective measurement variables, questionnaires, and user experiment.Analysis on the influence of each component on in-vehicle instrument cluster was studied.Quantitative assessment model of instrument cluster developed based on estimated perceived visual complexity of components.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Perceived visual complexity,Quantifiable measurement variables,Assessment model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This research proposes an assessment model for quantifying the perceived visual complexity (PVC) of an in-vehicle instrument cluster. An initial study was conducted to investigate the possibility of evaluating the PVC of an in-vehicle instrument cluster by estimating and analyzing the complexity of its individual components. However, this approach was only partially successful, because it did not take into account the combination of the different components with random levels of complexity to form one visual display. Therefore, a second study was conducted focusing on the effect of combining the different components. The results from the overall research enabled us to suggest a basis for quantifying the PVC of an in-vehicle instrument cluster based both on the PVCs of its components and on the integration effect.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Advancements in automotive information technology have led to the introduction of new interactive devices for drivers, such as the in-vehicle information system (IVIS; Horrey et al., 2006). An IVIS has the ability to display more information than a conventional instrument cluster, including information on the current driving status, as well as information indirectly related to driving, like maps, entertainment information, and multimedia. To address this opportunity, full LCD displays are replacing conventional analog instrument clusters, which consist of a single display that shows information related to speed, fuel level, navigation, driving assistance, and more (Bellotti et al., 2004; Huang, 2007).The addition of information in visual displays is closely linked with visual perception and complexity. The principles of visual perception are commonly explained by a top-down interpretation of what humans see based on sensory information from the physical world (Gregory, 1970), and bottom-up information driven by human knowledge (Gibson, 1966). In this research we defined PVC as the degree of detail or intricacy that the user perceives in a visual stimulus by a combination of bottom-up and top-down processing (Gregory, 1970; Gibson, 1966; Lim and Liu, 2009). Therefore, increased complexity in visual perception can negatively affect how drivers process visual information (Noy et al., 2004; Van der Horst, 2004).Tsimhoni and Green (2001) investigated the influence of visual demands on driving performance in an experiment that measured visual demands and mental workloads when participants read an electronic map displayed in a vehicle both while driving and while parked. Their results highlighted the payoff that exists between visual demands and driving performance. High demand for visual attention to a specific visual display decreases drivers' visual attention to the road (Lee et al., 2007; Liang and Lee, 2010; Xia et al., 2010). This is likely why increasing the amount of information in in-vehicle displays could disturb driving performance and lead to safety concerns. In solving the potential problem of visual distraction arising from an excess of information provided by in-vehicle visual displays, the design and amount of information presented to drivers must be controlled and optimized.The visual complexity of in-vehicle visual displays has long been a topic of concern. Several studies have focused on the possibility of measuring complexity by objective metrics (Lavie et al., 2011; Huang, 2007; Cummings and Tsonis, 2006). Previous studies applied an image compression technique whereby an image's degree of visual complexity is calculated based on its compressed size (Tuch et al., 2009). Other researchers have proposed an approach whereby an image's visual complexity is calculated based on the length of edges within the image (Lim et al., 2010; Schmieder and Weathersby, 1983). However, these methods for quantifying the complexity of visual stimulus are difficult to apply in the process of designing an IVIS. In-vehicle information has the specific characteristic that different types of information are combined in a single display. Hence, it is important to consider the complexity of the display's individual components. Accordingly, in this research we analyzed the PVC of an in-vehicle instrument cluster based on the PVC of each of its components.To discuss issues related to the combination of different components to form a single visual stimulus, we revisit Gestalt theory of perception, which states that humans tend to focus on a whole stimulus rather than on its individual parts (Graham, 2008). Gestalt theory introduced the idea that there are differences between the perception of the whole and the perception of its components (Rock and Palmer, 1990). The theory states that different perceptions of the whole are created when different components interact (Rock and Palmer, 1990). This impacts the concept of organization, and provides insights into differences between the perception of individual components and the whole (Rock and Palmer, 1990). In the context of an in-vehicle instrument cluster, individual components can affect a system in different ways when they are combined.In this study, we investigated individual components' influences on the overall PVC and also evaluate their interrelationships. In this way, this research provides insights into the possibility of evaluating the PVC of an in-vehicle instrument cluster by estimating the complexity of its components. However, as in previous studies, we determined that the combination of different components impacts the perception of complexity (Rock and Palmer, 1990). We conducted a study to propose an assessment model for quantifying the PVC by including the PVC of the estimated components, and then added a factor that considered the effect caused by the combination of the components; these two approaches were combined to form a complete assessment model to quantify the visual complexity perceived by drivers.In the present study, we suggest an assessment model to quantify the PVC of an in-vehicle instrument cluster. We first propose the possibility of quantifying the PVC of the cluster by estimating the perceived complexity of its components. That is to say, our first hypothesis was that the estimated PVC of the components that form the in-vehicle instrument cluster can be applied to explain the PVC of the whole instrument cluster.However, the estimated PVC of each component did not significantly influence the PVC of the whole cluster. Thus, to evaluate the combination of components, we conducted a second study based on Gestalt theory, which states that the whole is different from the sum of its parts, and thus suggests why we were unsuccessful in explaining overall PVC in terms of the components. Our second research hypothesis was that an integration effect exists when different components are combined into the one stimulus of an in-vehicle instrument cluster. Therefore, we added this integration effect as a new factor in the assessment model. Herein the integration effect is defined as the effect of combining different components such as the speedometer, navigation display, and menu into a single display; this definition is based on previous studies of Gestalt theory (Rock and Palmer, 1990; Palmer and Rock, 1994; Stickel et al., 2010; Xiang et al., 2007). Thus, we suggest an assessment model to quantify the PVC of the whole in-vehicle instrument cluster by considering its components and the effect of their integration.In this study, we conducted a survey and a controlled experiment to evaluate our hypothesis. We developed a statistical model to estimate perceived complexity based on subjective and objective measurements of each of the eight components. We then evaluated the relationship between the estimated PVCs of the components and the subjective perception of the visual complexity of the in-vehicle instrument cluster as a whole. To assess the model to quantify the PVC of the whole display in relation to the PVCs of the components, a multiple linear regression model was used in addition to a factor quantifying the integration effect.Eleven objective, quantifiable measurement variables were selected from previous studies on visual complexity. These measurement variables were applied to objectively quantify factors of the visual stimulus. The objective measurement variables used in this study were stimulus size, icon size, component quantity, number of divisions, color variety, font variety, icon quantity, blank space percentage, text percentage, graphic percentage, and text-to-graphic ratio (Cummings and Tsonis, 2006; Forsythe, 2009; Kemps, 1999; Olivia et al., 2004; Harper et al., 2009; Michailidou, 2008; Stickel et al., 2010; Xing, 2007; Rosenholtz et al., 2007). Table 1lists the definitions of these variables.Moreover, for each component we determined which subset of objective quantifiable measurement variables were relevant to the characteristics of each component, as summarized in Table 1.Components refer to the types of information that are included in an in-vehicle instrument cluster and presented to the driver. Eight components were identified in the instrument cluster based on the types of information they presented to drivers. The components were classified as providing either conventional information or additional information. Conventional information includes the standard information traditionally provided in a vehicle instrument cluster, such as speedometer, tachometer, other gauges, and the gear position indicator. The component labeled other gauges refers to other related components that present information in gauge format in the instrument cluster, such as fuel level and engine temperature readings. Finally, the gear position indicator refers to the display showing the gear rotation information as the driver selects or changes gears. Additional information refers to information that has been integrated into vehicle instrument clusters more recently, with technological advancements. In this research, we categorized the additional information into four groups: navigation, assistive information, entertainment, and menu. Navigation refers to information related to vehicle location. Assistive information refers to information to help drivers optimize their driving performance. Entertainment refers to information related to enjoyment while driving that is unrelated to the main task of driving. Finally, menu refers to a graphic user interface that allows drivers to select which information is displayed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we examined the influence of the components of an in-vehicle instrument cluster on the PVC of the whole cluster. An estimation model was proposed to quantify the PVC of each of the components as a function of their quantifiable measurements, such as size, quantities, and ratios of design elements (font, icon, and text). The results of Study 1 showed that not all components had any measures studied that were significantly correlated with the PVC of the entire instrument cluster. The usability of each measurement as an estimator of PVC was tested by correlation analysis between each measurement and subjective and objective measures of PVC. Stimulus size, icon size, component quantity, blank space percentage, graphic percentage, and clutter were identified as factors that correlate with PVC. This reduced set of attributes was utilized to develop an estimation model for PVC of the whole in-vehicle instrument cluster. The results suggested that drivers respond to specific properties of the display design; therefore, these properties should be prioritized during the design process.Regarding conventional information displays, only the estimated PVCs of the speedometer, the other gauges, and the gear position indicator showed significant correlations with the subjective PVC of the complete in-vehicle instrument cluster; the estimated PVC of the tachometer was not significantly correlated with the overall display complexity. This suggests that the tachometer is less important to drivers than the speedometer, other gauges, and gear position indicator.The PVCs of the additional information displays were not statistically significantly correlated with the PVC of the whole instrument cluster; this might be due to participants' unfamiliarity with the additional information given in the in-vehicle instrument cluster. Accordingly, additional factors, such as user knowledge and preference, may play a role in the perception of visual complexity. Thus, further research is needed to investigate factors that influence perceptions of complexity.The results of this study agreed with the Gestalt law. However, the research objective was to propose a model to quantify the PVC of whole in-vehicle instrument clusters. Thus, we followed up with a study to investigate the possibility of identifying a new quantifiable component capable of representing the effect of integrating the eight components of the in-vehicle instrument cluster, since these components had only been considered separately in the initial study.In the case of an in-vehicle instrument cluster, there may be a perceptual grouping based on the Gestalt law. The cluster consists of several components, and the PVC of its whole visual stimulus depends on how the components are organized. Hence, grouping and organizing the components depending on their perceptual factors, such as size, common region, location, and color (Palmer, 1992), might provide different results.The model developed to estimate the integration effect was evaluated by analyzing the relationship between the integration effect, as calculated by using the estimation model, and the PVC of the overall in-vehicle visual display. As expected, there was a significant relationship between them. The results of this evaluation emphasized the strong relationship between the integration effect and the PVC of the overall in-vehicle display. The Pearson correlation coefficient for the integration effect was 0.575, which was the largest of all the components. This demonstrates the importance of harmoniously and meticulously integrating each component when attempting to decrease the perception of complexity in a visual display. The results of this study suggest that the integration effect can be used as a component to complement the estimation model for the PVC of an in-vehicle instrument cluster.This research aimed to develop an assessment model to quantify drivers' perceptions of the visual complexity of in-vehicle instrument clusters. The results revealed the differences in human perception when visual stimuli are seen together or separately. We focused herein on in-vehicle instrument clusters, but we expect that our findings apply more broadly to other visual displays with similar characteristics, namely, displays composed of different and independent components. This research was conducted using static visual stimuli; further studies are required to examine the perceived complexity of dynamic visual displays.