@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Practicing universal design to actual hand tool design process

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The context and concept of UD which evolves with time.Appropriate UD evaluation scales are varied on product attributes.User evaluation results are converted into product design factors.Examination of the importance of design factors by design verification.The proposal of new UD principles.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
User participation,Product design process,Universal design (UD),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
UD evaluation principles are difficult to implement in product design. This study proposes a methodology for implementing UD in the design process through user participation. The original UD principles and user experience are used to develop the evaluation items. Difference of product types was considered. Factor analysis and Quantification theory type I were used to eliminate considered inappropriate evaluation items and to examine the relationship between evaluation items and product design factors. Product design specifications were established for verification. The results showed that converting user evaluation into crucial design verification factors by the generalized evaluation scale based on product attributes as well as the design factors applications in product design can improve users' UD evaluation. The design process of this study is expected to contribute to user-centered UD application.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The term universal design (UD) was proposed by the American architect Ronald L. Mace in 1985 during the development era of “barrier-free design” (Kawauchi, 2001). The purpose of UD is to promote interaction between products and the environment, and to allow users to use the product effectively without having to adjust to the product (Connell et al., 1997). The concept of universal design is making mainstream products and services accessible for whom mainstream users and those with specific requirements without special adaptations (Keates and Clarkson, 2003). After North Carolina State University established the Center of Universal Design (CUD), its research teams formulated seven UD principles (Connell et al., 1997). Subsequently, Satoshi Nakagawa considered the economic, aesthetic, and environmental friendliness dimensions, and added three supplemental dimensions: durability and economics, quality and aesthetics, and health and environment (Nakagawa, 2006). This enabled designs to increase their interaction with users. Comparatively, the 3B principles proposed by Ronald L. Mace (better design, more beautiful, and good business; Mace, 1970) focused on the economic and aesthetics dimensions, but were overly abstract when used in actual applications. Therefore, in consideration of practical applications, the Japan Ergonomics Society employed equitable use as the basic principle and the three product dimensions of operability, functionality, and attractiveness to compile UD principles (Japan Ergonomics Society, 2007). The results indicated that the principles and context of UD evolved over time, and varied according to different requirements in various industries. Japanese industries have attempted to implement UD in actual applications. To facilitate the development of UD, Mitsubishi Electric built the UD-Checker UD evaluation tool (Sawada et al., 2006). Toyota applied UD thinking to conduct evaluations of the ergo-index and scene conformity level (Kanamori and Misugi, 2004). This indicates that the UD product market based on the “respect each individual to achieve self-actualization” ideal is rapidly growing. User requirements, market knowledge, and approaches that are easy to understand are used to design and produce products that can achieve maximal usability for individual users. However, in the nearly 30 years of implementation since Ron Mace proposed the term UD in 1985, industries still lack sufficient design-related knowledge to realize UD (Vanderheiden and Tobias, 2000). Actual applications typically involved the use of UD scales (“scales useable for everything”) for conducting postevent product evaluations. There are several specific modules were developed to modify products so that could become universal has been brought up as strategies for universal design (Clarkson et al., 2003; Moon and McAdams, 2009). Based on target user simulation and product evaluation, University of Cambridge attempted to practice the idea of universal design into product design process (Clarkson, 2008; Clarkson et al., 2003, 2008; Langdon et al., 2008a,b; Waller et al., 2008). The research team integrated user trials to identifying usability problems and exclusion calculation, an expert appraisal method based on demographic population estimated how proportion of the people would be excluded from universal evaluation of products and services due to lack of capabilities or limitations (Keates and Clarkson, 2003; Waller et al., 2009, 2010). It was recommended to use both methods meanwhile to provide different guidance needed which were identifying behavior capability problems or needs by exclusion calculation and were expecting unexpected user behavior and cognition (Clarkson et al., 2007; Goodman-Deane et al., 2014). However, it is hard to identify the user group and find out who the boundary user are. Besides, for the universal design tool of exclusion calculation, it is difficult to define who the expert is to evaluate vision, hearing, thinking, dexterity, reach & stretch and locomotion (Goodman-Deane et al., 2014). In the other hand, in the perspective of design practice in past researches, marketing, economy, feasibility and its evaluation with respect to disabilities and limitations were considered to develop a method and make decisions for universal product families' design (Moon and McAdams, 2009). The product platform was established by mathematical method of Bayesian Game to identify the best module of product families regarding uncertainly market environments (Moon and McAdams, 2010). Kostovich et al. integrated the activity diagram, a progression to examining user interaction from purchase to recycling or disposal of products (Otto and Wood, 2001), and functional model, a graphical illustration of product functionality (Hirtz et al., 2002; Otto and Wood, 2001), to create a product analysis framework which was called action–function diagram (Kostovich et al., 2009). The diagram based on the concept of graphical representation during the early stages of design, a single graphical representation of user activity and product function which thus made user centric thinking and information available. According to the differences within functionality, morphological and parametric, products were categorized into universal one and its typical counterpart and the comparisons were applied to each pair afterward in order to analyze and practice into the researches of universal design (McAdams and Kostovich, 2011). Furthermore, universal architectural systems and consumer products were compared formally at the function level (Sangelkar and McAdams, 2010); and the transferability of application from American with Disabilities Act (ADA) to universal design of consumer products was detailedly analyzed (Sangelkar and McAdams, 2012). However, managing differences in product attributes by using scale designs is difficult, and scale evaluations are typically conducted during product design or after mass production is completed. In addition, design teams often make speculations and decisions based on their own experiences, intuitions, and assertions (Mitsufuji and Uchida, 1993). Even if the design team is experienced and possesses accurate intuition, the team cannot accurately convert user evaluation data into design factors without establishing reliable information for evaluating design factors (Haapalainen et al., 1999/2000). In a situation where user evaluations cannot be converted into design factors, the team can expect the future product to have only certain functions, but cannot propose product attribute design factors that conform to the spirit of UD.Therefore, a product design perspective was used in this study to propose a UD application methodology, which is expected to contribute to UD application in product design. Although industries generally use automated machines and automated production in contemporary product design, hand tools are still the primary and most direct contact medium for workers (Christensen and Bishu, 2000). Additionally, “do it yourself” (DIY) trends were used in this study to explore actual self-actualization ideals. Previous related studies have focused on the design product of using a tool in itself, and explored the quality of the design by using task-orientated results. In recent years, design thinking has extended to the work-place environment, and whether users can easily and comfortably implement work tasks has been investigated (Aptel et al., 2002; Marsot and Claudon, 2004). Because comfort in operating a product influences the purchase intentions of consumers, comfort is a factor that manufacturers have wished to explore (Vink et al., 2005). Feelings of discomfort can reduce users' operating performance and work satisfaction (Fellows and Freivalds, 1991). Numerous scholars have indicated that comfort and users' work performance are directly linked (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2006; Dempsey et al., 2002). Therefore, comfort is a factor that cannot be overlooked in hand-tool design. However, product attributes of hand tools differ greatly, and the overall value of exploring similar design factors is not high. Therefore, needle-nose pliers were used in this study as an example because many people use this product in daily life, and because needle-nose pliers have clear design factors. End users were invited to participate in the design process. In addition, this study focused on the following four aspects during the exploration of UD application in the product design model: 1) the context of UD which evolves with time; 2) development of an appropriate generalized evaluation scale based on product attributes; 3) examination of the importance of universal product design factors in conducting design verification; and 4) the proposal of new UD principles.Research method and procedure are divided into four sections from discussing the changed in the context of UD and its evaluation scale. The concept and development of UD are dynamic and the scale may be varied by product types. Third, most of the past UD application researches belong to postevent evaluation instead of initial design process. At last, the new UD principle is proposed over time and with changes in user requirements. Needle-nose pliers were used as an example, and end users were invited to participate in the design. This study was not limited to design evaluations, and user evaluations and opinions were converted into design factors to implement UD in the product design process.UD has been recognized as the current design trend around world. In the past 30 years of UD development, numerous scholars and organizations have proposed theories and insights that enable people to understand UD concepts. The Japanese scholar, Naoaki Nippashi, proposed the “design for ourselves” concept in 2006. Nippashi investigated the implementation of UD in practical applications, how UD will be expressed in the future (Nippashi et al., 2006). The scope of UD thinking is broad and diverse, but a method for practical application has not been proposed.The seven principles proposed by Satoshi Nakagawa, Ron Mace, and the Japan Ergonomics Society, and the supplemental principles of economics, aesthetics, and environmental friendliness reflect design and practical requirements, which increase the comprehensiveness of UD principles. This indicates that the context of UD will change over time and with changes in practical requirements.Comfort is a major factor that influences hand-tool design and use. However, the context of UD includes broad practical values, and comfort is only one part. Comfort alone cannot provide users with maximal benefit. UD concepts and comfort factors related to hand tools were used to conduct the research in this study. Based on the development and application of existing UD principles, 10 UD-related concepts were investigated in this study: UD principles proposed by Mace, application and implementation of UD in Japan, design for ourselves, inclusive design, user centered design (UCD), user experience design (UED), emotional design, human interface, ecodesign, and lifestyles of health and sustainability (LOHAS). These principles were used to compile 71 UD-related words (Nippashi et al., 2006). Additionally, the method used by Dutch scholars Kuijt-Evers et al. for evaluating hand-tool usability was employed to extract 36 words related to comfort, and introduce four vocabulary items that are highly correlated with comfort (professional looks, styling, nice color, and solid design; Zhang et al., 1996). In addition, words related to items that influence user experience were extracted from the feedback of users provided during qualitative questionnaire interviews (factors that influence the purchase of needle-nose pliers and user experience). These extracted words were used to build a UD word database and compile 118 representative words related to hand-tool evaluation (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004). Furthermore, specialized words were avoided to reduce cognitive differences and misunderstandings among users.The evaluation items used in this study were compared and compiled using contemporary UD principles and evaluation items. Evaluation items were defined individually by considering the relationship between target product attributes and UD words. Item analysis was used to evaluate the relevance of the pretest items, the reliability of individual scale items, and the suitability of the overall scale. Factor analysis was used to eliminate items that were inappropriate or had a weak relationship with the target product. A new generalized evaluation scale was constructed according to the dimensions covered by each product attribute.Evaluation scales are generally used on products or things for conducting user evaluations in UD or other fields of academic research. The resulting scores are used to determine the quality of the product or item. However, evaluation results alone cannot be used to convert user opinions into design factors directly. If the evaluation scale enables users to conduct evaluations, but does not enable designers to understand the implications of the evaluation results, then designers can rely only on subjective opinions, repeated tests, and simulations to achieve product modification or innovation in subsequent development processes. This enables designers to understand clearly the importance of user opinions and evaluation feedback derived from the scale evaluation, and facilitates the improvement of their designs. The results of this study are expected to serve as a reference for designers in the future design of needle-nose pliers that include UD.The context and development of UD change over time and with changes in user requirements. Factor analysis was used to effectively compile generalized evaluation items into new UD principles. Although the number of extracted factors was not high, a large amount of explained variance is required. The difference in the items comprising the common factors was small, which enabled the convenient naming of factors. In addition, the items comprising the factors were appropriate, which confirmed the construct validity of the new UD principles. To confirm the reliability and validity of the scale further, the Cronbach's α coefficient obtained from the reliability analysis was used as the standard (Bryman and Cramer, 1997) to judge the stability and reliability of each principle in the scale, and confirm the authenticity of the scale items and principles.A relational investigation based on the UD words obtained in the literature review, the characteristics of needle-nose plier use, and design factors was conducted to identify appropriate words for use in the generalized needle-nose plier design evaluation scale. Cluster analysis was used to select representative test samples based on design characteristics. Participants were invited to conduct the evaluation of the new UD scale by operating representative test samples. Item analysis was used to eliminate inappropriate evaluation items, and principle component analysis was used to group evaluation items, obtain UD principles, and compile a generalized needle-nose plier design evaluation scale. Finally, quantification theory type I was used to examine the relationship between the evaluation items and design factors based on the obtained design principles and product-design factors to clearly convert user evaluations and preferences into design factors, and to provide standards for design verification. This was divided into the following three parts (Fig. 1).In accordance with the UD ideal of suitability for most people, and considering experiment safety and user experience, the participants selected for this experiment were healthy people over 12 years of age. Human physiological functions begin to degrade at the age of 40 years. At 65 years, people's vision and organ functions begin to degrade, and analytical, judgment, and calculation abilities gradually degrade to 75–80% of the original ability (Morimoto et al., 2001). People's response ability also decreases with age. When encountering complex situations, degradations in cognitive function can influence decision making in elderly people (Salthouse, 1992). However, in situations in which a person has accumulated years of user experience involving a single mental task, elderly people possess superior operating skills compared with those of young people (Charness, 1981). Based on the aforementioned cutoff point, the target group for this experiment was people between 12 and 65 years of age, with 10 years as the delineation between each age group. Sex was another considered factor. Because of differences in the target product's attributes, male users outnumbered female users. Additionally, previous research exploring hand-tool user comfort indicates no significant difference in the needs of DIY users compared to professional users, and, therefore, they can be perceived as one group (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004). Therefore, random sampling was used in this study to allocate professional users and typical household DIY users proportionally to the various study groups to implement the essence of UD.From a UD qualitative research perspective, the broader the age group distribution, the better can the importance and equitable use in society of individuals in different age groups be highlighted. The difference in the ratio of men to women indicates that the male participants outnumbered the female respondents because the female respondents lacked hand-tool user experience. The participant demographics are shown in the following table (Table 1).Work tasks that facilitate user operation and evaluation were established to enable participants to express their feelings and opinions accurately during the product evaluation. Evaluations were conducted using the same operation experience standards. Qualitative questionnaires and partially close-ended questions were used to interview the participants regarding work tasks that require needle-nose pliers. The results indicate that most people use needle-nose pliers for “clamping with the tip,” “fixing,” “cutting,” and “bending” tasks. Because most people use needle-nose pliers to perform these four common tasks, these tasks were used as the work tasks for this experiment.The selected target product must be a mature product with clearly defined design factors. Unclearly defined design factors can cause cognitive confusion and the inability to implement user evaluation findings during the design stage. Products that are still in the development stage or have newly introduced functions have unclear product design factors, and the use of these products can result in inadequate experimental samples. Using different methods to operate products with dissimilar attributes can produce few overall benefits of applying common factors. Therefore, a single-attribute tool (the needle-nose plier) was selected as the target product in this study. Based on market segmentation and differences in exterior styling, function, brand, and place of origin, a total of 33 needle-nose pliers on the market were collected. To prevent an excessive number of samples from influencing the mental workload of the participants, a qualitative user experience questionnaire in which a 7-point Likert scale was implemented was used to explore the factors that influence the user purchase of hand tools. The results were transformed into hand-tool evaluation attributes (aesthetics, convenience, and operability). These attributes and the “comfort” described in hand-tool-related research were used as evaluation factors. Cluster analysis was used to compile the target product's design characteristics. User perspectives were used to examine needle-nose plier design factors and select representative test samples.Prior to distributing the questionnaires to the participants, the design factors that influence needle-nose pliers and the procedures used in this experiment were explained to the participants. The needle-nose plier components were defined as the plier head and handles. The overall design considerations for the plier head included a head with or without serration, a wire stripper, and a wire cutter. The design considerations for the plier handle included the material, textured handles, degree of styling changes, and a springback design (springs or a spring plate). The size and weight of the overall product were factors that influenced the needle-nose plier evaluation (Fig. 2).To convert user opinions into design factors, literature reviews and discussions with experts were conducted to define the needle-nose plier design factors clearly and provide the participants with the same evaluation standards. The definitions of the needle-nose plier design factors used in this study are shown in Table 2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
