@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Systematic engineering tools for describing and improving medication administration processes at rural healthcare facilities

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Providing a clear road map to identify potential issues in a clinical activity.Medical staff not exchanging the up-to-date MARs promptly.Nurses spent a lot of time seeking tools, supplies, or missing drugs.Nurses prepare more than one patient's drugs at a time out a convenience.Some drugs or supplies are stored in inappropriate locations due to limited space.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electronic health record,Hierarchical task analysis,Medication administration process,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study demonstrates a series of systematic methods for mapping medication administration processes and for elaborating violations of work standards at two rural hospitals. Thirty-four observational periods were conducted to capture the details of clinical activities, and hierarchical task analysis (HTA) was used to demonstrate the current medication administration process. Facility nurse managers in five units across the two facilities participated in focus group discussions to validate the observational data and to generate a reliable context-appropriate medication administration process. The potential errors or misconduct when passing the drugs were identified, such as unsafe storage and transportation of drugs from room to room. Those hazards would cause drug contamination, loss, or access by unauthorized individuals. Hospitals without 24-hour pharmacy coverage and other interruptions would hinder the medication administration process. Preparing drugs for more than one patient at a time would increase the risk of passing the drugs to the wrong patient. This study shows the use of observation and focus groups to describe and identify violations in the medication administration process. A clear road map for continuous clinical process improvement obtained from the current study could be used to help future health information technology implementation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In 2009, President Obama signed a $19.2 billion stimulus package, the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, to incentivize medical practices to adopt and implement electronic health record (EHR) systems. In order to provide effective information exchange for the healthcare systems in the United States, the legislation envisioned the utilization of EHR systems. Hospitals and clinics implementing such a system could receive bonus payments, as long as their databases meet information-exchange regulations (Blumenthal, 2009, 2010, 2011; Department of Health and Human Services 2010).However, the transition of daily clinical documentation from a paper-based system to electronic-based records would impact the conventional workflow. Many medical practitioners, facility managers, or stakeholders could underestimate the impact of this transition (Chan et al., 2006; Ghosh et al., 2006). Due to the changes involved with using the new Health Information Technology (HIT), EHR, hospitals and clinics seek professional assistance for evaluating the new workflows. For example, hospitals either seek aid from contracting consulting services or by establishing the quality assurance units within their facilities (Cendán and Good, 2006; Guite et al., 2006; Harders et al., 2006). Those interventions can help the facilities to perform process mapping, identify problems, aid in setting expectations for achieving HIT goals, and ensure that quality of care is retained or enhanced while having new technology.On the other hand, the changes due to adapting new HIT could have greater impact in small, rural facilities than in hospitals in urban areas. In general, rural facilities have fewer financial capabilities for seeking professional opinions or to invest in advanced technological options (DesRoches et al., 2008; Jha et al., 2009a,b; Middleton et al., 2005). Thus, in order to help rural hospitals accommodate the new EHR system for workflow transitions, the main purpose of this study is to introduce systematic methodologies and to guide medical professionals in modeling and describing the clinical practices in detailed steps. Rural hospitals are defined as non-federal and short-term general acute care hospitals that are located in rural areas. The U.S. Census Bureau (2010) defines a rural area as an area with a population of less than 2500 people. This study seeks to elaborate on the continuous improvement to demonstrate: (1) how to map clinical practice into visual aids, (2) how to conduct valid and reliable field study in healthcare settings, and (3) how to conduct successful group discussions for improving clinical practices. Once the practitioners (e.g., medical staff or quality specialists, etc.) are familiar with those methodologies, the same study procedure can be applied to various clinical practices. This study mainly focuses on a specific clinical practice, the medication administration process, to demonstrate the applications of the systematic tools in rural hospitals.The medication administration process is a series of complex tasks conducted by nurses in healthcare facilities (Alper et al., 2012; Carayon, 2006; Fraind et al., 2002; Grigg et al., 2011; Keohane et al., 2008; Lane et al., 2006). The most relevant studies have focused on applying information technology (IT) (e.g., the barcode scanning system or EHR system) to medication administration so as to prevent medical errors and to increase patient care safety (Agrawal and Glasser, 2009; Carayon, 2010; Cescon and Etchells, 2008; Koppel et al., 2008; Patterson et al., 2006, 2004; Poon et al., 2008, 2009, 2006). In general, the underlying medication administration process should satisfy the “five rights” principle. “Five rights” means that the nurse should give the right medication to the right patient in the right dose by the right route at the right time (Cescon and Etchells, 2008; Eisenhauer et al., 2007; Grigg et al., 2011; Koppel et al., 2008). In addition, some literature also mentions a sixth right for medication administration – the right documentation (Pape et al., 2005; Roach, 2000; Salmon and Pomerantz, 2009). Nurses should record the patient's status prior to administering medications. The nurses must also make a note on the patient's record, along with the dose given, time given, and the route given (Harrison and Weiss, 2010).Even with the “five rights” principle firmly established, it can still be a challenge to implement a standard procedure that is safe for administering medications in hospitals. The differences between units within a facility or differences between facilities are the primary causes of this challenge. In particular, it is not easy to have an identical standard work procedure for medication administration in these healthcare facilities due to the differences in physical layouts, equipment installations, workforce deployments, organizational culture, and practice policies across the facilities.The purpose of this study is to investigate the differences between units within rural healthcare facilities focusing on the medication administration process. Based on the findings, this study can provide insights into the medication administration workflow to demonstrate the violations of work standards within this clinical activity. Further, the current study provides a clear road map for the clinical process and it can be used to help future health information technology implementation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
