@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessments of risky driving: A Go/No-Go simulator driving task to evaluate risky decision-making and associated behavioral patterns

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
High-risk and low-risk drivers in G/NG-SDT were characterized by the number of Go decisions.High-risk drivers showed more violations, as well as higher DBQ-violations scores, and more BART pumps.High-risk drivers demonstrated smaller safety margins, and more reckless longitudinal and lateral controls.Velocity, accelerator and rotation were consistently distinguishable between high and low risk drivers in all situations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Risky driving,Simulator,Decision-making,Behavioral patterns,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study sought to develop and validate a Go/No-Go Simulator Driving Task (G/NG-SDT) to evaluate driver risky decision-making and associated behavioral assessments at a situation-specific level. Eighty-four participants were instructed to complete a route in as short time as possible, but avoiding any violations or crashes. To achieve this aim, they had to decide to go or wait in the dilemma scenes, paired with the baseline scenes in several scenarios. High-risk drivers with more Go decisions demonstrated more violations, in both simulator tasks and real road driving, as well as higher scores of Driving Behavior Questionnaire (DBQ) violations and more Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) pumps. These high-risk drivers also showed distinguishable behavioral patterns in simulator driving, moderated by the specific driving situations (e.g. scenario and scene). Several behavior assessments were consistently distinguishable in all tested situations, qualified as robust indictors to predict risk-taking in more general driving situations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Despite the unremitting efforts of road administrators, automobile manufacturers, and researchers to enhance road safety, traffic accidents remain the major cause of casualties worldwide. Global fatalities and injuries due to traffic accidents exceed one million and tens of millions per year, respectively (WHO, 2013). Nearly one hundred thousand fatalities occur each year on the roads in China (CRTAS, 2013). In 2011, the United Nations (UN) launched its decade of action for road safety (WHO, 2011), with the aim of stabilizing and then reducing global road deaths by 2020. Over one hundred countries, including China, have committed themselves to this aim.Previous studies have claimed that risk-taking is a key contributor to these on-road tragedies (Arthur et al., 1991; Gully et al., 1995; Iversen and Rundmo, 2002; Jonah, 1986). It is well known that traffic violations and aggressions are associated with risky decision-making (Bachoo et al., 2013; Blockey and Hartley, 1995; Cheng et al., 2012; Ivers et al., 2009; Junger et al., 2001; Parker et al., 1995).Driving tasks require drivers' decisions a compromise between motivated goals (e.g. saving time or sensation seeking) and risk avoidance (e.g. penalties or accidents), which motivate subsequent behavior on the road. Such decisions were driven by individuals' punishment-reward system, including Behavioral Activation System (BAS) and Behavioral Inhibition System (BIS) (Balconi and Crivelli, 2010). Risky drivers often give higher weight to the former, (Tom et al., 2007), which also related to the traits of impulsivity, sensation-seeking and anger (Bachoo et al., 2013). Therefore, reliable and comprehensive assessments of traits relating to risk-taking are necessary to identify high-risk individuals in order to undertake corresponding interventions.The Driver Behavior Questionnaire (DBQ), developed by the Manchester Driver Behavior Group (Reason et al., 1990) is the most widely used instrument of self-reported driving behavior. In the DBQ, violations and errors are distinguished as two different concepts (Parker et al., 1995). Violations are defined as “deliberate dangerous driving”, while errors are referred to as “the failure of planned actions to achieve the intended consequences”. The subsequent study suggested a supplementary concept of lapses, which were related to “failures of attention or memory” (Lajunen et al., 2004). It was suggested that scores of violations directly indicate intended risk-taking, which also demonstrated stronger correlation with crash involvements than the scores of errors or lapses (de Winter and Dodou, 2010; Parker et al., 1995).Aggression is another well-conceptualized risky behavior, which is largely determined by a driver's anger traits (Jerry L. Deffenbacher et al., 2001; J. L. Deffenbacher et al., 1994; Jovanović et al., 2011). It was suggested that drivers with highly aggressive propensities are more likely to be angered by uncomfortable driving situations, and risky driving could also be a way to vent their anger in such situations (Delhomme et al., 2012). Anger traits have often been measured by the Driving Anger Scale (DAS) (J. L. Deffenbacher et al., 1994), the Aggressive Driving Behavior Scale (Houston et al., 2003) or the Prosocial and Aggressive Driving Inventory (Harris et al., 2014).Although many studies have validated the subjective instruments by linking them to actual behavior on the road (J. L. Deffenbacher et al., 1994; T. Lajunen et al., 2004; Xie and Parker, 2002; Zhao et al., 2012), it was also claimed that the data derived from these instruments was lacking in reliability due to participant response styles, imperfect recall of retrospective events, impression management, and social desirability (Timo Lajunen and Summala, 2003; Sullman and Taylor, 2010). For these reasons, several objective indictors have gained prominence to assess risk-taking behavior in real-life situations. For instance, the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) (Lejuez et al., 2002), which has been shown to correlate significantly with risky driving (Cheng et al., 2012).Compared with the above instruments, driving data could provide more direct and objective assessments of risky driving. Previous simulator studies (Schwebel et al., 2007, 2006) examined risky decision-making of drivers while driving through closing gates which blocked the intended route. The results implied a relation between risky decision-making during simulator tasks and violation history, which was mediated by the individual personalities.Meanwhile, various behavioral assessments were explored to quantify risk tendency. Several studies examined the safe margin of drivers in specific situations, such as crossing/turning at intersections (Alexander et al., 2002; Pollatschek et al., 2002) or merging into traffic streams (Beanland et al., 2013; Yan et al., 2007). These studies suggested that risky drivers demonstrated high acceptance of small safety margins (e.g. Time-to-Collision or distance, TTC). The metrics of driver longitudinal (e.g. velocity, accelerator and brake pedal) and lateral (e.g. rotation, steering wheel) controls were also promising indicators of risk-taking. In a simulator study to explore the influence of personal traits on driver behavior (Stephens and Groeger, 2009); drivers with higher DBQ-violation scores tended to brake less heavily. In line with this result, a real world highway driving study (Zhao et al., 2012) also found that drivers with high DBQ-violation scores drove faster and demonstrated more lane changes.Decision-making could quantify a driver's balance between motivated goals and risk avoidance. However, the critical situations which can lead to risky decision-making are difficult to control and repeat in the real world. Other behavioral assessments (e.g. safety margin and vehicle control) were repeatable and comparable in both simulator and field environments. Nevertheless, the major challenge for these behavioral assessments was that the individual behavioral patterns were largely determined by specific driving situations, as elaborated by the task–capability interface model and risky-homeostasis theory (Fuller, 2005), and supported by experimental studies (Hoogendoorn et al., 2013; Stephens and Groeger, 2009). For example, in situations of high complexity/risk, even risky drivers demonstrate low speed and conservative maneuvers. In contrast, in situations of low complexity, even safe drivers adopt high speed and initiative behavior. The behavioral patterns reflecting the individual differences were largely buried by the variety of driving situations and difficulty in providing robust predictors of risk-taking in general situations (Stephens and Groeger, 2009; Zhao et al., 2012). To address this issue, it is necessary to explore these behavioral assessments in a wide range of driving situations.The purpose of the present study was to develop and validate a Go/No-Go Simulator Driving Task (G/NG-SDT) with objective assessments of driver risk related traits. Based on the above discussion, the proposed protocol and assessments should meet the following requirements: 1) the designated driving task should include a variety of driving situations, to comprehensively reflect driver decision-making and related behavioral patterns; 2) risky decisions in driving tasks should be related to driver records on the road in the real world, as well as other existing instruments; 3) the behavioral assessments qualifying as robust indicators of risk-driving should be able to distinguish high-risk drivers consistently across different situations.Specifically, during the G/NG-SDT, participants were instructed to complete a pre-designated route in as short time as possible, but avoiding any violations and crashes. Over the route, the participants encounter various scenarios, each of which contained a baseline scene (i.e. free driving situation) and a paired dilemma scene (i.e. situation with interference from other road users). During the dilemma scenes, the intended route of participants was blocked by other approaching road users, and they have to decide to go (i.e. take a risk) or to wait (i.e. show caution).The primary measure of G/NG-SDT was the total number of Go decisions made in the dilemma scenes. Participant task performances and vehicle controls were also recorded across different scenarios and scenes. We hypothesized that high-risk drivers with more Go decisions also showed high risk propensity in the simulator and real road driving, as well as determined by instruments. It was also assumed that the behavioral assessments for these high-risk drivers significantly differed with those of low-risk drivers. Among these behavioral assessments, robust assessments were consistently distinguishable between high-risk and low-risk drivers in all scenarios and scenes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The G/NG-SDT proposed in this study used reward-motived simulator driving tasks to measure driver decision-making and related behavioral patterns across different driving situations, which were related to their intended risk-taking. Drivers with more Go decisions in G/NG-SDT also showed higher risk tendency on the road and in other related instruments, and demonstrated distinguishable behavioral patterns. Among all those examined, behavioral assessments, velocity, percentage of accelerator pedal, and rotation velocity were consistently distinguishable between high-risk and lower-risk drivers in all driving situations. In light of this, the G/NG-SDT, as well as other standardized simulator tasks, are feasible to identify risky drivers for more effective interventions.