@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Display and device size effects on the usability of mini-notebooks (netbooks)/ultraportables as small form-factor Mobile PCs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The closer the device sizes to the regular sizes, the shorter the operation times.Both the effects of screen and input-device sizes affected movement times.The 11.6″ and 7″ diagonal screens were most and least preferred, respectively.All performances of the 10.1″ model rationalized its domination in the market.The 8.9″ model was good in portability and task performances (except for typing).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Input device,Size effect,Mobile PC,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
sA balance between portability and usability made the 10.1″ diagonal screens popular in the Mobile PC market (e.g., 10.1″ mini-notebooks/netbooks, convertible/hybrid ultraportables); yet no academic research rationalizes this phenomenon. This study investigated the size effects of display and input devices of 4 mini-notebooks (netbooks) ranged in size on their performances in 2 simple and 3 complex applied tasks. It seemed that the closer the display and/or input devices (touchpad/touchscreen/keyboard) sizes to those sizes of a generic notebook, the shorter the operation times (there was no certain phenomenon for the error rates). With non-significant differences, the 10.1″ and 8.9″ mini-notebooks (netbooks) were as fast as the 11.6″ one in almost all the tasks, except for the 8.9″ one in the typing tasks. The 11.6″ mini-notebook (netbook) was most preferred; while the difference in the satisfactions was not significant between the 10.1″ and 11.6″ ones but between the 7″ and 11.6″ ones.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As advances in Internet, wireless communication, and touch-control technologies, Eee PC launched in 2007 and iPad launched in 2010 have triggered mini-notebook (netbooks) and tablet market, respectively. Since then, many computer vendors had been offering netbooks and tablets which are two categories of so-called “Mobile PCs”. Actually netbooks fall into a category of what vendors refer to as “small form-factor” notebooks. Small form-factor notebooks have been known by various names, including subnotebook (ultra-portable, mini-notebook/netbook, ultrabook and mini ultraportable/ultrabook), CloudBook, and ultra-mobile PC (UMPC). There is no clear boundary between each other. Similarly, both powerful tablets (with super portability and enhanced productivity) and tablet-ultraportables (combining the ultraportable features of tablets with the productivity of detachable/dockable-hybrid or sliding/rotating-convertible keyboards, and the flexibility to switch between form factors) blurred the boundary between tablet and laptops. In this scenario, to compete with increased tablet adoption and the shift to touch notebooks and ultra-slim devices with lower-priced solutions, netbooks had been evolved to be “tablet-netbooks/ultraportables” with hybrid or convertible modes of tablets and netbooks; likewise, some small form-factor laptops, so-called “slim-type laptops” (ultraportables, ultrabooks, or mini ultraportables/ultrabooks with less than 14″ diagonal screens) have been transformed to be “ultrabooks/ultraportables- tablets”. These phenomena were especially widespread in the second half of 2013 with newly marketed processors aimed to bring more tablet PC-like features (e.g., instance on, all-day battery life, and sleek form factors) to notebook PCs. The tablet-netbooks/ultraportables and “ultrabooks/ultraportables- tablets” eventually converges to be convertible/hybrid “tablet PCs” as one category (except the ones remained as so-called convertible/hybrid or 2-in-1 ultraportables/ultra-slim PCs, e.g. Ultrabook 2 in 1). Thus, it seems that the PC brands have been increasing the number of tablet PC models (including convertibles/hybrids) in their product mixes.According to the data of “Comparison of tablet computers” and “List of Windows 8 and RT tablet devices” (Wikipedia Contributors, 2013a, 2013b) and cross-checking with the brands' product listings (deducted the overlapping with convertible/detachable Ultrabooks or mini-Ultrabooks) on websites, around 4%, 21%, 13%, 43%, and 19% models in the market were the tablet computers with 5″ (and smaller), 7″–7.2″, 7.7″–9.4″, 9.7″–10.8″, 11.6″ (and larger) diagonal screens, respectively. The new form factors of convertibles and hybrids contributed 34% (55 in 161) models to the tablet PC market (2009–2013), including merely 9% (1 in 11) the 7.7″–8.3″ screen models but around 42% (26 in 62) the 10.1″–10.8″ ones (convertible vs hybrid vs slate = 10%:32%:58%), 71% (10 in 14) the 11.6″ ones (convertible vs hybrid vs slate = 29%:42%:29%), and 77% (10 in 13) the 12.1″–12.5″ ones (convertible vs hybrid vs slate = 36%:55%:9%), respectively. Among the total tablet market, 62% (46 in 161) table computers were the 10.1″–12.5″ screen models of which 52% (46 in 89) were convertibles/hybrids. Similarly, based on the release of Windows 8 (and latest version Windows 8.1), some ultraportables/mini-ultrabooks have also been evolved to expand the convertible/hybrid form factors of ultrabooks and tablets with 11.6″–15.6″ diagonal touchscreens. (Wikipedia Contributors, 2013c) From these market data mentioned above, it was obvious that mini-notebooks/netbooks with 10.1″–12.5″ diagonal screens and ultraportables/mini-ultrabooks with 11.6″–15.6″ diagonal screens have been evolved with device convergence and responding by adopting the features of both tablets and notebooks that users most appreciated.With the optimal-sized displays and dedicated keyboards, “tablet-subnotebook/netbooks” and “ultraportable-tablets” allowed sufficient performances to fulfill the needs of a majority of PC users, such as web browsing, e-mailing, social networking, photo sharing, and other Internet-centric activities, as well as word processing and spreadsheet works. According to a recent CEA research study (Consumer Electronics Association, 2013), in U.S. household that 92% and 83% tablet users utilize their tablets to browse the Web and check e-mails, respectively. In addition, tablets are used for more leisurely activities such as playing games (78%), watching videos (66%), and reading e-books (61%). While 46% of them reducing the time spent on laptops, 98% tablet owners have not stopped using laptop. As a result, consumers are gravitating toward connected mobile devices able to perform multiple functions in efficient form factors like laptops or convertible/hybrid tablet PCs with productive keyboards.To fulfill users' needs of convenience and efficiency in the growing but fast changing mobile PC market, there is no one-size-fit-all device solution but adoption of appropriate form-factor device to specific task types. In fact, no matter how form factor (including size, shape, and layout) shifts, it simultaneously impacts mobility and productivity. Still, there were two major limitations with small form factors (including subnotebooks, mini-notebooks/netbooks, ultraportables, or their convertible/hybrid tablet modes) – limited viewing area on the screen and inability to type fast without constantly hitting the wrong keys. Consequently, for instance, some 12″ tablet-mini-notebooks/netbooks (convertibles) with larger screens and keyboards had been emerged to solve the limitations, while they were almost full-sized laptops which removed certain portability. However, no matter what type of task is applied, the size effect impacts productivity, portability and user's experience of device usage on any form factors of mobile devices. Thus, for the sake of simplicity, with a range of small form factors in size (from 7″ to 11.6″ screen diagonal), light weight, and complete with multiple input options (touchscreen, touchpad, and keyboard), netbooks (with touchscreens) were suitable to test and compare on varied application tasks if and how the size effects of displays and/or in-put devices impact the usability of ultra-portables/mini-notebooks. In terms of focusing on size effects, this study investigated and compared four mini-notebooks (netbooks) with 7″, 8.9″, 10.1″, and 11.6″ diagonal touchscreens which might provide valuable information to small form factors of convertible/hybrid tablet PCs/ultraportables, ultra-slim PCs, or similar mobile/portable computing devices.In addition to the form factors in sizes, given the demands in price-sensitive markets, the average selling prices might also affect the acceptance of products. Generally, most of mini-notebooks (netbooks) were less expensive and lighter than traditional laptop PC's. For example, the standard netbooks' prices (around US$200–450 in the US market) and typical weights (around 2–3.2 lbs.) were dependent on sizes and features, while many mini-notebooks (netbooks) with expanded features increased costs and weights. On the contrary, the prices of ultra-slim PCs (or ultraportables) have gradually decreased due to maturing panel production process. Recently a generation of low-voltage ultraportables appeared with prices under $600. By the end of 2013, a new generation of Windows tablets (or tablet-ultraportables hybrids) will be launched in a variety of price points, sizes (e.g. around 8″ or 10″), and form factors (even under $330 for some 10.1″ hybrid devices, e.g. Asus' tablet-netbook Transformer line, compared to $329 for 7.9″ iPad mini). Hence a mini-notebook’s (netbook's) or ultra-slim PC's (ultraportable's) price and weight are dynamic due to features and hardware (and/or software) platforms, and a larger device is not necessarily more expensive or heavier than a smaller one (yet still remain its competitive advantages).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
As the results revealed, it seemed that the closer the touchpad/touchscreen/keyboard sizes to the regular sizes, the shorter the operation times. Therefore, the differences were not significant in operating times between the 10.1″ and the 11.6″ models. It was observed that both the effects of display sizes and device sizes on the input devices affected movement times, and the task complexity and/or the constrained device sizes significantly influenced whether the display size effects would be enhanced or reduced by device size effects on motor controls. These above results were consistent with the results of significant scale effects in path steering and typing tasks (e.g., Accot and Zhai (2001); Yoshitake (1995)) and display size effects in simple pointing and multidirectional pointing tasks (e.g., Tränkle and Deutschmann (1991); Oehl et al. (2007)) performances, respectively.Basically, the subjective assessments confirmed the objective measures. As the results showed, the larger the model size, the higher the score in subjective measure (including ‘visual discriminability for screen’, ‘cursor movement’, ‘touchpad performances’, ‘touchscreen performances’, and ‘keyboard performances’).Overall, for all input devices tasks, the 10.1″ model was as fast as the 11.6 model and the 8.9″ model was as fast as the 10.1″ model. For the touchpad and touchscreen tasks, the 8.9″ model even could be as fast as the 11.6″ model. It seems that the 8.9″ one might be ideal for performances in touchscreen and touchpad tasks. However, given the similarity of the performance results of the 3 larger screens, the 10.1 size strikes a good balance between size of characters on screen and keyboard, weight of device, battery life, selling price, and user preference. Without significant degradation, all input devices performances of the 10.1″ model experimentally rationalized the domination of the 10.1″ diagonal screen (33% among the existing tablet computers) in the market (Wikipedia Contributors, 2013a, 2013b) even though buyers drive the mini-notebook (netbook)/ultraportable (as well as hybrid or convertible tablet/ultrabook) market toward larger screen sizes and prefer the 11.6″ diagonal screen. Consequently, considering the effects of device size, users could be suggested to select the 10.1″ mini-notebooks (tablet-netbooks, ultraportables/mini-ultrabook, or their convertible hybrid tablet modes) with all the optimal input tasks performance and portability, the 11.6″ one with the best performance and slightly less portability, or the 8.9″ one with superiority in portability and good tasks performance (except for typing).