@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Human performance under two different command and control paradigms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A simulated command and control task was performed thirty times by two teams who were structured differently.Due to the inherent instability of the human/system interaction a strong differential learning effect took place.The hierarchical command and control team were faster but less accurate than the network enabled team.The common ‘one shot’ cross-sectional psychology experiment would not have detected these differences.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Command and control,System design and evaluation,Time series analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paradoxical behaviour of a new command and control concept called Network Enabled Capability (NEC) provides the motivation for this paper. In it, a traditional hierarchical command and control organisation was pitted against a network centric alternative on a common task, played thirty times, by two teams. Multiple regression was used to undertake a simple form of time series analysis. It revealed that whilst the NEC condition ended up being slightly slower than its hierarchical counterpart, it was able to balance and optimise all three of the performance variables measured (task time, enemies neutralised and attrition). From this it is argued that a useful conceptual response is not to consider NEC as an end product comprised of networked computers and standard operating procedures, nor to regard the human system interaction as inherently stable, but rather to view it as a set of initial conditions from which the most adaptable component of all can be harnessed: the human.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper is motivated by a number of intriguing observations made during a large-scale simulated command and control exercise (Walker et al., 2009; Stanton et al., 2009). The exercise had the explicit aim of testing a new method of collaborative working supported by a networked ‘infostructure’ commonly referred to as Network Enabled Capability (NEC; e.g. Ferbrache, 2003; Alberts, 2003; Alberts et al., 1999). When the subsequent task analysis was scrutinised it was found that this socio-technical system was exhibiting unusual behaviour. Over time it became progressively more preoccupied with the ‘means’ to achieve a given end (the ‘process’) rather than the massing of objectives or ‘end states’ (the ‘output’). The latter focus on outputs is what is normally expected from NEC and what was expected in this case. Despite the provision of a networked information infrastructure, individuals and teams either used it in unpredictable ways or else adopted more familiar and presumably easier methods of working. To paraphrase Clegg (2000), what was witnessed were “people interpreting the system, amending it, massaging it and making such adjustments as they saw fit and/or were able to undertake” (p. 467). Paradoxically, what was designed to be a highly rational operation end up growing quite irrational (Ritzer, 1993, p.22). Experience over centuries of military command and control (e.g. Regan, 1991) make it possible to go further; the sociotechnical infrastructure put in place to manage large, complex, dynamic resource systems such as these can, if not designed correctly, actively create inefficiency (instead of efficiency), unpredictability (instead of predictability), incalculability (instead of calculability) and a complete loss of control (Ritzer, 1993; Trist and Bamforth, 1951). These are the antithetical problems, ironies, productivity paradoxes and ‘irrationalities of rationality’ (Ritzer, 1993) that, when all else fails – as in this case – fall into the domain of Applied Ergonomics.On closer inspection findings such as these are common, both in the field of military command and control and more generally in the sociotechnical literature. In the former case several studies have observed sub-optimal performance in terms of performance time (or the so-called Observe, Orient, Decide, Act loop; Stanton et al., 2009), task accuracy (or more specifically fratricide/friendly fire;Rafferty et al., 2012), not to mention overall system effectiveness. The UK's nascent NEC capability has already been the subject of a high profile parliamentary inquiry due to £4.7 bn of expenditure failing to translate into more effective command and control (House of Commons, 2007). The wider sociotechnical literature presents an interesting counterpoint. It abounds with examples of favourable ‘joint optimisation’ of people and management infrastructures (e.g. Walker et al., 2008; Teram, 1991; Trist, 1978; Davis, 1977), demonstrating the contribution a user-centred approach to organisational design can make. Indeed, if military operations really are as enormously complex as commentators feel, and complexity theory is the appropriate response, then by extension command and control should organise best from the bottom-up (Cebrowski and Gartska, 1998, p. 4–5). In other words, the component in these systems best able to cope with complexity is the humans. This creates a different interpretation of the results that motivate this study.Drawing from the emerging world of networked technologies such as the internet (the world from whence NEC concepts seem to have been derived in most cases) it is possible to discern powerful new trends whereby this form of human adaptability, far from being commanded and controlled out of existence, is instead actively exploited. From the sublime (e.g. the Human Genome Project) to the ephemeral (e.g. Facebook), both are networked, highly distributed systems embodying the diffuse non-linear causality of peers influencing peers (Kelly, 1994; Tapscott and Williams, 2007; Viegas et al., 2007). These are entities where the boundary between designers and users has become “highly blurred, highly permeable, or non-existent” (Scacchi, 2004, p. 6–7). Under these ‘initial conditions’ highly effective and agile forms of organisational infrastructure have ‘emerged’ rather than been created. To use Toffler's (1981) or Tapscott and William's (2007) phraseology, the participants in the motivating case study behaved rather like ‘prosumers’, individuals who see the ability to adapt, massage, cajole and generally ‘hack’ a new technology as a birth right (p. 32). In the Ergonomics world Shorrock and Straeter (2006) remind us that people are still needed in complex command and control systems precisely because of this, and that human adaptability is inevitable (Hollnagel, 1993). So perhaps a more useful way to look at NEC is not to see it as an end product or an entity that ‘is’ something, but rather as a process, something that ‘becomes’ (e.g. Houghton et al., 2006). It seems possible to go even further, to argue that an alternative conception of NEC is not something that can be called a finished article, but rather as the initial conditions from which the most adaptable component of all, the humans in the system, create the end product most useful for their particular set of circumstances. Even then, this adaptation may prove fleeting and highly context dependant.The purpose of this paper is to take the anecdotal evidence observed in the field and try to recreate, if not the exact situation, then at least conceptually similar conditions in the laboratory. The advantage of this, of course, is the degree of control that can be imposed, control that was almost entirely lacking in the case study example that has brought us to this point. Caution, however, needs to be exercised. Paradoxically, too much control could conceivably prevent the emergence of the adaptive behaviour being sought, so a novel approach to experimental design needs to be adopted. In the present study what might be referred to as a classic hierarchical command and control organisation (so called ‘classic C2’) was created within a simulated environment, then pitted against a peer-to-peer NEC counterpart, both of which contained live actors who had to operate within a complex, adaptive, high tempo scenario. Both conditions represent ‘frameworks’ that people undertake a common task within but different constraints apply to the different conditions. For example, there is relatively little in the way of rigid task specification in the NEC condition (the focus is on outcomes not actions) and the technological infrastructure is configured to facilitate peer-to-peer interaction. The opposite is true for the C2 condition. Here there is a high degree of ‘scripting of tasks’ and a more constrained technological infrastructure within which this occurs.Manipulations such as these have (and continue) to be of importance within the Ergonomic literature (e.g. Sinclair et al., 2012). The research question links to wider debates within Applied Ergonomics around collaboration (e.g. Patel, Pettitt and Wilson, 2012) and organisational/group learning (Guimaraes et al., 2012). The same artefacts have been observed beyond the field of Ergonomics in a number of recent studies in the specialised command and control literature (Stanton et al., 2012, 2009; Bordetsky and Netzer, 2010). Common to these studies is a break from the traditional human centred approaches wherein the interaction and subsequent representations are generally static (Lee, 2001; Woods and Dekker, 2000). In this study we continue to assume they are dynamic. There is a good basis for this. Patrick, James and Ahmed (2006) for one recognise the ‘unfolding’ nature of command and control in their particular ‘process based’ methodology. They state that, “A critical feature of command and control in safety critical systems is not only the dynamically evolving situation or state of the plant but also the fluctuating responsibilities, goals and interaction of team members” (p. 1396). Our experimental design needs to take such factors into consideration but there is a trade-off. The link between the ‘unfolding’ nature of command and control and the resulting human interaction is no longer a direct one. There is also the likelihood of hidden variables that cannot be known in advance. Despite this there is a wider cybernetic principle at work: “if all the variables are tightly coupled, and if you can truly manipulate one [or a few] of them in all its freedoms, then you can indirectly control all of them” (Kelly, 1994, p. 121). In regard to human performance under different command and control paradigms the central question is related as much to the outright relative performance of the two organisations, the ‘short term’ end product (and what is normally measured) as it is to the pattern of adaptation and how performance changes over time, or the ‘long term’ end product. In other words, the central question relates to the system that the users ‘design for themselves’ by undertaking whatever adaptations they feel able and necessary, factors that are not normally measured. Whilst the promise of NEC leads us to anticipate better initial conditions for more effective adaptation, the sociotechnical ‘model’ needs to be run in order to find out.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The results, in summary, show that the traditional command and control condition is good at optimising task completion times, starting off slower than NEC but catching up and overtaking it. Optimisation of task time, however, comes with no benefit to other factors, in particular, the C2 condition is less accurate. What the NEC condition loses in task time (approximately 1 min) it ‘gains’ in accuracy and remains stable in terms of enemies neutralised. The main lesson to learn from this study is the instability of the human-system interaction and the impact this has on how future studies could or should be considered. If the human-system interaction had been assumed to be stable the results would have been quite different. Even allowing for not just one but several practice or control trials, the NEC condition would have posted faster task completion times than the traditional command and control condition. The trade-off, of course, is that what is gained with a repeated measures study is lost in terms of the diversity and size of the sample. To gain this back would inevitably require considerably more experimental resources than is presently common. Thus a broader lesson can be extracted, which is to adopt a contingent approach. To determine, first of all, the likely instability in the human-system interaction of interest and approach the study design with that in mind. For ‘stable’ problems the conventional cross-sectional study will perform well. For ‘unstable’ interactions, the type of study undertaken here may well reveal the real underlying phenomena of interest. In doing so, the present study gives us insights into the following:•The emergent nature of command and control: Participants did indeed perform adaptations to the way they carried out their task within the confines of the study. This methodological success shows that these open-systems properties can be instantiated (and measured) in a laboratory setting, which...…led to a degree of unpredictability in the NEC condition: This behaviour matched that observed in the previous live case study which motivated the current paper. It was hypothesised that NEC would increase tempo, and had a static view of the human system interaction been taken this view could be upheld. But with NEC representing an initial condition from which adaptations could take place, this hypothesis was not supported, however……are we comparing like with like? With more than one factor to optimise is the fact that NEC was slower really very meaningful? Perhaps not. Whereas the more traditional hierarchical command and control condition accelerated task completion times this came at a cost to other factors, a cost that the NEC condition was able to trade-off and optimise. How these two organisation types are able to balance and optimise more factors than those present in the current study requires further research, but the possible relationship between the ‘rigidity’ of a team structure (i.e. hierarchical command and control) versus its output flexibility (i.e. ability to optimise more than one process outcome) is an intriguing one with numerous analogues in the literature.As the case study(s) that have motivated this work have already hinted, NEC-like organisations often exhibit paradoxical behaviour. The NEC condition ‘should’ have been faster, but actually, the scope of adjustments available (and actually made by the incumbents of the team roles) meant that task time was not elevated to the status of single most important priority. This, surely, is a desirable outcome given the inherent complexity, dynamism and asymmetry present in the context within which these organisations operate. Perhaps this is the hallmark of what NEC is really all about? The greater extent of open systems behaviour is what seems to enable the NEC organisation to undertake a more complex process of optimisation compared to its hierarchically organised counterpart. The take home message seems to be that this situation can be made to arise by creating the optimum conditions for the most adaptable, open-systems component of all in NEC: the human.This paper operates in the domain of Effects-Based Operations (EBO) from which terms such as ‘effect’, ‘effector’ etc. are drawn. The author's acknowledge that ‘affect’ and ‘affector’ are more linguistically appropriate in most cases.