@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Anthropometric study of farm workers on Java Island, Indonesia, and its implications for the design of farm tools and equipment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We collected anthropometric data of farm-workers from 3 diverse regions on Java Island.The anthropometry was statistically different among regional groups and gender.We compared the anthropometry to the groups of people from eight other nations.We analysed the suitability of farm tools design to the anthropometry of farmers.Ergonomic consideration may improve the tools' design to suit them to the users.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Anthropometry,Farm worker,Tool design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Anthropometric data are a prerequisite for designing agricultural tools and equipment that enable workers to achieve better performance and productivity while providing better safety and comfort. A set of thirty anthropometric dimensions was collected from a total sample of 371 male and female farm-workers from three different regions (west, central and east) of Java Island, Indonesia. The mean stature is 162.0 cm and 152.5 cm, the sitting height is 82.9 cm and 77.4 cm, and the body weight is 57.1 kg and 52.3 kg for male and female subjects, respectively. The index of relative sitting height (RSH) was 0.51 on average for both male and female subjects. Significant differences are found in most of the anthropometric dimensions between gender and regional data groups as well. Compared with groups of people from several other countries, the anthropometric dimensions of Indonesian people are quite similar to Indian people, but are relatively smaller than Filipino, Chinese, Japanese, British, and American people. An attempt was conducted to illustrate the use of this anthropometric database and ergonomic considerations in refining the design of traditional tools and equipment commonly in use for rice farming operations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Indonesia is an agricultural country in which a large portion of the population engages in agricultural works, either as smallholder farmers, farm labourers, or workers in agro-industrial plantations. In spite of a doubling of the total population from 1970 to 2010, the proportion of the agriculture-engaged workforce decreased by half over the same period (Komatsuzaki and Syuaib, 2011). Moreover, the proportion of female and elderly farm-workers is also steeply increasing.Various types of tools, equipment and simple machines have been commonly used to accomplish a variety of farm works, and new types of machines are sometimes introduced to improve the productivity of farm operations. Ergonomic considerations are required in this regard to attain a good match and suitability of machines to tasks to ensure safety and enhance comfort and eventually to leverage productivity.Anthropometry is a branch of Ergonomics that considers the measurement and description of the dimensions of the human body. Anthropometric considerations in the design of tools will result in the improvement of performance and efficiency along with safety and comfort as well as prevent work-related injuries or accidents. Anthropometric dimensions vary considerably across gender, race, ethnicity and age (Pheasant, 2003). Anthropometric data of several Asia Pacific populations have been reported, such as those in China, Japan and Korea (Lin et al., 2004); the Philippines (Prado-Lu, 2007); India (Dewangan et al., 2008; Agrawal et al., 2010); Turkey (Iseria and Arslan, 2009); Malaysia (Karmegam et al., 2011); and Iran (Sadeghi et al., 2015). However, the application of anthropometry to the design of farm tools and machinery has not been implemented in practice in Indonesia due to the lack of a proper anthropometric database.To collect anthropometric data representing the Indonesian population as a whole is quite cumbersome because the country's area is quite extensive and consists of hundreds of tribes and ethnic groups. With a focus and emphasis on the main island of Java – which is inhabited by over half of the total population as well as by over half of the agriculture-engaged population of the country (Statistics of Indonesia, 2013) – this study was conducted with the aim to obtain an anthropometric database that can be used to design, or refine the design of, tools, machines, or work systems, particularly in agriculture.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Thirty anthropometric parameters of Indonesian farm-workers in three diverse regions of Java Island were collected and summarized. The variation in the anthropometric dimensions among people in the regions and between males and females were analysed. Significant differences of most of the anthropometric dimensions were indicated between males and females as well as among people of diverse ethnic backgrounds. Generally, the anthropometric dimensions of Indonesian farm-workers are found to be similar to Indian workers; however, they were comparatively smaller than the Filipino, Japanese, Chinese, Brazilian, Turkish, British and American workers, for both males and females.Indonesia is a country with diversity in both indigenous and agro-environments, and agriculture-related operations still play a very important role in the local economy, employing the majority of the grass-root population. Most of the agricultural tools and equipment used by the majority of farmers are simple and traditional that are locally produced by small-scale makers or artisans and are designed with a lack of ergonomic principles. Some tools or machinery may also be introduced and adopted from other regions or countries. As a result, an anthropometric database is essential in Indonesia to enable engineers, manufacturers, or artisans to design, adopt, adjust or modify the tools, machines, or equipment manufactured in other countries or regions that are being introduced in Indonesia.