@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Validation of standard ASTM F2732 and comparison with ISO 11079 with respect to comfort temperature ratings for cold protective clothing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Both standards predict similar temperature ratings for 1.89 clo and 2 MET activity.The prediction is consistent with thermophysiological and thermal comfort responses.For 4 MET activity, the whole body thermal responses are on the cold side.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cold,protective clothing,Metabolic rate,Thermal comfort,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
American standard ASTM F2732 estimates the lowest environmental temperature for thermal comfort for cold weather protective clothing. International standard ISO 11079 serves the same purpose but expresses cold stress in terms of required clothing insulation for a given cold climate. The objective of this study was to validate and compare the temperature ratings using human subject tests at two levels of metabolic rates (2 and 4 MET corresponding to 116.4 and 232.8 W/m2). Nine young and healthy male subjects participated in the cold exposure at 3.4 and −30.6 °C. The results showed that both standards predict similar temperature ratings for an intrinsic clothing insulation of 1.89 clo and for 2 MET activity. The predicted temperature rating for 2 MET activity is consistent with test subjects' thermophysiological responses, perceived thermal sensation and thermal comfort. For 4 MET activity, however, the whole body responses were on the cold side, particularly the responses of the extremities. ASTM F2732 is also limited due to its omission and simplification of three climatic variables (air velocity, radiant temperature and relative humidity) and exposure time in the cold which are of practical importance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the most important thermal properties of cold weather protective clothing is insulation. European standard, EN342: Protective clothing – Ensembles and garments for protection against cold, specifies the protection offered by the clothing. It states that the insulation value shall be marked on the clothing (EN 342, 2004). In the USA, however, this is often expressed as a temperature rating on product labels and in product descriptions in catalogs (McCullough et al., 2009, ASTM F2732, 2011). In Europe, the temperature ratings on sleeping bags are also standardized (EN 13537, 2002). Compared to stating the insulation value, putting the temperature on clothing labels is an alternative and easier way for users to understand. The ultimate goal of both standards is to provide protection and thermal comfort for users.American standard ASTM F2732 (2011) estimates the lowest environmental temperature for thermal comfort for cold weather protective clothing for two physical activity levels (2 and 4 metabolic equivalent (MET), 1 MET = 3.5 ml O2/kg/min = 58.2 W/m2) in cold environments based on measured clothing insulation and human heat balance model. International standard, ISO 11079 (2007): Ergonomics of the thermal environment – Determination and interpretation of cold stress when using required clothing insulation (IREQ) and local cooling effects – serves the same purpose but expresses cold stress in terms of required clothing insulation for a given cold climate condition (air and radiant temperatures, humidity, air velocity), work rate (including walking or work created air movements) and air permeability of clothing, or duration limited exposure (DLE, Dlim.) when clothing insulation is known. At very low temperatures and low activity levels, IREQ becomes high. If the clothing insulation does not provide such high insulation, indicating that a person cannot sustain this cold stress for 8 h, then a recommended maximal exposure time, i.e. DLE (in hours), is calculated. The IREQ equations are open and it is also possible to determine temperature ratings when clothing insulation is known. As both standards are based on heat balance equations, it would be of interest to compare them. The comparison was partly carried out by a recent study on the influence of different ways of wearing clothing on clothing insulation and temperature rating predictions (Li et al., 2012).In comparison with ISO 11079, ASTM F2732 is based on environment conditions with a number of assumptions and limitations (McCullough et al., 2009). The effects of radiant temperature and wind are not used in the heat balance model. Radiant temperature is assumed to be equal to air temperature. Wind and pumping effect are not taken into account. An average of 50% relative humidity is used in the model. The duration of cold exposure has not been taken into consideration either.Holmér (1984) introduced IREQ for the analysis of cold stress, based on which the international standard ISO 11079 was developed in 1993, and the latest ISO version was released in 2007 (ISO 11079, 2007), and an updated web IREQ (version 4.2) was available from 2008 (Nilsson and Holmér, 2009), which provides a fully operational online program for calculation of IREQ and Dlim. The method used for the calculation of heat balance is the same as in the standard. Users are not only able to calculate IREQ and Dlim values, but are also able to view the open source code and download a copy that can be run on any personal computer with JavaScript installed. This has made the close scrutiny of the program possible in the scientific community. Recently, d'Ambrosio Alfano et al. (2013) conducted an in-depth analysis of IREQ program and found incongruities and errors in the web based program leading to a systematic overestimation of the duration limited exposure. However, they have also pointed out that the presence of the errors and inconsistencies only slightly affects the required insulation values, which indicates that the errors may be mainly related to the clothing insulation and related heat transfer through clothing when calculating DLE, as the calculation of required insulation values are based on climatic conditions and metabolic rates. Earlier versions of the standard (ISO/TR 11079:1993, ISO/CD 11079:2001) were validated by field studies (Griefahn, 2000), wearing trials and manikin measurements (Holmér et al., 2003), and human subject tests (Kuklane et al., 2007b).Since the thermophysiological responses to cold are complex; independent validation and continuous improvements of the models are needed (Holmér, 1995). Cold environments represent a challenge to the human heat balance and protection. More studies are required to explore the interaction between thermal comfort perception and heat exchange in cold environments (Holmér, 2004). A laboratory validation of EN 13537 on sleeping bags has been recently reported (Lin et al., 2013). In contrast with the temperature ratings for sleeping bags, physical activities while wearing cold weather protective clothing play a more important role in determining the temperature ratings for thermal comfort. The first version of ASTM F2732 (2009) included only one level activity of 2 MET. The latest version has also incorporated 4 MET activity. The increase of physical activity level means a prediction of much lower temperature rating for clothing with the same insulation. Whether the increase of physical workload and metabolic rate can maintain heat balance and thermal comfort in extremely cold environments needs to be further studied and validated. Therefore, the objective of this study was to validate and compare the prediction of temperature ratings by both standards using human subjects at two levels of metabolic rates (116.4 and 232.8 W/m2), and to provide further evidence to improve the standards.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Both ASTM F2732 and ISO 11079 standards predict similar temperature ratings for an intrinsic clothing insulation of 1.89 clo and 2 MET activity. For higher physical activities, higher air velocity and walking generated air movement, the prediction of comfort temperature ratings differs more since ASTM F2732 does not consider air velocity and pumping effects in the temperature rating prediction.When the intrinsic thermal insulation of the cold weather protective clothing is 1.89 clo, the predicted temperature rating for 2 MET activity is valid according to test subjects' thermophysiological and subjective responses. For 4 MET activity, however, the whole body thermal sensation and thermal comfort are on the cold side, particularly the responses of the extremities. The predicted temperature rating is too low for thermal comfort. Although the core temperature is table, heat loss from the body continues because the mean skin temperature is low and drops continuously. Therefore, the predicted temperature rating may put users at risk for an eight-hour work shift. In contrast, the predicted temperature rating according to ISO 11079 seems to be more reasonable based on this study.For a given total insulation, the temperature rating will decrease with the increase of activity level. However, special attention needs to be paid to extremities. The thermal insulation for peripheral extremities should be increased with the decrease of air temperature particularly in extremely cold environments even though the physical work intensity is high. The ASTM standard has indicated that localized cooling and discomfort can occur on different parts of the body. However, the local cooling is not further specified. In addition, the application of the ASTM F2732 is limited because of its omission and simplification of three climatic variables (air velocity, radiant temperature and relative humidity) and exposure time factor in the cold which are of practical importance. When these factors change, the cold weather protective clothing will not provide predicted thermal comfort and protection.