@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The influence of occupation and age on maximal and rapid lower extremity strength

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined age-related maximal and rapid strength capacities in workers.Physical workload was quantified and examined in relation to strength capacities.Occupation did not influence the age-related decline in any strength variables.A negative correlation was shown between workload and rapid strength in older men.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rate of force development,Blue collar,Aging,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aims of this study were to 1) examine the influence of age and occupation on maximal and rapid strength of the lower-extremity muscles and 2) examine the relationship between maximal and rapid strength and physical workload (work index (WI)) in the blue-collar (BC) cohort. Peak torque (PT) and peak rate of torque development (peakRTD) of the leg extensors (LE), leg flexors (LF), and plantar flexors (PF) were assessed in 47 young (age = 24.1 ± 2.4 years) and 41 middle-aged (52.4 ± 5.2 years) white-collar (WC) and BC men. Middle-aged workers exhibited lower PT for all muscles, and peakRTD for the LF and PF muscles. A positive relationship (r = 0.59; P < 0.01) was observed between WI and peakRTD for the PF in the young BC workers, however, this relationship was negative (r = −0.45; P = 0.053) for the LF of the middle-aged BC workers. Lowering physical work demands and/or incorporating effective health-related practices for employees may be appealing strategies to enhance aging workers' productivity and longevity in the workforce.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rapidly rising age of the labor force has resulted in the number of workers aged 55 and older to double between 1990 and 2010, with projections of a further 38% increase by 2020 when this population will comprise 25% of the total labor force (Toossi, 2012). Despite recent technological advances and automated labor, workers categorized in blue collar occupations still comprise over 60% of the labor force (Workers by occupational category, 2012). In addition, the physical work demands of these workers may not decline with age (Ilmarinen, 2002), but may actually increase, as reported by Nygard et al. (1997) who examined physical work demands over an 11-year period in older workers. Moreover, research suggests that those involved in physically demanding work are predisposed to early retirement (Yeatts et al., 2000). Thus, a better knowledge of the influence of physical work demands on various physiological systems (e.g. neuromuscular function) will be important to help maximize the productivity and longevity of the aging manual laborer.It is known that neuromuscular function progressively declines with advancing age (Clark and Manini, 2008) and adequate neuromuscular functioning is required for optimal occupational-related performance (de Zwart et al., 1995). Previous authors have also indicated that occupational demands may also have a significant influence on neuromuscular function. For example, studies examining the shoulder and wrist flexor muscles (Schibye et al., 2001; Tammelin et al., 2002; Torgen et al., 1999) have reported that workers in blue collar (BC) occupations exhibited greater muscular strength when compared to those in white collar (WC) occupations, while more studies have suggested either no differences for trunk and wrist flexor muscles (Nygard et al., 1987a, 1988, 1991a) or lower muscular strength for the wrist flexor, trunk, and leg extensor muscles (Nygard et al., 1987a, 1991a; Era et al., 1992; Heikkinen et al., 1984) for BC versus WC workers. Moreover, the interaction of the workers' age and occupational category further complicates the ability to elucidate the influence of occupational demands on the decline of overall physical function in the aging worker. Mixed findings have also been reported for the effects of aging in workers of different occupational categories. For instance, Schibye et al. (2001) demonstrated greater muscular strength in the shoulder muscles of BC workers (waste collection) when compared to WC controls, however, in contrast, both Heikkinen et al. (1984) and Era et al. (1992) reported lower strength in older BC workers compared to WC controls. Although discrepancies among these studies may be due to different strength testing methodologies, muscle groups, and age groups, little is presently known regarding the influence of physically strenuous work on neuromuscular function across the lifespan. A useful approach for enhanced clarification of such issues, would be to examine the relationships between occupational physical workload levels and muscle function at different stages in the working lifespan.Although work-related neuromuscular function is most commonly assessed using maximal strength capacities, the ability to produce strength rapidly is often considered a more functionally relevant expression of strength (i.e. explosive or rapid strength) (Thompson et al., 2013a). Previous studies (Bento et al., 2010; Thompson et al., 2013b) have shown that the ability to rapidly produce torque is associated with athletic status and risk of falls, and thus may provide more sensitive physiological information regarding one's neuromuscular capacities compared to maximal strength alone. However, we are aware of no studies that have examined these variables among workers of different occupational categories. Furthermore, the majority of studies examining neuromuscular function in workers have focused on muscles of the upper body (i.e. trunk, shoulder, wrist muscles). However, the lower body musculature provides the primary means of locomotion, and the base of support for manual materials handling, with work abilities and injury risks being inherently linked to a workers' ability to move their body rapidly and efficiently. For instance, the most preventable fatal occupational-related events include contact with objects, and falls (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2013). It is possible that the inability to rapidly produce torque may increase the likelihood of sustaining these injuries. Therefore, the purpose of the present study was to examine the influence of age and occupational category on maximal and rapid strength capacities in young and middle-aged BC and WC workers, with a secondary aim to investigate the relationship between physical workload and maximal and rapid strength in the BC cohort. In light of previous literature, it was hypothesized that BC workers would exhibit similar age-related declines in strength capacities compared to WC workers, and that higher workload would be related to lower strength-related performance in BC workers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
