@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Context matters: The structure of task goals affects accuracy in multiple-target visual search

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Task structures typical of radiology and airport security searches are compared.Participants searching in a radiology structure are to achieve a fixed objective.Participants in an airport security structure search for a fixed duration.Higher errors rates for multiple targets are seen in the fixed objective condition.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Visual search,Radiology,Airport security screening,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Career visual searchers such as radiologists and airport security screeners strive to conduct accurate visual searches, but despite extensive training, errors still occur. A key difference between searches in radiology and airport security is the structure of the search task: Radiologists typically scan a certain number of medical images (fixed objective), and airport security screeners typically search X-rays for a specified time period (fixed duration). Might these structural differences affect accuracy? We compared performance on a search task administered either under constraints that approximated radiology or airport security. Some displays contained more than one target because the presence of multiple targets is an established source of errors for career searchers, and accuracy for additional targets tends to be especially sensitive to contextual conditions. Results indicate that participants searching within the fixed objective framework produced more multiple-target search errors; thus, adopting a fixed duration framework could improve accuracy for career searchers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Numerous careers require individuals to conduct difficult visual searches; for example, radiologists search medical images for abnormalities, and airport security screeners search luggage for contraband. Accuracy for these tasks is critically important, as any errors could result in fatalities, and career searchers are trained to detect target items with as few errors as possible. Nevertheless, radiologists, airport security screeners, and other highly trained professional searchers still regularly miss targets. As such, a primary goal in applied visual search research is to identify the causes of search errors with the ultimate goal of improving accuracy and performance (Clark et al., 2013).Visual searches conducted by professionals often present a number of significant complexities. One particular difficulty arises because search arrays can contain more than one target—a medical image could contain multiple abnormalities (e.g., a tumor and a fracture), and a suitcase X-ray could contain multiple banned items (e.g., a water bottle and a gun). Research in academic radiology has investigated the challenges associated with searching for multiple targets and identified a phenomenon known as “satisfaction of search” (SOS; Smith, 1967), the idea that observers tend to be less accurate in detecting a second target after having identified one target in a display (see Berbaum, 2012; for a review). The SOS phenomenon was originally believed to result from an early termination of search, assuming that an observer was “satisfied” with the meaning of the display after the identification of one target and discontinued searching (Tuddenham, 1962). However, further research suggests that this is not the primary cause of SOS because observers do continue to search after detecting one target (e.g., Berbaum et al., 1991). Instead, the decline in second-target accuracy may arise because of attentional disruptions related to the identification of the first target and the depletion of available cognitive resources (Cain and Mitroff, 2012), resulting in faulty decision-making (Berbaum et al., 1998) or faulty pattern recognition (Samuel et al., 1995).Most investigations of SOS have used radiologists as participants and medical images as stimuli (Berbaum, 2012), but recent experimental work in cognitive psychology has used non-professional participants and precise manipulations of simplified stimuli (e.g., Fleck et al., 2010) to understand the nature of multiple-target visual search more generally (e.g., Cain et al., 2011; Cain and Mitroff, 2012; Fleck et al., 2010). Non-professional participants who search simplified displays demonstrate decrements in second-target accuracy paralleling those seen in radiology, revealing that SOS is a generalizable search phenomenon and not specific to the radiological community. Furthermore, multiple-target search paradigms can be a useful means for investigating the impacts of nuanced cognitive processes; contextual factors such as anticipatory anxiety (Cain et al., 2011) and time pressure (Fleck et al., 2010) can have substantial effects on second-target accuracy without altering accuracy for single-target searches.Exploring how multiple-target search accuracy can be improved is critical because most professional searches occur in settings where multiple targets are possible, and errors can have a tangible and direct impact on health and national security. The goal of the current study is to investigate whether the structure under which searchers complete their tasks can affect accuracy. Both radiologists and airport security screeners conduct series of searches as part of their jobs, but they do so under different constraints: Radiologists typically operate with a fixed objective (e.g., assigned to assess 45 mammography images), while airport security screeners are scheduled to search for a fixed duration (e.g., scheduled to serve as an X-ray screener at the passenger checkpoint for a 30-min period).Both radiologists and airport security screeners are trained to maximize accuracy and, in effect, should be attempting the same process—carefully examining each display for potentially harmful targets, regardless of the number of cases yet to be scanned or the amount of time left before the end of a shift. However, it is well known that the conceptual framework of a situation can dramatically alter behavior. For example, a substantially larger proportion of respondents are likely to support a medical program if presented in terms of the proportion of lives saved rather than proportion of lives lost, despite identical results between the conditions (e.g., Tversky and Kahneman, 1981). Given that contextual factors (e.g., anticipatory anxiety and time pressure) can have negative effects on second-target accuracy in a multiple-target visual search (Cain et al., 2011; Fleck et al., 2010), we hypothesized that the framework under which an individual searches could also potentially alter performance. Specifically, we tested whether there are differences in accuracy when a search is completed within a task structure similar to radiology (searching with a fixed objective) versus airport security screening (searching for a fixed duration).To address this question, we tested non-professional participants using a version of an established multiple-target search task with simplified stimuli that has reliably induced the SOS effect (e.g., Fleck, et al., 2010) and demonstrated sensitivity to environmental contexts (e.g., Cain and Mitroff, 2012; Clark et al., 2011). Professional and non-professional searchers tend to produce comparable patterns of multiple-target errors (Biggs et al., 2013); however, it is important to account for potential differences in motivation between these groups in order to compare their search behavior. Undergraduate research participants may not be as concerned with their accuracy as radiologists and airport security screeners, for whom an error could have fatal consequences. Since assessing goal-relevant performance is only meaningful if individuals are truly attempting to attain the goal (Locke and Latham, 1990; Erez and Zidon, 1984), and monetary incentives offer a simple means to strengthen goal commitment (Locke et al., 1988), we provided a performance-based monetary incentive to increase the likelihood that the participants would genuinely attempt to achieve the instructed task goals. Related work using this motivational structure and the same multiple-target search task found enhanced accuracy in financially motivated versus non-motivated conditions (Clark et al., 2011).In the current experiment, we compared multiple-target search accuracy among participants searching with a fixed objective versus a fixed duration.11The paradigm employed here is meant to approximate the nature of searches conducted by radiologists and airport security screeners, but key manipulations are necessarily altered. For example, the Fixed Objective structure is similar to radiological searches, but true radiological searches use a “Fixed Trials” structure, as immediate accuracy information is not feasible. A “Fixed Trials” condition would have substantially altered the strategy such that speed would be irrelevant.Two groups of participants completed an experimental search paradigm in which they accumulated points for accurate searching and were informed that the individual who achieved the “best” performance out of a set of 10 participants would receive an additional $50 in compensation. The paradigm was identical in each of the two conditions except for the framework of the participants' task goal: In the Fixed Objective condition, participants were to achieve a specified number of points as quickly as possible; in the Fixed Duration condition, participants were to accumulate as many points as possible during a specified number of minutes. For the Fixed Objective condition, “best” was defined as the individual who achieved the specified points goal in the shortest number of minutes; for the Fixed Duration condition, “best” was defined as the individual who achieved the highest number of points in the specified time period. Importantly, the two conditions were structured such that the optimal strategy in both was identical—to maximize one's rate of point accumulation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Detecting a second target after having detected a first target in a display is a cognitively challenging task, and accuracy for additional targets tends to be uniquely sensitive to contextual influences that do not disrupt single-target searches. For example, accuracy impairments specific to second targets are observed under conditions such as anticipatory anxiety (Cain et al., 2011) and time pressure (Fleck et al., 2010). Here, we find that the even the mere structure of an observer's search goals can affect accuracy in the same manner as stressful contexts, resulting only in differences specific to accuracy for second targets. There was a significant decrease in second-target accuracy for participants who were searching with a specified objective compared to those who were searching for a specified duration, suggesting that the structure of an observer's search goals affects his or her accuracy in detecting multiple targets.Our participants were non-professionals who were motivated to search accurately with a performance-based monetary incentive. Participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions and completed identical experimental paradigms; the only difference between the conditions was the framework in which they completed the task. Critically, the two frameworks called for employment of the same optimal strategy; whether attempting to achieve an objective in the shortest amount of time or to accomplish as much as possible in a specified period of time, searchers are attempting to maximize search efficiency in both conditions. However, humans are prone to irrationally conceptualize constructs such that objectively identical frameworks can dramatically alter decisions and behavior (Tversky and Kahneman, 1981).Our analyses reveal that search performance, for the most part, was quite similar between the conditions, and there is no evidence that participants in the opposing frameworks were consciously employing different strategies or approaches to the task. Participants in the two conditions spent an equivalent amount of time assessing the search arrays and performed equally well on trials containing only one target. The only difference between the conditions was the likelihood with which participants found the additional targets on dual-target trials, with superior accuracy for multiple targets for the Fixed Duration condition. That is, the group of participants who were instructed to accomplish as much as possible in a specified time period found second targets more deftly than those who were instructed to achieve a specified goal in the shortest number of minutes. Unlike those in the Fixed Duration condition, participants in the Fixed Objective condition produced a satisfaction-of-search effect, showing a substantial decline in accuracy for second targets.All participants completed a modified version of a search task that typically elicits SOS (Fleck et al., 2010, Experiment 3), and both groups completed this task under motivated conditions, a manipulation which can alleviate the SOS effect (Clark et al., 2011). Interestingly, only those in the Fixed Duration condition showed the benefits associated with monetary incentives for this task; participants in the Fixed Objective condition performed similarly to non-motivated individuals in prior studies (e.g., Fleck, et al., 2010). Both groups were incentivized with a monetary reward, but performance on cognitive tasks can be modulated by the nature of the motivation (e.g., Callan and Schweighofer, 2008; Murayama and Kuhbandner, 2011). Motivation to avoid a punishment, for example, can be particularly stressful and promote anxiety (Davis and Whalen, 2001; Lang and Bradley, 2009), resulting in a decline in cognitive performance (Murty et al., 2011). All of our participants were motivated to earn a reward, and there were no punishments to avoid (unless the scoring penalty for errors is considered a punishment in itself); however, it is possible that the Fixed Objective condition elicited more anxiety and stress than the Fixed Duration condition.As mentioned, previous work has demonstrated that certain contexts tend to exacerbate errors specific to second targets in dual-target displays. Fleck et al. (2010) found decreased accuracy under time pressure: observers committed significantly more errors when trials had a 15-s time limit than a 30-s time limit, despite the fact that participants rarely exceeded either time limit, and there were no differences between response times in the 15- versus 30-s conditions. Cain et al. (2011) found that second-target errors were exacerbated when observers were searching under anticipatory anxiety. In some experimental blocks, participants were aware that they may receive a brief, uncomfortable shock to the wrist; in others, participants were aware that they may hear a neutral tone. In both cases, the shocks and tones occurred completely independent of performance, but second-target accuracy was significantly worse when anticipating the possibility of receiving an aversive shock than hearing a tone.Both time pressure and anticipatory anxiety are potentially stressful contexts, and given that stressful motivation may inhibit cognitive performance (Davis and Whalen, 2001; Lang and Bradley, 2009), it is entirely possible the Fixed Objective framework examined here induced perceptions of time pressure and/or anxiety in the participants. Factually, both conditions imposed the same amount of time pressure, as speed is equally critical when attempting to achieve the most points over a specified duration or when attempting to achieve a set number of points in the shortest amount of time. However, the framework of achieving a workload goal as quickly as possible might feel significantly more stressful than accomplishing as much as possible in a pre-determined amount of time. With the present data, we can only speculate about the role of the psychological and physiological states of the observer in these frameworks, but the strong similarities between our results and prior investigations of multiple-target search accuracy suggest that stress may be a common denominator.Future work can speak to the underlying mechanism by which the task constraints in the current study influenced performance, however, regardless of the specific mechanism our data support the notion that second-target accuracy is improved when observers are searching for a certain period of time compared to when observers are searching to achieve an objective. This finding has direct implications for the structure of constraints for career searchers: Airport security screeners currently conduct searches for a pre-determined duration regardless of how many bags they search in that time; radiologists, on the other hand, are typically aware of a number of cases to be scanned until the job is complete. As second-target accuracy is a substantial problem in the radiological community, our data suggest that radiologists could benefit from a change in protocol. Rather than assigning a number of cases to each doctor, radiologists could be assigned to assess cases for a certain amount of time. This procedural modification could effectively increase second-target accuracy without decreasing efficiency as we find identical speeds for searching in the two frameworks.For helpful conversation, we thank Elise Darling, Emma Dowd, Stephen Adamo, Adam Biggs, and Joe Volosky. This work was partially supported by the Army Research Office (#54528LS) and partially through a subcontract with the Institute for Homeland Security Solutions, a research consortium sponsored by the Resilient Systems Division in the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). This material is based upon work supported by the DHS under Contract No. HSHQDC-08-C-00100. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of DHS or of the U.S. Government. The study is approved for public release.