@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Context-based presets for lighting setup in residential space

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Multilateral relationship among activity, affect, and lighting setup was explored.Twenty context-based lighting setup presets were derived for residential space.Seven affect factors were derived for describing emotions of colored illumination.A set of testbed was prototyped: a smartphone application and a model house.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Affective illumination,Colored illumination,Residential space,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As illumination technology rapidly progresses each year, the role of artificial illuminations is changing to become more meaningful and dependent on user context (Nawyn et al., 2012). One of the light sources that have made such changes to the illumination industry possible is the Light-Emitting Diode (LED). LEDs have become particularly popular for because they are physically small, highly efficient, and allow users to manipulate the brightness and colorific characteristics of light to generate highly optimized illumination according to specific user activities and preferences (Chen et al., 2013).Previous studies have shown that illumination can affect both the physical and mental conditions of humans (Juslén et al., 2007; Leichtfried et al., 2015). As one of the earliest studies of colored illumination, Gerard (1958) measured physiological reactions to show that red light increases arousal level. In a more recent research, the effects of hue, lightness, and saturation of colored illumination on arousal and valence have been studied through subjective evaluations (Rajae-Joordens, 2011). To further highlight the potential of using colored illumination to improve everyday life, some researchers have expanded their scope of research to investigate the psychological and physiological effects of a wider range of colored illumination (Lee and Suk, 2012).Another research trend in illumination is investigating ‘affect’ as an important element of user experience (Park et al., 2013). Affect, also known as the perception of affective quality, indicates the subjective feelings or impressions that users experience (Han and Hong, 2003). Variable illumination color temperatures and intensities exert a potential advantage indoors with respect to subjective mood (Hoffmann et al., 2008). Park et al. (2011) investigated how LED illumination hues influence the rating and recognition of affective stimuli. Moreover, as an attempt to develop a theoretical basis of affective illumination, Woo et al. (2013) proposed a dimensional model of affectiveness by evaluating the affective quality of an illumination with different color temperatures. In response to these findings, it has become accepted that colored LED illumination can be effectively used to positively improve users' mood and their well-being (Suk, 2013).Highly flexible in color and brightness manipulation, LEDs are not only being used as light sources in decorative spaces, like retail shops and restaurants, but have shown the most market growth for ambient illumination in the residential sector (Price, 2003). Ambient illumination refers to the general illumination in a space that illuminates a room in a uniform, unfocused, and indirect manner with no visible direction of light. Although it can come in different types, ambient illumination generally takes the form of ceiling lamps installed in the center of a room (Leslie and Conway, 1996). Because ambient illumination, in residential spaces in particular, often requires high functionality, users must be able to control lighting setup so as to best serve their needs depending on the contextual situation.Affect is often a favorable variable for defining user context and user needs (Park et al., 2013). Some recent works that explore context-aware lighting setup recommendations have shown the effectiveness of affective states as contextual variables (Vandewalle et al., 2010; Zheng et al., 2013). These studies have agreed that the colors of illumination influence the way that the brain processes perception; therefore, incorporating affective states in controlling the lighting setup can help users make better decisions in creating the intended atmospheric mood.In support of this argument, Ku et al. (2012) proposes “IlluMe,” software that processes natural language from instant message logs to analyze the affective state of users and to create personalized ambient environments by means of illumination and music. The “Emotional Impact Slider” is another example of incorporating affect as a parameter for controlling the lighting setup (Liew, 2007). It is an interface concept for cinematic and theatrical lighting setup that uses emotion-based abstractions as communicative functions to generate entertaining environments. However, the affective states covered by these studies are rather limited or do not go hand in hand with the residential context.The range of activities that take place within a home can vary greatly. Depending on the activity, people may wish to encounter different affective states that can help enhance those everyday experiences. For example, when listening to music, people may want to feel a sense of relaxation; whereas, when studying, they may prefer a sense of alertness and focus. As RGB LEDs become available to homes, it has become possible to use colored LED illumination to accommodate these different affective needs for various user contexts by creating optimal lighting setups that are both fitting for the activity and evoke the desired affective state. As mentioned earlier, there are some researches that take into consideration the user context (Ku et al., 2012; Liew, 2007; Vandewalle et al., 2010). However, there is yet to be any research that investigates colored illumination with the context of a residential environment in mind, specifically concentrating on the diverse range of activities and affective states that take place in a home. Hence, with the lack of studies on the affective responses of colored illumination, this study aims to examine the users' affective responses and preferences for colored illumination as well as derive optimal lighting setups for residential spaces.Using manual controls to change the settings of high dimensional systems can be difficult and time consuming. For illumination control systems, manual controls can often lead to wrong selection of light intensity and moods, making users feel annoyed and fatigued (Steffy, 2008). Contrary to manual controls, presets provide users with an easy and natural way of changing multi-dimensional parameters (van Wijk and van Overveld, 2003). With that said, one of the main advantages of using context-based presets is that the presets are not only activity-based, but affect-based as well. In other words, the context-based presets reflect optimal lighting setups for various household activities and the affective state users want to experience for those activities. This user-centered, rather than technology-centered, approach can help make the task of selecting optimal lighting setups more simple and relatable to execute.The main purpose of this study is to explore the multilateral relationships between household activities, affects, and lighting setups in order to derive context-based presets in residential space, as shown in Fig. 1. A context-based preset denotes an optimal lighting setup that accommodates both activity-based and affective needs of users. The context-based presets are expected to provide users affordance in selecting optimal lighting setups in residential homes. These findings will be applied as the basis for designing a user-centered LED illumination control interface for future illumination systems.Depending on the medium and context, the set of affect factors representing the affective state experienced by users can vary (Desmet, 2012). This implies that the factors for evaluating affective responses to colored illumination can be different from the factors used to evaluate product colors. The purpose of this preliminary study was to extract affect factors of colored illumination to evaluate ambient lighting setup in the main user study for deriving context-based presets.In order to extract the affect factors for evaluating the affective responses to illumination, numerous adjectives were extracted from existing papers related to the evaluation of affective illumination (Park et al., 2011; Shin et al., 2009; Woo et al., 2013). Affective adjectives with negative valence were removed to keep the context-based presets focused on the positive well-being of users, and adjectives which were synonyms were combined as one. Hence, a total of sixty affective words were derived for the preliminary study.The examination was conducted in a room equipped with a LED luminous ceiling, as shown in Fig. 2. The colorific properties of ambient illumination could be controlled by adjusting the R, G, B, and W (White) input values. The color gamut of the experimental room is compared with two standards (AdobeRGB and sRGB). A color gamut refers to the range of colors which can be accurately represented by a certain output device. A larger area inside a triangle is regarded to represent a capability of displaying more colors. As shown in Fig. 3, the LED luminous ceiling of the experimental room could achieve a wide color gamut, which in turn is capable of displaying a wider span of colors. The LED ceiling was covered with Barrisol® diffusers (officially registered trademark of PVC translucent) to distribute uniformly the greatest amount of light without causing glare problems (Martins Mogo de Nadal, 2005). A uniform and soft illumination environment was realized in the room, which illuminated the entire space, ensuring that the participants fully adapted to the surrounding environment.The illumination stimuli were created using three quantitative parameters that make up the colorific components of light sources: dominant wavelength, illuminance, and excitation purity, which are analogous to hue, brightness, and saturation, respectively (Malacara, 2002). The dominant wavelength, which represents the perceptual notion of the hue, is denoted by nanometers (nm). Illuminance, which corresponds to the brightness of the lit environment, is expressed as lux (lx). Excitation purity is a quantitative measure of the saturation that ranges between 0 and 100%. The larger the purity, the more saturated the color appears, or the more similar the color is to its spectrally pure color at the dominant wavelength. The smaller the purity, the less saturated the color appears, or the more white it is (Erdogan, 2013).As for the illumination stimuli, the twelve light source colors as stipulated by the Korean Standard Association (KS A 0012, 2013) were selected as hues to represent the different colored illumination, as shown in Fig. 4. The twelve color names were red (R), orange (O), yellow (Y), yellow green (YG), green (G), blue green (BG), blue (B), bluish purple (bP), purple (P), reddish purple (rP), pink (Pk), and white (Wh). The illuminance and purity were kept relatively constant. The illuminance range for all stimuli was between 500 and 600 lux, which is a recommended illuminance for tasks with medium visual requirements for indoor (ISO 8995, 1989; Karwowski, 2006; KS A 3011, 1998). Because this study focuses on the context of ambient residential illumination, the purity of the lights were preserved at a relatively low level within the range of 20–30%, with the exception of white (0%), so that they would seem practical for residential space. The colorimetric values of each stimulus were measured with a chroma meter (Konica Minolta CL-200), at the center of the experimental room from a height of a table around which participants were seated, as shown in Table 1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
