@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Thermal discomfort and hypertension in bus drivers and chargers in the metropolitan region of Belo Horizonte, Brazil

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study was conducted with a sample of Brazilian collective transportation workers.Prevalence of hypertension was higher in workers that reported thermal discomfort.Our findings call for reflection about social protection needed for these workers.Our findings encourage transport policies about bus climatic conditions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bus driver,Hypertension,Hot temperature,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study aimed to assess the relationship between perception of temperature inside the bus and hypertension among 1126 collective transportation workers in metropolitan region of Belo Horizonte, Brazil. Thermal discomfort was determined based on the perception of temperature inside the bus. Hypertension was determined if participant had a medical diagnosis of this disease. Prevalence ratios (PR) for hypertension and their respective 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) were adjusted using multivariate Poisson regression analysis. The perceptions of temperature inside the bus were tolerable (26.5%), disturbs a little (28.6%), disturbs a lot (34.8%) and unbearable (10.2%). The prevalence of hypertension was 14.3%. The thermal discomfort categories of disturbs a lot (PR = 1.41; 95% CI = 1.02–1.95) and unbearable (PR = 1.75; 95% CI = 1.16–2.63) were independently related to hypertension. Thermal discomfort was associated with a higher prevalence of hypertension. This finding should be considerate in new policies for public transportation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Hypertension is a serious public health problem in Brazil. In a recent survey conducted with a representative sample of a Brazilian adult population, the prevalence of self-reported hypertension was 20% (Brazil, 2012). In the City of Belo Horizonte, the diagnosis of hypertension was reported at 20.8% of the adult population (Lima-Costa et al., 2012).Increased arterial pressure represents a linear, continuous and independent risk factor for cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), which are responsible for more than a third of all deaths in this country, with emphasis on ischemic heart disease (IHD) and brain stroke (BS). It is estimated that hypertension explains 47% and 54% of the multifactorial etiology of IHD and BS, respectively (Williams, 2010).Apart from the high magnitude of CVDs, they are responsible for a large proportion of hospital admissions, generating social and economic burdens. Almost 20% of expenditure relating to hospitalizations in the Brazilian public healthcare system in 2006 was due to CVDs-related costs (Brazil, 2013). Early retirement due to disability and prolonged absenteeism are reflections of diminished capacity to work caused by CVDs sequelae (Azambuja et al., 2008), thus justifying the focus on occupational groups, among other reasons.The findings of previous studies demonstrated the relationship between individual and behavioral factors with hypertension (Echouffo-Tcheugui et al., 2013). However, the association between the working environment and hypertension is little explored, despite the plausibility of this relationship (Lin et al., 2009). Regarding the bus microclimate, there are only a few studies concerning this topic, which have shown inconsistent results (Li et al., 2011; Vangelova & Deyanov, 2007).Therefore, the aim of the present study was to analyze the relationship between perceptions of the internal temperature of buses and detection of hypertension among collective transportation workers in the metropolitan region of Belo Horizonte.The present study was cross-sectional and formed part of a broader project that included other outcomes and was named “Health and working conditions of drivers and chargers of urban public transportation in the cities of Belo Horizonte, Betim and Contagem, MG, Brazil”.The eligible population in the three cities investigated was 17,470 workers (Belo Horizonte = 6500 drivers and 6750 chargers; Betim = 696 drivers and 524 chargers; Contagem = 1800 drivers and 1200 chargers) (Traffic and Transport Company of Belo Horizonte city, 2009).In the sample calculation, the prevalence of the hypertension outcome was taken to be 22% (Benvegnu et al., 2008), with 80% statistical power, 95% confidence level, prevalence ratio of 2.00 and expected losses of 20%, thus yielding a total of 526 subjects. The sampling process was performed with selection of quotas proportional to the total number of professionals in each of the three cities, according to their occupation (drivers and chargers).However, this was a wider survey in which other outcomes of lower prevalence were also investigated and, in the end, 1607 individuals were interviewed, of whom 853 were drivers and 754 were chargers. Their distribution was as follows: Belo Horizonte (72% drivers and 80% chargers), Contagem (20% drivers and 14% chargers) and Betim (8% drivers and 6% chargers). Therefore, the number of respondents was 114% above the calculated sample size for the outcome of interest (hypertension) and, thus, the statistical power increased considerably.Data collection was carried out by means of face-to-face interviews with the aid of netbooks between April and June 2012, in the morning and afternoon shifts. Exclusive software was developed for the research project, taking into consideration the objectives of making it possible for the interviewer to fill out a digital questionnaire, and enabling online data processing.Data from the literature and previous interviews with union representatives and workers were the basis for designing the tool for data collection. It included 82 questions relating to the following factors: demographic data (sex, age, skin color and marital status); socioeconomic data (schooling and family income); working conditions (job, working shift, number of hours at work, length of time worked at the company, holidays and working schedule); internal working environment (noise, vibration, illumination and temperature); external working environment (traffic and noise); ergonomics; personal protective equipment; lifestyle and habits (smoking, drinking, physical activity and sociocultural activities); health conditions (medications used and diseases diagnosed); anthropometric data (weight and height); violence (traffic accidents and conflicts with passengers); and quality of life.Research procedures and instruments were previously tested in a pilot trial (30 participants). Specific workshops led by the research coordinators were held in order to train the 22 interviewers, who were recruited from courses at the Federal University of Minas Gerais. The reliability of the interview was assessed by reapplying some selected questions from the original questionnaire to some of the same respondents (12% of all participants).The interviews were carried out at four metro/bus stations in Belo Horizonte and at 35 resting places in the three cities. These resting places were selected because they concentrate the majority of the buses, trips and registered workers. They are used by bus workers to have a pause after a trip of 60–90 min. An average of 80% of all passengers using the bus services pass through these four selected stations (Traffic and Transport Company of Belo Horizonte city, 2009).The research project was widely publicized through a local radio station, in a program specifically directed towards urban collective transportation workers. Furthermore, posters and leaflets were distributed before the field team began its work.The exposure variable “thermal discomfort” was determined based on the answers to the following question in the questionnaire: During the time you are working, what is your perception of the temperature inside the bus? The possible answers were: tolerable, disturbs a little, disturbs a lot or unbearable.The following variables were considered to have the potential to confound the relationship between the internal temperature of the bus and hypertension: sex (male or female); age (18–29 years of age, 30–39 years, 40–49 years, 50–59 years or 60 or more years); family income (up to two minimum salaries, two to four minimum salaries, or four or more minimum salaries; the minimum monthly salary at that time was R$ 622.00); smoking (Considering smoking to be the habit of having smoked at least 100 cigarettes or five packs, how do you classify yourself? Nonsmoker, former smoker, current smoker); physical activity (How often do you practice physical activities? Never, once to twice a week, three or more times a week); sociocultural activities (Do you participate in cultural activities (cinema, theater or exhibitions)? No or yes); body mass index (BMI) (calculated by means of the following equation: weight (kg)/height (m)2; <25 (normal), 25–29.9 (overweight); or ≥ 30 (obese); both weight and height were self-reported by the participant); vibration of the body (During your work, do you feel your body vibrate? Never, rarely, sometimes, often or always); illumination inside the bus (During your work, what do you think about the lighting inside the bus? Good, average, bad or very bad); and noise inside the bus (In general, the noise inside the bus is: minimal, reasonable, high or unbearable).The outcome variable, hypertension, was determined from the answers to two questions: (1) Do you have a medical diagnosis of high pressure (hypertension)? (2) At present, are you using medications prescribed by a doctor to treat high pressure (hypertension)? For both questions, the possible answers were no and yes.Individuals were considered to have hypertension if the answer to at least one of the questions was yes. When the participant answered no to both questions, this person was classified as having normal blood pressure.The sample was characterized through calculating the absolute and relative frequencies of the following variables: demographic (sex and age), socioeconomic (family income), lifestyle (smoking, physical activity and sociocultural activities), anthropometric (BMI) and conditions inside the bus (temperature, vibration of the body, noise and illumination), according to the categories of the exposure variable (internal temperature of the bus). Statistical differences were assessed using the Pearson chi-square test.Bivariate analysis was carried out to assess the crude association between the perception of temperature inside the bus and each covariable of interest with hypertension. The strength of the associations was measured by means of prevalence ratios (PR) and their respective 95% confidence intervals (95% CI).The independent association between the perception of the temperature inside the bus and hypertension was assessed by means of multiple Poisson regression models with robust variance, adjusted for potential confounding factors. Thus, the PR and its respective 95% CI were calculated using the category “tolerable” as the reference, regarding the perception of temperature inside the bus. In model 1, the adjustment variables considered were sex, age and family income. For model 2, all variables of model one were considered and, additionally, smoking, physical and sociocultural activities done and BMI were included. Finally, for model 3, the variables from model two were considered and, additionally, vibration of the body, illumination and noise inside the bus were included.We also produced interactions terms between the temperature and other environmental factors inside the bus, such as the driver's body vibration, illumination and noise. The independent associations between these interactions with hypertension were also tested.For all analyses, the statistical significant level was set at 5% (p < 0.05).In this study, we have opted to use PR estimated by Poisson regression models with robust variance as measure of strength association. However, it is very important to highlight that there is no consensus regarding which measure of strength association is best for cross-sectional studies, PR or Odds Ratio. The latter measure was judged inappropriate because it overestimates the strength of association when a higher rate of the outcome is expected. In this case, PR was proposed as an adequate measure of strength association (Barros and Hirakata, 2003; Coutinho et al., 2008).This research project was approved by the Ethics Committee for Research on Humans of the Federal University of Minas Gerais (Protocol number CAAE – 02705012.4.0000.5149). All participants signed a free and informed consent statement.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
