@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Applying riding-posture optimization on bicycle frame design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The concept of “fitting object to the body” is designed in the bicycle.The important feature points of riding posture can be detected automatically.The dimensions of bicycle frame can be captured from the measurement data.The frame size table for common bicycle types is further proposed.The result of this study can be applied to bicycle design and development.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Riding posture optimization,Bicycle frame design,Image processing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the improvement of living standards, the design orientation of bicycles has moved from its past significant role in the transportation field to its potential in today's leisure sports. Accordingly, customized design has become a trend in the development of bicycles in recent years. The comfort of riding a bike is an important factor that should given serious consideration when developing a bicycle. For example, Hsiao and Chou (2005) incorporated the degree of riding comfort into the design and development of an electric motorcycle, and also aimed at improving the comfort of riding on bicycle products by importing the design concept of “fitting an object to the human body”.Among numerous studies on riding, de Vey Mestdagh (1998) suggested that riding posture could be optimized by changing the height of the saddle. Peveler et al. (2007) pointed out that injuries caused in bicycle sports are mostly related to incorrect adjustment of the saddle height, handlebar and/or pedals. In addition, Laios and Giannatsis (2010) proposed an appropriate design method related to bicycle size that considered bicycle design in accordance with human body dimensions, and further examined assessment results ergonomically to re-design a series of bicycles for children aged between 7 and 14.In the studies and development of bike riding posture, Delong (1974) and Sloane (1970) concluded that when riding on bikes with upward-bent handlebars, the upper body of the rider will be erect, shifting most of the body weight onto the saddle, thus compressing the intervertebral disks. If the body bends forward, a portion of the body weight can be shifted to the arms, enabling the backbone to be stretched, thus lessening the pressures on the intervertebral disks. Kolehmainen et al. (1989) argued from a different point of view, and stated that the upward-bent handlebar can help lessen the pressure on cervical vertebra. Richmond (1994) and Matheny (1992) found that if the height of the handlebar is too low, it will increase the probability of oppression on the nerves around the haunch, as well as symptoms caused by overuse, such as health problems involving women's pudenda or men's prostate areas.On the other hand, Wu et al. (1998), when exploring the influences exerted by vertical vibration over the pressure distribution on the interface between the human body and saddle, found that for those with heavier body weights, the effective contact area on the saddle should be increased to reduce the pressure on the ischium. Christiaans and Bremner's study (1998) proposed that the saddle of a racing bicycle should not be ridden in an erect posture due to this posture creating the greatest vertical pressure, which increases the probability of saddle sores. Diefenthaeler et al. (2008) concluded that when riding, the average angle of the trunk is 38° (±5°), the average angle of the lumbar is 57° (±6°), and the spinal bent angle is 149° (±8°). Adding to this, Mellion (1991) suggested that the rider should keep a forward-bending posture, but not an over-stretched posture, over long periods of riding since in comparison with the bending posture, a stretching posture poses less pressure on the neck, lower back, arms, palms and shoulders. Furthermore, a stretching posture enables the extension of the thorax, enabling smoother breathing. de Vey Mestdagh (1998) also put forward a similar concept, which held that the vertebras are supported when the pelvis is bent forward, thus enhancing the riding momentum.In addition, taking biomechanics as the starting point, Christiaans and Bremner (1998) attempted to measure and analyze the riding dimensions of the human body by using an adjustable bicycle model. Then, by measuring the bike in a dynamic way, they obtained the most suitable sizes and joint angles related to riding. In Silberman et al.’s (2005) view, most people generally accept that riding efficiency and comfort depend on the bicycle design, but having a bicycle that fits is the most important. Schwellnus and Derman (2005) pointed out that some of the most common health problems and troubles are caused by incorrect riding postures. Later, Diefenthaeler et al. (2008) performed a riding assessment study on midsagittal trunk kinematics, which has had milestone significance in the anatomy of the lowest ribs, and is now used to calculate the tilt angle of the trunk, the bent angle of the spine and tilt angle of the lumbar. Bressel et al. (2009) focused on exploring the influences of various bike saddle designs on saddle pressure and stability perception, and showed that these two factors are negatively correlated.Human computer-aided motion capture has become a commonly used method in recent years (Thomas and Erik, 2001, Thomas et al., 2006). Due to the enhanced efficiency of computers, the acquisition of images has become very easy. In this manner, applying a hierarchical Part-based method to conduct human body pose estimation was beneficial to efficiency and accuracy of estimation (Navaratnam et al., 2005). The meaning of objectives' behaviors were able to be recognized and estimated by the acquired body actions through the set conditions, because human actions were logic related (Cristian et al., 2006). Furthermore, useful information was able to be acquired by the analysis of computer vision for the detected human actions, which enhanced the determination of each decision and analysis (Ronald, 2007). Nowadays, more complete human motions are able to be real-time captured through depth cameras (Wang et al., 2013; Aggarwal and Xia, 2014), especially for 3D information of the human skeleton. This diversified the application of the related field. Even though more complete information is able to be acquired with depth cameras, considering the accuracy of detection for points of human features, a system for detection of feature points based on 2D images was then constructed.In this study, three common bicycle types were selected, namely, the racing bicycle, city bicycle and lady's bicycle, to discuss the frame sizes for different bicycle types and for different human body dimensions in regard to the best riding posture. Firstly, the important riding-posture feature points were automatically detected by the image processing method. In the measurement process, the best riding posture was identified experimentally; thus, the human body's feature points and joint angle positions were obtained. Afterwards, according to the measurement data, three key points, the handlebar, the saddle and the crank center, were identified and applied to the frame design of various bicycle types. Lastly, this study further proposed a frame size table for common bicycle types, which could be used as a guide in the design bicycles.This study used a branch map to illustrate the rider's riding posture on a bicycle, as shown in Fig. 1. The defined feature point positions mainly included: the head (0), neck (1), shoulders (2), elbows (3), hands (4), waist (5), inguinal region (6), knees (7), ankle bones (8), and soles (9), which are all marked with red (in the web version) points. Simultaneously, the three feature points on the bicycle frame were the handlebars (4), the saddle (6) and the crank centre (10). The design of the relative positions between the three points would determine the final frame-size design. Among all feature points, points 4, 6 and 9 are the places where the human dimension and frame size interact with each other. It is from these points that the comfortable riding-posture degree could be measured, thus yielding the frame-size design.In addition, based on the interrelationships formed between feature points, this study defined six feature points related to the degree of comfort, to analyze and understand the relation between feature angles and degree of comfort. The definitions of the feature angles are shown in Fig. 1. A1 signifies the elbow angle formed by 2-3-4; A2 the neck angle formed by 0-1-2; A3 the waist angle formed by 2-5-6; A4 the sciatic angle formed by 5-6-7; A5 the patellar angle formed by 6-7-8; and A6 the malleolar angle formed by 7-8-9. Since this study mainly measured the relative positions of each feature point on a projection plane, the above mentioned feature angles refer to the angles formed by each feature point on the projection plane, and the value of each angle could be calculated by the vector inner-product in Formula (1).(1)θ=cos−1(u→·v→|u→|·|v→|)whereθrefers to the value of the angle formed by two vectors,u→andv→. After further summary and analysis, the causal relationship between the factors and comfortable degree in riding could be obtained.A schematic of bicycle frame size obtained from the riding experiment is shown in Fig. 2. Generally, the three key feature points: handlebars, the saddle and the central crank, were used as the kernel to mark the frame size. A represents the vertical distance from the saddle to the ground; B the vertical distance from the crank center to the ground; C the vertical distance from the handlebars to the ground; D the horizontal distance from the handlebars to the saddle; and, E the horizontal distance from the crank center to the saddle. By this marking method, different frame sizes for different human dimensions could be clearly illustrated.An image is a two-dimensional function consisting of pixels, i.e., f = (i, j), of which i and j are space coordinates. Each pixel contains the three elements of color, red (R), green (G) and blue (B), to display the captured images. Therefore, image processing involves numeric operations with the intensity and chromaticity of each pixel contained in the image. This study used a digital video camera to capture the riding posture feature points to investigate and analyze the results of frame-size design in line with ergonomics. Therefore, determining how to effectively and accurately capture each feature point was one focus of this study.The solution employed in this study was to use a digital video camera with color filters to capture the images of infra-red LED lights, which were affixed on each feature point. The resolution of the obtained images was 1280 × 720 (pixels). With the aid of a color filter, other non-infra-red images could be filtrated out so that the image results obtained were only gray-scale images (see Fig. 3b), rather than normal color images (Fig. 3a). Applications were used to read the RGB value of each pixel from the images captured by the digital video camera, after which the gray-scale value of each pixel was calculated as follows.(2)va=(vr+vg+vb)3wherevadenotes the gray-scale value of a pixel,vris the red value,vgis the green value, andvbrefers to the blue value.After obtaining the gray-scale value of each pixel in the image, the values were calculated using clustering algorithms in the order of size. First, as shown in Formula (3), the value ofvawas transformed by the threshold valueτto a binary image, which contained only 0 and 1, signifying the transformation of the gray-scale image to black-and-white image.(3){va=1ifva≥τva=0otherwiseThen, ifva=1, the group relations between pixels could be judged based on the following criteria:(1)Ifva(i,j−1)=va(i−1,j)=0, it could be annotated directly asG(i,j)=Gmax+1, wherein G(i, j) was the group serial number of pixel (i, j), and Gmax was the largest group serial number.Ifva(i,j−1)=va(i−1,j)=1, andG(i−1,j)=G(i,j−1), it could be annotated directly asG(i,j)=G(i,j−1).Ifva(i,j−1)=va(i−1,j)=1, butG(i−1,j)≠G(i,j−1), it could be annotated directly asG(i,j)=G(i,j−1), and each pixel within the same group asG(i−1,j)should be changed toG(i,j−1).Ifva(i,j−1)=1, butva(i−1,j)=0, it could be annotated directly asG(i,j)=G(i,j−1).Ifva(i−1,j)=1, butva(i,j−1)=0, it could be annotated directly asG(i,j)=G(i−1,j).Lastly, based on the grouping results, the pixels' center-of-gravity positions of each group were calculated based on Formula (4) to obtain the location results of the captured infra-red LED lights (Fig. 3c):(4)wm(x,y)=∑Pm(x,y)nwherewmis the center-of-gravity position of group m,Pmrefers to the pixels of this group, and n is the total amount of pixels in the group.The images captured by digital video cameras were the resulting images of perspective projection, which could produce different results based on the different video camera locations. To obtain an objective result, calibration of all coordinates was conducted. A panel with four infra-red LED lights was set in front of the digital cameras, and the relative position and angle between two kinds of devices were inputted into the system. When calibration of all coordinates was complete, the coordinates data conversion mode could be acquired by the factual coordinates and the detected coordinates of the infra-red LED lights (Fig 4). Compared with the adopted DPI of 1280 × 720 pixels and real measurement of human factors, 1 pixel was approximately equal to 0.25 cm. As such, the detected measurement of human features must be at least 25 cm, which allowed for the range of error to be controlled to less than 1%. The mode of data conversion is illustrated as follows:If x and y denote the factual coordinate, andx∗andy∗the projected coordinate, the transformation of these two could be realized by using a homogeneous coordinates system, as shown in Formula (5), in which [T] is the conversion array and h the conversion factor of the homogeneous coordinate. Formulae (6a), (6b) and (6c) could be obtained by extending Formula (5); and, Formula (7) could be obtained by introducing Formula (6c) into Formulae (6a) and (6b), as follows:(5)[xy1]·[T]=[xy1]·[T11T12T13T21T22T23T31T32T33]=[x′y′h]=h·[x∗y∗1](6a)T11x+T21y+T31=hx∗(6b)T12x+T22y+T32=hy∗(6c)T13x+T23y+T33=h(7)(T11−T13x∗)x+(T21−T23x∗)y+T31−T33x∗=0(T12−T13y∗)x+(T22−T23y∗)y+T32−T33y∗=0The coordinate conversion calculation contains two parts: (a) the seeking of its transformation matrix, and (b) coordinate calibration. First, in transformation matrices, it could command the original matrix elementT33=1, and transform Formulae (7) into the matrix form of Formula (8). There are 8 unknown numbers in the equation. Therefore, four groups of calibration points were needed to obtain the other elements in matrix T by inverse matrix calculation to obtain the complete matrix T. Later, in each infra-red LED detection process, the location of each infra-red LED light was calibrated to gain each of their correct positions on the projection plane. Since matrix T was obtained, Formula (7) could be converted into the matrix calculation form of Formula (9). Lastly, coordinate (x, y) was determined by inverse matrix calculations, which were the factual coordinates of each infra-red LED light, the calculated results of which could be applied to the measurement of the bicycle riding posture.(8)[x0−xx∗y0x100x−xy∗0y−yy∗01]·[T11T12T13T21T22T23T31T32]=[x∗y∗](9)[T11−T13x∗T21−T23x∗T12−T13y∗T22−T23y∗]·[xy]=[T33x∗−T31T33y∗−T32]Primarily based on the defined feature points, the riding posture measurements were realized by measuring the distances between the feature points and the angles they formed. This study used an adjustable flywheel to imitate and produce the frame sizes of different bicycle types. In the riding test, the frame size was adjusted for riders of different height in accordance with the standard riding posture and comfort degree. The major experimental method employed was to detect and capture the positions of infra-red LED lights on the feature points of the human body by using an image processing method (Fig. 5). Then, vectors were used to calculate and obtain the distances and angles between the identified feature points. Based on the measured data and information, the positions of the three key points (the handlebar, saddle and crank center) with respect to the best riding posture, were identified and applied to the design of the bicycle frame size. Each part of the overall experimental method is illustrated in detail in the following:In the actual measuring process, the adjustable flywheel shown in Fig. 6was used in the experiment. Bicycle handlebars of different shapes were changed for the measurement of different bicycle types. Meanwhile, the study adopted the following rules and definitions according to the measured bicycle types.(1)An upward-bent handlebar was used for the lady's bicycle, in which the position of the handlebar was higher than that of the saddle (Fig. 7a).A parallel handlebar was used in the city bicycle, for which the position of the handlebar was the same as that of the saddle (Fig. 7b).A downward-bent handlebar was used for the racing bicycle, the handlebar of which was lower than that of the saddle (Fig. 7c).The ergonomics standards centiles for the Taiwan area were considered and adopted, which determines the centiles of the study group in the experiment. The height ranges of testees were set up as shown in Table 1. In the actual experiment, both male and female testees were divided into four testing ranges of different heights, with each range having two testees and one verifier.To ensure the effective and accurate tracking of the riding posture, this study used Java language to design and develop the “Detection System for Bicycle Riding Posture” (Fig. 8), to capture the images required for measurement, and to calculate and represent the relevant results. In the drawing representation of the results, the riding posture of the human body is illustrated by a branch map, and the frame design represented simply by a frame triangle formed by the three key points (the handlebar, saddle and crank center; Fig. 9). In this manner, all relevant information is represented concisely and effectively.In accordance with experimental indications, every user rode the three types of bicycles for 5 min each time, to identify the best riding posture. Upon completing measurements of testees for height ranges, one testee was selected from each range to verify the results in order to ensure the accuracy of the riding experiment. In accordance with the verification method, the frame size was adjusted according to the factual measured data of testees from different testing ranges. Then the testees were directed to pedal the flywheel for 10 min. After riding, the comfortable degrees of riding were queried to verify the accuracy of the acquired experimental data. The experimental procedure flowchart is given in Fig. 10.The frame size results obtained from the riding experiment were calculated to obtain the arithmetic averages, thus providing the average sizes for every height range in each riding posture. The results of frame size for different height ranges in each riding posture obtained based on the experimental results are listed in Table 2, enabling the user to find a suitable frame size for the required bike type in accordance with his or her height.Based on the data results measured in the experiment, this study further calculated the average frame size for common bicycle types by using the arithmetic average to calculate the average frame size of each dimension range. For example, the common average frame size of a racing bicycle for men was obtained as follows: based on the experimental results of male testees in the racing bike posture, the average bicycle frame size ridden by all testees within the height range of 165–185 cm was calculated. In addition, since in most bicycle designs, the position of the saddle can be adjusted upwards or downwards, this study used the highest point of the saddle as the maximum value, and the lowest point as the minimum value in the design. The average frame sizes for three bicycle types for males and females in all height ranges are listed in Table 3. Based on these results, the frame size of a male's common bicycle type, as shown in Fig. 11, could be calculated. The average size could be used in the frame size design of various bicycle types to obtain the frame size suitable for most users.Lastly, to verify the accuracy of the frame size of each bicycle measured in the actual riding experiment, one testee from each height range was directed to ride each bicycle for verification. For example, for male testees within the testing height range of 165–170 cm and for verification of the racing bicycle, the average frame size should be as follows: distance from the saddle to the ground: 83.8 cm; distance from the crank center to the ground: 25.0 cm; distance from the handlebar to the ground: 73.4 cm; distance from the handlebar to the saddle: 64.8 cm; and, distance from the saddle to the crank center: 21.3 cm. Therefore, the bicycle frame was adjusted to fit to the above requirements, and a tester within the height range of 165–170 was asked to ride the racing bicycle again for 10 min for verification. After riding, the testee was requested to describe the comfort score, the parameters of which were as follows:(1)Comfort score of the distance from the saddle to the groundComfort score of the distance from the handlebar to the groundComfort score of the distance from the handlebar to the saddleComfort score of the distance from the saddle to the crank centerComfort score of the overall riding comfortEach question was scored on a scale of 0–10, with a low score signifying uncomfortable, and high score signifying comfortable.Through this verification, the comfort degrees for riding postures on different bicycles for male and female testees of different heights were able to be determined.Table 4shows the questionnaire results of each bicycle type's riding comfort degree. As seen, the comfort degree for every bicycle type obtained a score of 5 or more. Although only a few testing samples were used, the assessment results obtained were generally good.This study defined five joint angles in the measurement of riding postures, as shown in Fig. 12. Since each feature joint angle was constantly changing during the process of measurement, this study used only the feature angles when the testees stopped at the lowest stepping point in riding as the required measured results. Meanwhile, the changing range of each testers' body angle on different bicycle types was recorded. According to the experimental result, the measured joint angles varied greatly due to differences in testers' figures. Among the measurement results of different bicycle types, the upper body of testers was bent relatively forward in the riding posture of the racing bicycle, and bent only slightly on the city bike; the upper body was kept nearly straight on the lady's bicycle, which shifted the body pressure to the saddle.Further, in order to verify whether the results obtained by this study could be applied to bicycle design and development, three concept bicycles, shown in Fig. 13, were designed based on different bicycle types. Then, the average frame sizes for common bicycle types obtained in this study were incorporated into the frame size design of the three developed concept bicycles. By identifying the relative positions between the three key points on the bicycle frame, the final design of the frame size could be completed. The obtained design results of the different bicycle types verified the feasibility of the method proposed by this study, which could assist designers in bicycle design and development.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
