@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Preference for newspaper size

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Five different standard sizes of newspaper were tested for reader preference.Preferences were determined in comfortable and cramped environments.A paired comparison method yielded scales of reading preference.In both reading environments, the Tabloid format was preferred over other sizes.Differences in preferences were greater in cramped reading environment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Reading comfort,Newspaper size,Scaling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The past few years has seen a change in the size of newspapers, with publishers moving to a smaller size format. Five ‘standard’ newspaper sizes are used in different countries: Broadsheet, Rhensch, Tabloid, Tall Tabloid and Berliner. These papers vary in both width and height of pages and hence there are implications for human reading comfort, which may be dependent on reading location such as on a lounge chair or on a train. Experiments were carried out to determine preferences for the different sizes and to relate these preferences to the geometric characteristics of the newspapers. For both comfortable and cramped/uncomfortable reading conditions, the rank order of preference for paper types was, from least to most-preferred, Broadsheet, Rhensch, Berliner, Tall Tabloid and Tabloid. Preferences were much stronger when determined in cramped/uncomfortable reading conditions, where most comparisons were significantly different. There was good correlation between participant ratings on several scales and preference, where most factors were related to comfort of holding and controlling the paper.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many newspapers are currently changing from large format (Broadsheet) to a smaller format (Tabloid or Berliner). In the UK, this has already taken place with the London Times, The Independent (both to Tabloid) and the Guardian to the Berliner format.The Broadsheet is the largest format and has generally been associated with ‘quality’ newspapers. The Tabloid format is also known as a ‘Compact’ format by former Broadsheet newspapers in order to avoid the stigma associated with tabloid journalism (Rowe, 2011). The change to smaller formats is also happening in other countries. For example, the two major Australian broadsheet quality newspapers, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Melbourne Age, changed to the Compact format in March 2013. Their weekend papers are, however, still produced in the Broadsheet format. This change in weekday format occurred even though a survey of 14,000 readers voted 47% to retain the Broadsheet format, while 29% voted for the Tabloid and 10% for the Berliner format (SMH, 2012). However, in their first issue with the compact format (3rd March 2013), it is described how “100 readers were asked to read both broadsheet and compact versions of the newspapers in real-life conditions for 10 min while wearing specialised head caps”. These head caps had 80 electrodes that “pick up on subtle measures of brain activity which indicated levels of engagement, emotional intensity and memory encoding, or what is committed to memory. Combined with eye-tracking technology … the neurological testing revealed how engaged readers were with the papers. The compacts were found to be more engaging than the broadsheets (page 20).Similar changes from large to smaller formats are happening in other parts of the world; in Switzerland the Blick has changed from Broadsheet to Tabloid (Stone, 2012); in Germany there is a compact version of Die Welt (Welt Kompakti). A review of the changes that are occurring in the newspaper industry is given in the proceedings of “The Future of Newspapers Conference” (2007).Newspapers that are produced in two size versions have in recent years found reader preference for the smaller format, with increasing sales of the Tabloid format compared with the Broadsheet format. This has occurred with the Irish Times (Slattery, 2012). Similarly, The Times of London offered readers both Tabloid (Compact) and Broadsheet formats for nearly a year, with the only difference lying in their sizes. It was found that most readers opted for the Tabloid format because of its convenience in size (News Corporation, 2005). Considering all newspapers in the UK, the average daily circulations of the tabloid newspapers are much higher than that of the broadsheet papers (Newspaper Marketing Agency, 2013).Reasons for publishers making the change of format are not always clear: Smaller formats give more convenient handling of the paper and are more popular with the younger population of readers, are several reasons that have been given. Holmqvist and Constanze (2005) found that Tabloid format made more efficient use of paper than Broadsheet format did, as the time readers spent per square centimetre was 47% higher for tabloid spreads. Downsides appear to be the shorter article lengths and the decrease in size for advertising. It is this latter that is of concern to publishers as advertisement sizes are decreased and hence income to the newspaper may be reduced. Besides, it was reported that the bigger the size of the advertisement the better the readers see, like and remember it (Lundqvist and Holmqvist, 2001). Sales of the newspaper may also be affected and opinions seem to be divided on the effects of size change as, in some cases, there have been increased sales with the smaller format, while others have reported decreased sales (Stone, 2012; Slattery, 2012; Future of Newspapers Conference, 2007).There does not appear to be any published information on human preferences for newspaper size, although it is likely that there is in-house research (as noted above for the Sydney Morning Herald and the Melbourne Age) made when a change of format is considered. The reader survey published in the Sydney Morning Herald is far from scientific (as stated in the newspaper) as it is a vote of readers that was carried out on-line. Thus the aim of the present research was to attempt to determine if there are differences in the preferences in newspaper size of a reader population and attempt to correlate the preferences with the geometric size of the newspapers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
