@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Energy expenditure at work in physical education teachers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Energy expenditure (EE) was measured in physical educators during 2 workdays.Physical education teachers showed a high level of fitness level.Average EE was low-to-moderate (kcal min−1) and low in relative values (% VO2max).However, physical educators reached very high work intensities for significant periods.Physical educators should be prepared to perform tasks with different levels of EE.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Oxygen consumption,Heart rate,Teaching,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objective of this study was to quantify work energy expenditure (EE) in physical education (PE) teachers. Sixty-four (64) physical educators (49 men, 15 women) had their individualized linear function between heart rate (HR) and oxygen consumption measured by laboratory testing. HR was then recorded on 2 different days at work to estimate EE, correlated with a diary of daily tasks. Average absolute EE was low-to-moderate (2.7 ± 1.4 to 4.6 ± 2.5 kcal·min−1) and low when expressed in relative values (15.3 ± 6.1% to 24.8 ± 7.6% of VO2max). However, these physical educators often reached very high intensities (from 7.5 ± 7.9% to 23.8 ± 22.3% of work time at 100 bpm and more). PE teaching requires a light-to-moderate EE with more intense periods of physical activity. The variety of tasks performed (office work, supervision and monitoring, mixed participation and active participation) significantly influenced EE.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Physical educators are a special category of teachers. Sandmark et al. (1999) suggested that workload is heavy among physical education (PE) teachers. In fact, some authors claim that the occupational requirements of PE teaching compare to those of forestry, agricultural and construction workers (Skiold, 1999). Such heavy workloads have also been associated with a high rate of musculoskeletal dysfunction and injuries among PE teachers (Lemoyne et al., 2007; Sandmark, 2000). Indeed, in a qualitative survey of Quebec PE teachers, few perceived themselves as being able to actively continue their profession until retirement age (Bizet et al., 2010).Energy expenditure (EE) among PE teachers was not assessed quantitatively in previous studies. Sandmark et al. (1999) analyzed their work tasks by direct observation. High physical load may be caused by equipment handling, by supporting the load of students' weight in certain situations, by prolonged standing, stress and repetitive or sudden movements (Sandmark et al., 1999). Not only do they have to lift students in parades for gymnastics or psychomotor learning, often in awkward and difficult positions, but they are also exposed to additional horizontal shear forces. Ultrafast, dynamic forces can inflict large and sudden mechanical loading with increased risk of musculoskeletal injuries or fractures. Heart rate (HR) was recorded per daily work duration and was on average above 100 beats per minutes (bpm) for 42% of the work period in women, and 25% in men (Sandmark et al., 1999). Activities which generated the highest HRs were warm-ups, aerobic exercises, dance and circuit training. In these activities, teachers usually participated and helped students through demonstrations. Participation in warm-ups, aerobic exercise and support of students in gym class generated peak HRs of 150 bpm or more (Sandmark et al., 1999). However, the literature tells us little about the relative workload that these teachers must face. HR was not converted into EE values. Indeed, to the best of our knowledge, no study has investigated the average percentages of maximum metabolic capacity (max) that physical educators must endure every workday.The main purpose of this research is to quantify EE in PE teachers in their work environment. We also compare EE across various conditions (teaching levels, types of tasks performed, gender, age, and years of experience).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
PE teachers are a group of workers with a high level of fitness, and particularly aerobic fitness. Our results confirm those of Åstrand et al. (1997) on PE teachers in Sweden. The data on most fitness variables were very similar for women and men except for body composition and back extension. The physical fitness of physical educators in our sample was not influenced by age. Can this be explained by maintenance of their physical fitness over the years, as suggested by the longitudinal data of Åstrand et al. (1997), or is it due to attrition of individuals with lower fitness level, or both? Other previous findings suggest that some physical educators no longer feel they are fit enough to continue teaching PE and choose to change their career path (Bizet et al., 2010). Our study has not been able to answer these questions, which would require a longitudinal protocol.The EE of physical educators is, on average, low-to-moderate when expressed in absolute values (Kroemer et al., 1997) and low when expressed in relative values (Rodgers et al., 1986; Wu and Wang, 2002). However, their work includes periods with very high intensities that must be taken into consideration when analyzing task difficulty. A weakness of our study is the lack of measurement of tasks requiring sudden and short bursts of muscular contraction (e.g. lifting or recovering falling students) that may increase the occupational burden without augmenting HR. Finally, we observed high inter- and intra-variability (gender, age and level) because teaching practices varied greatly from one physical education teacher to another and across workdays. Our results are in agreement with Sandmark et al. (2009) in her work with physical education teachers: «the variability in physical exposure is substantial.» Therefore, if we expect PE teachers to actively participate with students, good fitness is warranted.