@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Concentration on performance with P300-based BCI systems: A matter of interface features

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The user's capacity to concentrate can affect his/her performance with a P300-based speller.This study was to test this hypothesis using three different interfaces.The d2 test was applied to assess attention and concentration.The performance of users with lower concentration level can be improved by providing BCIs with more interactive interfaces.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Brain–computer interfaces,P300,Speller,Concentration,Attention,Word predictor,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
People who suffer from severe motor disabilities have difficulties to communicate with others or to interact with their environment using natural, i.e., muscular channels. These limitations can be overcome to some extent by using brain–computer interfaces (BCIs), because such systems allow users to communicate on the basis of their brain activity only. Among the several types of BCIs for spelling purposes, those that rely on the P300 event related potential—P300-based spellers—are chosen preferentially due to their high reliability. However, they demand from the user to sustain his/her attention to the desired character over a relatively long period of time. Therefore, the user's capacity to concentrate can affect his/her performance with a P300-based speller. The aim of this study was to test this hypothesis using three different interfaces: one based on the classic P300 speller paradigm, another also based on that speller but including a word predictor, and a third one that was based on the T9 interface developed for mobile phones. User performance was assessed by measuring the time to complete a spelling task and the accuracy of character selection. The d2 test was applied to assess attention and concentration. Sample (N = 14) was divided into two groups basing on of concentration scores. As a result, performance was better with the predictor-enriched interfaces: less time was needed to solve the task and participants made fewer errors (p < .05). There were also significant effects of concentration (p < .05) on performance with the standard P300 speller. In conclusion, the performance of those users with lower concentration level can be improved by providing BCIs with more interactive interfaces. These findings provide substantial evidence in order to highlight the impact of psychological features on BCI performance and should be taken into account for future assistive technology systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A brain–computer interface (BCI) system provides a non-muscular channel of communication and interaction by transforming brain signals into computer commands. These systems have been traditionally developed to assist people who, due to different disorders, are in a locked-in state, that is, unable to move despite retaining their cognitive abilities. A paradigmatic example of such patients are people that suffer from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Locked-in patients are therefore totally dependent on others, so the use of BCI systems can provide them with greater autonomy and quality of life. The usability of BCI systems has been supported by a wide variety of studies among the general population as well as people who are affected by a motor disability (Donchin et al., 2000; Sellers and Donchin, 2006; Silvoni et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2005) and, indeed, there is evidence that the use of such systems improves ALS patients' communication and interaction with their environment (Birbaumer, 2006; Wolpaw et al., 2002).Currently, the most commonly used BCI systems are those based on electroencephalographic (EEG) signals, mainly because they can be recorded in a non-invasive manner and show adequate temporal resolution. Among them, those based on the P300 event-related potential (ERP) are very common due to easiness with which this ERP can be elicited. Specifically, the P300 is a positive deflection in voltage occurring about 300 ms after an infrequent or significant stimulus is perceived (Wolpaw et al., 2002; Woodman, 2010). P300 wave amplitude is typically between 2 μV and 5 μV and is symmetrically distributed around central scalp areas, showing greater amplitude in occipital rather than frontal regions (Krusienski et al., 2008).When used for the purpose of communication, P300-based BCIs—called P300-based spellers—generally display a keyboard-like alphanumeric matrix in a computer screen. The rows and columns of this matrix are randomly flashed a number of times. To write a character, the user focuses his/her attention to it by mentally counting the number of times that its row and its column is flashed. The perception of each relevant flash produces a change in the EEG, which, on average, will elicit the P300 and, thus, allow the system to identify the row and column of the desired character.Despite P300-based spellers have shown high levels of daily usability (Sellers et al., 2010), their communication rate is still lower than other alternative assistive technologies, such as eye tracking systems, and there is still room for improving their usability. In this regard, recent studies have attempted to increase user performance and BCI manageability by optimizing EEG signal acquisition (Krusienski et al., 2006), by examining the impact of the properties of the stimuli (Serby et al., 2005), by refining signal processing methods (Krusienski et al., 2008), and by analyzing different display paradigms (Martens et al., 2009; Townsend et al., 2010).The influence of several psychological characteristics in user performance and usability of P300-based spellers has also been taken into account due to their impact on the amplitude and latency of the P300 component (for a review, see Polich and Kok, 1995). For instance, some empirical studies have highlighted the role of various psychological factors, namely use-induced mental fatigue (Kececi et al., 2006; Murata et al., 2005); sustained attention (Mangun and Buck, 1998); user motivation (Kleih et al., 2010; Nijboer et al., 2010); anxiety (Silva-Sauer et al., 2011) and frustration arising from performance errors (Kleih et al., 2013; Reuderink et al., 2009). With respect to attention, it is important to point out that temporary slips—due to dispersion, mental overload, or task difficulty—can negatively affect task performance (Smallwood and Schooler, 2006) as P300 amplitude modulations have been related to these factors (Wickens et al., 1984, 1983; Gavett et al., 2012; Martens et al., 2009; Townsend et al., 2010). On the other hand, the temporal and spatial characteristics of the interface can influence user's attention and, in turn, his/her performance (Lu et al., 2013; McFarland et al., 2011).These and other different findings suggest that when attention or concentration levels are diminished, BCI user performance would tend to be lower. Conversely, conditions or interventions that promote higher levels of concentration or sustained attention may lead to better accuracy or shorter completion time on BCI-mediated tasks. The study by Lakey et al. (2011) illustrates this point. These authors examined the effects of an attention-induction procedure—mindfulness-based meditation—on user performance on a BCI speller task and found that participants who received the induction procedure showed more accurate character selection and faster task completion times than control participants.The current work aims at contributing to these lines of research by verifying the effects of user concentration on performance in a spelling task using three different P300-based BCI systems. First, a P300-based speller with a 7 × 6 symbol matrix—hereafter referred to as Spellermod—that was based on the one proposed by Farwell and Donchin (1988), which has been studied intensively (Bianchi et al., 2010; Krusienski et al., 2008; Sellers et al., 2006); second, a Spellermod provided with a word predictor—hereafter referred to as SpellermodPred—; and third, a P300-based speller showing a reduced 4 × 3 symbol matrix, resembling the T9 interface developed for mobile phones (Grover et al., 1998). This matrix, hereafter referred to as SpellerT9, has been proposed by Ron-Angevin et al., 2015. As using text predictors within a classic speller makes spelling faster (Dunlop and Crossan, 2000) we expected that using the SpellermodPred or the SpellerT9 would be less tiresome than using the Spellermod and thus prevent lapses of concentration due to fatigue. On the other hand, since the SpellerT9 presented a reduced matrixes compared with the SpellermodPred's, spelling with the former would be faster than with the later, but maybe more complicated due to the operation of the T9 system. Thus, we hypothesized that the benefits of having a reduced matrix size might be balanced out by the drawbacks of cognitive overload during the spelling task.In the following sections we will describe the experimental procedure and analyze and discuss the obtained results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
