@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Variable Message Signs for road tunnel emergency evacuations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The Theory of Affordances is proposed to evaluate Variable Message Signs (VMS).A questionnaire study is used to investigate VMS for tunnel evacuation.VMS including amber text, flashing lights and emergency exit symbol results as best.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Emergency evacuation,Variable Message Sign,Tunnel evacuation,Theory of Affordances,Way-finding,Notification,System design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper investigates the design of Variable Message Signs (VMS) as a way-finding aid for road tunnel emergency evacuations. The use of the Theory of Affordances is suggested to provide recommendations on the design of VMS. A preliminary evaluation of 11 selected VMS systems was performed and 6 of them were further evaluated using an affordance-based within subject stated-preference questionnaire administered to a sample of 62 participants. Results are used to provide recommendations on the characteristics of the VMS systems, such as (1) size of the sign (large or small); (2) use of flashing lights; (3) colour scheme; (4) message coding (i.e., text, pictograms or a combination of them). The best performing VMS features for road tunnel emergency evacuation included the use of larger signs, flashing lights, the combination of emergency exit pictorial symbol in green in one panel and text in amber in the other panel.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A Variable Message Sign (VMS) (also called Traffic Information Sign) is a programmable electronic panel capable of displaying different types of messages. Depending on the type of technology employed, the panel is capable of displaying messages composed of text, pictograms or a combination of them. Visualization technologies employed in VMS, e.g. LCD screens, include dynamic features such as the use of animation, flashing, scrolling, etc. This leads to a great flexibility in the content and type of information that can be displayed (Wang et al., 2006). This allows a great range of possibilities to the designer of the VMS. In addition, it poses several questions on the information to be displayed in order to provide understandable and effective messages (Dudek, 1991; Dudek and Ullman, 2002).In the case of a road tunnel emergency, e.g. fire evacuation, VMS can be a useful tool to convey concise and precise information to motorists about the emergency as well as instruct them on the appropriate actions to perform to reach a place of safety, i.e. an emergency exit (Nilsson et al., 2009). In fact, VMS can be used as a procedural measure (providing real-time information/instructions) to influence people's decision making and route choice. Nevertheless, to date, little research has been carried out on the use of VMS as a way-finding aid and notification system in the case of emergency evacuation in road tunnels.To address this issue, dedicated research efforts are needed in order to evaluate the use of VMS for road tunnel emergency evacuations to provide information to motorists and pedestrians in case of evacuation. It should be noted that the present study refers to the design of VMS within the scope to instruct people in case of evacuation on foot (i.e. motorists or passengers leaving their vehicle and walking towards an emergency exit). Some of the concepts used to design VMS for normal operations can be applied to the design of VMS for evacuation emergencies. In order to increase the probability of identification, signs should be placed in visible and expected locations (Borowsky et al., 2008). The effectiveness of a VMS primarily depends on the design of its message and the display format (Wang et al., 2006). Key design parameters are the type of display technology (light-emitting display, light-reflecting display, etc.), height and width of the characters and symbols (Dudek, 1991; Zwahlen and Schnell, 1999), the stroke width of the characters and the type of font displayed (Dudek and Ullman, 2001). The relationship between people and a VMS can be considered as a transmission of information from the VMS to people in order to modify their behaviours (Crundall and Underwood, 2001). For instance, Koyuncu and Amado (2008) have systematically investigated the effect of location and content on the understanding/effectivity of traffic signage.This paper suggests and applies the Theory of Affordances (ToA) (Gibson, 1986, 1977; Hartson, 2003) as a framework to design VMS for emergency evacuations. The ToA has been used in a variety of different research fields to analyse the design of everything from climbing routes (Boschker et al., 2002) to human–computer interaction design (Hartson, 2003). It has also been used to evaluate the design of emergency exits (Sixsmith et al., 1988) and to explain the effectiveness of way-finding systems for evacuation (Nilsson, 2009). In addition, the theory has been successfully employed in fire safety research to understand individual pedestrian evacuation behaviour (Joo et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2011).In order to identify the characteristics of the VMS selected for evaluation, a preliminary literature review has been carried out. Then the evaluation of selected VMS systems is performed in two steps. In a first step, a qualitative evaluation based on the ToA is performed and a sub-set of best VMS systems is selected. Further evaluation of the selected VMS systems is made using an affordance-based stated-preference within subject questionnaire with a sample of 62 participants. A stated-preference within subject questionnaire refers to a method in which individual respondents' statements about their preference/choices in a set of options are recorded (Hensher, 1994). Recommendations on the design of the characteristics of the VMS systems have been provided.The present work is currently used to directly assist the design of the emergency systems in a real world tunnel project, namely the Stockholm Bypass project (Sweden), co-funded by the EU Trans-European transport network (TEN-T). Given the practical application of this paper in the tunnel engineering world and their relevance in assessing the effectiveness of VMS for road tunnel evacuation, four VMS design variables have been selected for evaluation, namely 1), the size of the sign (large or small); 2) flashing effects, 3) colour scheme, 4) message coding (i.e., text, pictograms or a combination of them). This selection has been driven by the need to investigate variables which may be dependent on the type of message to be conveyed. This refers to the cases in which literature on road signs for normal operation (i.e., not in an emergency) are not entirely applicable. In fact, it is important to note that motorists may observe the VMS either while driving their car (as in normal conditions), while stopped in a car queue or while walking on foot. In addition, the layouts of the VMSs are identified in order to correspond to designs currently used in tunnel safety engineering practice.This paper summarises the main findings of the research conducted. A technical report of this research study is also available for tunnel safety designers (Ronchi and Nilsson, 2014).The use of the ToA to study evacuation system design has been previously investigated and applied by Sixsmith et al. (1988) and by Nilsson (2009). In the present study, this theory is used for the first time to evaluate VMS systems. In particular, the categorization of affordances based on the research studies made by Hartson (2003) is here used. In fact, Nilsson (2009) showed that in order to enable the analysis of the affordances provided to people (i.e., evacuees) by an evacuation system, it is useful to divide affordances into different categories. One possible division suggests that affordances can be divided into the following four categories: 1) Sensory affordance, 2) Cognitive affordance, 3) Physical affordance, 4) Functional affordance (Hartson, 2003).Sensory affordance is determined in VMSs by their capability of attracting the attention of the motorists and their impact on the ability in seeing the message provided. This is associated with the location (which is constant in this study) and size of the panels, the colour in use and the type of code displayed in the sign (text, pictorial symbols, and flashing lights) and its characteristics. For instance, text provided by a visual evacuation system must be sufficiently large (Dudek, 1991) and the content of the VMS should be easy to see.Cognitive affordance is associated with the effectiveness of the VMS in providing information that motorists can understand. This is dependent on the methodology used to provide information (text, pictorial symbols, flashing lights) and the written message design and their combination. The signs are intended to instruct people on appropriate actions (Dudek, 1991). In this case, the two required actions to perform are to turn off the engine and to reach an emergency exit on foot. The use of written messages in different languages may affect cognitive affordance in relation to the expected type of population involved. The cognitive affordances provided by a design should also take into account of the context. For example, a VMS sign during the fire in the Södra Länken tunnel in Stockholm on June 16, 2008 (Åberg et al., 2008) presented an “evacuate tunnel” written message. This sign led many motorists to drive out their car through dense smoke instead of leaving their vehicle and evacuating on foot. This is a clear example in which a message was interpreted differently than the designers had intended.Physical affordance supports the user physically performing an action. An example can be an opening device for doors. The VMS is a sensory system which does not require a physical interaction with the object under consideration, so the study of physical affordance is not relevant to VMS.Functional affordance is associated with the goals of the tunnel evacuees. Main people's goals include reaching a safe place overcoming possible property attachment (i.e. the reluctance to leave the vehicle) and inhibiting negative social influence (Kinateder et al., 2014a, 2014b; Ronchi, 2013). VMS systems are designed in line with the same goals. For this reason, it is argued that functional affordance can be directly derived as a consequence of the factors affecting the other affordances (sensory and cognitive in this case). High scores in functional affordance are resulting from a powerful combination of the other affordances. If a system fails in terms of one of the affordances, the functional affordance will also be low as a result of the failing of that affordance. For example, a VMS that is easy to notice (sensory), easy to read/see (sensory) and easy to understand (cognitive) will also provide appropriate functional affordance.The VMS system under consideration consists of two rectangular VMS panels conveying information to motorists and three intermediate smaller squared signs (see schematic representation in Fig. 1). The dimensions of the VMS panels have been selected in order to be a credible representation of a realistic design and they have been inspired by the design of VMS panels in a real-life project (the Stockholm Bypass project). The VMS panels have a fixed dimension of 240 × 90 cm on the opposite side of the emergency exit and two possible dimensions on the side of the emergency exit, either 240 × 90 cm or a larger size of 240 × 170 cm. In fact, two different sizes are taken into consideration in order to evaluate the impact of the sign dimension (large or small) on the effectiveness of the VMS system. The intermediate panels have fixed dimensions corresponding to 90 × 90 cm. In the case of emergency, the smaller panels show red crosses which are used to encourage people to stop their vehicles. The choice of those specific sizes and layout has been done to reflect current engineering practice, i.e. they are based on real world designs (Modig et al., 2014). For instance, the width of the panels is generally dependent on the width of the lanes, which are defined by tunnel design regulations.Flashing effects can be used for lights or during the display of text messages. Message lines should be static (in line with the studies by Chan and Ng (2009) and Wang et al. (2006)) and zero or four flashing amber lights in the corners of the VMSs (see examples in Fig. 2) are selected for experimental testing. The four flashing amber lights are assumed to flash all at the same time in accordance with the studies performed in evacuation research (Nilsson, 2009). This is in contrast with general VMS practice in which lights generally flash alternatively (Dudek, 1991). The flash rate of the lights is 1.0 Hz since previous experimental research (Nilsson, 2009) demonstrates that this flashing rate enhances the degree of perceived urgency (cognitive affordance) without creating a flashing effect which may annoy motorists, as investigated in laboratory experiments (Ronchi et al., 2015).Several studies have been carried out in order to investigate the effectiveness of different colours to provide information to motorists, e.g. Christ, 1975; Lai, 2010, 2008; McDougald and Wogalter, 2014. Colour codes can generate higher sensory affordances if compared with the use of text, pictograms, etc. given the lower reaction times associated with them (Christ, 1975; Wright, 1968). Colour coding can be designed in line with international standards, e.g. ISO 3864-1:2011 (2011). Nevertheless, response times of users in recognizing and understanding the content of an object given the colour employed (cognitive affordance) may depend on several factors, such as the meaning of the colour code given different cultural and national backgrounds (Chan and Ng, 2009; Lai, 2008; Ou and Liu, 2012), or the class of information provided (Adams et al., 1998; Chan and Ng, 2009; Wickens, 2004). Sensory affordance is affected by the colour employed and the correlation between the meaning of the colour code and the type of information displayed (Lai, 2012, 2010, 2008; Pastoor, 1990; Tang et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2006).In line with the literature available (Chan and Ng, 2009; Dudek, 1991; Lai, 2012, 2010, 2008; Pastoor, 1990; Wickens, 2004), panels containing either two or three colours are selected for experimental testing for the background and the written messages. The suggested background colour of the VMS is always black and the elements in the panel may be either amber, red or white in relation to the type of information provided (e.g. respectively warning message, danger, information, etc.) and the possible combined use of pictorial symbols, in line with the recommendations provided by Dudek (1991) and ISO 3864-1:2011 (2011). The combinations of these elements produce VMS panels with a two-colour or a three-colour scheme.Message coding is here intended as the selected type of message employed to convey information, i.e., written text, pictograms or a combination of them.Different factors need to be taken into account during written message design, such as the number of units of information, message load and length (Dudek and Ullman, 2001; Liu, 2005), font size (Borowsky et al., 2008; Shinar and Vogelzang, 2013), wording, separation and abbreviations (Wang et al., 2006).In the case of road tunnel evacuations, VMSs can contain three different types of information such as 1) the problem (i.e. the accident), 2) the location of the problem and 3) the recommended motorist action (Dudek, 1991). Nevertheless, given sign space and legibility constraints it is not always possible to provide information on all elements (Dudek and Ullman, 2001). In those cases, motorists actions should be given priority to avoid people uncertainty (Dudek, 1991).In line with the literature available (Borowsky et al., 2008; Dudek, 1991; Dudek and Ullman, 2001; Liu, 2005; Shinar and Vogelzang, 2013; Wang et al., 2006; Wang and Cao, 2003), the selected written message for experimental testing is made of either one or two lines (see Fig. 3). Each line will contain only one unit of information. Dudek (1991) recommends that in the case of a 1-line message, the unit of information informs motorists on the main action to perform (to evacuate the tunnel or use the emergency exit). In the case of 2-line message, the two lines recommend motorists on the actions to perform in more detail (to turn off the car engine and to evacuate the tunnel). The message lines should not include abbreviations (Dudek and Ullman, 2001). Text is written in capital letters and size is selected (25 cm in this case) in order to take into account legibility distance. Given the direct application of the current study in a Swedish tunnel, the message is written either in Swedish only or it is constituted by two frames in Swedish and English. The content of the text is a warning message. The warning messages are selected in order to instruct motorists on the action to perform. A set of messages are selected in line with previous experimental research (Nilsson et al., 2009).Two-line warning message:Line 1: “STANNA MOTORN” (Swedish) – “STOP ENGINE” (English)Line 2: “UTRYM TUNNELN” (Swedish) – “LEAVE TUNNEL” (English)One-line warning message:Line 1: “UTRYM TUNNELN” (Swedish) – “LEAVE TUNNEL” (English)It should be noted that the direct translation in English of “Utrym Tunneln” would be “Evacuate Tunnel” rather than “Leave tunnel”. Nevertheless, the translation “Leave Tunnel” is used due to space restrictions in the panel (which may usually occur).Motorists generally have high accuracy rate when responding to pictorial symbols rather than text only since they present information concisely, thus requiring short response time (Liu, 2005). In contrast with the use of text only (where familiarity is less important), the sole use of symbols is advantageous when the observer is familiar with it (Shinar and Vogelzang, 2013). Many studies (Koyuncu and Amado, 2008; Liu, 2005; Ou and Liu, 2012; Shinar and Vogelzang, 2013) investigated the combined use of text messages and pictorial symbols, pointing out that pictorial symbols enhances people capacity in remembering and understanding the content of a message. Experimental and field studies (Koyuncu and Amado, 2008; Shinar and Vogelzang, 2013; Wang and Cao, 2003; Wolff and Wogalter, 1998) on traffic signs confirm that written and symbolic stimuli activate both early perceptual and late cognitive processes (Koyuncu and Amado, 2008).In line with the literature available and international standards (International Standards Organization, 2011), the pictorial symbols selected for experimental testing are the standard “do not enter sign”, the “warning sign” (ISO 3864-1:2011) and the “emergency exit sign” based on the Swedish standard (AFS, 2008) (See Fig. 4), depending on the information that is intended to be provided (a warning message or information on the emergency exit). Pictograms are used in the VMS panel considering the adopted colour scheme. It should be noted that the pictorial symbols have been selected for test purpose and that the “do not enter sign” and the “warning sign” are not generally intended to be used for panels concerning evacuation emergencies since they have their own meanings in relevant signage standards (International Standards Organization, 2011).Based on the previous literature review on VMS systems and the aims of the study, a set of eleven VMS systems were selected and subjected to an affordance-based evaluation to identify a set of possible appropriate designs. It should be noted that a complete experimental testing would require the analysis of a significantly higher number of designs. Nevertheless, the choice of the designs has been made in order to represent some of the most common VMS systems used in engineering practice as well as allowing the relative ranking of some of the main features affecting the effectiveness of VMS systems for road tunnel evacuation. The selected designs for evaluation are presented in Table 1.The selected VMS systems in accordance to Table 1 are shown in Fig. 5.A qualitative evaluation based on the ToA was used to identify the best VMS system in terms of their capability to instruct people on the action to perform in case of an emergency. This analysis has been done in order to demonstrate the usefulness of the ToA to perform an evaluation of different systems. For instance, the methodology in use can be adopted by practitioners for system evaluation. A set of a priori qualitative level of affordances has been obtained by the authors deriving information available in the literature. To facilitate the qualitative evaluation of the VMS design, the affordances of each system are compared to a benchmark design (see Fig. 6). In particular, the impact of each VMS feature on the final score of each design is evaluated in relation to the associated affordances. The qualitative evaluation is based on a systematic analysis based on the following 5-step procedure:1)Identification of the features of each VMS systemLinking each feature with the relevant affordances, i.e. identification of the affordance scores (in this case sensory and cognitive) that can depend on the features of the VMSQualitative comparison between the features of the benchmark design and each VMS system under consideration for sensory and cognitive affordanceAssignment of qualitative scores to sensory and cognitive affordances for each designEvaluation of functional affordance scores (low/medium/high) based on the qualitative scores of sensory and cognitive affordanceFurther information on the procedure can be found in Ronchi and Nilsson (2014).People tend to perceive amber faster than other colours in the case of written messages in VMS (Lai, 2012, 2010, 2008; Wang et al., 2006), thus the use of red and white colour (e.g., VMS system 8 and VMS system 10) may produce a lower sensory affordance. Flashing can increase sensory affordance since it may capture people attention to objects in a display better than colours (Duarte et al., 2014; Thackray and Mark Touchstone, 1991). The use of panels of bigger size on the size of the emergency exit (240 × 170 cm) is deemed to increase sensory affordance, although experimental tests are needed to evaluate the impact of the size of the panel. Double-line messages generally lead to a faster reading if compared with single line messages (Lai, 2010) (VMS systems 7, 8 and 11).The use of pictorial symbols of different colours than the text (VMS systems 5, 8, and 9) is deemed to create confusion in the motorists and it may decrease cognitive affordance. This solution is not recommended, but experimental tests are needed to verify if this negative effect can be balanced by the use of an effective pictorial symbol (e.g. VMS system 5). The use of pictorial symbols in an unusual colour may decrease cognitive affordance (Lai, 2010; Wickens, 2004) (e.g. VMS system 8). Since the information to be transmitted concerns an emergency, it is deemed that the use of a white colour scheme for the text (VMS system 8) may decrease cognitive affordance on the message if compared with the use of amber or red, i.e. motorists may not perceive the emergency and the urgency of the situation (Chan and Ng, 2009). The use of the single unit of information “Utrym tunneln” (“Leave tunnel” in Swedish) may decrease cognitive affordance and be mis-understood since motorists are not specifically instructed to abandon their cars and perform their evacuation on foot.A summary of the qualitative evaluation of the VMS systems based on the interpretation of the literature using the ToA is presented in Table 2.The VMS systems which present either a low score in sensory, cognitive or functional affordance have been excluded from further experimental evaluation. In conclusion, the use of the ToA permitted the exclusion of five VMS systems, namely VMS systems 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11. The VMS systems selected for further research are therefore VMS systems 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6.The analysis of VMS systems using the ToA permitted the selection of six possible VMS designs. The selected designs are tested experimentally with an affordance-based questionnaire in order to validate the results of the preliminary analysis, give recommendations on appropriate VMS system and select the best designs. Questionnaire studies are not subjected to ethical review in Sweden, thus no ethical application has been submitted to the national ethical board.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
