@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ecodriving in hybrid electric vehicles – Exploring challenges for user-energy interaction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined ecodriving in HEVs and challenges for optimal user-energy interaction.Impact of motivation and knowledge on fuel efficiency varied with environmental complexity.There was considerable inter-individual variance in ecodriving strategy selection.Drivers had diverse conceptualisations of HEV energy efficiency and named several false beliefs.Design guidelines for ecodriving support systems are derived to facilitate ecodriving.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hybrid electric vehicles,Ecodriving,User-energy interaction,Driving behaviour,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) can help to reduce transport emissions; however, user behaviour has a significant effect on the energy savings actually achieved in everyday usage. The present research aimed to advance understanding of HEV drivers' ecodriving strategies, and the challenges for optimal user-energy interaction. We conducted interviews with 39 HEV drivers who achieved above-average fuel efficiencies. Regression analyses showed that technical system knowledge and ecodriving motivation were both important predictors for ecodriving efficiency. Qualitative data analyses showed that drivers used a plethora of ecodriving strategies and had diverse conceptualisations of HEV energy efficiency regarding aspects such as the efficiency of actively utilizing electric energy or the efficiency of different acceleration strategies. Drivers also reported several false beliefs regarding HEV energy efficiency that could impair ecodriving efforts. Results indicate that ecodriving support systems should facilitate anticipatory driving and help users locate and maintain drivetrain states of maximum efficiency.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Facing the global sustainability challenge of reducing greenhouse gas emissions, electrification of road transport has become a major trend (Dijk et al., 2013), and hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) in particular are becoming increasingly widespread (Al-Alawi and Bradley, 2013; U.S. Department of Energy, 2015). HEVs are key for sustainable road transport as they can reduce fuel consumption without necessitating complex changes in energy-supply infrastructure (in contrast to plugin or fuel cell electric vehicles). Yet, ultimately, sustainability strongly depends on the actual energy efficiency that users achieve in everyday usage. User behaviour is, therefore, a critical factor with regard to the ultimate effect that such systems have on making the road transport system more sustainable.Ecodriving has emerged as a term that encompasses all the influences users have on the real-world energy efficiency of a road vehicle (see e.g., Barkenbus, 2010; Jamson et al., 2015a; Sivak and Schoettle, 2012; Stillwater and Kurani, 2013; Young et al., 2011). As well as strategic and tactical ecodriving measures (e.g., optimize tyre pressure, route choice; Sivak and Schoettle, 2012), specific driving behaviours (i.e., operational ecodriving strategies; Sivak and Schoettle, 2012) are a core element of ecodriving. Electric drivetrains have been discussed as particularly challenging (McIlroy et al., 2014; Neumann et al., 2015) due to the novelty of their energy dynamics (e.g., consumption dynamics of electric propulsion, bidirectional energy flow resulting from regenerative braking). HEVs represent the most complex drivetrain in this respect because of the extremely dynamic interplay between the different drivetrain components, and the central role of bidirectional energy flow. Hence, maximising HEV fuel-efficiency can be considered particularly challenging, not only requiring ecodriving motivation, but also a sufficient level of technical system knowledge. From the perspective of green ergonomics (Thatcher, 2013; Hanson, 2013) a key challenge, therefore, is to advance understanding of user-energy interaction and support drivers' ecodriving efforts.The objective of the present research was to advance understanding of HEV drivers' ecodriving strategies, and the challenges to optimal user-energy interaction. To this end, we recruited 39 HEV drivers with above-average fuel efficiencies (suggesting the performance of eco-driving behaviours) and collected interview data, questionnaire responses, and long-term fuel efficiency recordings. With this research we seek to: (a) identify challenges to, and ways of facilitating ecodriving in HEVs, and (b) advance understanding of user-energy interaction in dynamic systems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
