@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Heat strain evaluation of overt and covert body armour in a hot and humid environment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine the thermophysiological effects of wearing lightweight non-military body armour.Particular focus is paid to wearing different types of armour in a hot and humid environment.Heat strain encountered was negligible compared to no armour.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heat stress,Hydration,Personal protective equipment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this study was to elucidate the thermophysiological effects of wearing lightweight non-military overt and covert personal body armour (PBA) in a hot and humid environment. Eight healthy males walked on a treadmill for 120 min at 22% of their heart rate reserve in a climate chamber simulating 31 °C (60%RH) wearing either no armour (control), overt or covert PBA in addition to a security guard uniform, in a randomised controlled crossover design. No significant difference between conditions at the end of each trial was observed in core temperature, heart rate or skin temperature (P > 0.05). Covert PBA produced a significantly greater amount of body mass change (−1.81 ± 0.44%) compared to control (−1.07 ± 0.38%, P = 0.009) and overt conditions (−1.27 ± 0.44%, P = 0.025). Although a greater change in body mass was observed after the covert PBA trial; based on the physiological outcome measures recorded, the heat strain encountered while wearing lightweight, non-military overt or covert PBA was negligible compared to no PBA.Practitioner summaryThe wearing of bullet proof vests or body armour is a requirement of personnel engaged in a wide range of occupations including police, security, customs and even journalists in theatres of war. This randomised controlled crossover study is the first to examine the thermophysiological effects of wearing lightweight non-military overt and covert personal body armour (PBA) in a hot and humid environment. We conclude that the heat strain encountered while wearing both overt and covert lightweight, non-military PBA was negligible compared to no PBA.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The wearing of bullet proof vests or body armour is a requirement of personnel engaged in a wide range of occupations including military, police, security, customs and even journalists in theatres of war. The primary purpose of the body armour is to protect the wearer from ballistic trauma; however an unintended consequence of wearing body armour in hot and humid environments is an increased risk of heat strain (Caldwell et al., 2011; Cheung et al., 2000; Havenith et al., 1999; Sawka et al., 2011; Taylor et al., 2008). Depending on its thickness and fit, PBA can form a barrier between the wearer's skin and the environment, impairing the amount of sweat that can be evaporated due to the impermeable nature of the material (relative to normal or work clothing) (Craig and Moffitt, 1974; Havenith, 1999). Sweat can also become trapped or absorbed into the clothing layer, further impairing and decreasing the amount of heat transfer (Craig and Moffitt, 1974). PBA can also inhibit sweat loss by establishing a microclimate that sweat has to travel across and subsequently inhibits the evaporative capacity of the human body to transfer heat to the environment (Candas and Hoeft, 1995; Nunneley, 1989; Nunneley et al., 1978).The combination of these factors may cause an imbalance between heat production and heat dissipation (Holmér, 1995) eventually leading to increased heart rate and core temperature and consequently an increase in heat strain and perceived exertion. Increasing levels of heat stress are associated with dehydration, heat cramps, heat exhaustion, heat stroke and ultimately death if left untreated (Armstrong, 2007; Taylor et al., 2008). Prolonged heat stress coupled with exercise, even if at low intensity, can pose a challenge to the regulation of temperature and oxygen delivery to the working muscles, brain and heart (Gonzalez-Alonso, 2012) and ultimately reduce human performance. Changes in physiologic function have been reported in a military setting (Cheuvront et al., 2008; Majumdar et al., 1997) but inconsistencies exist as to whether lightweight non-military body armour can be detrimental to performance (Caldwell et al., 2011, 2012).Cash in transit security guards, otherwise known as armoured vehicle officers (AVOs), are one such example of personnel required to wear lightweight PBA in hot–humid environments (Stewart and Hunt, 2011). AVOs wear PBA in operational activities which can be conducted in hot conditions depending on their geographical location. Although the armour is effective in reducing the risk of mortality its influence on thermal balance needs to be considered. To date, there is a paucity of research examining the thermophysiological effects of wearing this type of non-military lightweight PBA. To our knowledge only two studies (Lehmacher et al., 2007; Stewart and Hunt, 2011) have examined the effects of wearing lightweight body armour on security guards in the field, and a controlled, laboratory based study is warranted. Therefore the current study sought to elucidate the thermophysiological effects of wearing lightweight non-military overt and covert personal body armour (PBA) in a hot and humid environment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
