@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The influence of gait cadence on the ground reaction forces and plantar pressures during load carriage of young adults

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
High ground reaction forces and plantar pressures are observed during load carriage at high gait cadences.Special attention should be paid in the medial forefoot and medial rearfoot regions during load carriage at high gait cadences.The pattern of force distribution is different between load carriage and normal walking during low and high gait cadences.During load carriage changes on gait pattern appears to occur to protect the musculoskeletal system from high vertical forces.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Backpack,Walking,Gait speed,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Biomechanical gait parameters—ground reaction forces (GRFs) and plantar pressures—during load carriage of young adults were compared at a low gait cadence and a high gait cadence. Differences between load carriage and normal walking during both gait cadences were also assessed. A force plate and an in-shoe plantar pressure system were used to assess 60 adults while they were walking either normally (unloaded condition) or wearing a backpack (loaded condition) at low (70 steps per minute) and high gait cadences (120 steps per minute). GRF and plantar pressure peaks were scaled to body weight (or body weight plus backpack weight). With medium to high effect sizes we found greater anterior-posterior and vertical GRFs and greater plantar pressure peaks in the rearfoot, forefoot and hallux when the participants walked carrying a backpack at high gait cadences compared to walking at low gait cadences. Differences between loaded and unloaded conditions in both gait cadences were also observed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Standing or walking with backpacks shifts posterior and superiorly the combined centre of mass of the system backpack and backpacker, inducing postural imbalance for static and dynamic conditions (Singh and Koh, 2009). When wearing a backpack there is an increase in the load carried by the musculoskeletal system, which may lead to adaptation in postures and forces acting on the human body. Many studies indicated that load carriage changed the kinematics (Attwells et al., 2006; Birrell and Haslam, 2010; Birrell et al., 2007; Cobb and Claremont, 1995; Majumdar et al., 2010), ground reaction forces (GRFs) (Birrell and Haslam, 2010; Birrell et al., 2007; Castro et al., 2013, 2014a; Cobb and Claremont, 1995; Simpson et al., 2012), and plantar pressures (Castro et al., 2013, 2014b) of walking. These biomechanical changes caused by load carriage might contribute to the high levels of back pain (Grimmer and Williams, 2000; Skaggs et al., 2006), muscle discomfort (Johnson et al., 1995), joint problems (Birrell and Haslam, 2009), metatarsal stress fractures (Hodge et al., 1999), metatarsalgia (Knapik et al., 1992; Pau et al., 2011), and foot blisters (Knapik et al., 1996) observed in people wearing backpacks.Changing gait speed or cadence—the relationship between cadence and speed during walking tends to be linear (Perry, 1992)—influences many biomechanical gait parameters during “normal” walking (without a backpack). At higher gait speeds, the vertical and anterior-posterior GRFs (Chiu and Wang, 2007; Chung and Wang, 2010; Goble et al., 2003), and the plantar pressure peaks in the heel and medial forefoot were higher, whereas in the midfoot and lateral forefoot they were lower (Rosenbaum et al., 1994) compared to slower gait speeds. Previous studies observed changes in gait stability (Hsiang and Chang, 2002), and in spatial-temporal gait parameters (Charteris, 1998) as a consequence of changing gait speed during load carriage. However, it is unclear the influence of gait speed on kinetic gait parameters, such as shear and vertical forces and plantar pressures, during load carriage.The GRFs and plantar pressure approaches are insightful techniques for assessing gait biomechanics. The vertical GRF provide information about mechanical stress (Piscoya et al., 2005). This measure might be related to joint contact forces, which appear to play an important role in the development of pathological conditions such as low back pain and osteoarthritis (Piscoya et al., 2005). The anterior-posterior GRF is the main component that indicates shear stress (Chang et al., 2011). This force provides insights into the friction between the foot and shoe or shoe and ground, and their increase might be linked to the development of foot-related injuries such as foot blisters (Knapik et al., 1992), and tendency to slip (Chang et al., 2011). Both of the mentioned GRF components inform about the overall forces acting on the human body. However, the GRFs do not provide any information about where the forces are being applied on the foot (Castro et al., 2014c). In-shoe plantar pressure systems allow quantification of the amount of vertical GRF being applied on each region of the plantar surface, providing information about foot structure and function (Cavanagh and Ulbrecht, 1994). Positive correlation between plantar pressure peaks and pain ratings have been previously found (Hodge et al., 1999). Finally, to achieve a more detailed and comprehensive picture of the forces acting on the musculoskeletal system, combining the GRFs and plantar pressure analyses appears to be relevant.Students, hikers and soldiers often change their gait cadence while they are walking, or, depending on their aims, adopt a low or high gait cadence during activity. The knowledge of the loads imposed to the musculoskeletal system caused by alterations in gait cadence may help in developing accessories (e.g. shoes and insoles) more suitable for specific gait conditions (walking with or without a backpack, at a low or high gait cadence), as well as to identify plantar foot areas more susceptible to damage, with the purpose of making the activity safer and more comfortable and preventing injuries. Therefore, the aim of this study was to compare biomechanical gait parameters—GRFs and plantar pressures—during load carriage of young adults at a low gait cadence and a high gait cadence. We also assessed differences on these biomechanical gait parameters between load carriage and normal walking during both gait cadences. We hypothesised that during load carriage at the high gait cadence higher GRFs and plantar pressures will be found compared to the low gait cadence. We also hypothesised that differences in GRFs and plantar pressures will be observed between load carriage and normal walking (values scaled to body weight plus backpack weight for the load carriage condition, and scaled to body weight for the normal walking condition) in both gait cadences.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
