@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Work with prolonged arm elevation as a risk factor for shoulder pain: A longitudinal study among young adults

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Longitudinal association between work with arm elevation and shoulder pain in the first years of working life.An association between prolonged arm elevation and shoulder pain was found among women.Low levels of shoulder pain are found. The associations may nevertheless be early indicators of more severe shoulder pain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mechanical workload,Musculoskeletal disorders,Inclinometer,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This prospective study aimed at examining if work with prolonged arm elevation predicts shoulder pain among 41 young adults in their first years of working life. Fifteen hairdressers, 15 electricians, 5 students and 6 with various work were followed over a 2.5-year period (2006/7–2009). Arm elevation was measured with inclinometers during a full working day at baseline. Shoulder pain was reported at baseline and twice in the follow-up period. Data were analyzed by generalized estimating equations (GEE-analysis), stratified by gender and adjusted for time, mechanical workload, work demand, physical activity, tobacco use and prior shoulder pain. Work with prolonged arm elevation with angles >60° and >90° were associated with shoulder pain among women. Even though the shoulder pain levels are low the study suggests work with arms elevated as an early work-related risk factor among women, and indicates the importance of early prevention strategies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Shoulder pain is frequently reported in both the general and the working population (Luime et al., 2004; Sterud et al., 2014). Pain in the shoulder region also has substantial influence on sickness absence and health-care costs (Andersen et al., 2012; Nyman et al., 2007). In a recent review, exposure to work postures involving elevated arms was found as an important risk factor for shoulder pain (Mayer et al., 2012). The association between work with arms above shoulder level and shoulder pain has however often been examined by cross-sectional designs (Holmström et al., 1992; Ohlsson et al., 1995), and the exposure of arm elevation during work has frequently been based on self-reported measures (Leclerc et al., 2004; Roquelaure et al., 2011). A study among automobile assembly workers objectively measured the work postures by video recordings (Punnett et al., 2000). They found that working 10% of the work day with elbows over shoulder height (>90° arm elevation) constitutes a risk for shoulder disorders (Punnett et al., 2000). A previous study evaluating the relation between shoulder disorders and objectively measured episodes with arms above shoulder level, found an exposure-response relation between current arm elevation and shoulder disorders (Svendsen et al., 2004). The literature is however still scarce on the effects of objectively measured prolonged arm elevation and it is unclear how high the arms must be elevated and how long the periods of arm elevation must be before the harmful effects occur. In the current study we used inclinometer to give an accurate measure of arm elevation. In contrast to earlier studies of middle-aged and older workers we have in our study analyzed the prospective associations between arm elevation and shoulder pain among a population in the start of their working carrier, being unexposed to earlier work with arms elevated. Young Norwegian workers report more work with arms elevated compared to middle-aged and older workers (NOA, 2011) and it may therefore be of importance to examine if exposure to work with arm elevation is a risk factor for shoulder pain in the first years of working life. The study population consisted of hairdressers and electricians together with a group of students and subjects in various jobs. The population was chosen based on the knowledge that manual occupations like hairdressers (Veiersted et al., 2008) and electricians (Moriguchi et al., 2013) are commonly exposed to work with elevated arms.The study postulates that work exposures with elevated arms predict shoulder pain. Thus, the aim of the present study was to examine the relative time with prolonged arm elevation >60° and >90° and its associations with shoulder pain during the following 2.5 years among young adults in their first years of working life.Forty one young adults (median age, 21) were followed over a 2.5-year period (2006/7–2009) in their first years of working life. Arm elevation was measured objectively for each participant during a full working day at baseline (T0 = 2006/7) and considered as a time independent variable. Questionnaire giving information on shoulder pain and covariate variables were completed at baseline and two times in the follow-up period (T1 = 2008 T2 = 2009). In addition, prior shoulder pain was assessed by a questionnaire approximately one year prior to baseline (T-1 = 2005/6). Table 1illustrates the study design.The study population constituted of 41 participants (23 women and 18 men) with different occupations at baseline. Fifteen females were hairdressers, 15 males were electricians, 5 females were students while 3 females and 3 males had other occupations, such as working in the retail business and kindergarten. Most of the electricians and hairdressers had done their apprenticeship and had been working 2–3 years prior to baseline. Two of the 41 participants (5%) had parents from non-western countries (one male electrician and one male with various work). Thirty four participants (83%) reported to have medium or high socioeconomic background. Table 2presents a further overview of the study group characteristics. They were all sampled from a cohort followed from 2002 consisting of 420 technical school students from the greater Oslo area, representing student hairdressers, student electricians and art/media/design students (Østerås et al., 2006). Forty five subjects agreed to participate in a one-day field registration at baseline where arm elevation was evaluated by bilateral inclinometers. Two of these cancelled their appointment, and another 2 subjects were excluded because of technical problems, leaving data on 41 participants. The sampling procedure is described in more detail in an earlier publication (Hanvold et al., 2013). The study group (n = 41) had a lower frequency of tobacco users when compared to the original cohort (n = 379), (p = 0.06). No other statistically significant difference was found between the two groups when analyzing other background variables (general health, gender, parental origin, and physical activity in leisure time), shoulder pain and self-reported mechanical exposure from the data collected in 2002.Shoulder postures and movements were assessed by an inclinometer on each upper arm. The inclinometers were fixed with double-sided adhesive tape below the deltoid muscle insertion. Data were sampled at 20 Hz and stored on a portable data logger fastened in a waist belt of the worker (Logger Teknologi HB, Åkarp, Sweden (Hansson et al., 2003)). The inclinometers measured the orientation relative to the vertical plane. The reference position = 0° elevation (normalization procedure) of the upper arm was recorded with the subject seated, with the side of the body leaning towards the armrest of the chair, and the arm hanging perpendicular while holding a 1 kg weight in the hand. The weight was used to stabilize the vertical position. Recording equipment was mounted in the morning before the start of the working day and a questionnaire was completed before the normalization procedures were initiated. The participants were instructed by the investigator to perform their ordinary work during the measurement day. The percentage of time spent with the upper arms elevated >30°, >60° and >90°, were used as measures to describe working postures (Hansson et al., 2001). To give the time proportions of prolonged arm elevation, episodes lasting for >5, >10 and >20 s were processed. The lengths of episodes were chosen on the basis of earlier findings (Svendsen et al., 2004). The percentage of time with arm elevation was calculated bilaterally before a mean from the right and left upper arm was used in the analyses. The mean duration of the measurements was 6 h and 5 min (range 3 h. 39 min–8 h. 37 min).Shoulder pain during the preceding 4 weeks was assessed using a pain drawing (Margolis et al., 1988). The participants were asked to shade in areas within an outline of a human figure that correspond to areas of their bodies in pain. The test-retest reliability of the pain drawing has been found reliable over time in both location and extent of pain (Margolis et al., 1988). Fig. 1show the pain drawing used in the current study. It also show the area defined as the shoulder region and how the shoulder pain was calculated. In our study the number of squares that was shaded within a grid covering the shoulder region indicated shoulder pain. This grid was applied during the data processing and was not visible for the participants. The sum of shaded squares in the left (0–9) and right (0–9) shoulder gave an index ranging from 0 to 18. Shoulder pain was considered as a time-dependent variable and measured at 4 time points (T−1, T0, T1, T2).The participants self-reported mechanical workload, quantitative job demands, control over work intensity, physical activity in leisure time, tobacco use and working status were all considered as time-dependent variables and measured at 3 time points (T0, T1, T2). The mechanical workload was assessed by 12 questions based on body postures (7 questions) and work involving repetitive, precision movements, manual material handling and vibration (5 questions). On the basis of 3 response alternatives 0 (nothing/hardly nothing), 1 (somewhat), 2 (a great deal), an index was calculated ranging from 0 to 24 (Balogh et al., 2001). Psychosocial work factors were assessed by items selected from the General Nordic Questionnaire for Psychologocal and Social factors at Work (QPSNordic) (Dallner et al., 2000). Quantitative work demands and control over work intensity was each assessed by 2 questions. The questions on quantitative work demand were “is your work load irregular so that the work pile up?” and “do you have too much to do?”. The questions assessing control over work intensity were “Can you set your own work pace?” and ” can you determine the lengths of your own breaks?” (Dallner et al., 2000). All 4 questions had 5 response alternatives from 0 (never/seldom) to 4 (often/very often). The mean of the 2 questions made the score for the 2 psychosocial working conditions. Physical activity in leisure time was assessed by 1 question (how often do you perfome activities that lead to incresed heart rate and shortness of breath?) with 7 response categories from 0 (never) to 6 (everyday) (Wold et al., 2000). Smoking and snuff habits were assessed and the participants were characterized as tobacco users if they smoked or used snuff daily or occasionally. Working status was monitored in the follow-up period to detect changes that might have changed the participant's exposure to arm elevation.The missing data was either due to unit non-responders (missing because participants did not answer the questionnaire as a whole) or item non-responders (missing because participants did not fill in single items in a questionnaire). The total amount of unit non-responders ranged from n = 0 at T0 to n = 9 at T1, while item non-responders was mostly found in the assessment of mechanical workload and ranged from n = 2 at T0 to n = 13 at T1. See Table 1 for more information on the missing data. Multiple imputations were done to impute the missing values and the imputations were based on a linear mixed model. The imputation model included all the variables which were used in the multivariate analysis in this study. Five imputed datasets were made and on the basis of them one average estimate on the association was calculated (Rubin, 1996).Statistical analyses were done using STATA (version 12.0). Chi-square statistics were used to evaluate differences between the study group and the original cohort. Gender differences in occupational factors at baseline were analyzed using Mann–Whitney U test. We used Spearman's rank correlation (ρ = rho) when analyzing shoulder pain at baseline and prior pain in addition to evaluating the correlation between self-reported mechanical workload and objectively measured arm elevation. To evaluate the longitudinal association between arm elevation and shoulder pain, Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE-analysis) was used. This model takes into account the correlation between the repeated measurements within the individual. Due to over dispersion in the discrete outcome variable a negative binomial GEE-analysis was used. For the effect estimates, rate ratio (RR), with corresponding 95% confidence intervals were reported. In all negative binomial GEE-analysis an exchangeable correlations structure was used. The multivariate analyses were adjusted for covariates selected for inclusion a priori. The analyses were adjusted for time, work demands, tobacco use, self reported mechanical exposure, physical activity, prior pain and gender. Because of the gender difference in effect of pain over time the univariate and multivariate analyses were done for the whole group and stratified by gender. Although the study population was small (n = 41), one of the benefits of repeated measures is statistical power relative to sample size, allowing the adjustment of multiple covariates. Incorporating the intraclass correlation coefficient (ρ = 0.64) of the 3 outcome measures. The effective sample size in our study was calculated to n = 64.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
