@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Lean production tools and decision latitude enable conditions for innovative learning in organizations: A multilevel analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Innovative learning climate and sharing ideas is necessary for innovative learning.The use of lean tools can facilitate questioning, new thinking, and sharing ideas.Also decision latitude can enable a climate for innovative learning.Lean tools enable sharing of ideas especially when decision latitude is low.Especially value flow analysis can create an arena for shared understanding.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Psychosocial work conditions,Job resources,Learning climate,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The effect of lean production on conditions for learning is debated. This study aimed to investigate how tools inspired by lean production (standardization, resource reduction, visual monitoring, housekeeping, value flow analysis) were associated with an innovative learning climate and with collective dispersion of ideas in organizations, and whether decision latitude contributed to these associations. A questionnaire was sent out to employees in public, private, production and service organizations (n = 4442). Multilevel linear regression analyses were used. Use of lean tools and decision latitude were positively associated with an innovative learning climate and collective dispersion of ideas. A low degree of decision latitude was a modifier in the association to collective dispersion of ideas. Lean tools can enable shared understanding and collective spreading of ideas, needed for the development of work processes, especially when decision latitude is low. Value flow analysis played a pivotal role in the associations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Lean is a production system that claims to create learning organizations through continuous improvements (Liker and Meier, 2006). Aspects of lean production are common in all sectors, in Sweden (Johansson and Abrahamsson, 2009) as well as in other European countries (Arundel et al., 2007; Radnor et al., 2012). However, there is an ongoing debate concerning its effect on learning, possibly due to the many different ways of interpreting and operationalizing lean production (Pettersen, 2009; Westgaard and Winkel, 2011; Hasle, 2011; Brännmark et al., 2012; Hasle et al., 2012). As lean production can be defined in many ways (Pettersen, 2009), its effect on learning might depend on what is implemented – for instance, if tools such as standardization and visual monitoring can be considered aids for time-consuming routine tasks, or if they are to be seen as means of control. Depending on how new working methods are implemented, organizational changes aimed at reducing variation and waste, such as lean production, may affect employee experience of the work environment and conditions for learning (Adler and Borys, 1996). Changes and formalization of the work process can be coercive, characterized by forced compliance, introduction of rules, and focus on technical and financial methods; or they can be enabling, encouraging employee involvement in problem solving, and stressing learning and innovation (Adler and Borys, 1996; Eklund, 2000).Lean production operates by reducing unnecessary variation and steps in the work process, and consists of a set of operational tools and a strategic or philosophical part (Shah and Ward, 2007). The philosophical level concerns how to understand value (what is needed and wanted by the customer or client) and how the work process can be improved by removing steps without value (Womack and Jones, 1996; Womack, Jones and Roos, 2007). Lean production tools are often implemented in order to eliminate non-value-adding activities and reduce variability in the work process, without considering the lean production philosophy (Shah and Ward, 2007; Radnor et al., 2012; Joosten et al., 2009; Mazzocato et al., 2010). It is often argued that failure to consider the holistic, process view of lean production and the socio-technical aspects of the interaction between human behaviour and operational tools leads to restricted success (Liker and Morgan, 2006; Joosten et al., 2009; Mazzocato et al., 2010; Radnor et al., 2012). If aspects of lean production is combined with socio-technical thinking, where the social as well as the technical system of the organization are considered and aspects such as work content and variation, learning, decision making, recognition and coherence are acknowledged (Thorsrud and Emery, 1969), this may have beneficial effects on the work environment (Seppälä and Klemola, 2004).Improvement strategies and just-in-time practices (i.e. producing and delivering the right items at the right time in the right amounts) are the aspects most frequently mentioned in studies on lean implementations (Womack and Jones, 1996; Pettersen, 2009). Tools such as value flow analysis, resource reduction, standardization, and housekeeping (5S) are also common (Pettersen, 2009; Brännmark et al., 2012). The standardization of processes aims to provide a standard on which to improve, and to facilitate involvement in problem solving and improvement by freeing up time for new thinking (Liker and Meier, 2006). Resource reduction (i.e. reducing set-up time, lead time, inventories and buffers) aims to reveal problems in the work process and facilitate just-in-time production (Liker and Morgan, 2006). Value flow analysis, mapping or flow-charting the operations, identifies the specific actions required to bring a specific product through the entire work process and reduce the steps that create no value (Womack and Jones, 1996). Visual control and monitoring (e.g. posting results on displays and notice boards) provides information on how work is going and how it should be done, in order to facilitate standardization as well as communication, cooperation and participation within the work group (Liker and Meier, 2006). Housekeeping, or 5S (i.e. sorting out what is wasteful, straightening up and putting in its right place, shining and keeping tidy, standardizing, and sustaining this housekeeping process), is a way of maintaining visual control, standardizing and facilitating communication and participation in the work process (Liker and Meier, 2006; Liker and Morgan, 2006).It is possible to identify potentially positive as well as negative effects of lean production on innovative learning (Ellström, 2001). Innovative learning can occur when established definitions of problems or mutual goals are questioned, discussed and analysed (Engeström, 2001). In order to enable innovative learning it must be possible to question current work practice, test new ideas and collectively explore problems and improvements, and also to share and spread ideas, both within and between units within the organization (Crossan et al., 1999; Ellström, 2010), and changes in production processes needs to be accompanied by a climate in which employees are encouraged to discuss problems and think new (Baer and Frese, 2003). Participation in problem solving and development are important conditions for learning new at work. Standardized work tasks and clear feedback might enable participation, but too strict standardization and goal-setting may also stifle innovative learning (Adler and Borys, 1996; Ellström, 2001). In organizations working with lean production, participation in decision making, employee involvement and opportunities for learning and reflection can be reduced by high performance pressure, precise standards and intensified work pace and demands (Landsbergis et al., 1999; Parker, 2003; Sprigg and Jackson, 2006; Lorenz and Valeyre, 2005).However, routinization of tasks can also free up time for learning and innovation (Ohly et al., 2006). According to the literature promoting lean production, time for creativity and innovation in the work process can be achieved by standardizing work tasks and making the best practice of today visible for all. Individuals' ideas and improvements on that standard can then be dispersed and benefit the entire organization (Liker and Meier, 2006). Innovative learning has however been found less likely in lean organizations, possibly due to increased standardization, production pressure, and a reduced level of discretion in problem solving (Lewis, 2000; Arundel et al., 2007).It has been suggested that Sweden, due to a strong history of socio-technical traditions (Johansson and Abrahamsson, 2009) and an emphasis on decision latitude in work organization (Arundel et al., 2007), use a “Scandinavian” model of lean production which could involve a more participative lean organization (Seppälä and Klemola, 2004; Brännmark and Eklund, 2013). Decision latitude – the authority over decisions, the breadth of skill usable on the job, and opportunities to develop skills – is an important part of everyday work (Karasek and Theorell, 1990). Decision latitude is an important condition for learning and reflection (Karasek and Theorell, 1990; Ellström, 2001), especially when work pace and demands are intensified (Van Ruysseveldt and van Dijke, 2011), and is important for innovation and initiative (Ohly et al., 2006). A high degree of decision latitude at work is a job resource that enables employees to take advantage of an innovative learning climate at work (Fagerlind et al., 2013).Hypothesis 1: the use of lean production tools is positively associated with an innovative learning climate and collective dispersion of ideas in organizations.Hypothesis 2: A high degree of decision latitude enhance the association between the use of lean tools and a) innovative learning climate and b) collective dispersion of ideas in organizations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The present study shows that use of lean tools is associated with an innovative learning climate and collective dispersion of ideas. A good learning climate and encouragement of dispersion of ideas is important in order to facilitate development of the work process in organizations. In this study, value flow analysis was a lean tool that played a pivotal role. Value flow analysis seems to enable employees to collectively analyse and question the work process, to come together around a shared understanding of what can be done to reduce unnecessary steps and ensure that the product flows smoothly through the work process. Also decision latitude was important for the experience of job resources such as an innovative learning climate and collective dispersion of ideas at work. The use of lean tools can be experienced as more enabling for sharing ideas when decision latitude is low compared to when high. The results of the present study have implications for the organization of work, and for enabling innovative learning and development in organizations. Both decision latitude and an innovative learning climate are job resources that also help individuals to handle challenges at work with sufficient skills, and facilitate well-being (Bakker and Demerouti, 2007; Fagerlind et al., 2013).