@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Work for sustainability: Case studies of Brazilian companies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Companies considered sustainable includes work-related aspects in the TBL framework.Deployment of the strategy does not lead to the full dissemination of sustainability.In the work design phase tasks are defined independently of the sustainability discussion.Changes in work are not explicitly considered during the introduction of sustainability policies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Work design,Corporate sustainability,Ergonomics,Production engineering,Strategy,Operations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The introduction of strategic corporate sustainability policies is expected to result in the improvement of several issues in companies. One of these issues is work, which should involve greater well-being for workers. Within the context of production engineering, this research connects sustainability and work-related issues, the latter seen in light of the discipline of ergonomics. Based on case studies conducted at four companies considered sustainability benchmarks, we examined how the introduction of the theme of sustainability has influenced work-related issues. The elements analyzed here were the corporate sustainability strategy, organizational practices for deploying the strategy, and the work design phase. The last element is the moment in which work is prescribed in the organization. The results show that, despite the announcement of the inclusion of changes in work, there is not any explicit evidence confirming that such changes are considered as a requirement for corporate sustainability projects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The last few years have been characterized by the widespread inclusion of the theme of corporate sustainability. When a company declares its commitment to sustainability to the external community, the expectation is that it will introduce strategies and actions of a more systemic nature through improvements incorporated into its operation. In this context, the concerns of corporate social sustainability would include worker well-being, whose strategic priority would be on the same level as that of other economic, social and environmental aspects. However, evidence suggests that when sustainability strategies are deployed at the tactical and operational level, the systemic objective of the initial intention may end up being left behind. This paper, based on a PhD thesis, seeks to address three main research questions:–What concepts related to sustainability are announced and introduced by organizations, and how are work-related issues (like work design, professional development and issues related to health and safety) included in the policies of corporate sustainability?Are the organizational mechanisms used to deploy corporate sustainability able to fully disseminate sustainability policies within corporations?In relation to work design, are tasks designed in compliance with explicit strategic sustainability policies?These questions are essential for the confirmation of the thesis of this research, i.e., that albeit reportedly included, there is no explicit evidence that changes in work are taken into consideration as one of the key issues during the conception of sustainability policies, as one of the key issues. Work, defined by how different subjects are engaged in performing tasks deploying different actions, should be considered also during the implementation process of these policies, reinforcing the need to integrate work and production. For ergonomics, adapting tasks to human characteristics is the main issue.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The purpose of this study was to investigate companies engaged in sustainability in order to understand how work-related issues like work design, professional development and questions related to health and safety are considered in the context of corporate sustainability policies. This research revealed some weaknesses that will hopefully be overcome in the future so that organizations can align their stated intentions with their practices. Another contribution of this research is the instigation to understand work's central role in order to achieve production goals and to actually implement sustainability policies.It is people and their work that create services and products, and their performance is crucial to the performance of organizations. To refrain from considering people in the effective introduction of sustainability can pose a risk. We believe that the engagement of people is the best way for organizations to continue to be sustainable over time, in terms of their implemented solutions and economic success in the market. But how to guarantee engagement is an important question and must be analyzed specially in relationship to empowerment policies as well as organizational changes in order to provide conditions enrich professional paths and development and to favor emancipation of people (Dejours, 2009).One of the limitations of research in the field of sustainability based on perceptions is the possible bias of respondents in seeking politically correct answers that do not necessarily portray the reality of the company. To try to reduce this effect, the data were collected so as to triangulate perspectives of different points of view, as well as published data and data on concrete and specific projects. Another limitation was the great difficulty the researchers encountered in obtaining access to information and to the people in the organizations. This difficulty limited the number of analyzed companies, the access to interview more departments within the organizations, accessibility to workers in the operational area, and accessibility to workers of outsourced companies.Future studies are needed in this field. For instance, researchers are invited to explore further what motivates firms to implement sustainability initiatives and how companies can effectively introduce all work-related issues in their daily practices. It would be particularly relevant to study the role of ergonomics in greater depth. Today this discipline is predominantly active at the local level of organizations, far removed from the sphere of action of sustainability. It would be interesting to create possibilities for the introduction of activity-centered ergonomics, psychodynamic of work and macroergonomics' actions at the strategic level of organizations in order to fully include work-related issues in the company's sustainability practices.