@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A human factors approach to snowsport safety: Novel research on pediatric participants' behaviors and head injury risk

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Interdisciplinary, human factors research exploring real-time: snowsport behaviors and head acceleration frequency and severity.Data collection via the combination of technologies incorporating GPS data, tri-axial accelerometers, and supported by survey data.Results indicate that pediatric snowsport participants regularly exceed the design and test parameters of snowsport helmets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Snowsports,Helmet design,Head injury,Participant behavior,Methods,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveThis study applied a human factors approach to snowsport resort systems to contribute to the understanding of the incidence and severity of pediatric snowsport head accelerations.BackgroundPrevious research indicates low magnitude head accelerations are common among snowsport participants. This study adds to the knowledge of snowsport safety by measuring aspects of participants' snowsport behavior and linking this with head acceleration data.MethodSchool-aged students (n = 107) wore telemetry-fitted helmets and Global Positioning System (GPS) devices during snowsport activity. Data was collected over 159 sessions (total hours 701). Head accelerations recorded by the telemetry units were compared with GPS-generated data.ResultsThis study found speeds attained normally exceed the testing rating for which helmets are designed; lower rates of head accelerations compared to earlier studies and that when head accelerations did occur they were generally below the threshold for concussions.ConclusionPediatric snowsport head accelerations are rare and are generally of low magnitude. Those most at risk of a head acceleration >40 g were male snowboarders. Given the recorded speeds in first time participants, increased targeting of novice snowsport participants to encourage education about the use of protective equipment, including helmets, is warranted. Post event recall was not a good indicator of having experienced a head impact. Consideration should be given to raising the standard design speed testing for snowsport helmet protective devices to reflect actual snowsport behaviors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There are more than 90 million annual snowsport participants worldwide (Vanat, 2014) and, as with many sports, there is a risk of injury and even death. Traumatic brain injury has been suggested as the leading cause of death in snowsports (Levy et al., 2002; Shealy et al., 2008; Warda and Yanchar, 2012). Helmets are promoted internationally as effective protection against snowsport head injuries (Cusimano and Kwok, 2010; Hagel et al., 2005a, 2005b; McCrory, 2002), yet there are some concerns about the evidence base upon which to build this claim (Finch et al., 2011). With the growing concern over the long-term sequelae of sport-related head injuries and repeated sub-concussive head accelerations (Cusimano et al., 2013; McCrory et al., 2013a,b) the call, publically and politically, for mandatory helmet use in snowsports has increased (Bussewitz, 2010; Cundy et al., 2010; Ellis, 2013; Langran, 2011; Munro, 2006; Ruedl et al., 2011). However, more research is needed to clarify what the risk of head injury is, as well as under what circumstances snowsport helmets are effective in preventing injuries.Unlike other activities where the aim may be to minimize risks through engineering or design (Gao et al., 2008), snowsports involve risks, perceived and real, that may be part of the attraction (Dickson et al., 2012; Eccles et al., 2011). The discussion of risk is broader than just the consideration of safety, and includes elements that can have either a positive or negative impact upon one's objectives (International Organization for Standardization, 2009). The diverse objectives of a snowsport participant may include fun and excitement, social time with family and friends, enjoyment of nature, and even health and wellbeing across one's life (e.g. Amesberger et al., 2012; Dickson and Terwiel, 2013). A risk which can also have a positive impact upon those objectives may be the pleasure of fresh snow or the physical effort involved in increased fitness, while a risk associated with a negative impact may be high cost of participation or the chance of incurring an injury. Minimizing negative impacts, including injuries, and maximizing positive impacts, such as fitness, may result in an increased enjoyment of the activity and thus overall retention and participation – something of interest to resort operators and allied businesses in light of other challenges faced by the industry from climate change and an aging participation base (Steiger, 2012).The risk of sustaining a sporting injury is the result of the interplay between the likelihood of an unplanned event and the consequences or severity of that event (Velani et al., 2012); this reflects the risk analysis matrix in the field of risk management (International Organization for Standardization, 2009). Developing strategies to reduce the risk and/or severity of sport injuries involves 4 steps: i) an evaluation of the extent of the problem, ii) identification of risk factors and mechanisms of injury, iii) implementation of evidence-based prevention strategies and iv) evaluation of those strategies (van Mechelen et al., 1992). Further, in order to implement effective sport injury prevention strategies a multifactorial approach may be applied that considers the interactions of both intrinsic and extrinsic risk factors along with the event itself (Bahr & Krosshaug, 2005; Meeuwisse et al., 2007). This article investigates the first and third steps, as informed by the extant literature, and contributes to the second step by applying a human factors approach that reflects the multifactorial nature of snowsport injuries. Table 1expands upon examples of sport injury risk factors (e.g. Bahr & Krosshaug, 2005; Gissane et al., 2001) to demonstrate snowsport injuries' multifactorial nature and suggests underpinning disciplines that may be used to investigate ways of modifying or minimizing injury risk.Head injuries include fractures, subdural hematomas and concussions; the latter is a subset of traumatic brain injury (TBI), and the term is sometimes used interchangeably with mild TBI (McCrory et al., 2013a,b; Rughani et al., 2011). Head accelerations do not always result in a head injury and may occur without an impact, e.g. a fall without a head impact, where a sudden deceleration causes the brain to move inside the skull. Alternatively, a fall with a head impact may only lead to low-level head accelerations.While TBI in sports, including snowsports, are concerning, an Australian study revealed a low incidence of TBI in snowsports; patients presenting to Canberra Hospital with a snowsport-related head injury revealed an incidence of 1.8 per 1,000,000 skier days (n = 25). Snowboarders had three times the incidence of head injuries as skiers (Siu et al., 2004). Compared to other sports, head injuries from snowsports occur at a much lower rate. In Australia in 2002–03, in one of the few international studies where International Classification of Diseases coding (ICD), hospitalization data and information identifying the sport were available, 45,452 sport/recreation-related hospitalizations (0.7% of all hospitalizations) were recorded (Flood and Harrison, 2006). Across the three versions of contact football played in Australia (rugby union, rugby league and Australian rules), head injuries were the main reason for hospitalization, with an average of 24.4% of injuries being head injuries within the three disciplines. In ice and snowsports (grouped together in Australian data), head injuries were the reason for admission in 9.9% of cases. By sport, ice-skating had over four times the proportion of hospitalizations due to head injuries (25.8%, similar to football) compared to skiing (6.3%) and snowboarding (5.9%). Thus, hospitalizations for sport/recreation injuries are rare (less than 1% of all injury admissions), 18% of those hospitalizations were head injuries and only 6% of snowsport injury-related hospitalizations (n = 53) were due to head injuries. A problem with hospital data however, is that there is likely to be no data on mechanisms of injury that might help inform prevention strategies.Only one study has investigated the biomechanical characteristics of snowsport head impacts and accelerations, concluding that ‘head impacts in recreational riding are not rare, but are typically low level in magnitude' (Greenwald et al., 2009). Greenwald et al. (2009) recorded 674 head impacts across 46 pediatric snowboarders (mean age 13.7, range 9–20) riding in Whaleback, New Hampshire USA between February 2007 and March 2008 (average of 14.7 impacts per participant). None of these impacts resulted in a medically diagnosed concussion. More than 95% of the impacts were less than 50.2 g's, with peak linear acceleration of 113 g's and rotational head acceleration of 9515 rad/sec2. They suggested that the data demonstrated similar accelerations to other helmeted sports such as American football and ice hockey. In the absence of other data, it was not possible to identify where in the resort the impact occurred, nor what the person's speed was at the time of impact.Even though snowsport-related head injuries may occur at a much lower rate and frequency than other sports there remains significant interest in snowsport-related head injuries leading to calls for mandatory snowsport helmet usage (Bussewitz, 2010; Cundy et al., 2010; Ellis, 2013; Langran, 2011; Munro, 2006; Ruedl et al., 2011; Terwiel and Dickson, 2015); however, one must question whether helmets are the solution.The hierarchy of controls model, as seen in ‘healthy places’ and workplace health and safety literature (Dannenberg et al., 2011; Standards Australia, 2001) begins with the most effective element of removing the hazard and ends with amelioration via protective equipment, such as helmets, as the least effective – tantamount to a ‘last line of defense’. Previous research has explored the role of helmets in reducing TBIs in snowsports (e.g. Cusimano and Kwok, 2010; Hagel et al., 2005a, 2005b), using epidemiological approaches, with an emphasis on quantifying injury type, frequency and severity, often via incident reports (Finch et al., 2011). However, in most circumstances the controls chosen were other injured participants who may have presented with any another injury such as a wrist or lower limb injury. There is no evidence that they were ever at risk of a head injury, yet they have been used as evidence that helmets protect against head injuries. A further study reviewed pediatric TBI in snowsports and concluded that helmet use may need to be promoted, even though the research couldn't compare TBIs with helmet-use as the helmet-use data was not available in their data set (Graves et al., 2013). The problem with the extant literature is that there is insufficient research that explores the mechanism of TBI and/or matches cases with controls with similar mechanism of injury (Finch et al., 2011). Finch et al. (2011) concluded that ‘the strong conclusions from these studies about the effectiveness of helmets must be treated with caution’ (p. 68).Additional concerns about the use of the helmets as a primary injury prevention strategy relate to their design, testing, certification process and use. First, helmets may not be designed to be effective, and certainly are not tested as to their effectiveness, in an impact with a solid object at speeds greater than 23 km/h (Shealy et al., 2008), a speed that is well-below the maximum speeds observed in several studies (Dickson et al., 2012; Shealy et al., 2005; Williams et al., 2007). Second, there is some resistance to wearing helmets, particularly as people may not believe they are necessary (Dickson, 2008; Terwiel and Dickson, 2015), and finally, people may not wear them as they are not required by laws or resort management policy (Cundy et al., 2010; Ellis, 2013). Thus, it may be questioned whether a snowsport helmet is fit for purpose, and whether wearing a snowsport helmet can do what the wearer (or the wearer's parents) thinks it will do; that being to prevent or mitigate a head injury.To better inform the public about the value of wearing a helmet and to contribute to debate as to whether helmets should be compulsory, it is imperative to understand the characteristics of snowsport head accelerations. This particularly relates to biomechanical considerations such as velocities and impact characteristics (e.g. magnitude and location on the head) as well as incident location and participant behavior, upon which to develop evidence-based injury prevention recommendations.This current research, which builds upon Greenwald et al. (2009) research, is the first to combine data on snowsport behaviors with head acceleration data in a real-world scenario and thus provides insights into who is at risk of higher-level head accelerations, the biomechanical factors involved, as well as the extrinsic risk factors that may contribute to pediatric snowsport head injuries. The importance and relevance of this research for those who manage snowsport resorts and snowsport participants alike was reinforced during the data collection period when two young females died from traumatic injuries while participating in snowsports in the resorts where the research was being conducted. Both of the victims were wearing helmets at the time of the incident (“Inquest into the deaths of Hannah Taylor and Amelia Catherine McGuiness”, 2011).The research questions considered here, from a human factors perspective, address the multifactorial nature of snowsport injury prevention, including intrinsic and extrinsic risk factors and the inciting event. Those questions include:•What are the characteristics of pediatric snowsport participants' snowsport behavior?How frequent are snowsport head accelerations?What are the factors associated with measurable head accelerations, e.g. gender, age, experience level, activity, resort location, terrain and speed?The University of Canberra's Committee for Ethics in Human Research granted approval for this research. Either a parent or guardian granted permission for each participant to be involved in the research.Human factors is a ‘scientific discipline concerned with the understanding of interactions among humans and other elements of a system, and the profession that applies theory, principles, data and methods to design, in order to optimize human well-being and overall system performance’ (Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 2010). In this research the snowsport ‘system’ would include: the participants (e.g. age, activity choice, skill levels, capacities, experience and personal goals); their personal equipment (e.g. skis, clothing and helmets), the resort infrastructure (e.g. lifts, snow-making); the resort design and maintenance (e.g. trail design, information and signage), as well as the natural environment and elements (e.g. slope angles, weather); and the characteristics of the inciting event. In this study, we consider participants' behaviors, personal characteristics and the characteristics of any head accelerations in the context of resort design.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
