@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Detailed assessment of low-back loads may not be worth the effort: A comparison of two methods for exposure-outcome assessment of low-back pain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We assessed the effects of differing measurement accuracy on exposure estimates.Also the effect on associations with low-back pain was assessed.Inaccuracy can be unacceptably large at the individual level.Collecting more accurate data does not necessarily lead to higher predictive values.This was especially the case for cumulative loads.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Low-back load,Exposure assessment,Low-back pain,Accuracy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The trade-off between feasibility and accuracy of measurements of physical exposure at the workplace has often been discussed, but is unsufficiently understood. We therefore explored the effect of two low-back loading measurement tools with different accuracies on exposure estimates and their associations with low-back pain (LBP).Low-back moments of 93 workers were obtained using two methods: a moderately accurate observation-based method and a relatively more accurate video-analysis method. Group-based exposure metrics were assigned to a total of 1131 workers who reported on their LBP status during three follow-up years. The two methods were compared regarding individual and group-based moments and their predictive value for LBP.Differences between the two methods for peak moments were high at the individual level and remained substantial at group level. For cumulative moments, differences between the two methods were attenuated as random inaccuracies cancelled out. Peak moments were not predictive for LBP in any method while cumulative moments were, suggesting comparable predictive values of the two methods. While assessment of low-back load improves from investing in collecting relatively more accurate individual-based data, this does not necessarily lead to better predictive values on a group level, especially not for cumulative loads.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Exposure to physical risk factors at the workplace such as lifting, pushing, pulling, and awkward trunk postures (e.g., flexion and rotation) has been associated with low-back pain (LBP; da Costa et al., 2010; Griffith et al., 2012; Lötters et al., 2003). However, it has also been argued that evidence concerning such work related risk factors for LBP is weak and inconsistent (Bakker et al., 2009; Kwon et al., 2011), potentially due to insufficient high quality studies using accurate objective measurement methods (Burdorf, 2010; David, 2005). An important potential reason for this is that the choice for a measurement method for occupational physical exposure involves a trade-off between accuracy and feasibility (i.e., in time and costs). As an example, although self-reports of physical exposure are frequently used as they can be obtained with relative ease and few expenses, outcomes are highly subjective and often based on rough categorization, thereby limiting accuracy (Balogh et al., 2004; Punnett, 2004). As a result, in theory, the choice of such methods in view of available resources, is expected to affect accuracy of exposure estimates which may bias risk associations (Tielemans et al., 1998) and reduce statistical power (Mathiassen et al., 2002, 2010). However, in practice, this is not always the case in epidemiological literature, since studies that measure more accurately often measure limited amounts of subjects which reduces the power of the given study (Griffith et al., 2012). Therefore, the effect of the accuracy of a chosen measurement method on exposure-outcome associations for occupational physical exposure risk factors of LBP is not well understood.Mechanical low-back load as a result of exposure to physical load at the workplace (e.g., lifting and trunk flexion) is an appropriate load measure and is expected to be an important determinant of LBP (Chaffin, 2009; Wells et al., 2004). Such loads (i.e., low-back moments or forces on the lumbar spine) are suspected to provide a direct relationship with spinal failure and consequently with LBP. Mechanical low-back loads can be obtained from measured hand forces and structured posture observations as inputs in a biomechanical model in epidemiological studies (e.g.; Neumann et al., 2001). It has however been shown that these methods can lead to large inaccuracies (de Looze et al., 1994). Nevertheless, such estimates are predictive for LBP (Coenen et al., 2013b; Norman et al., 1998) and more valid and reliable methods for mechanical low-back loads, such as direct measurement techniques (i.e., combining information from motion tracking systems and external force measurements; Kingma et al., 2010; Marras et al., 2010a; Plamondon et al., 1996) can potentially lead to more accurate estimates and to less biased associations with LBP. However, in accordance with abovementioned trade-off, such methods are often costly and difficult to apply to a field setting, as they may interfere with the work performed (Trask et al., 2007). Posture fitting on planar video recordings during manual materials handling tasks has been shown to be a feasible and accurate method for application in field settings (Chang et al., 2003; Coenen et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2011). Yet, such methods are time-consuming and only allow analysis of selected tasks rather than continuous monitoring.To date, the optimum of the above-mentioned trade-off, indicating which measurement tool for occupational low-back load assessment should be chosen in order to have the best combination of measurement accuracy and feasibility, is unknown. We therefore explored this trade-off by comparing the assessment of low-back loads based on observations (Coenen et al., 2013b) and low-back loads assessed more accurately using detailed video-analysis (Coenen et al., 2011). The two methods were compared, at both the individual and group levels, in terms of the accuracy of load estimates and predictive values regarding LBP prevalence.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
