@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Scalable interrogation: Eliciting human pheromone responses to deception in a security interview setting

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
For the first time a stress pheromone was identified in deception interrogations.Participants concealing information responded differently to innocent participants.Biological, physiological, psychological and behavioural stress data were collected.This research validated a unique scalable interrogation paradigm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hostile reconnaissance,Terrorism,Deception,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Individuals trying to conceal knowledge from interrogators are likely to experience raised levels of stress that can manifest itself across biological, physiological, psychological and behavioural factors, providing an opportunity for detection. Using established research paradigms an innovative scalable interrogation was designed in which participants were given a ‘token’ that represented information they had to conceal from interviewers. A control group did not receive a token and therefore did not have to deceive the investigators. The aim of this investigation was to examine differences between deceivers and truth-tellers across the four factors by collecting data for cortisol levels, sweat samples, heart-rate, respiration, skin temperature, subjective stress ratings and video and audio recordings. The results provided an integrated understanding of responses to interrogation by those actively concealing information and those acting innocently. Of particular importance, the results also suggest, for the first time in an interrogation setting, that stressed individuals may secrete a volatile steroid based marker that could be used for stand-off detection. The findings are discussed in relation to developing a scalable interrogation protocol for future research in this area.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Terrorist attacks are usually preceded by phases of ‘hostile reconnaissance’ where those concealing their hostile intent enter public spaces in order to gather field intelligence (Linett, 2005). This intelligence is used to profile front-line security measures (e.g. staff rotas, security camera locations, emergency rendezvous points) as well as wider systemic issues (e.g. response times to potential threats, communication between different security agents, and the wider organisation of security). From this intelligence it is then possible for terrorists to identify vulnerabilities in security and plan their attacks for maximum impact. Other criminal activities also adopt similar strategies to identify vulnerable people or locations (e.g. pick-pockets targetting commuters at rush hour, graffiti artists exploiting security camera backspots). In all these situations if the would be criminal or terrorist are confronted, they will conceal their true intent in order not to raise any suspicion (Cain, 2009). However, it is during these instances that such cuplrits are at their most vulnerable, both to detection and disruption (Cain, 2009).Given the risk of detection, individuals who are concealing any hostile intent may find the experience stressful particularly if they are intercepted and/or formally interviewed. Stress response data can be collected across behavioural, psychological, physiological and biological parameters (Selye, 1976). Whilst several studies claim to have identified the general presence of pheromones in participants who have been subjected to stressful experiences, the biology of stress in relation to chemo-signalling is less developed (Chen et al., 2006; Mujica-Parodi et al., 2008).The role of pheromones in communication across the animal kingdom (e.g. insects, fish and mammals) is well documented (Chen and Haviland-Jones, 2000; Wyatt, 2003; Chen et al., 2006). Chemical communication by insects has shown that pheromones are used in attracting/detecting mates and when placed under stressful conditions, insects (e.g. bees and ants) are known to release alarm pheromones that warn others of impending dangers (Regnier and Law, 1968). Insect pheromones may be detected across large distances with moth pheromones being detected by other moths at distances in excess of five miles (Roach, 1975). Whilst it is apparent that animals use chemo-signalling, this form of vestigial olfactory communication for communicating stress, alarm or fear, is little known in humans (Ackerl et al., 2002). However, the effect of human scent on recipients is often subconscious (affective rather than cognitive) but still notable (Mujica-Parodi et al., 2009) and the human brain “automatically guides physiological adjustments to chemo-sensory anxiety signals without being dependent on conscious mediation” (Prehn-Kristensen et al., 2009, p. 8). Furthermore, scent receiving participants cannot distinguish which nostril is receiving the scent illustrating that detection occurs within the olfactory system and not the trigeminal system (Zernecke et al., 2009).Although there is considerable literature in deception and a little in human chemo-signalling, there is little or nothing on detecting deception through chemo-signalling (Eachus et al., 2013). The field is still in its infancy where much of the research is exploratory. A review by Mujica-Parodi et al. (2008) found only five previous studies investigating human alarm pheromones and none of these set out to create the specific and subtle cognitive state that might be experienced by someone attempting to conceal their intent when taking part in a suspect interrogation. Cognitive performance for a word association task illustrated that recipients of a ‘fear’ scent were more careful and more accurate than recipients of a neutral scent (Chen et al., 2006). Cognitive neuroscience experiments involving functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) scanning has illustrated activity changes in the amygdala, a structure activated in humans by emotional arousal and in animals by alarm pheromones (Mujica-Parodi et al., 2008). In other studies, recipients of a ‘fear’ scent were more likely to describe images of ambiguous facial expressions as ‘fearful’ (Zhou and Chen, 2009) and exhibited more extreme reactions to startle stimuli (Prehn et al., 2006).One of the inherent difficulties associated with the characterisation of human fear pheromones are their low concentrations in secreted media (Grosser et al., 2000). It is also assumed that alarm pheromones in humans must be volatile to ensure greater penetration of the olfactory membrane (Millar, 2002) and this may lead to practical difficulties in the capture, storage and analysis of samples. Expertise in methods and experimental protocols for this area is still developing. Some common themes in the design of the studies already cited include the use of the underarm axillary glands of males to collect scent samples (Zhou and Chen, 2009). Ferdenzi et al. (2009) found that differences between samples from left and right armpits and dependence on dominant-handedness were minimal. Donors are often expected to:•abstain from the use of scented toiletries (Ackerl et al., 2002; Chen et al., 2006; Ferdenzi et al., 2009; Zhou and Chen, 2009)not use antiperspirant deodorants for two days before the study (Ackerl et al., 2002; Chen et al., 2006; Ferdenzi et al., 2009; Zhou and Chen, 2009; Prehn-Kristensen et al., 2009)be non-smokers or abstain from smoking during the study (Ackerl et al., 2002; Ferdenzi et al., 2009; Zhou and Chen, 2009; Prehn-Kristensen et al., 2009)abstain from drinking (Ackerl et al., 2002; Ferdenzi et al., 2009)avoid sport or sex (Ferdenzi et al., 2009)avoid odorous or spicy foodstuffs, cabbage or asparagus, garlic, onions before the study (Ackerl et al., 2002; Ferdenzi et al., 2009; Prehn-Kristensen et al., 2009)wash or shower with provided toiletries on the day of the study (Ackerl et al., 2002; Chen et al., 2006; Ferdenzi et al., 2009; Prehn-Kristensen et al., 2009)wear specific clothing (Ackerl et al., 2002; Zhou and Chen, 2009)complete questionnaires covering armpit shaving, oral contraception, menstrual cycle and medications (Ackerl et al., 2002)collect samples using self-administered oval cotton pads, taped on by the wearers for 24 h (Ferdenzi et al., 2009)not be on medication or recreational drugs, have had no neurological, psychiatric, endocrine or immunological disease (Prehn-Kristensen et al., 2009)be of European origin (Prehn-Kristensen et al., 2009)be male donors (Zhou and Chen, 2009)use scent free toiletries and have washed their bed-sheets with odourless detergent (Zhou and Chen, 2009)have observed dietary restrictions and maintained dietary diary (Zhou and Chen, 2009)Whilst these details are useful in establishing consistent protocols for new investigations, they present restrictions that can limit the ecological validity of such studies for many real life scenarios. It is also important to consider approaches to interviewing those suspected of deception. Guilty Knowledge Tests or Concealed Information Tests present multiple stimuli that include ‘guilty’ primes embedded within irrelevant knowledge. The responses to the guilty primes are then compared with the general baseline levels to identify differences in deception-based behaviours (Ganis and Patnaik, 2009). Interventionist interviewing approaches have also used, where unanticipated questions can help distinguish between liars and truth-tellers when there are two or more accounts of an event (Vrij et al., 2009). In another study, where participants were asked to recount an event in reverse chronological sequence, liars exhibited significantly more signs of cognitive load than the truth-tellers, and police officers were more able to distinguish liars from truth-tellers (Vrij et al., 2008). These perspectives provided the basis for investigating deception in scalable interviews where the level of questioning intensified. An integrated approach was adopted in order to understand and model deception across the four key factors. By taking this approach it was possible to investigate aspects of concealed intent from a user-centred perspective by incorporating data focused on user responses to the scalable interrogation process.A controlled laboratory study based on established research paradigms (Ackerl et al., 2002; Chen et al., 2006) utilised an innovative approach in which participants were required to actively deceive the investigator in return for a motivational reward. In order to achieve this some participants were given a ‘token’ that represented information they had to conceal when interviewed. A control group did not receive a token and therefore did not have to conceal information or deceive the investigators. The aim of this investigation was to determine if both sets of participants responded differently when interviewed, across the behavioural (e.g. video and audio recordings), psychological (e.g. subjective stress ratings), physiological (e.g. heart-rate, respiration, and skin temperature) and biological (e.g. cortisol levels and sweat samples) measures that were collected. As stress is a multi-factor concept, the measures were taken based on previous research protocols but also served as a basis for exploring the potential of a pheromone response to deception. This study was part of a larger investigation that also considered a field-based approach to modelling hostile intent and which discovered a stress related pheromone within a task that was analogous to conducting hostile reconnaissance (Eachus et al., 2013). The approach for the current study was analogous to a suspect who might be interviewed (by security representatives or the police) and who might actively withhold information or seek to deceive investigators in some way.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
