@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Usability and perceived usefulness of personal health records for preventive health care: A case study focusing on patients' and primary care providers' perspectives

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined the usefulness and usability of a Personal Health Records (PHR) application.Multiple methods with observations, think-aloud, surveys, interviews, focus groups.Patients found tailored health recommendations useful.Patients asked more informed questions to their providers due to the system.Care providers interested in PHR due to useful content and patient activation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Personal health records,Usefulness,Usability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Personal Health Records (PHR) are electronic applications for individuals to access, manage and share their health information in a secure environment. The goal of this study was to evaluate the usefulness and usability of a Web-based PHR technology aimed at improving preventive care, from both the patients' and primary care providers' perspectives. We conducted a multi-method descriptive study that included direct observations, concurrent think-aloud, surveys, interviews and focus groups in a suburban primary care clinic. Patients found the tailored health recommendations useful and the PHR easy to understand and use. They also reported asking useful health-related questions to their physicians because of using the system. Generally, care providers were interested in using the system due to its useful content and impact on patient activation. Future successful systems should be better integrated with hospital records; put more emphasis on system security; and offer more tailored health information based on comprehensive health databases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Each year, thousands of people suffer from potentially preventable illnesses such as heart attack, stroke and cancer. In addition to claiming lives and reducing individuals' quality of life, these illnesses also result in millions of dollars in health care costs (Peterson and Dragon, 1998; Avorn and Shrank, 2008). Screening can prevent a considerable amount of these illnesses and reduce costs (Salkeld, 2006). The number of recommended preventive screening tests has increased in the last decade, but patients' compliance with recommended health screening rates still remains low (Manne et al., 2002; Weinberg et al., 2004). In 2003, the seminal paper of McGlynn and colleagues indicated that patients receive only 55% of the recommended preventive care based on a survey of a random sample of 6712 adults in 12 metropolitan areas in the US (McGlynn et al., 2003). Based on CDC's recent report, for example, only 59% of patients in the US receive the recommended colorectal cancer screening tests (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2012). These low rates may partially be due to a lack of awareness by clinicians and patients, inadequate reinforcement mechanisms for patients with regards to compliance with the recommended preventive screening guidelines, limited access to high quality of care, and financial barriers (Mosca et al., 2006).Patient-centric health information technologies (HIT) are becoming increasingly popular (Perlin et al., 2004; Sunyaev et al., 2010). To offer better care at lower costs, HIT needs to support and facilitate patient-centered care rather than focusing on isolated physician and clinician tasks (Walker and Carayon, 2009). If designed well, HIT can educate patients on health care topics, give reminders to ensure timely screening, and provide support mechanisms for patients to facilitate their preventive screening decisions (Institute of Medicine Committee on Quality of Health Care in America, 2001). Personal Health Records (PHR) are an HIT that can play a significant role in improving patients' knowledge of and attitudes toward their health care (Powsner, 1998; Brennan, 2000). The Markle Foundation (2003) defines PHR as “an electronic application through which individuals can access, manage and share their health information in a private, secure, and confidential environment.” International Standards Organization (ISO) (2009) indicated: “The Personal Health Record of an individual is a repository of information considered by that individual to be relevant to his or her health, wellness, development and welfare, and for which that individual has primary control over the record's content.”PHR can improve health care, including preventive care, through educating and engaging patients in their own health care (Krist and Woolf, 2011; Tang et al., 2006), and as a result transforming them into ‘more activated patients’ (Von Korff et al., 1998; Lorig et al., 1996). Patient activation aims to help patients develop the skills, knowledge and motivation to become an effective participant in their health (Hibbard et al., 2004, 2005). It has been linked to better health outcomes and lower costs (Bodenheimer et al., 2002; Britto and Wimberg, 2009). PHR can increase patient activation (Eriksen and Ursin, 2004; Goth, 2008; Ueckert et al., 2003) and improve communication between patients and caregivers (Ueckert et al., 2003) (Eriksen and Ursin, 2004; Steele and Lo, 2009). These studies make it clear that patients are more likely to make good decisions and take actions to promote their health if they become active participants of their own health care (Bourgeois et al., 2008; Ueckert et al., 2003).In the early stages of health information systems, PHR-like systems were not always Web-based (Tang et al., 2006; Srinivasan, 2006). While there are still various platforms supporting PHR systems, including free-standing/PC-based, universal serial bus (USB)/portable storage-based, and mobile/smart phone-based platforms, Web-based systems have so far shown their dominancy (Steele and Lo, 2009). Unlike Web-based health portals, which in most cases consist of a collection of standard information on health issues and illnesses and user-created discussion boards (Weingart et al., 2006). PHR systems typically allow users to manipulate their own health information, and therefore have the potential to better satisfy their health information needs and positively impact health behaviors (Malamateniou and Vassilacopoulos, 2010). PHR can motivate patients to take the recommended preventive screening tests and to improve compliance with drug and other therapies by providing them with either tailored recommendations and education or electronic reminder mechanisms (Palen and Aalokke, 2006; Krist et al., 2011). These recommendations and reminders can lead to more informed patient–caregiver interactions and cost savings. PHR can help family members manage the health information of specific groups such as children, elderly, or terminally disabled patients as well (Greenhalgh et al., 2010; Bourgeois et al., 2008).PHR systems can also improve quality of health care by supporting care providers' work. For example, they can help in closing the health information gap between patients and providers by making the “episodic” nature of care more continuous (Ball et al., 2006) as well as facilitate patient education and shared decision-making.Although PHR have great potential to improve health care (Tang and Lansky, 2005; Scherger, 2005), in particular preventive care (Kahn et al., 2009; Krist et al., 2011), to date there is limited evidence supporting a positive impact of PHR on health care from patients' as well as caregivers' perspectives (Tang et al., 2006; Zuckerman and Kim, 2009). A small number of studies identified barriers to acceptance and widespread usage concerns about privacy, security and confidentiality of health-related data, feasibility of integration of PHR to electronic health records (EHR), accuracy and completeness of data entered, and usability and usefulness of PHR systems (Denton, 2001; Liu et al., 2011; Tang et al., 2006; Hargreaves, 2010). For PHR to gain widespread use, it needs to be accepted and adopted by both patients and care providers, as similar technology acceptance and adoption issues were reported in other areas (Venkatesh and Davis, 2000). It is therefore important to study factors that may potentially affect PHR acceptance from both the patients' and care providers' viewpoints. This will guide us on how to design and implement PHR that will meet the needs of both stakeholders, and will increase the likelihood of success.There is a knowledge gap in the literature regarding patient and care provider perceptions, attitudes and preferences toward any type of HIT (Angst and Agarwal, 2009), in particular PHR (Baird et al., 2011). A number of studies focused on usability and usefulness issues from both patient and provider perspectives (Montague, 2010; Martin et al., 2011), but they focused on medical device design, rather than HIT. Furthermore, previous studies evaluated PHR from either patients' (direct users of PHR) or providers' (indirect users) perspective, which is only part of the picture. More work is needed to understand the use of PHR systems as a tool that can complement the traditional care, as well as their impact on patients, providers, organizations and health care systems based on human factors and ergonomics concepts and methods (Nazi et al., 2009).Based on the above factors and the well-known Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) (Davis, 1989; Davis et al., 1989), we argue that high-usability and usefulness of patient-centric HIT can be valuable in improving patients' compliance with the recommended guidelines and medical outcomes. Fig. 1presents the overarching conceptual framework guiding our study, which was adapted from the TAM. The framework indicates that a patient's or care provider's attitude toward the PHR system can be determined by two constructs: perceived usefulness and perceived usability. Instead of the construct “perceived ease of use” included in the original TAM model, the modified framework uses the construct of “perceived usability.” Due to the broader range of the usability term that includes ease of use as well as a number of other concepts (Nielsen, 1993), perceived usability was chosen as one of the main constructs. Nielsen (1993) defines a high-usability interface as an interface with high learnability, efficiency, memorability and satisfaction, and one with a low number of errors. In the context of this study, perceived usability refers to the “degree to which using this particular PHR system will be free of effort.” We define perceived usefulness as “the degree to which a patient or provider believes that using the PHR would increase compliance with preventive screening and lifestyle changes.” The conceptual framework postulates that if patients and providers have a more positive attitude toward the technologies they use (in terms of usefulness and usability), their acceptance, intention to use, and eventually their actual use of these technologies will also be higher.The purpose of this study was to evaluate the value (i.e., usefulness and usability) of a specific patient-centered information technology in improving awareness of (for patients) and compliance with (for both patients and care providers) preventive care guidelines. Using a case study, we specifically aimed at determining patients' and providers' perceptions regarding (1) whether a PHR system can be useful in improving patient–care provider interactions, preventive health screening, and compliance with healthier lifestyle behaviors; and (2) the key usability factors of such a system. For the specific technology, we used a Web-based, secure system, MySafe-T.Net, developed as a PHR with the primary aims of (1) improving preventive care and preventive screening rates and (2) changing patients' lifestyles to improve their health. MySafe-T.Net's secondary aim is to serve as a health information repository.Making the technology useful and easy to use for both patients and care providers is a challenging goal, yet not exclusive to PHR systems. Health care is filled with situations in which there are different types of users for the same technology (Carayon et al., 2010). Care is often provided in complex socio-technical environments (Buckle et al., 2006; Carayon, 2010). Hence, (re)designing technologies based on human factors engineering, specifically usability and usefulness, principles by taking into account the overlapping, complementary, and sometimes conflicting needs of multiple players is crucial if we want to improve overall systems performance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
