@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Interpretation of way-finding healthcare symbols by a multicultural population: Navigation signage design for global health

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Comprehension of healthcare symbols increases with literacy and decreases with age.Symbols for abstract referents (such as oncology and diabetes education) are more difficult to interpret correctly.Healthcare symbol design should consider cultural factors as may they may influence comprehension.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Symbols,Way-finding,Culture,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The interpretation of way-finding symbols for healthcare facilities in a multicultural community was assessed in a cross-sectional study. One hundred participants recruited from Al Ain city in the United Arab Emirates were asked to interpret 28 healthcare symbols developed at Hablamos Juntos (such as vaccinations and laboratory) as well as 18 general-purpose symbols (such as elevators and restrooms). The mean age was 27.6 years (16–55 years) of whom 84 (84%) were females. Healthcare symbols were more difficult to comprehend than general-purpose signs. Symbols referring to abstract concepts were the most misinterpreted including oncology, diabetes education, outpatient clinic, interpretive services, pharmacy, internal medicine, registration, social services, obstetrics and gynecology, pediatrics and infectious diseases. Interpretation rates varied across cultural backgrounds and increased with higher education and younger age. Signage within healthcare facilities should be tested among older persons, those with limited literacy and across a wide range of cultures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The ease of way-finding or navigating to a specific part of a hospital or clinic is a quality issue to be safeguarded in the design of healthcare systems (MacKenzie and Krusberg, 1996). Along with noise control, privacy, safety and general ambience, way-finding in health facilities can profoundly affect patient and family well-being (Frasca-Beaulieu, 1999). Visitors to a health facility rely on signs with text and symbols to navigate to specific destinations such as a laboratory or an imaging room. Signs with visual symbols are suited for rapid communication with the ability to cross age and language boundaries (Foster, 2001). Way-finding signs help greatly in faster escape during emergencies (Tang et al., 2009). Apart from being rapidly interpretable, symbols are compact and yet more prominent and noticeable than textual signs (Foster, 2001; Shieh and Huang, 2003). Symbols are easier to follow and more likely to be understood and retained than multilingual text signs by patients from diverse language backgrounds. In compliance with statutory requirements for improving access to persons with disabilities, signs should be designed for recognition by older patients and those with disabilities (Scialfa et al., 2008).A set of healthcare symbols has been developed after testing in the US (Hablamos Juntos, 2004), and several hospitals have incorporated them in way-finding signage with positive results (Cooper, 2010). Unfortunately, these ‘universal healthcare symbols’ have not been extensively tested in an international multicultural context to assess their application for global use. As more patients from diverse backgrounds seek care across regional borders, universally recognized healthcare symbols are imperative. Our setting, the city of Al Ain in the rapidly developing United Arab Emirates (UAE), is a highly multicultural mix with its native Arabic community as well as a large (69 percent) expatriate population (Statistics Center Abu Dhabi, 2012) from North America, Europe, Africa and South Asia. Local hospitals tend to utilize monolingual (English only) and bilingual (English and Arabic) text-based signs with general-purpose symbols such as for exit and no smoking. Thus, visitors to healthcare facilities from certain demographic groups may experience barriers to access and way finding.We conducted this study to find out whether persons from different cultures, age groups and literacy levels interpret standard healthcare symbols correctly. These user factors are important in the design, testing and placement of symbols in healthcare facilities worldwide. As these symbols refer to frequently utilized medical services such as radiology, laboratory and emergency, their interpretation is of paramount importance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
As the comprehension of symbols is variable, signs in healthcare facilities should be specifically tested among persons with limited literacy and the elderly. Design of symbols should underscore social values from a wide range of cultures. Whether such a synthesis is possible remains to be elucidated. A universal symbol for healthcare is still lacking. While the ‘cross’ and the ‘crescent’ could be juxtaposed on a single graphic, a secular healthcare icon will have universal appeal. In an era of global health, massive international travel and highly multicultural communities, there remains a pressing need for easily recognizable, universal way-finding signs for healthcare facilities.