@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A better way of fitting clips? A comparative study with respect to physical workload

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The study compared muscular activity and external force for 4 clip fitting methods.Muscle activity of the dominant limb was lower when using the unpowered tools.Non-dominant limb muscle activity was lower with bare-hand or powered-tool fitting.However, fitting clips with the bare hand required a higher external force.Thus, measuring the external force alone may give rise to an erroneous interpretation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Engineering,Physical workload,Surface electromyography,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The clip fitting task is a frequently encountered assembly operation in the car industry. It can cause upper limb pain. During task laboratory simulations, upper limb muscular activity and external force were compared for 4 clip fitting methods: with the bare hand, with an unpowered tool commonly used at a company and with unpowered and powered prototype tools. None of the 4 fitting methods studied induced a lower overall workload than the other three. Muscle activity was lower at the dominant limb when using the unpowered tools and at the non-dominant limb with the bare hand or with the powered tool. Fitting clips with the bare hand required a higher external force than fitting with the three tools. Evaluation of physical workload was different depending on whether external force or muscle activity results were considered. Measuring external force only, as recommended in several standards, is insufficient for evaluating physical workload.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The current trend, in manufacturing industries, of seeking productivity gains combined with a high level of quality has resulted in a willingness on the part of designers to ensure an uniformity in the ways in which operators work (Gold et al., 2009; Parent-Thirion et al., 2007; Neumann et al., 2006; Domkin et al., 2005; Chassaing, 2004; Andersen et al., 2003; Neumann et al., 2002). Workstation designers define a single succession of postures and movements to be performed by the operator, without offering any alternative. Assembly lines are no exceptions to this rule. Such lines are made up of series of workstations on which tasks are performed in succession and repeatedly (Carnahan et al., 2001). Many of these tasks are performed manually, with the bare hand or using a tool, powered or unpowered (Byström et al., 1995). In view of the repetitiveness of the movements, of the level of force required to perform an action, of extreme joint amplitudes and/or of activity maintained for long periods, neck and upper limb pain or indeed musculoskeletal disorders occur frequently in the workers performing such tasks (Ferguson et al., 2013, 2012; Jansen et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2012; Spallek et al., 2010; Nordander et al., 2009; Landau et al., 2008; Buckle and Devereux, 2002; Silverstein et al., 2002; Sluiter et al., 2001; Fransson-Hall et al., 1995). In ergonomics, workplace exposure to such physical workload is often evaluated by measuring muscular activity, which has been correlated with pain or musculoskeletal disorder symptoms (Ferguson et al., 2012; Porter et al., 2010; Bao et al., 2009; Ostensvik et al., 2009; Southard et al., 2007). Conversely, designers mostly use standards as a basis for evaluating physical workload, such standards recommending assessment of external force or posture (CEN 1005-4, 2004; CEN 1005-3, 2002; CEN 894-3, 2008).One of the tasks that are frequent in automotive assembly processes is insert fitting. The inserts are small components of different shapes, made of metal, plastic or composite material. They are referred to by various names including clips, staples, nuts, rings or bushings. They are used to secure two parts together, for example a glove compartment and a dashboard. This task can be performed manually or in automated manner. As in other assembly tasks, automation is considered in order to reduce musculoskeletal disorders related to manual fitting. However, investment in automated machinery is costly and requires considerable expertise (Andrews et al., 2008). Usually, it is not considered to be cost-effective in view of the lifespan of such a part and of alterations that are often performed half way through its life. Therefore, insert fitting is generally performed manually, with or without a tool.An ergonomic investigation conducted at an automotive supplier specialized in designing and producing dashboards preceded this study (Gaudez, 2008a, 2008b). The request from that company involved objectifying physical workload exerted during the insert fitting operation, which was a source of neck and upper limb pain or of musculoskeletal disorders. In that company, the insert fitting operation was combined with other operations such as deflashing, visual quality inspection, and packaging of the dashboards. The company had developed an unpowered tool. Its aim was to reduce the physical workload during the insert fitting operation. But it was observed that, when fitting the particular variety of clip-type inserts, most of the operators performed the operation with the bare hand despite the fact that the workstation working procedure recommended fitting them with the tool. In that company, the operators suffering from upper limb pain fitted the clips sometimes with their bare hand and sometimes with the tool. Operators changing their working practices depending on their physical conditions, such as depending on whether they feel tired or in pain, has already been observed during work activities (Derosier et al., 2008). Those operators explained that alternating the two fitting methods allowed them to vary their movements and reduced the physical workload on different parts of the body. In addition, many operators found that the tool was too heavy and that its handle was too large, cold, hard, and slippery when sweaty.This laboratory study simulated the clip fitting activity. Its aim was to use muscular activity and external force measurements to evaluate the physical workload on the neck and upper limbs. Four different insert fitting methods were analyzed: two used in the company, namely bare hand and unpowered tool, as well as two prototype tools, one unpowered and one powered. The first objective of this study was to determine whether any one of these four methods generated lower physical workload than the other ones, thereby demonstrating its benefit to the musculoskeletal health of workers. The second was to compare the results of muscular activity measurements with the results of external force measurements.This laboratory study supplemented the initial ergonomic investigation. Indeed, this simulation offered the advantage of isolating the insert fitting operation and thus of satisfying the initial request of the automotive supplier. It also allowed the use of prototype tools and techniques that were difficult to apply out in the company such as measuring resultant force, which would have required the workstation to be transformed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
