@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The implementation of ergonomics advice and the stage of change approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper investigates the implementation of ergonomics advice tailored according to the Stage of Change approach.Companies were randomly allocated to receive tailored or standard ergonomics advice.Companies in receipt of tailored advice implemented significantly more changes.The implementation of ergonomics advice may be improved by the incorporation of Stage of Change principles.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stage of Change,Implementation,Ergonomics interventions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper investigates the implementation of injury prevention advice tailored according to the Stage of Change (SOC) approach. The managers of 25 workgroups, drawn from medium to large companies across a wide range of occupational sectors were allocated to receive either standard ergonomics advice or ergonomics advice tailored according to the workgroup SOC. Twelve months after the advice was provided, semi-structured interviews were conducted with each manager. In a multivariate model, managers who had received tailored advice were found to have implemented significantly more of the recommended changes (IRR = 1.68, 95% CI 1.07–2.63) and more “additional” changes (IRR = 1.90, 95% CI 1.12–3.20). Qualitative analysis identified that the key barriers and facilitators to the implementation of changes were largely related to worker resistance to change and the attitudes of senior managers towards health and safety. The findings from this study suggest that the implementation of ergonomics recommendations may be improved by the tailoring of advice according to SOC principles.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In professional practice ergonomics and injury prevention advice commonly comprises a series of recommended changes to work systems, the work environment and individual work practices (Rothmore et al., 2013). However, even when actively sought, this advice may not be fully implemented or simply ignored (Trevelyan and Haslam, 2001). Compounding this is the absence of routine evaluation by ergonomics consultants of the implementation and effectiveness of the advice provided (Whysall et al., 2004).The paucity of evaluation to explore the implementation of ergonomics advice provided by professional ergonomics consultants has been primarily related to client/company disinterest due to the associated costs, but also in part, due to the consultants’ views that requests for evaluation might indicate a lack of confidence in the effectiveness of the interventions they had proposed (Whysall et al., 2004). Reasons for the lack of implementation of advice may include issues of cost, concerns over effectiveness, a lack of understanding of company priorities on the part of the consultant engaged or simply a lack of “desire” on the part of the company to introduce change (Trevelyan and Haslam, 2001). These factors suggest the need for consultants to frame their advice in a manner which will maximise its potential adoption (Rothmore et al., 2013).Injury prevention advice typically proposes changes to the work environment, work systems and individual work practices (Rothmore et al., 2013). Such changes inevitably involve a change in behaviour.Various methods have been proposed to improve the implementation and effectiveness of ergonomics advice according to behaviour change principles (DeJoy, 1996; Haslam, 2002; Urlings et al., 1990). The most frequently applied of the behaviour change methods in workplace settings has been Prochaska and DiClemente's Stage of Change (SOC) framework (Barrett et al., 2005; Prochaska et al., 2001; Village and Ostry, 2010; Whysall et al., 2006a, 2006b) in which readiness to change is assessed using a short series of closed questions after which they are assigned to one of five stages:1.Pre-contemplation (unaware or unconcerned about workplace hazards)Contemplation (considering change but not yet ready to act)Preparation (intend to change in the near future)Action (made changes in the previous 6 months)Maintenance (made changes and are working to consolidate gains and avoid relapse)Advice is then tailored, according to the stage of change, in order to improve receptiveness. For example, while those in the more advanced stages will benefit from practical information on how to make, or maintain change, those in the earlier stages will benefit from information on the risks and hazards linked with their current behaviour and actions, which may encourage progression onto later stages.The SOC approach has been evaluated by measuring progression through the various stages of change, post-intervention, assuming that those in more advanced stages will be more “risk aware” and therefore adopt less risky behaviour (Barrett et al., 2005; Whysall et al., 2006b). Other measures have included changes in self-reported body part discomfort or safety culture as indicators of effectiveness (Whysall et al., 2006b).In their study of workplace interventions using the SOC approach, Whysall et al. (2006b) reported that organisations in receipt of SOC-based ergonomics advice were significantly more effective in promoting risk awareness and desired safety behaviour among their workers. Significant reductions in worker self-reported body part discomfort were also reported. These health benefits and risk awareness changes were maintained at 15 and 20 months post-intervention (Shaw et al., 2007).Potential barriers to the implementation of advice exist not only at the consultant/client interface but also at the manager/worker level. When Whysall et al. (2006a) interviewed company managers who were responsible for implementing workplace changes designed to reduce the incidence of musculoskeletal disorders the strongest reported barriers included: resistance to change by employees; difficulties in gaining senior manager authorisation for change; and managers’ attitudes to health and safety in general. While the tailoring of advice according to the SOC approach may be effective in overcoming resistance to change, empirical evidence, while encouraging, is limited.Using a mixed methods approach the aims of this study were:•To determine whether the rate of implementation of ergonomics and injury prevention advice provided to companies could be improved if it was tailored according stage of change principles, andTo identify the barriers and facilitators experienced by managers in the implementation of the proposed changes

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The results of this study suggest that the tailoring of advice according to behaviour-change principles can improve its implementation. Not only were recommended changes implemented at a higher rate in companies which received tailored advice but they also introduced more additional changes (i.e. changes which were not specifically proposed). This may be indicative of a larger effect for the behaviour change approach within organisations. Larger studies are needed to confirm this.The field of musculoskeletal injury prevention is dominated by practitioners with an ergonomics or physical/occupational therapy background. Consequently the development of interventions with a behavioural focus may not be seen as immediately relevant in professional practice although it has been suggested that this may be more related to a lack of suitable techniques in their repertoire.