@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Differences in typing forces, muscle activity, comfort, and typing performance among virtual, notebook, and desktop keyboards

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Typing biomechanics were compared between one virtual and two conventional keyboards.Finger flexor and extensor muscle activity was lower during the virtual keyboard use.Typing productivity and self-reported comfort declined during the virtual keyboard use.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Touchscreen,Electromyography,Typing biomechanics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The present study investigated whether there were physical exposure and typing productivity differences between a virtual keyboard with no tactile feedback and two conventional keyboards where key travel and tactile feedback are provided by mechanical switches under the keys. The key size and layout were same across all the keyboards. Typing forces; finger and shoulder muscle activity; self-reported comfort; and typing productivity were measured from 19 subjects while typing on a virtual (0 mm key travel), notebook (1.8 mm key travel), and desktop keyboard (4 mm key travel). When typing on the virtual keyboard, subjects typed with less force (p's < 0.0001) and had lower finger flexor/extensor muscle activity (p's < 0.05). However, the lower typing forces and finger muscle activity came at the expense of a 60% reduction in typing productivity (p < 0.0001), decreased self-reported comfort (p's < 0.0001), and a trend indicating an increase in shoulder muscle activity (p's < 0.10). Therefore, for long typing sessions or when typing productivity is at a premium, conventional keyboards with tactile feedback may be more suitable interface.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Computer keyboard characteristics can affect computer users' risks for developing upper extremity musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs). Previous studies have shown that a keyboard's key activation force, travel distance, force-displacement characteristics, and tactile feedback can affect typing forces, muscle activity, muscle fatigue and discomfort in the upper extremities (Gerard et al., 1999; Lee et al., 2009; Marcus et al., 2002; Martin et al., 1996; Radwin and Ruffalo, 1999; Rempel et al., 1997; Rempel et al., 1999). Although the strength of relationships between key activation force and typing force varies across studies (Sommerich et al., 1996a), typing forces have been shown to be directly associated with keyboard key activation force (Armstrong et al., 1994; Lee et al., 2009; Radwin and Jeng, 1997; Radwin and Ruffalo, 1999; Rempel et al., 1999). These previous studies have found that typing forces increase with higher key activation forces and that the higher typing forces resulted in increased muscle activity, muscle fatigue and discomfort in the upper extremities.As tablet use is becoming increasingly common, conventional keyboards are being replaced by virtual, touchscreen keyboards with no physical key feedback. Due to the increased presence of tablets and the associated increase in virtual keyboard use, it is important to understand how the use of a virtual keyboard may affect typing productivity and the physical risk factors associated with MSDs. A touchscreen keyboard is completely different from conventional physical keyboards in terms of key feedback characteristics. Since most standard physical keyboards have a narrow range of activation forces, typically between 0.5 and 0.8 N, users can rest their fingers on the keyboard keys. However, because keys on a virtual keyboard are activated by any physical contact with the skin, users are unable to rest their fingers on the keyboard and must float their fingers, hands, and wrist to avoid accidental key activation. As this hand and finger floating could lead to prolonged static loading in the finger/forearm extensors and shoulder muscles, the associated risks for MSDs may increase whilst using a virtual keyboard. Furthermore, because a virtual keyboard provides limited tactile feedback without key travel and force-displacement characteristics, there may be differences in typing productivity and typing forces relative to conventional keyboards which provide users with some sort of tactile feedback.With the relatively recent introduction of tablets, there has been very little research on how a touchscreen virtual keyboard may affect typing force exposures, muscle activity, user comfort, and typing performance. Young et al. (2013) examined the wrist posture and forearm muscle activity during touchscreen tablet use and found that a touchscreen table use can increase risks for MSDs. Another study (Shin and Zhu, 2011) evaluated the physical risk factors associated with touchscreen keyboard use in a desktop computer setting. They showed that using a touchscreen increased muscle activity in the shoulder and neck muscles, and increased self-reported discomfort in the fingers, shoulder and neck. However, it is still unknown whether using a virtual keyboard affects typing forces and the load on finger flexor, extensor, and shoulder muscles differently than a conventional computer keyboard. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to determine whether there are differences in typing forces, finger and shoulder muscle activity, self-reported comfort and typing productivity between a virtual keyboard which has no tactile-based switches and physical key travel and conventional computer keyboards with tactile (force–displacement) feedback.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
