@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Measuring job quality: A study with bus drivers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Measuring job quality is important politically and economically.Ergonomics is well placed to contribute to this discussion.The DGB-Index is an effective tool for assessing job quality.It is not inevitable that bus driving should be low quality work.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Job quality,Bus drivers,DGB-Index,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There is growing interest in the contribution which job design can make to worker health; also a desire to better understand the multidimensional notion of ‘job quality’ and to develop approaches to measuring this. This paper reviews concepts of ‘job quality’ and ‘good jobs’ and examines these issues in the work of bus drivers, an occupational group commonly reported as having poor health and poor working conditions. The DGB-Index (Deutscher Gewerkschaftsbund Good Work Index), a tool used recently in Germany for measuring job quality, was translated and administered to a sample of UK bus drivers (n = 381). It found job quality to be significantly lower than that for a group of non-drivers in the same organisation; and better than that for a sample of German bus drivers. We conclude that the DGB-Index is an effective tool for measuring job quality and providing feedback to employers; and could be used to compare job quality between organisations or internationally.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There is increasing interest in the relationship between job quality and health worldwide. This includes the traditional focus on the potential impact of poor quality jobs on health, recognising that over 2 million people world-wide die annually as a result of an accident or illness associated with their work (World Health Organization, 2010). However, there is also a growing interest in the role of good quality work in maintaining and improving individual health and wellbeing, reflecting the positive contribution that work can make to physical, mental and emotional health (Smith et al., 2011; Straker and Mathiassen, 2009; Warr, 2007; Ward et al., 2008).The European Union has a particular interest in being able to assess job quality in different countries and in making comparisons between different groups of workers (Muñoz de Bustillo Llorente et al., 2009). By enabling better understanding and learning from areas of good practice, such data could help to raise standards in particular industries towards the level of the highest performing countries. However, this presupposes that there is a universal model of a ‘good’ job. In reality, the job features which are highly regarded in one country may be considered much less valuable in others – for example, for Japanese employees usefulness to society is the most important feature of a good job; whilst within America and Europe, job security and interesting work are the most critical (Muñoz de Bustillo Llorente et al., 2009). A key difficulty when measuring job quality then, is that there is ‘no international agreement as to what job quality is and how it might be measured’ (Muñoz de Bustillo et al., 2011).In addition to international and cultural differences in perceptions of what contributes to good quality work (Wallace et al., 2007), there are also differences between individuals, influenced by factors such as age, gender and various personality attributes (see Warr (2007) for a review); as well as personal and socioeconomic circumstances (Cooke et al., 2013; Loughlin and Murray, 2013). Furthermore, there is uncertainty regarding the exact contributions of particular characteristics – for example whether each might contribute positively to job quality or is important only to prevent it being poor (Warr, 2007; Smith et al., 2011).Despite the lack of an agreed, comprehensive model of job quality there is a strong evidence base regarding the aspects which it might include, and the individual factors which are known to influence health. For example, Coats and Lekhi (2008) have suggested that a good job should encompass:•employment securitywhether work is characterised by monotony and repetitionwhether employees have autonomy, control and task discretionbalance between efforts and rewardswhether workplace procedures are seen to be fairthe strength of workplace relationships – or social capitalSimilar elements form the basis of well-known models of Effort-Reward Imbalance (Siegrist, 1996) and Job Strain (Karasek, 1979). However in addition to these psychosocial aspects, a comprehensive measure of job quality must also consider physical factors which can impact on health, such as manual handling, exposure to hazardous substances, working hours, and environmental conditions. Ergonomics as a discipline is familiar with such a broad approach (Niu, 2010); and also with the importance of demonstrating that improved job quality can be a good business decision (Hendrick, 2008), so that its assessment is important for employers and governments as well as for employees.The DGB-Good Work Index (DGB-Index) is a job quality measurement tool developed for the German Trade Union Confederation (Deutscher Gewerkschaftsbund, DGB) which has been used annually in Germany since 2007, surveying approximately 6000 workers each time. A low score on the DGB-Index is associated with being more likely to change one's employer, and less likely to feel that one's health will permit working up to retirement age (Mussman, 2009). Occupational roles which score most highly on the index in Germany include administration, engineering and child care: whilst agriculture, construction and transport score poorly. These conclusions accord with the findings drawn for Europe as a whole using data from the European Working Conditions Survey (EWCS) (Parent-Thirion et al., 2007).The current study will extend the research on job quality measurement by translating the DGB-Index into English and testing it in the UK. If language and cultural differences can be resolved, this will extend the utility of the tool, making it available for those seeking to measure and subsequently improve job quality in countries other than Germany. There could also be scope for comparisons between different countries as discussed above.The DGB-Index is made up of three sub-indices: Resources, Burdens, and Income/security. These in turn comprise 15 dimensions, assessed by 31 questions on relevant factors, summarised in Table 1.Each question is in two parts – the employee is asked firstly whether they consider that particular factors are present in their workplace, and then whether the absence of good features (or the presence of bad features) bothers them. This two part question format is a significant strength of the index, as it takes into account the way in which individual preferences influence personal experiences of work.A structured scoring algorithm combines the responses to allocate a final score out of 100 for each sub-index and for the overall DGB-Index, allowing jobs to be classified as being good, medium or poor. Good work is that which scores 80 points or higher, with 50 being the cut off between poor and medium quality work. German data from 2010 (DGB 2010) identified 15% of respondents as being in jobs which were good, 52% were in medium quality jobs and 33% were in jobs which were poor.The DGB-Index is not without its critics. Prümper and Richenhagen (2009) have suggested that the scoring system permits good work to be mis-classified as being only medium quality: and that the tool places too much weight on income and security. These claims have been refuted by Fuchs (2010). A further concern raised by Prümper and Richenhagen (2009) is the lack of published validity and reliability data. This deficit has been addressed in a recent independent review (Schütte, 2011), based on the data of 16,268 DGB-Index respondents gathered over a four year period.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
