@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Subjective responses to display bezel characteristics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
It has been suggested that glossy screen surrounds (bezels) could cause eyestrain, or adverse symptoms to users.We studied the responses of twenty naive office workers who each used six different bezels, which were changed weekly.None of the participants were disturbed by the glossiness of the bezels.Although preferences were found, there was no relationship between glossiness and adverse symptom.We conclude that there are no sound reasons for restricting bezel glossiness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
FPDs,Bezel,Gloss,Glare,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
High quality flat panel computer displays (FPDs) with high resolution screens are now commonplace, and black, grey, white, beige and silver surrounds (‘bezels’), matt or glossy, are in widespread use. It has been suggested that bezels with high reflectance, or with a high gloss, could cause eyestrain, and we have investigated this issue. Twenty office workers (unaware of the study purpose) used six different FPDs, for a week each, at their own desk. These displays were identical apart from the bezel colour (black, white or silver) and shininess (matt or glossy). Participants completed questionnaires about their visual comfort at the end of each week, and were fully debriefed in lunch-time focus groups at the end of the study. For the white and the silver bezels, the glossiness of the bezel was not an issue of concern. The participants were significantly less content with the glossy black surround than with the matt black surround, and in general the glossy black bezel was the least-liked of all those used. With the possible exception of this surround, there was no evidence of significantly increased visual discomfort, indicative of eyestrain, as a result of high or low bezel reflectance, or of high glossiness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Flat panel displays (FPDs11In this paper we use the following terms with these specific meanings: Display: the complete piece of hardware which makes up a computer monitor, including the screen and the case Screen: the active part of a display device Cathode Ray Tube (CRT): the complete display device using this screen technology Flat Panel Display (FPD): the complete display device incorporating Flat Panel technology Bezel: the portion of the display immediately adjacent to the screen.) with high resolution screens are now common in the workplace. As with tablets, style has played an important role in the marketplace, and black, grey, white, beige and silver surrounds (‘bezels’), matt or glossy, are common. However, concerns linger that some of these could be detrimental from an ergonomic viewpoint, leading to eyestrain for the user.The question of whether bezel characteristics adversely affect people is important because there are moves to limit their design,22ISO/TC 159/SC4/WG2.which are based on concerns about the health and safety of people using the display. This is despite the fact that there is little scientific evidence to indicate why, or how, reflectance or glossiness could actually affect users. In 2003 the Swedish Confederation of Professional Employees (TCO) stated (Overödder and Rudling 2003a) that “If a dark frame is used with flat displays in common office lighting, the display-to-frame contrast can cause eye strain”. TCO concluded, presumably on the basis of their own studies, that “black frames can be a problem due to excessive contrast ..” and that “… white frames are considered a problem due to excessively high reflectance” (Overödder and Rudling, 2003b). No data were published to substantiate these claims at the time, although a subsequent study performed at TCO (Belánd and Andrén, 2007) indicated that higher gloss bezels were less acceptable than those with lower gloss, with the reflections in the higher gloss frame being ‘disturbing’. The suggestion has been made that poorly-designed bezels could contribute to so-called “computer vision syndrome” (Yan et al., 2008) and potentially this could, to some degree, affect millions of people at work.Other studies to date (Soderston et al., 2003, Hunter et al., 2003, Howarth and Hodder, 2004, Sheedy et al., 2005, Hisatake et al., 2011) present the opposite view and indicate that the bezel characteristics do not affect either performance or comfort. However, these studies can all be criticised (as can that of Belánd and Andrén, 2007) on the grounds that they were laboratory studies of restricted time and scope, and did not examine the effect of bezel colour or gloss during normal work. The current study avoids this pitfall as it examined participants using a number of different displays for a week at a time in their own workplace.We provide evidence here that office workers, rather than test panel subjects, were not disturbed by either the glossiness of the surround, or its colour (black, white or silver) with the possible exception of a glossy black bezel. Also, importantly, there was no evidence of a difference in visual discomfort between the different conditions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
