@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Learning effects in the lane change task (LCT) – Realistic secondary tasks and transfer of learning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Lane change task's (LCT) sensitivity towards learning effects was examined.Repeated use of same LCT/secondary task combination resulted in increased performance.Limited transfer of learning was confirmed for sufficiently similar secondary tasks.Results point to limitations of LCT as standardized assessment procedure.The LCT's sensitivity towards learning effects is interesting for research purposes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inattention,In-vehicle information systems,Evaluation methods,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Driver distraction is a factor that is heavily involved in traffic crashes. With in-vehicle devices like navigation systems or mobile phones on the rise, the assessment of their potential to distract the driver has become a pressing issue. Several easy-to-use methods have been developed in recent years to allow for such an assessment in the early stages of product development. One of these methods is the lane change task (LCT), a simple driving simulation in which the driver has to change lanes as indicated by different signs along the road. Although the LCT is an ISO sanctioned procedure, there are still open questions. One issue are learning effects which have been found in previous studies and which have the potential to compromise the comparability of test results. In this paper, we present results on two experiments that further explored the effect of previous experience on LCT and secondary task performance. The results confirm that learning effects occur when combining the LCT with a realistic secondary task. Also, we found evidence for the transfer of learning from one secondary task to another to some degree, provided that the two tasks are sufficiently similar.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, the investigation of driver distraction has become a highly important issue in road safety. Driver distraction has detrimental effects on a variety of driving-related variables (see Regan et al., 2009 for an overview), and has been reported to play an important role in traffic crashes (Stutts et al., 2001). While activities like smoking or eating while driving have been common for decades, so called “technology-based distraction” (Young et al., 2003) has come into focus only since navigation systems, mobile phones and related devices have entered daily life, and consequently, our vehicles. Given that in-vehicle information systems (IVIS) and other related devices have become increasingly popular (Buettner, 2009), and that they are reported to be used frequently while driving (Pickrell and Ye, 2011), it is not surprising that researchers have started to develop easy-to-use methods to investigate the extent to which the operation of a certain device is distracting.One of these easy-to-use tools is the lane change task (LCT; Mattes, 2003). The LCT is a simple and inexpensive dual task method which is used in a laboratory setting to estimate secondary task demand on a driver as a result of the operation of an in-vehicle device. The task employs the look and feel of a simple driving simulation (Fig. 1), which mainly consists of a three-lane road, with no other traffic present, and a set of signs appearing on both sides of this road which instruct the participants to change lanes. Participants are required to control a simulated vehicle and change lanes according to the information on the signs while maintaining a constant speed of 60 km/h which cannot be exceeded. The signs appear around every 150 m; duration between lane changes is around 9 s. Main performance measures are the mean deviation (MDEV) from a normative lane change model, or the MDEV from an adaptive model which is based on the participants' own baseline drive. The LCT has been investigated quite thoroughly already (e.g. Bruyas et al., 2008; Engstrom and Markkula, 2007; Harbluk et al., 2009, 2007; Huemer and Vollrath, 2010; Petzoldt et al., 2009), and has subsequently become an ISO standardised procedure (ISO/DIS 26022, 2010). Still, there are open questions like which metrics are most appropriate for which kind of distraction, or how to instruct participants properly to generate reliable and valid data (Young et al., 2011).Another issue that has been raised is the potential influence of previous LCT experience (Huemer and Vollrath, 2012; Petzoldt et al., 2011). During the early stage evaluation of in-vehicle information systems, it would not be uncommon that participants are drawn from a pool of people that is regularly recruited for similar studies, and thus might be repeatedly assigned to LCT experiments. The question then is if previous experience leads to effects that alter LCT performance in a way that makes it incomparable to results obtained elsewhere. Evidence from various studies supports this assumption. In a simulator experiment, Shinar et al. (2005) found that after a sufficient amount of practice in using a mobile phone while driving, learning effects led to a decrease in driving impairment. Chisholm et al. (2008) investigated the effects of practice in using an IPod while driving on driving performance. They found that over the course of six sessions, event detection improved considerably, although not to a safe level. Also secondary task performance benefits from repeated practice, as Jahn et al. (2009) reported in their study on skill acquisition in operating navigation systems. An early study by Brown and Poulton (1961) showed that driver performance on an auditory secondary task while driving improved remarkably over the course of several dual task trials. It has generally been argued that such improvements can be the result of improved single task performance (“intratask automaticity”), but also optimised resource allocation between the tasks (“intertask resource deployment strategies”, Brown and Carr, 1989). Brown (1998) emphasised that dual task practice promotes time sharing. Damos and Wickens (1980) confirmed that such learning effects occur, and that they even might transfer to other task combinations. But, while gaining experience and learning to allocate resources in an optimal way are good for road safety in general, for the assessment of the distraction potential of in-vehicle information systems, this is somewhat problematic.Huemer and Vollrath (2012) addressed the issue of learning effects in the LCT in three experiments. In the first experiment, they investigated the development of LCT single task performance as a function of training. Although participants appeared to reach their optimum level of performance rather fast, a significant increase in performance was observed especially from the first to the second trial. Experiment II addressed different training regimes and their effects on dual task performance. Using the so called surrogate reference task (SuRT; Mattes and Hallén, 2009), a self paced visual secondary task, they tested effects of blocked single task, alternating single task and dual task training. Again, they found performance improvements over time, for both the LCT and the secondary task. Interestingly, the different training regimes resulted in different patterns of performance development. More important, however, was that, again, effects occurred. In their final experiment, they substituted the SuRT for another secondary task, the critical tracking task (CTT; Jex et al., 1966). Different from the SuRT, which only requires intermittent monitoring, the CTT requires a more or less continuous devotion of attention. With an experimental setup comparable to the previous experiment, no improvements in LCT performance were found. However, for the CTT, substantial performance increments in the dual task training were observed. Petzoldt et al. (2011) addressed potential learning effects in two similar studies. In their first experiment, they tested the effects of single task and dual task training on LCT and secondary task performance. Participants either received i) no training, ii) a single task LCT training, or iii) a dual task training with LCT + SuRT and LCT + CTT. In a test phase one week after the initial training, all three groups completed several dual task trials of LCT + SuRT and LCT + CTT with various levels of secondary task difficulty (identical to the training phase for the dual task training group). Overall, the results supported the view that both primary and secondary task performance improve with training, with stronger effects for the dual task training. In the second experiment, the period between training and test phase was extended to 4–7 months. The procedure remained largely unchanged, except for the fact that only the CTT was used as a secondary task. Again, performance improvements were found for both LCT and secondary task, which indicates that the training effects found previously are rather stable.While the results in general indicate that previous LCT exposure might be an issue, the described experiments have certain shortcomings that limit the extent to which these results can be generalised. One problem is the use of artificial secondary tasks, although they arguably have their advantages. They are overall quite standardised, and the level of difficulty is easy to manipulate. However, the fact that they are only artificial gives rise to the question of whether the results obtained are applicable to realistic secondary tasks as well. While the components of demand (usually visual and motor interaction with the task) are similar, complexity might be higher for realistic tasks, which certainly would result in different patterns at least for the learning curve, if not for learning effects in general. Also, the fact that the same secondary tasks are employed repeatedly appears to be somewhat unrealistic. While it is true that subjects are repeatedly drawn out of the same pools of potential participants, it is unlikely that they will be used to test the same systems over and over again. Hence, it is necessary not only to assess if there is any learning effect for LCT use in conjunction with a realistic secondary task, but also whether there is transfer of learning from one secondary task to another. To address these issues, two experiments were conducted.In a first experiment, we sought to find evidence that the learning effects found in previous studies also occur when combining the LCT with a realistic secondary task. Considering the impressive sales figures for both portable (GfK Retail and Technology, 2009) and factory (J.D. Power and Associates, 2010) installed navigation devices, entering destinations into a navigation system was chosen as the secondary task. We decided to use a simple repeated measures design, as this most closely resembled the described problem of repeated use of the same participants when testing in-vehicle information systems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
