@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A week in the life of full-time office workers: Work day and weekend light exposure in summer and winter

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Measured 24-h light exposure in full-time office workers in summer & winter weeks.Consistent workday/weekend schedules and circadian phase between summer & winter.Morning light exposure was greater on workdays versus weekends in both seasons.Early evening light exposure was greater in summer versus winter on all days.In the 2 h before sleep onset, light exposure was consistently low (<20 lux).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Circadian,Light exposure,Full-time office worker,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Little is known about the light exposure in full-time office workers, who spend much of their workdays indoors. We examined the 24-h light exposure patterns of 14 full-time office workers during a week in summer, and assessed their dim light melatonin onset (DLMO, a marker of circadian timing) at the end of the working week. Six workers repeated the study in winter. Season had little impact on the workers' schedules, as the timing of sleep, commute, and work did not vary by more than 30 min in the summer and winter. In both seasons, workers received significantly more morning light on workdays than weekends, due to earlier wake times and the morning commute. Evening light in the two hours before bedtime was consistently dim. The timing of the DLMO did not vary between season, and by the end of the working week, the workers slept at a normal circadian phase.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The circadian system regulates many physiological and behavioral rhythms over the course of about one day. The daily timing of sleep and wake, for example, is largely influenced by the circadian system, though voluntary human behavior can override this internal time-keeping system. On average, the central circadian clock in humans has an endogenous period of ∼24.2 h (Burgess and Eastman, 2008; Czeisler et al., 1999) and therefore requires daily phase advances (shifts earlier in time) to remain synchronized to the external 24-h day. Light in the evening causes the clock to shift rhythms later (phase delay) and light in the morning causes the clock to shift rhythms earlier (phase advance) (Czeisler et al., 1989; Khalsa et al., 2003). Thus, morning light is essential for the daily corrective phase advances, while evening light can exacerbate the clock's endogenous tendency to drift later and promotes circadian misalignment. Many people chronically experience such circadian misalignment when their circadian clock promotes later sleep, but they are required to wake prematurely to an alarm clock to meet their social obligations, such as work (Roenneberg et al., 2012; Wittmann et al., 2006). This “social jetlag” is associated with reduced alertness and performance (Burgess et al., 2012; Taylor et al., 2008; Yang and Spielman, 2001; Yang et al., 2001), greater use of alcohol, nicotine and caffeine, and an increased risk for depression and obesity (Levandovski et al., 2011; Roenneberg et al., 2012; Wittmann et al., 2006).Full-time office workers are at high risk for social jetlag given their need to get up early in the morning to get to work, and their reduced exposure to the external light–dark cycle while they work ∼8 h indoors during the workday. Several previous studies have measured 24-hour light exposure in healthy adults but the samples were of mixed (e.g., students, unemployed, part-time workers, full-time workers, retired) or unreported employment status (Cole et al., 1995; Hebert et al., 1998; Jean-Louis et al., 2000; Kawinska et al., 2005; Thorne et al., 2009). Others measured 24-hour light exposure in participants who slept according to fixed sleep times (Emens et al., 2009; Goulet et al., 2007; Scheuermaier et al., 2010). One study measured light exposure during a work week in daytime hospital workers, and reported lower light exposure at work (<500 lux) (Heil and Mathis, 2002). Unfortunately, however, they did not examine light levels by time of day, and their photosensor saturated at a relatively low 2500 lux. Thus, little is known about the 24-hour light exposure patterns of full-time office workers during a typical week when they are free to sleep and wake as they choose. The only opportunities for being outside and exposed to sunlight may be the commute to and from work, and perhaps during a lunch break. Limited exposure to the external light–dark cycle may be further exacerbated in winter when day length is shorter (Cole et al., 1995; Hebert et al., 1998; Jean-Louis et al., 2000; Thorne et al., 2009), and colder temperatures lead people to spend more time inside (Cole et al., 1995).Thus, the aim of the current study was to describe the 24-hour light exposure patterns of full-time office workers over the course of a typical week during the summer months, when outdoor light exposure is expected to be optimal due to a long day length and warm climate in Chicago IL. A second aim was to compare 24-hour light exposure patterns of a subset of these full-time office workers again in the winter. Sleep/wake behavior, morning commute time, and evening activities were also examined, as a means to determine potential causes of alterations in light exposure.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
