@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A four-year follow-up study of physical working conditions and perceived mental and physical strain among food industry workers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Deteriorating physical working conditions increases physical and mental strain among food industry workers.The change in physical strain was associated with the change in mental strain.Younger employees were mostly affected due to poorer ergonomic factors at work.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Environmental factors,Ergonomic factors,Food factory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study hypothesized that in a longitudinal setting deteriorating physical working conditions increases the perceived physical and mental strain among food processing employees. The study was conducted in 2003 and 2007. It examined 248 blue-collar workers, all of whom were in the same occupation throughout the entire follow-up period. The data were obtained through a structural questionnaire distributed to the employees at the workplace. Mental strain had increased (7%) significantly among younger employees during the follow-up. The changes in mental strain for the younger employees were positively associated with the changes in physical strain. The changes in physical strain were also significantly associated with the changes in physical working conditions among both younger and the older workers. The results of this study partly support the study hypothesis, namely that deteriorating physical working condition increases physical strain and also increases mental strain, especially among younger employees.Perceived exertion is the single best indicator of the degree of physical strain (Borg, 1970). The perceived exertion (RPE) scale values range from 6 to 20 and can be used to denote heart rates ranging from 60 to 200 beats/min. This scale is easier to use because a certain value on the scale, e.g. 13, would match approximately a heart rate of 130 beats/min for 30–50-year-old subjects.Details of the scale:6 – No exertion at all7 – Extremely light8 –9 – Very light10 –11 – Light12 –13 – Somewhat hard14 – Hard (heavy)15 –16 – Very hard17 –18 –19 – Extremely hard20 – Maximal exertion

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Although the demands of work have changed from physical to more mental demands in recent decades (Frese, 2000; Sutela, 2007), there are still branches where the physical demands are heavy. Food manufacturing is an example of such branches where the work still includes a lot of lifting and carrying, repetitive movements and other heavy physical load. The work environment of the food processing industry is also characterized by low and high temperatures, draught, noise and poor lighting which are risk factors for early cessation of working life, especially in that industry (Salonen et al., 2003). Additionally, in many situations the environmental factors and physical factors may act independently or collectively as stressors (LaDou, 2007). As a result, repetitive strain injuries are the most prevalent work-related diseases in the food processing industry in Finland (Riihimäki et al., 2004).Industrial workers are most exposed to job strain (Nicot, 2007). The high job strain is mostly due to the physical work environment in the industry. Several other studies have reported that physical working conditions, especially heavy lifting and uncomfortable work postures are associated with sick-leave (Laaksonen et al., 2010; Lund et al., 2006; Allebeck and Mastekaasa, 2004). Consequently, the risk for sick leaves and early retirement is typically increased in such working conditions (Ilmarinen et al., 1997; Nygård et al., 2005; Sell, 2009). Food industry workers have been shown to have twice as much sick leave as the average among industry workers in Finland and the EU (Ilmarinen, 1999; Vahtera and Kivimäki, 2004; Gimeno et al., 2004). The branch is also at the top of the early retirement statistics (Salonen et al., 2003; Ilmarinen et al., 1997).Our study was based on a four-year follow-up of stress and strain in four food processing factories. The stress-strain concept (Rutenfrantz, 1981; Cox et al., 2000) assumes that the stress on a worker depends on objective environmental factors acting upon the person, whereas strain denotes the effects of stress which will be individually different. The use of the stress-strain concept is practical in the study of the effect of physical workload on the cardiovascular system which is directly related to the individual's physical work capacity (Rutenfrantz, 1981). It also emphasizes the role of individual characteristics such as age, gender, and health status and work ability as modifiers of the relationship between physical working condition and strain. Work ability is a comprehensive concept for occupational health research and prevention (Ilmarinen, 2009). The relationship between the physical strain and heart rate depends on the type of muscular work (Ilmarinen, 1984). Heart rate at a given physical strain is the highest in industrial work that also includes much static work (Ilmarinen, 1978). Moreover, the associations of work stressors and individual stress symptoms with work ability are unclear: there seems to be a strong effect in particular among the aging (Tuomi et al., 1991), but there are also studies (Gamperiene et al., 2008) that have not found a relation between physical strain and work ability. Also, the physical working conditions among younger and older workers are poorly understood, as some previous research concluded that in the same occupation younger workers are at greater risk of physical strain than older workers (Pailhe, 2005). But the subjects of the aforementioned study were not only the blue-collar but also the others who were working in different job settings. Another study by Nygård et al. (1997) reported higher strain among older municipal employees in both blue- and white-collar jobs.Although many studies have previously assessed the association between work environment and strain, the association between changes in physical working conditions and parallel changes in perceived strain has rarely been studied before. One of the experimental study found that physical capacity is adversely affected by mental stress (Mehta and Agnew, 2012) and that also mental stress adversely affect biomechanical responses during low back exertion (Marras et al., 2000). Our study is an original contribution to studies of the links between physical working conditions and perceived strain among food industries workers. We hypothesized in this study among industrial blue-collar workers that; a) deteriorating (negative changes) of the physical working condition increases the perceived physical and mental strain among younger and older workers and b) the perceived mental and physical strain interact with each other among younger and older workers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
