@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of elevation change on mental stress in high-voltage transmission tower construction workers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The task workload was similar between working surface heights.Workers perceived an increasing mental stress as working surface height increased.One possible reason for the stress is the sense of insecurity and uncertainty.Another possible contributor to stress is the working environment.The third possible explanation for the stress is visual issues.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
High-voltage transmission tower,Heart rate variability,Working surface height,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
High-voltage transmission tower construction is a high-risk operation due to the construction site locations, extreme climatic factors, elevated working surfaces, and narrow working space. To comprehensively enhance our understanding of the psychophysiological phenomena of workers in extremely high tower constructions, we carried out a series of field experiments to test and compare three working surface heights in terms of frequency-domain heart rate variability (HRV) measurements. Twelve experienced male workers participated in this experiment. The dependent variables, namely, heart rate (HR), normalized low-frequency power (nLF), normalized high-frequency power (nHF), and LF-to-HF power ratio (LF/HF), were measured with the Polar RS800CX heart rate monitor. The experimental results indicated that the task workload was similar between working surface heights. Tower construction workers perceived an increased level of mental stress as working surface height increased.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For several decades, there have been more than ten thousand high-voltage transmission towers in Taiwan. Most of the towers need to be maintained regularly or rebuilt. The primary structure of a high-voltage transmission tower is a steel lattice, which is used to support overhead electricity conductors for electric power transmission. High-voltage transmission towers are built in a wide variety of shapes and sizes, with a typical height ranging from 60 to 70 m (Fig. 1). Because most of the high-voltage transmission tower construction sites are on remote, exposed mountainsides at an elevation of about 850 m, workers have to climb up and down the tower to lift all the steel components up and deliver them manually with a small winch, instead of using a crane. Slopes have been shown to have a negative impact upon worker productivity (Apud and Valdes, 1994) and workload (Kirk and Parker, 1993, 1994; Kirk and Sullman, 2001; Li et al., 1989; Sullman and Byers, 2000). Differences in physiological responses between high-elevation and ground-level workers have also been reported. For example, on bridge construction sites, the heart rate (HR) of those working at higher elevations have been reported to be 10–20 beats/min faster than those of ground-level workers (Mao et al., 2000). Some tasks that are easy at ground level become more difficult when performed in high-elevation workplaces (Steven and Mohamed, 1979).Additionally, high-elevation workers might encounter some difficulties in physiological adjustment when performing heavy duties or delicate tasks. The effects of extreme weather conditions, such as thermal or cold stress and strong winds, on the work performance and safety of high-rise building construction workers is greater than those of ground-level workers (Hsu et al., 2008). As the thermal stress increases, workers have a natural tendency to reduce their work pace to keep their average heart rate within a relatively narrow range (Smith and Rummer, 1988; Vogt et al., 1983). As mentioned above, extreme climatic factors also expose tower construction workers to potential thermal stress disorders, including both hypothermia and hyperthermia, depending on the season. However, these findings provide somewhat limited understanding of the physiological phenomena, for only heart rate have been monitored in past experiments. Furthermore, the working heights and spaces in previous studies were quite different from those involved in high-voltage transmission tower construction.As shown in Fig. 2, while working on a high-voltage transmission tower with a typical height exceeding 60 m, workers have to stand on steel bars that are 15 cm wide to conduct the lifting, delivery, and assembly tasks manually. In previous studies of the effects of elevation on physiological measurements, the workers typically performed high-rise building construction activities upon flat and broad floors at heights up to 40 m (Chang et al., 2009; Hsu et al., 2008; Mao et al., 2000; Min et al., 2012). To date, few studies on extremely high tower constructions have been reported.Fear of heights, or acrophobia, is characterized by marked anxiety upon exposure to heights, by avoidance of heights, and by interference in functioning caused by this fear (American Psychiatric Association, 1994; Choy et al., 2007; Curtis et al., 1998). The hazardous nature of tower construction work requires constant vigilance in order to prevent serious or fatal injuries. A multitude of factors need to be continually monitored and observed, with corrective action taken for sudden occurrences. If any one of these factors is misread, neglected, or incorrectly diagnosed, these workers may face serious injury or death. In the extremely elevated and rather limited standing space, workers suffer from acrophobia and the fear of falling, even when equipped with a safety harness. The combined effects of an elevated height and lack of scaffolding induce anxiety and subjective stress due to the fear and risk of falling, which has been shown to affect the neuromuscular performance (Adkin et al., 2000; Davis et al., 2009; Hauck et al., 2008). Based on the findings mentioned above, it would be expected that elevation would have an important impact on psychological phenomena of workers in extremely high tower constructions.Numerous studies have demonstrated that heart rate variability (HRV) is sensitive to any change in mental or physical state, despite a minimal physical load (Garde et al., 2002; González-Camarena et al., 2000; Hjortskov et al., 2004; Mezzacappa et al., 2001; Myrtek et al., 1996; Pagani et al., 1991; Perini et al., 2000; Sloan et al., 1994; Zhong et al., 2005). When a person is exposed to a stressor, the sympathetic system of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) is activated (Van Praag, 2002). Once the stressor disappears, the vagal system decreases the heart and breathing rate. HRV refers to alterations in heart rate and provides quantitative markers of autonomic regulation (Malik et al., 1996). As many commercial devices now provide automated measurement of HRV, the cardiologist is provided with a seemingly simple tool for both research and clinical studies. HRV is a simple and noninvasive way to measure the response of the ANS to mental and physical demands. Several studies have shown that physical tasks (González-Camarena et al., 2000; Pagani et al., 1991; Perini et al., 2000), mental stress in laboratory experiments (cognitive demands, mental arithmetic) (Mezzacappa et al., 2001; Myrtek et al., 1996; Sloan et al., 1994), and both physical and mental loads (Garde et al., 2002; Hjortskov et al., 2004; Taelman et al., 2011) influence HRV indices related to the ANS. Furthermore, some recent studies have highlighted the fact that the analysis of HRV and its connection with anxiety may provide a useful field-based assessment tool (Filaire et al., 2010; Friedman, 2007).The HF power of R-R variability is considered to be a function of cardiac parasympathetic nervous system activity to the heart (Pagani et al., 1988). The LF component of R-R variability, although not modulated by a single arm of the autonomic nervous system (Kingwell et al., 1994), is considered to be a representative index of sympathetic activity to the heart, especially when expressed in normalized units (Malik et al., 1996; Malliani et al., 1991; Pagani et al., 1986). The LF-to-HF power ratio of R-R variability is considered to be an index of the balance of sympathovagal input to sinoatrial node activity and has been found to be representative of sympathetic to parasympathetic balance in both physiological and pathophysiological conditions (La Rovere et al., 1998; Malik et al., 1996; Montano et al., 1994; Pagani et al., 1986, 1988).Most research has revealed that higher mental stress/higher mental demand is associated with an increase of LF power and a decrease of HF power, and an increase of the LF/HF ratio (Cinaz et al., 2010; Durantin et al., 2014; Murai et al., 2008). However, Nickel and Nachreiner (2003) have argued that the LF band indicates general activation rather than task-specific mental demands. Pruyn et al. (1985) has demonstrated that social stress induced by an observer while the participant completed a memory task led to a decrease of HRV in the LF band. The results of Sonderegger and Sauer (2009) study indicated that the presence of observers as a social stressor influences HRV in the LF band in the opposite direction as the cognitive stressors. These findings reiterate the need for a greater differentiation between stressors that may have even opposite effects on different HRV bands. Berntson and Cacioppo (2004) stated that no single pattern of autonomic adjustments and associated changes in HRV will apply universally across distinct stressors. These results indicate that physiological reactions to different stressors may be varied (Jorna, 1992; Pruyn et al., 1985).It is acknowledged that there has been some controversy in the literature about the sensitivity and diagnosticity of HRV and how the different types of stressors are related to HRV on the different frequency bands (Berntson and Cacioppo, 2004; Nickel and Nachreiner, 2003). Despite the ongoing debate, the research presented above provides some justification for using the LF frequency band and the LF/HF ratio as indictors of stress. For the purpose of this study in a field setting, it is assumed that either of the two measures may change as a result of the mental stress level, whether it is cognitive stressor related or ecological stressor related.To contribute to the understanding of the psychophysiological phenomena of workers in extremely high tower constructions, and to establish some guidelines to ensure adequate protections for them, we carried out a series of field experiments to test and compare three working surface heights in terms of HRV. Based on these insights into high-rise building construction tasks, we hypothesized that HRV for construction workers would be susceptible to the effects of working surface height.In summary, the purpose of the present study was to provide an investigation of the HRV of high-voltage transmission tower construction workers by comparing three heights of the construction platform in terms of frequency-domain measurements.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
