@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Design options for improving protective gloves for industrial assembly work

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Glove design 1 and barehanded produced higher handgrip strength than double gloves.Glove design 1 and the bare hand condition had better dexterity than double gloves.Selective thickness over some hand areas can be applied to improve the glove design.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Glove,Screwdriver,Pliers,Hand tool,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The study investigated the effects of wearing two new designs of cotton glove on several hand performance capabilities and compared them against the effects of barehanded, single-layered and double cotton glove conditions when working with hand tools (screwdriver and pliers). The new glove designs were based on the findings of subjective hand discomfort assessments for this type of work and aimed to match the glove thickness to the localised pressure and sensitivity in different areas of the hand as well as to provide adequate dexterity for fine manipulative tasks. The results showed that the first prototype glove and the barehanded condition were comparable and provided better dexterity and higher handgrip strength than double thickness gloves. The results support the hypothesis that selective thickness in different areas of the hand could be applied by glove manufacturers to improve the glove design, so that it can protect the hands from the environment and at the same time allow optimal hand performance capabilities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In many workplaces it is necessary to protect workers' hands by using gloves. The effects of gloves on different aspects of hand performance capability have been recognised and investigated in a large number of previous studies (Bradley, 1969; Swain et al., 1970; Riley et al., 1985; Bellingar and Slocum, 1993; Imrhan and Farahmand, 1999; Claudon, 2006; Chang and Shih, 2007; Dianat and Haslegrave, 2008). However, unlike studies of hand performance capabilities, very few studies have investigated glove design features. In one of the few attempts, Muralidhar et al. (1999) developed two prototype cotton gloves with the thickness varying between different areas of the hand, based on force distribution and sensitivity patterns on the palmar side of the hand (established from various studies), and compared the effects of wearing the prototype gloves with those of wearing a double glove. One of Muralidhar et al.'s prototype gloves had two and the other four layers of protection in selected hand areas. Although Muralidhar et al. found no significant difference in dexterity between the glove conditions (measured by time to complete a dexterity test), the two prototype gloves were shown to be better than the double glove in terms of handgrip strength.The primary consideration in designing protective gloves is protection of the hand from injury or discomfort and it is believed that thicker gloves can provide better protection (Muralidhar et al., 1999). In other words, the primary concern when designing gloves has been hand protection rather than hand performance. This policy may be necessary for protection from hazards, but a uniform thickness of material can lead to gloves that are bulky and clumsy to use, perhaps creating other hazardous conditions such as inappropriate grasp on the tool, loss of grip strength or range of motion, or reduced sensory feedback and dexterity. The results of a study conducted by Akbar-Khanzadeh et al. (1995) at an automobile plant revealed that only 42% of workers reported comfort while using their protective gloves and also that, when such protective equipment was inappropriately designed, workers frequently opposed wearing it due to discomfort. As Feeney (1986) pointed out, the possibility of resistance to wearing protective equipment is one of the considerations that should be carefully examined during the design.There are many design considerations, including material, condition of use, task requirements, comfort and environment, that together with glove manufacturing processes and cost make the issue of designing appropriate gloves a complex challenge (Dianat et al., 2012b). Fig. 1shows a conceptual model of the relationship between design requirements, design considerations/constraints, worker and task. Worker characteristics and design requirements are the inputs to the model, while the design criteria that are generated through the model are the outputs. This model is to develop ergonomic design criteria for evaluation trials rather than a more general model of glove design, and therefore the non-ergonomic parts of design considerations/constraints (i.e. manufacturing process, cost) have been separated out. Glove thickness is obviously an important factor in glove design with its influence on dexterity and tactility, as well as on hand and finger (dis)comfort. Consequently, the material and thickness also have an influence on strength capability of handgrip, pinch grip and forearm torque. Some of the issues that need investigation, among others, are the extent to which gloves cause difficulty in flexing the finger joints and the patterns of discomfort in both barehanded and gloved conditions while working with hand tools. The present study was undertaken for this purpose. Two prototype pairs of gloves were designed and constructed, using the evidence that was currently available from published literature. Their effects on a number of hand performance capabilities were measured and the wearers' subjective assessments were collected. The results with the two prototype gloves were compared with those for bare hand, single-layered glove and double glove conditions. The present study differed from that of Muralidhar et al. (1999) in that the prototype gloves were constructed on the basis of different criteria and also that they were evaluated when performing a work task. The intention was to assist in introducing design alternatives for improving gloves for industrial assembly work. The results of two earlier studies (Dianat et al., 2010, 2012a) which had evaluated the effects of wearing gloves on several aspects of hand performance while working with hand tools (including screwdriver and pliers) showed that the effects of wearing gloves changed over a 2 h work period. So, to have a realistic evaluation of glove effects in a working context, glove evaluation studies need to consider actual working conditions in which gloves are being used by workers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Two prototype gloves were produced from cotton gloves based on the findings of subjective hand discomfort assessments for industrial assembly work and aimed to match the glove thickness to the localised pressure, sensitivity and flexibility in different areas of the hand. It was shown that the performance or strength capabilities of the hand with glove design 1 were comparable to that observed with the bare hand condition, so that both produced lower pegboard completion times (i.e. increased dexterity) than double gloves, and there was a lower number of errors with glove design 1 than with double gloves. Also, glove design 1 and the bare hand condition produced higher handgrip strength values compared to double gloves. Lateral pinch and forearm torque strength capabilities were not affected when wearing any of the gloves in this experiment. It appears that improved dexterity and tactile feedback in some areas of the hand with the first prototype glove tended to give more improvements in performance and strength capabilities of the hand than with the second prototype glove. The findings support the hypothesis that selective variation in thickness over some areas of the hand can be applied to improve industrial glove design. Such an approach is particularly useful for gloves intended to protect the hands from the environment while at the same time allowing better hand performance capabilities. The findings present a unique insight into the design of gloves for industrial hand tool use but further research is needed to validate the findings in real workplaces, looking at wider factors and local work practices.