@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Removing the thermal component from heart rate provides an accurate

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A practical application of Vogt et al.'s method to assess the HR thermal component during forest work is shown.TheV˙O2overestimation error is strongly correlated to the thermal strain level observed.Vogt et al.'s method enabled an accurate estimation of the HR motor and thermal components.Removing the thermal HR component from the measured HR eliminated the overestimation error.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Work metabolism,Heart rate,Heat stress,Prediction bias,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Heart rate (HR) was monitored continuously in 41 forest workers performing brushcutting or tree planting work. 10-min seated rest periods were imposed during the workday to estimate the HR thermal component (ΔHRT) per Vogt et al. (1970, 1973).V˙O2was measured using a portable gas analyzer during a morning submaximal step-test conducted at the work site, during a work bout over the course of the day (range: 9–74 min), and during an ensuing 10-min rest pause taken at the worksite. TheV˙O2estimated, from measured HR and from corrected HR (thermal component removed), were compared toV˙O2measured during work and rest. Varied levels of HR thermal component (ΔHRTavg range: 0–38 bpm) originating from a wide range of ambient thermal conditions, thermal clothing insulation worn, and physical load exerted during work were observed. Using raw HR significantly overestimated measured workV˙O2by 30% on average (range: 1%–64%). 74% ofV˙O2prediction error variance was explained by the HR thermal component.V˙O2estimated from corrected HR, was not statistically different from measuredV˙O2. WorkV˙O2can be estimated accurately in the presence of thermal stress using Vogt et al.'s method, which can be implemented easily by the practitioner with inexpensive instruments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Assessment of work energy expenditure (or metabolic rate) is a key parameter in the evaluation of the physical aspect of work in occupational ergonomics, especially when using thermal stress indices (e.g., TWL, PHS, WBGT, IREQ, PMV-PPD), and in the determination of work-rest regimens for physical work (ACGIH, 2013; Brake and Bates, 2002; ISO 11079:2008; ISO 7730:2006; ISO 7933:2004). Oxygen consumption (V˙O2) has been used extensively in sports and in controlled settings to estimate metabolic rate (Åstrand and Rodahl, 1986). But the obligation to wear a mask is invasive and unacceptably uncomfortable to many workers so that measurement durations in work settings are often restricted to short periods of time especially when working in hot conditions. On the other hand, heart rate (HR) is a very cost effective non-invasive measure that can be easily and safely obtained over long work periods (e.g., complete work shift) and can be used as a replacement toV˙O2to estimate metabolic rate (ISO 8996:2004). A submaximal test is often performed to establish a subject's HR-V˙O2relationship from which metabolic rate can be estimated to within ±10% according to ISO8996 (2004). However, factors such as size of working muscle groups, static work components, steady or non-steady-state work, ambient temperature, stress and dehydration are known to increase HR without a subsequent increase inV˙O2(i.e., cardiovascular drift) (Coyle and González-Alonso, 2001; Coyle, 1998; Nielsen and Meyer, 1987; Wingo et al., 2012). These factors if present during work HR measurement will lead to an overestimation ofV˙O2if they were not present during the submaximal test (Nielsen and Meyer, 1987). Ways to control them include, for instance, ensuring they are present during the submaximal test such as having a test that uses similar muscle groups as in the work to be studied, or by administering the test near the actual worksite so as to have similar test and work conditions (Nielsen and Meyer, 1987). This is seldom possible in the case of thermal stress since it can vary greatly between time of the test (often early in the morning) and time of work measurement, especially when work is performed outdoors (e.g., forestry, agriculture).Vogt et al. (1970, 1973) proposed a simple method to assess the heat stress contribution to the heart rate (i.e., HR thermal component or ΔHRT, see also ISO 9886:2004) to improve the estimation ofV˙O2by using only the motor component (ΔHRW), which is related to the physical work performed and determines metabolic rate. The method hypothesizes that the heat strain component develops progressively during work and remains stable during the first minutes of the ensuing rest break (Vogt et al., 1973). During that time, the subject recovers from the physical work performed (motor component) and accordingly, a fast decrease in heart rate can be observed. After the first minutes have elapsed the heat accumulated in the body (i.e., HR thermal component), begins to dissipate gradually and accordingly from that point on HR decreases slowly to eventually reach the resting level. In Vogt et al.'s method, the HR thermal component can be estimated during a 10-min seated rest pause immediately following a work period (Fig. 1). The HR thermal component at the end of the work period is calculated as the HR elevation above resting value at or near the 4th minute after the beginning of the rest pause, that is when recuperation of the motor component is thought to be complete. This method allows the assessment of the HR thermal component when HR data is collected in the presence of heat stress, which is often the case in actual work conditions. Imbeau et al. (1995) applied Vogt et al.'s method to estimate the metabolic rate of scaffolding work. However very few studies have been published in peer reviewed journals on the practical application of this method or on the accuracy in estimatingV˙O2that can be achieved with it in actual work settings. Using a different approach based on rectal temperature and heart rate measurements to estimate the HR thermal component, Kampmann et al. (2001) have shown that the mean metabolic rate estimation in mining work can be reduced by 25% when the HR thermal component is taken into account. Such an overestimation error is significant and can change radically the outcome of a risk analysis performed with any of the thermal stress indices cited above or compromise the determination of productive work-rest regimens for physical work.The present study aims to characterize theV˙O2estimation error associated with HR measured (raw) HR during work and with HR corrected (thermal component removed) per Vogt et al. (1970, 1973). TheV˙O2estimations from HR (uncorrected and corrected) are then compared to actualV˙O2measurements performed during forest work in widely varying thermal conditions so as to elicit different HR thermal components (ΔHRT).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
