@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Psychometric properties evaluation of a new ergonomics-related job factors questionnaire developed for nursing workers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a new job factors questionnaire for nursing workers.It evaluates the perception about job factors and their contribution to disorders.Confirmatory factos analyses confirmed the pre-defined structure.Reliability and validity tests showed good results for using the new tool.ErgoEnf can assist in identifying problematic factors in nursing workplaces.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Musculoskeletal diseases,Risk factors,Nursing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objectives of this study were to develop a questionnaire that evaluates the perception of nursing workers to job factors that may contribute to musculoskeletal symptoms, and to evaluate its psychometric properties. Internationally recommended methodology was followed: construction of domains, items and the instrument as a whole, content validity, and pre-test. Psychometric properties were evaluated among 370 nursing workers. Construct validity was analyzed by the factorial analysis, known-groups technique, and convergent validity. Reliability was assessed through internal consistency and stability. Results indicated satisfactory fit indices during confirmatory factor analysis, significant difference (p < 0.01) between the responses of nursing and office workers, and moderate correlations between the new questionnaire and Numeric Pain Scale, SF-36 and WRFQ. Cronbach's alpha was close to 0.90 and ICC values ranged from 0.64 to 0.76. Therefore, results indicated that the new questionnaire had good psychometric properties for use in studies involving nursing workers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders are one of the most important causes of occupational injuries and socioeconomic problems in developed countries as well as in developing countries.Studies have highlighted the health care workers as a risk group for the development of work-related musculoskeletal disorders, particularly vertebral pains (Cole et al., 2001; Alexopoulos et al., 2004; Salik and Özcan, 2004; Aasa et al., 2005; Freitag et al., 2007; Lorusso et al., 2007). Many studies also have shown that nursing workers have high incidence of musculoskeletal symptoms, and their most frequent symptom is pain in the lumbar spine (Gurgueira and Alexandre, 2003; Kjellberg et al., 2003; Smedley et al., 2003; Violante et al., 2004; Freitag et al., 2007; Lorusso et al., 2007; Kromark et al., 2009). These same studies showed a significant occurrence of musculoskeletal symptoms in other areas, such as cervical, thoracic, shoulders, hips/thighs, knees, and ankles/feet.There is no unique cause related to these disorders, however literature shows that various job factors can contribute to their appearance, such as repetitiveness of movements, maintaining postures for long periods of time, physical effort, invariability of tasks, mechanical pressure on certain parts of the body, static work, impact, vibration, cold, organizational and psychosocial factors (Punnett and Wegman, 2004).Therefore, nursing workers are exposed to risk factors at their workplace, which include biomechanical (awkward movements and postures), environmental (workplace layout), psychosocial (work pressure, low autonomy and competitiveness), and organizational factors (low number of colleagues during the shift and inadequate equipment and no maintenance) (Coluci and Alexandre, 2012).There is no measurement instrument that evaluates the perception of these workers regarding the influence of job factors in the development of musculoskeletal symptoms. A questionnaire for this purpose would facilitate achievement of surveys on nursing working conditions, prioritizing certain factors in different work sectors, and it could be a simple tool that can direct the use of other instruments of objective measures which take more time and costs.The aim of this research was to develop and validate a questionnaire regarding the nursing workers' perception of job factors that may contribute to the onset of musculoskeletal symptoms.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
All methodological steps to construct a new measuring instrument were followed as recommended by the international literature during the development of the "ErgoEnf – Questionnaire survey of ergonomic risks among nursing workers". Construct validity was demonstrated by the confirmatory factor analysis, by the known-groups technique, and by convergent validity. Reliability was assessed by internal consistency with Cronbach's alpha values around 0.90, and by test-retest stability with ICC values indicating good correlation between the responses on time interval. Therefore, the ErgoEnf has demonstrated satisfactory and reliable psychometric qualities, and it can be used for ergonomic analysis of nursing workplaces, assisting in identifying problematic factors that can lead to job-related musculoskeletal symptoms.