@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
New technical design of food packaging makes the opening process easier for patients with hand disorders

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
It is possible for manufacturers today to produce easy-to-open food packaging.Opening of easy-to-open food packages increases the consumer satisfaction.Food packages of the future are a benefit for the entire population.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Food packaging,Activities of daily living,Consumer satisfaction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Opening packaged food is a complex daily activity carried out worldwide. Peelable packaging, as used for cheese or meat, causes real problems for many consumers, especially elderly people and those with hand disorders.Our aim was to investigate the possibility of producing meat packaging that is easier for patients with hand disorders to open. One hundred patients with hand osteoarthritis were asked to open a meat package currently available in supermarkets (Type A) and a modified, newly designed version (Type B), and rate their experiences with a consumer satisfaction index (CSI).The mean CSI of the Type B packs was 68.9%, compared with 41.9% for Type A (p < 0.0001). These results show that manufacturers today can produce easy-to-open food packages that afford greater consumer satisfaction. Such future packaging would benefit not only people with hand disorders but also the population as a whole.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Opening food packaging is a daily activity carried out worldwide. It is a complex task with many interacting parameters. The process is often associated with difficulties or even an inability to open the packaging. Opening peelable packaging, such as is used for cheese or meat, causes real problems for many consumers, especially elderly people and those with hand disorders (Heiniö et al., 2008; Rowson and Yoxall, 2011). Previous studies have demonstrated that 40% of people aged between 62 and 82 years, and up to 78% of patients with hand disorders, have difficulties opening peelable packaging or are simply unable to do so (Dittrich and Spanner-Ulmer, 2010; Marks et al., 2012). In Switzerland, about 15% of the population suffers from hand or upper limb complaints, conditions which increase with age (Krieger and Graf, 2011). In the coming years, demographic aging will increase in both Switzerland and other western countries. The number of hand conditions and difficulties opening packaging will rise accordingly and aspects of strength and dexterity will become increasingly important. Packaging of the future should therefore be developed according to the needs of the consumers (Duizer et al., 2009; Yoxall et al., 2013).The main reasons for the problems are the high forces required to open packaging, tear tabs that are too small, and the poor visibility of the opening mechanisms (Dittrich and Spanner-Ulmer, 2010). Werle et al. (2009) evaluated grip strength and showed that it decreased with age even in the healthy population. Marks et al. (2012) quantified the problems that patients with hand disorders experience when opening food containers. Patients found glass jars to be the most difficult containers to open, followed by peelable packaging such as is used for meat or cheese. The authors also measured the forces that patients were able to apply on various tear tabs of the type attached to standard meat packaging in Europe. The main findings showed that 1) the longer the tab, the more force patients could apply, and 2) patients were able to apply no more than 53% of the force exerted by healthy people. Based on these results and the findings of the Fraunhofer Application Center for Processing Machinery and Packaging Technology (Dresden, Germany; Fraunhofer AVV) (Schreib and Liebmann, 2011), Bell AG (Switzerland) modified and redesigned its meat packaging with a view to improving the parameters causing problems. Although the modified meat packages are continually tested and checked technically, it is not yet known whether patients can actually open them easily.The aim of the present study was to investigate the possibility of producing easy-to-open meat packaging that affords high consumer satisfaction in patients with osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis affecting the hands. We also evaluated whether patients were significantly more satisfied with the modified peelable packaging (Type B) than with the packages currently available in supermarkets (Type A).A peelable package is defined as a packaging system that consumers are able to open themselves without assistive devices. The opening process consists of holding the packaging firmly in one hand whilst using the other to pull on a tear tab in order to peel off the foil lid along the sealed seam. The design of an easy-to-open, consumer-friendly package must take into account not only packaging-related parameters but also consumer-related factors that affect the handling of peelable packaging. First, the principle behind opening the package must be recognized and understood. This depends partly on the visibility of the opening mechanism but also on the consumer's knowledge and capability. The process itself should be easy. The opening force therefore plays a very important role: it is influenced by the size and material of the tear tab, by the sealing parameters, and by the tear contour. Furthermore, the consumer's physical abilities, such as hand strength and grip, determine whether the package can be opened (Berns, 1981; Schreib and Liebmann, 2011). Two finger-tip sized notches, placed laterally in the bottom plastic foil, simplify the opening process by providing more space for the fingers and allowing consumers to use the key grip. With notches placed on both sides of the packaging, the key grip can be used by both right- and left-handers. Guidelines for the development of consumer-friendly packaging recommend that 95% of the healthy consumer population and 80% of people with hand disorders should be able to open the packaging (Berns, 1981; Marks et al., 2012; Schreib and Liebmann, 2011; Yoxall et al., 2006). For healthy female consumers between 61 and 80 years this threshold is 11N for a 14 mm long tear tab (Schreib and Liebmann, 2011). For patients with hand disorders an opening force not higher than 8N is recommended for this specific tab (Marks et al., 2012).The Type A packages tested were characterized by the fact that a great deal of force was needed to open them, because they had been sealed so strongly. The space provided to hold the tear tab was too small, so that it was not possible to apply the key grip, and the plastic cover often ruptured during opening (Fig. 1).In order to simplify the opening of their meat packaging, Bell AG modified their production process in cooperation with the Fraunhofer AVV. The adaptations, explained below, were based on the guidelines of Schreib and Liebmann (2011) and Marks et al. (2012), as well as on the technical know-how of Fraunhofer AVV. The main objective was to reduce the opening force required. The opening force depends on various criteria that must be considered for optimization. First, Bell AG replaced their sealing tools to give a sealing contour with a constant peel–line profile. This profile ensures an optimal distribution of force during opening and minimizes the risk of the plastic cover rupturing. Secondly, the force required to open a peelable package had to be within a defined range, as determined in a series of technical tests and based on the findings of the two consumer tests with healthy people and people with hand disorders, performed by Schreib and Liebmann (2011) and Marks et al. (2012), respectively. Bell AG obtained this optimal range by adjusting the parameters of temperature, pressure, and dwell time of the sealing process for each packaging machine, in such a way that the packages were easier to open while still ensuring that the contents remained safely wrapped. The sealing seam and its tear contour were also changed in order to provide an optimal and jerk-free force distribution during the opening process. A forward tear contour has a favorable effect on the peel–line profile. Thirdly, the size of the tear tab exceeded the threshold of 10 mm in length, providing as large a contact surface between the fingers and tab material as possible and allowing the use of the key grip to exert greater force (Fig. 2). Quality management procedures have been introduced to ensure that daily production complies with the new specifications. For example, the force required to open the packaging is tested periodically using a specifically designed device.In a pilot study, we tested three types of the modified peelable meat packages produced using different sets of sealing parameters. Ten patients (six women, four men) with hand disorders and a mean age of 63 years were asked to open these packages. All the test packages looked exactly the same: size, content, cover, and laterally placed notch. The only differences were in the above-mentioned sealing parameters. The patients opened all packages in their usual way and without aids. The opening process was filmed with a video camera so that any difficulties with the packaging could be evaluated objectively. Each time they opened a package, the patients completed a questionnaire about their subjective difficulties in opening it, including the seal, tear tab size, tear tab palpability, visibility of the opening mechanism, force required, pain during the opening process, and problems with the fine motor skills. The patients also evaluated the laterally placed notch. Based on the results, we adapted the packaging and decided what technical configurations would be the best for the patients, bearing in mind that the contents always have to be packed safely.In the next step, reported in the present paper, we carried out a larger study to determine whether patients were more satisfied with this technically modified packaging (Type B) than with the packages that were available in supermarkets at that time (Type A).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study is an example where ergonomics could be successfully included in the designing process of a product, making it more user-friendly. Our results provide evidence that patients with hand osteoarthritis are significantly more satisfied with the technically modified Type B meat packaging than with the type A package. Based on our results, Type B packaging has been introduced on the market, labeled with a special easy to open logo (Fig. 2). We have shown that it is possible for manufacturers today to produce easy-to-open food packages that afford greater consumer satisfaction. Such future packaging would benefit not only people with hand disorders but also the population as a whole.All the authors received support from Coop, Switzerland, and Bell AG, Switzerland, for the submitted work. The source of funding did not influence the data analysis and interpretation.The study was sponsored by Coop, Switzerland. Bell AG, Switzerland provided the packaging under investigation. The sponsors had no role in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data or in the process of publication.