@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ergonomics for the inclusion of older workers in the knowledge workforce and a guidance tool for designers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Approach of Elder workforce inclusion through ergonomics of work environment User Sensitive Design.Review of existing source of assistance tools for inclusive design of knowledge work environment.Proposal of a theoretical framework to assist designers in the first stage of the inclusive design process.Study of relevant information for designers at the first stage of the design process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inclusivity,Older workers,Knowledge work,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The ageing of the population and the inverted population pyramid is bringing important changes to society as a whole. These changes are associated with the inclusion of an older workforce in knowledge work and the challenge they represent in adapting the work environment accordingly. In order to approach a more universal design of the work environment, industrial designers need support from user-sensitive inclusive design studies. While there are plenty of guidelines and tools containing relevant information, there is a need to develop more appropriate tools for Industrial Designers that cover the initial phase of the design process. This study provides a review of the available tools and guidelines and proposes a theoretical framework intended for developing a design guidance tool for inclusive workstation design.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An inverted population pyramid is predicted for 2050 (Jackson, Initiative, and Plan, 2011; Serrano et al., 2014). The proportion varies from one country to another: more than 23% of the population will be over 65 in Japan and in the US, and 17.9% of the population will be over 65 in Europe (CIA, 2010). Moreover, in the Basque Country (northern Spain) the percent of the population over 65 has reached 18.5% percent (17% in the rest of Spain) in the last 16 years, and that percentage is predicted to keep growing (Fig. 1). This requires a deep transformation of our model of society.This current study is framed within the strategy promoted by the Basque Government of enjoying the advantages that will come with the potential increase in an older population and what their expertise, know-how and relationships represent, where “knowledge” is the raw material. The idea is to prevent the loss of all the knowledge that has been acquired by these people throughout their professional career, knowledge that implies change, growth and internal enrichment that is beneficial to the organization they work for, which results in “knowledge capital”.A great part of national income is derived from knowledge-based industries, were the knowledge workforce plays a significant role. Knowledge-based industries are classified by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) as manufacturing, financial services, business services, telecommunications, education, and health services. As knowledge work grows in significance, the door to further opportunities is opened to society, wherein we can take advantage of valuable elements that senior knowledge workers can provide us with, namely motivation, experience, knowledge, know-how and the relationships that have been cultivated over their personal experience and professional career. The trends point to an increased number of older knowledge workers, reaching numbers that have never been seen before (Myerson et al., 2010; Shiokawa and Hagino, 2002). Older knowledge workers also benefit from being active in knowledge work as well by having social contact and by feeling valuable. The changes in activity that older people experience have been studied from the perspective of the Activity Theory of ageing (Neugarten et al., 1961) and the Disengagement Theory (Havighurst et al., 1964). The Activity Theory explains the progressive drop in the activities that were previously part of an individual's daily normal life pattern and the process of progressive disconnecting between the individual and society. The Disengagement Theory supports the idea that the ability to stay active is one of the fundamental conditions for living successfully after retirement and while ageing.‘Universal design’ is defined as “the design of products and environments usable by all people to the greatest extent possible, without the need for adaptation or specialized design” by North Carolina State University (Mace, 2004). ‘Universal design’ originated in construction and web site design (Waller et al., 2015; Design for All Foundation, 2015; Klironomos et al., 2006; Preiser and Ostroff, 2001), and thus public spaces and housing have received most attention (Shiokawa and Hagino, 2002). Shiokawa and Hagino also point out the necessity, advantages and disadvantages of focussing on the workplace, and of offices in particular, in order to face the challenge of the ageing population, that ‘Universal design’ can sometimes be used as a synonym for ‘Inclusive design’, and that ‘Universal design’ benefits those with similar disabilities at the same time (Shiokawa and Hagino, 2002). ‘Inclusive design’, in contrast, originated with product design, and although it follows the same principles, there are some differences that make ‘Inclusive design’ more appropriate for product design, as the ‘Inclusive Design research centre’ webpage (OCAD University, 2015) explains.Age changes do not occur to the same degree or in the same amount in every person. Instead, there is great diversity among older people. Though most people today often reach old age with better health and fewer age-related issues than their predecessors, intra-individual changes are significant for design (Kothiyal and Tettey, 2001). Age is also related to the decline in physical and motor skills (Smith, 2008b), such as reaching, bending, dexterity, sight (Maguire et al., 2014), perception, memory and understanding, among other changes (Chavalkul et al., 2011). Emotional changes as the so-called positive effect (Carstensen and Mikels, 2005), or the influence of past experiences, or values change in favour of personal and social relations.As a consequence, the contemporary marketplace should evolve to satisfy the needs of more mature users too, extending beyond those of physical size, movements and force applications. Variations also expand expectation, interpretation, perception and physical characteristics (Hitchcock et al., 2001). More attention is being paid to workplace stress, which is often related to musculoskeletal issues and which needs to be addressed in a holistic manner (Osmond, 2013). True inclusive design must engage the wider population as actual users, not just potential users (Reed and Monk, 2011). Current work environment (tools, workstation, and workspace) requires a more inclusive design in order to cope with these age-related changes, treating age-related requirements as mainstream. Moreover, new generations bring along new working styles, new technologies and new ways of interacting.This problem has been addressed by relying on the user's ability to adapt. Users become concerned about consequences; they go through training sessions, follow ups, and manuals. The problem is that these solutions too often require a lot of effort and carry an associated human cost (Tsai et al., 2012; Porter Mark et al., 2004); in addition, the solutions are costly and do not always address the problem, or at least not efficiently enough. Relying on design and ergonomics instead can provide a more suitable option. As Kawahara and Narikawa note in their study, it all boils down to the question of how we focus on the users and on humanitarian considerations when thinking about the interface between the user and artificial objects (Kawahara and Narikawa, 2015). Designers play a critical role in promoting inclusive design practice (Dong et al., 2015).The main idea is to address the needs of the knowledge workers who use workstations. The problem is that the components of these workstations have been designed for a context that has evolved and is expected to evolve through changes in the workforce, organizational factors and activity, while the product, the workstation has not evolved enough. In the introduction this problem and design can play an important role in addressing population ageing. In Section 1.1. State of the art shows how this problem has been addressed, and the fact that there is a gap between designers' needs and ergonomics and human factors research. In Section 1.2 it is explained that ultimately it is the users' needs that will benefit as a result, it is however, necessary to intervene through designers; designers' needs are also to be addressed in the current study. Then what content is required to develop such tool framework is presented in Section 2, discussed in Section 3 and finally It is concluded that being coherent with an ergonomics system perspective, the product design, the workstation, has to evolve accordingly and the presented points are especially relevant to build upon them the future tool that serves as a bridge from ergonomics and human factors research, to designers' understanding and application in practice.After conducting a literature search, numerous works have been found regarding ergonomics in the workplace. However, these mainly focus on functional ergonometric characteristics, the physical or sensory aspects of ergonomics. These studies contain posture measurement tools, assessment and recommendations (UNISON, 2003; Osmond Group Limited (Osmond), 2015; Office Ergo), anthropometric data (Kaklanis et al., 2012), methodologies, ISO Standards (Bevan, 2006), etc., all of which are relevant for workstation design and development.There are multiple standards in CEN-CENELEC and ETSI for office environments, but they are based on current standard users and do not address inclusive purposes regarding older users. On the other hand, ISO/TR, 20081:2008 does address older people and people with disabilities. ISO/TR, 20081:2008 is intended to help standards developers understand the accessible design principles of ISO/IEC Guide 71 and implement them in individual standards by providing design considerations and ergonomic data related to human abilities. It provides relevant and useful data on ergonomics and human abilities regarding older users for inclusive design purposes. Furthermore, as Guide 71 notes, additional sector-related guides need to be developed for specific product and service sectors.Methodologies for acquiring these measurements have also been reviewed, including active measurement. Active measurement is the recognition of posture and anthropometrics while the user is at the workstation. Automatic active recognition systems have been studied (Martins et al., 2014; Wongpatikaseree et al., 2014; Haveman and Kant, 2008), which allow some of the potential MSD (muskuloesqueletal) risks to be detected. One system uses two matrices of sensors arranged in cushions (Mota and Picard, 2003), and the CAPRIO system is a compromise between the other most used systems (Haveman and Kant, 2008). As Haveman and Kant explain in the ‘Smart monitoring of worker posture in an office environment’ the reason is that Video Monitoring, even with double camera used, one of the most used systems has problems when desks or other obstacles intercept the reception. Pressure mapped sensors accuracy is low compared to the other available methods, and EMG (Electromyography) is often too intrusive (Haveman and Kant, 2008). When users know how to self-adjust their posture and they are provided with continuous feedback when attention is required they react positively by sitting in the right posture (Epstein et al., 2012).Many items can be found in the market that are intended to be ergonomic in the best case, or are tagged as “ergonomic” by marketing (Osmond, 2013), from tools such as keyboards and mice to chairs and other workstation items. However, even when a product is designed “perfectly fit-for-purpose”, the user might not use it as it was intended to be used. As a result, this may cause a lack in ergonomics. For example, even though a chair is “ergonomic”, fully adjustable, easy to use and comfortable in every way, the user might place the monitor too low and slide down in the chair with an unhealthy posture, especially regarding lumbar support, which results in guaranteed back and neck pain. The problem is that knowing how to use the products appropriately is not very intuitive for users, and even when designers provide information or users can access it some other way, the information too often does not reach them or they simply do not bother until they are aware they are suffering pain.There are audit tools based on functional capability scales and anthropometric capability such as The Exclusion Analysis Tool (Cardoso et al., 2006) and HADRIAN. HADRIAN provides a multivariate of anthropometric and capability measures in virtual user trials (Kaklanis et al., 2012; Porter Mark et al., 2004; Marshall et al., 2010). But as it is based on 3D CAD, it requires having reached a design phase in which the design is clear and defined enough that it can be modelled in 3D. Other tools are more intended for field research and can provide designers with a better idea about older users' impairment through impairment simulators such as the ones found in the Inclusive Design Toolkit (Waller et al., 2015). Requirements and analytical frameworks have been proposed (Langdon et al., 2010) and have become the basis for the development of a cognitive capabilities analysis tool (Mieczakowski et al., 2013).However, as Reed and Monk (2011) state in their study, while the tools themselves are centred on a capabilities framework, no emotional, situational, social or political components are contemplated. Actual use depends on other factors, the most important of which are preference and whether the potential user chooses to use the product over an alternative. Preference and access must be considered for true inclusive design (Reed and Monk, 2011). Customers tend to make decisions based on emotion rather than logic and reason (Khalid, 2006).The majority of inclusive design information and ergonomics is presented as written guidelines and handbooks (Persad et al., 2007). Design guidelines are simplifications that must be general enough to be applicable to a wide range of products and technology. And where these are more precise by applying particular dimensions, they become difficult to apply to other technical areas or are too restrictive for innovative designers (Nicolle and Abascal, 2001); they also lack usability, usefulness and desirability (Nickpour and Dong, 2011), nor do they provide a specific focus on inclusive design in an office environment.The idea is to ultimately address the necessary design requirements for adjusting the work environment (tools, workstation, and workspace) for the use of both older and younger users from a perspective of ergonomics.The aim of this study is to propose a theoretical framework for the development of a guidance tool for assisting designers in the phase between conceptual and final formal detailing. The importance of the ergonomic systems' perspective and the coherence of the different elements of that system (formed by the workstation, tools to support the activity and workspace as interrelated parts that the user interacts with) are highlighted. The coherence between the user's body and the workstation elements, (components, user, context and the activity), are critical for both providing postural and activity support both for the user's body and other tools and items used during the working activity.The most popular as well as challenging workspace trends are the Open Space and Activity Based Workspace (a.k.a. Hot Desking) (Myerson et al., 2010), where workstations are used by multiple users, often for a short time. The lack of ergonomics and particularly the lack of coherence between the user's body and the workstation elements is a problem especially in Activity Based Workspaces, or for users who have greater physical needs, such as many older knowledge workers. For this reason, though workspace and tools are considered as well, workstation design is the main focus of this study.The tool that will be based on the outcomes of the study should assist designers by providing the information related to the specific design item from the workstation items studied, without overwhelming the designer with too much information. This way, the risk of pitting creativity against functionality, which is critical in this phase (Reed and Monk, 2011), is minimised while leaving space for creativity to develop. Consequently, it is necessary to provide guidance without providing constricting values. As a result of using this guidance tool the designer should be able to identify the potential problems regarding physical and cognitive abilities, as well as emotional issues. Moreover, the guidance tool should provide information on the coping strategies found in the interaction with the studied cases, and some guidance for choosing methods for assessing product accessibility (Cardoso et al., 2006), further development methods information sources suggestions. Information needs to be presented in easy and accessible formats, perhaps by educating designers in useful data sources (Goodman et al., 2006).The theoretical framework for the development of our guidance tool will be referred to as the Inclusive Workstation Design Guidance tool (InWoDG). This section describes the context in which InWoDG is intended to be used, two field studies which address users' and designers' needs, and a range of topics, that is, the essential physical, cognitive and emotional requirements to adapt each workstation to each person, where the users of the workstation include older persons.As defined by the Design Council-Double Diamond model, the design process usually involves the following four main phases: 1) Discover, observe and analyse the context and the field research; 2) Define and evaluate the identified requirements; 3) Develop, propose solutions; 4) Deliver and test the final decisions (Design Council, 2007). Fig. 2illustrates this process. It is precisely in the first two areas, Discover and Define, which are shaded in darker grey circles and are illustrated as the first diamond, where action is required. These areas are the most conceptual and abstract part of the project. This part starts from the client brief and ends just before technical details are specified and the development phase starts. During the Development phase, formal definition takes place (often involving detailed sketching, materials definition, 3D modelling, etc.). The phase in the first diamond includes the familiarization and research process of the designer and the abstract and conceptual idea. For that purpose it is common for designers to do field research, whether it means observing or directly interacting by asking or otherwise trying to involve the users and self-experience, as proposed in the IDEO user-centred design methodology or other research methods (Kumar, 2012). Apart from the research, in this phase storyboarding and sketching, as well as other common ways of exploring an abstract idea, are also common. As a result of this phase, the designer has an idea of what the product has to be, what the final use is, who is going to use it and in what context, and more or less what the final product will look like.The Discover and Develop stages defined by the Design Council-Double diamond model correspond to Explore and Development, according to Dong et al.'s terminology, which are the phases of the project when data is most used (Dong et al., 2015). Product Designers want to have as much human factor inspiration as possible in the conceptual design phase (Fulton Suri and Marsh, 2000).InWoDG does not propose specific solutions, but instead provides the basic direction for the designer who uses it to interpret the data. More particularly, the guidelines provided are intended to give assistance during the initial phase of design, prior to dimensioning. The costs in this phase are only marginal since making changes to plans is minor compared to making changes in the physical manifestation of the plans (Edwards and Jensen, 2014).Although there is a wide range of tools which address the first and third phases of the design process illustrated in the diamond model, there are no tools designed to address the needs for the second phase. A consequence the designers are left with little more than intuition to overcome such gap. This gap from projecting to correcting can result in an iterative process in which it is easy to get lost.Physical, sensorial and even cognitive science has been widely explored and considered in such tools at the first stage and third stage. But too often emotional ergonomics are ignored even from the first stage in the design process. The presented framework highlights the relevance of emotional ergonomics as well as another significant issue to cover together with usability and recommends the tools from the first and third phase in case the designer wants to expand the base or continue the development beyond the second phase.We carried out two field studies. One addressed the needs and preferences of the users who are going to work at the workstations and the other addressed the needs and preferences of the designers of those workstations.The first field study aimed to obtain information regarding the contents of InWoDG in order to see how inclusivity and ergonomics are applied in practice and how this varies with age and new trends in the workforce and the workplace. It also studied the elements (environment, workstation components and tools) that were used and preferred by knowledge workers in practice.Participants were classified into three age groups: 24–35, 36–59 and 60–70. The main focus of the study was the oldest and youngest groups. The reason for this is that the 60–70 group is closest to the current official retirement age, and in 2050 the 24–35 year olds will be the ones who will be near retirement and who have experienced the newest office trends, such as shareability and openness.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In order to face the challenges that the inverted population pyramid will bring and to make use of the great potential and benefits of having an older workforce in knowledge work, the necessity and relevance of relying on design and ergonomics has been shown. An extensive literature review has pointed out the lack of tools in effectively assisting industrial designers in the first phase of the design process, which focuses both on inclusive design for older persons and design for the knowledge work environment. For this reason, the current objectives of our study were to 1) help adapt the design requirements to the work environment for the use of older and younger knowledge workers by considering ergonomics and focussing on the coherence of the designed product as part of a coherent system formed by the product, user, context and activity, and 2) provide a theoretical framework for developing a digital guidance tool to help industrial designers in the initial phase of the design process, in a way that connects research with application in a more usable, useful and desirable way.First, the process and needs of industrial designers were described. Then the required information content covered 4 main ideas: 1) workstation component design is inherently linked to the system it belongs to; 2) a user-sensitive coherent perspective, which covers ergonometric and psycho-social considerations, is demanded; 3) the context has changed with new generational trends and the emergence of ABW highlights importance of the adjustment activity; 4) the adjustment activity determines how the work activity will develop. Physical and adjustment parameters are strongly linked to each other and are critical in the adjustment process. Finally, a case study was presented.This theoretical framework provides relevant information regarding the three ergonomics aspects (physical, cognitive, emotional) contemplated in user-sensitive inclusive design. This, when used from the beginning of the design process, helps to reduce the following iterative process of correcting the measurable aspects of the product (physical and cognitive) and helps to acquire a broader understanding of the user. As a result the theoretical framework proposed in the current document provides a base in order to create a tool that can help the designer to make a mental model of the user that more closely matches reality, to create a solution that is coherent with the user's environment, and to find a starting point for the next step in the design process.