@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Objective classification of performance in the use of a piercing saw in jewellery making

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Objective measures of tool use defined.Data collected from sensors fitted to tool used in situ.Performance classified in terms of control, regulatory and functional parameters.Methods and analysis for the study of skilled tool use developed and illustrated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tool use,Jewellery making,Functional dynamics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Data from 15 jewellery students, in their 1st and 3rd years of training, were analysed to show how data collected from work settings can be used to objectively evaluate performance in the use of tools. Participants were asked to use a piercing saw to cut 5 lines in a piece of metal. Performance was categorised in terms of functional dynamics. Data from strain gauges and a tri-axial accelerometer (built into the handle of the saw) were recorded and thirteen metrics derived from these data. The key question for this paper is which metrics could be used to distinguish levels of ability. Principal Components Analysis identified five components: sawing action; grasp of handle; task completion time; lateral deviation of strokes; and quality of lines cut. Using representative metrics for these components, participants could be ranked in terms of performance (low, medium, high) and statistical analysis showed significant differences between participants on key metrics.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper focuses on the question of how one distinguishes between different levels of performance in the use of tools in the workplace (rather than in laboratory settings). Ergonomics has a long history of researching hand tools (Dudley, 1968; Freivalds, 1987; Greenberg and Chaffin, 1977; Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004; Lewis and Narayan, 1993; Mital, 1991; Rubin et al., 1952; Salvendy and Seymour, 1973; Seymour, 1953, 1972). While the study of performance and expertise in tool use played a major role in ergonomics research in the 1960s and 1970s, it has received less attention in recent years (Baber, 2003, 2006). At an applied level, understanding what constitutes variability in tool use could inform the design of tools or the training of tool users, and at a theoretical level, such understanding can help in explaining how skill is acquired and why it varies across individuals. In order to define levels of performance in tool use, the paper follows the functional dynamics approach that has been developed by Bril and her colleagues (Biryukova and Bril, 2008; Bril et al., 2010; Parry et al., 2014).Much of the work into functional dynamics of tool use has focussed on flint-knapping. In this activity, a core of flint is worked using a hammer stone. When performing flint-knapping, experts (in comparison to novices) show a greater range of joint angle excursions in their movements (Biryukova and Bril, 2008), have significantly lower variability in kinetic energy (Bril et al., 2010) and are able to modify several parameters at the same time whereas novices tend focus on one parameter at a time (Vernooij et al., 2012). Thus, an activity which might appear quite mundane exhibits variability in terms of performance, such that it can take time and practice to become proficient. Roux et al. (1995) showed that expert craftsmen (using hammers to make beads from glass or stone) exhibit significantly less variation in performance than less experienced workers, suggesting that not only is there greater accuracy but also greater precision, or consistency, across the skilled tool users.The work of Bril and her colleagues suggests that it is important to consider the type of action that is required to achieve a goal, and then determine the parameters which contribute to this action. Rather than seeing the goal in terms of the outcome of tool use, it makes more sense to regard the goal as one of several parameters which need to be managed. In this way, performance involves the definition of a dependent variable through the management of a set of independent variables. In studies of flint-knapping, the chosen dependent variable was the kinetic energy of the hammer as it strikes the stone (Fkin = ½mass × velocity).11For example, out of the 15 participants, participant P01 is ranked 3rd for Resultant Velocity, 8th for Peak Grip Force, 5th for Time per Line, 15th for Line Quality and 3rd for SD x; arranging these ranks in gives 3 3 5 8 15; thus, the median value is 5. This estimation of median was repeated for all participants.This dependent variable, the functional parameter, defines the problem that the tool user is seeking to solve within the constraints imposed by the task. For flint-knapping, the problem is to remove pieces of flint from the core stone using an appropriate level of force (too much force could damage the core, too little could be ineffective). In order to manage this functional parameter, the tool user will modify velocity with which the hammer stone is moved. This represents the regulatory parameters (which the person can adjust) that result in the desired functional parameter. In the work of Bril and colleagues, regulatory parameters involve variation in potential energy, trajectory and distance travelled by the hammer as well as muscular effort. However, this set of regulatory parameters can lead to infinite ways in which actions can be performed, i.e., the well-known degrees of freedom problem in movement science (see below). Hence, the user will set limits on the selection of actions through the use of regulatory parameters, which can be further constrained by the control parameters, such as mass of the hammer stone used or other task demands.In the field of biomechanics it is well known that muscle use and limb-segment movement shows inter- and intra-individual variation for the same movement execution (Scholz and Schöner, 1999; Riley and Turvey, 2002; Bergin et al., 2014). Examples are muscle activation patterns during human walking and running (e.g. Arsenault et al., 1986; Guidetti et al., 1996; Winter and Yack, 1987) or muscle recruitment in response to pain, such as lower back pain (Hides et al., 1996; Tucker et al., 2012; D'hooge et al., 2013). Similarly, EMG activity varies both with respect to muscle recruitment and activation intensity across participants when performing carpentry activities (Hammarskjöld et al., 1990). While the generation of a movement may vary within a bounded parameter space, visual inspection of the movements may lead one to conclude that they are identical. Quantification of this variability in movement may allow comparison of task performance across different people without the degree of freedom problem becoming a confounding factor. In the present study, we seek to quantify such parameters to investigate whether they indeed correlate with level of performance.For this paper, we seek to define functional, control, and regulatory parameters for the use of a piercing saw. We can relate these parameters to Ergonomics notions of tool use through a quotation from Seymour (1972): “First, the experienced worker usually employs ‘smoother’ and more consistent movements [… ]. Secondly, the experienced worker operates more rhythmically, indicating that a higher degree of temporal organization has been achieved. Thirdly, the experienced worker makes better use of the sensory data [… ]. Fourthly, the experienced worker reacts in an integrated way to groups of sensory signals, and makes organized, grouped responses to them”. The summary of relevant parameters from past work is as follows:i.Control Parameters include the mass of the hammer stone and the velocity with which the hammer stone hits the core. Experts showed greater consistency in their behaviour when control parameters changed. The suggestion that there are differences in expert and novice hammering accords with the observation of Salazar and Knapp (1996) that using a hammer in the non-preferred (and, by implication, less skilled) hand is significantly inferior to use in the preferred hand;Regulatory parameters include the trajectory followed by the hammer stone and the potential energy applied. Regulatory parameters, to some extent, are under the control of the participant, but can lead to constraints on other aspects of task performance. Improved performance arises when the action become smoother and less variable because of the integration of actions into a seamless sequence. In Seymour's (1972) terms, this shows how experts are able to use a ‘higher degree of temporal organization’, i.e., demonstrating less variability in the timing of actions, and also to make ‘better use of the sensory data’, i.e., indicating a capability to pay attention to visual, tactile, auditory cues, in managing their actions (see also Dudley, 1968; Salvendy and Seymour, 1973; Seymour, 1953; Rubin et al., 1952);Movement Parameters – the kinematics of the task performance. As Seymour (1972) put it, the expert actions are performed in a ‘smoother’, ‘more consistent’, ‘more rhythmical’ manner;The Functional parameter, in the case of flint-knapping, is kinetic energy, which is not directly under the control of the participant but represents the dependent variable which defines performance. In the studies discussed above, Bril and colleagues show that expert activity when performing flint-knapping tasks results in constant kinetic energy, which is kept as low as possible without compromising performance between movement cycles. Presumably, kinetic energy relates to the manner in which a blow is made on the core stone. Using other tools for other purposes are likely to involve the definition of other Functional parameters, and it is a question for this paper as to what the Functional parameter might for people using piercing saws.In previous research, strain gauges have been fitted to tool handles in order to measure grip force (Fellows and Freivalds, 1991; Kilbom et al., 1993; McGorry et al., 2003; Murphy et al., 2000; Stoy and Aspen, 1999). In this paper, we follow the lead of McGorry (2001) who mounted strain gauges in a bespoke tool handle in order to measure grip force. The handle was made from a hexagonal bar, milled to produce three beams around a hollow centre, with the strain gauges mounted on top and underneath each beam. Our design (Fig. 1) is much the same (except we mount the strain gauges on to strips which are then screwed to hexagonal bolts at each end). The handles can then be fitted with different tool heads; in this paper, we attached a jeweller's piercing saw to the handle. In addition to measuring grip force, we were interested in the kinetics of tool use. This has received less attention in the recent ergonomics literature, although the previous section considered some of the research in the motor skills domain which looks at the relationship between tool-use and movement. In this study, we have fitted a tri-axial accelerometer in the tool's handle to derive kinematic parameters.The handle consists of three strips of stainless steel (140 mm × 14 mm × 2 mm) attached to two hexagonal bolts (25 mm diameter); attachment is to alternate edges on the bolt. Each strip has a 120Ω strain gauge mounted on it, which is used to detect the bending force exerted on the bar. A tri-axial accelerometer (ADXL335), strain gauge amplification circuit, microcontroller, and battery are all contained within the space between the strips, while a Bluetooth wireless module is mounted on the end of the handle. The analogue signals from the strain gauge circuit and the accelerometer are digitised by the microcontroller and then transmitted to a host computer via the Bluetooth module. A more detailed description of the design and construction can be found in Parekh and Baber (2010).A piercing saw (see Fig. 2) is similar to a fretsaw, with a very fine blade. The fineness of the blade dictates one of the main constraints on using this type of saw; too much force the blade will snap. The fine teeth permit delicate manipulation of the saw to allow detailed shapes to be cut from metal. The saw is (typically) held vertically, with sawing motion in vertical direction. The orientation of the teeth in the saw blade means that cutting is performed on the down strokes. Ideally, there should be as little pressure as possible applied when cutting and the full length of the blade should be used in the cut.22These instructions were provided by the tutors we spoke with, but see also, for example, http://www.dave-cushman.net/bee/piercingsaw.html.Often jewellers speak of allowing the saw to do the work. For us, this raises the notion of affordance (Gibson, 1979). Rather than viewing an affordance as the property of an object, we prefer to regard it (in similar terms of Chemero, 2009) as arising from the behaviour of the system in which it occurs. To say simply that the ‘saw affords cutting metal’ overlooks the interplay of factors in an environment-user-tool-object ‘system’ (Baber et al., 2014) and it is in this interplay that one can differentiate skill. In other words, one would expect skilled performers to be better able to perform the line-cutting task because they allow the saw to do the work rather than attempt to impose undue force during cutting. In order to do this, skilled tool users would adopt a loose grip of the saw's handle which, as a consequence, relaxes their wrist and allows a more flexible movement of the forearm-wrist-hand to produce longer, more consistent vertical strokes during sawing. These long, smooth, consistent strokes continue to cut the metal as long as the blade does not stick or break (and both of these failures can be catered for, either by rubbing the saw with wax to lubricate it and reduce the possibility of sticking or by ensuring that minimal lateral force is applied to the blade during cutting). From this perspective, the ‘affordance’ of the saw is less to do with its physical properties and more to do with the manner in which the environment-user-tool-object system is adapted to contextual demands. From this, the concept of an affordance is not dissimilar to that of an ‘attractor’ in dynamical systems, i.e., a state in which the system will most likely be in equilibrium. For the study of tool-use, this offers us two useful insights. The first is that variation in the environment-user-tool-object system (e.g., arising from changes to any of the components) can lead to different affordances. Thus, the less experienced user might be unable to appreciate or even recognise the affordances of particular states in the interaction. The second is that the changing states in this system create changing affordances. The more experienced user of the tool will be able to not only recognise and appreciate the changing states but also anticipate these changes. This could potentially mean that the expert is continually shifting the ‘system’ to new affordances (even if this might result in inelegant or uncomfortable movements during the transitions). While the focus of this paper is not explicitly on the recognition, appreciation or anticipation of state in a dynamic interaction, this brief discussion of affordance can be related to Bril's concept of functional dynamics. The argument is that it is not sufficient to only consider joint motion or muscle activation when using a tool but also to consider the dynamics of the interplay between the different components of the environment-user-tool-object system. While we do not consider the role of the environment in this paper, the interplay of the other system components (saw, material, user) are central to the analysis and discussion.In terms of functional dynamics for piercing saw use, we describe the task studied in this paper as follows. The goal is to saw a 1 cm line into a strip of copper. The task constraints relate to the manner in which the copper is held on the bench peg (as well as the properties of the copper, e.g., thickness etc.) and the requirement to move the saw vertically. From the description of using a piercing saw, we suggest that the functional parameter can be defined as the percentage of blade used. Good practice is to use as much of the blade as possible on each stroke. This is not to deny that the task could be performed using short, rapid strokes, but this is not the recommended way to use such a saw. The control properties relate to the nature of the saw blade (we used a 6/0 blade which is 14 cm long, 0.18 mm thick, 0.32 mm wide, with 32 teeth per cm) and the metal being sawn (we used strips of copper, 1 mm thick, 3 cm long and 2 cm wide). Regulatory parameters relate to the grip force on the handle. Movement parameters relate to velocity of saw motion.In this paper, we explore whether an understanding of functional dynamics allows us to distinguish between performance levels in a jewellery-making task. It is proposed that the research reported here makes three contributions to the literature. First, extending the concept of functional dynamics from flint-knapping (which involves discrete and repetitive hammering actions) to sawing (which involves continuous and repetitive movement) provides an opportunity to explore the ways in which different tasks might be controlled. Second, the emphasis on dynamic interaction between user and tool creates a very different approach to the study of skilled tool use when compared with approaches which rely on assumptions about motor programmes or motor schema. Rather than assuming that the tool user learns and encodes a particular set of actions (as implied by motor programme/schema approaches), the tool user might only need the ability to recognise the variation in parameters as an activity unfolds (Latash, 2010). Through experience, these parameters are tuned by what Bernstein (1967) terms a coordinative structure: neuromuscular activation which corresponds to particular desired states, using variation in specific parameters to indicate the boundaries of activity. This highlights a third contribution in that it provides alignment with the notion that tool use can be considered in terms of an environment-user-tool-object system (Baber, 2006; Kadefors et al., 1993; Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004). The main objective for this study was to identify key measures of performance (derived from the data produced by strain gauges and accelerometers mounted in a tool's handle) that could differentiate levels of performance, or skill.In order to pursue the study's main objective, we approached the School of Jewellery in Birmingham and discussed ways in which we could recruit a group of novice users of tools and a contrasting group of more experienced users.A group of novice (i.e., first year) and a contrasting group of more experienced (i.e., third year) tool users were recruited from the School of Jewellery at Birmingham City University. The School of Jewellery runs a two-year programme on Jewellery Making (HND Jewellery and Silversmithing) and a one year extension to convert this to a BA Jewellery and Silversmithing. During the initial weeks of the HND course, students are introduced to the tools and techniques that they will use in their studies. As the course involves the production of sample pieces, their initial project requires them to use piercing saws and jeweller's files. It was agreed that tasks involving these tools would be appropriate for this study: the tasks were fairly easy to master, students use the tools regularly throughout their practice, and the simple, repetitive nature of the tasks lends itself to system dynamics descriptions. Comparison between 1st year students (in their first weeks of study) and 3rd year students was felt to provide a reasonable contrast in levels of ability.All participation in this study was voluntary. An initial presentation was given by the lead and second authors of this paper, in which the aims of the study were explained and the instrumented tools demonstrated. Students were invited to participate in a study session. The study design had undergone University of Birmingham ethical review prior to recruitment.In total 18 students volunteered to participate in this study. Twelve students were in the 1st year of the HND Jewellery and Silversmithing programme (2 male and 10 female; mean ± SD age 20.3 (±3.5) years; 2 left-handed and 10 right-handed). This represented some 90% of the cohort of students on that programme. Six students were in the 3rd year of a BA Jewellery and Silversmithing degree (5 male and 1 female; mean age 28.8 (±11.9) years; all 6 were right-handed). This represented 50% of the cohort of students on that programme. While the 1st year students were being given instruction on the use of piercing saws, some students (4 out of 12) had used these previously and the lecturers noted that these were already quite adept in the use of the tools. Thus, simply categorising level of ability in terms of year of study would not necessarily give a fair reflection of performance. This was one of the primary reasons why a more objective approach to categorising performance was felt to be appropriate.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have sought to extend the concept of functional dynamics from flint-knapping to sawing. The main objective for this study was to identify key measures of performance (derived from the data produced by strain gauges and accelerometers mounted in a tool's handle) that could differentiate levels of performance. This has required definition of the functional, regulatory and control parameters which might characterise the task of sawing with a piercing saw. While the flint-knapping studies emphasised kinetic energy as the functional parameter (which is as to be expected when one considers that the hammering action involves the controlled force applied by the use of one stone on another), in this study we proposed that the functional parameter would be percentage of blade used. We now believe that the functional parameter involves some combination of grip force and percentage of blade used (as implied by Fig. 6). However, the point that we make is that the underlying model, of functional dynamics, created a perspective on the collection and analysis of tool-using data which was instructive and useful. This perspective emphasises the dynamic interaction between user and tool, which raises the possibility that the tool-user is managing a set of parameters as the activity unfolds (Latash, 2010). Future work will address the more complicated task of sawing and filing a disc, and use the data we have collected to develop and evaluate Dynamical Systems models to help predict variation in performance in more detail.