@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
When is job rotation perceived useful and easy to use to prevent work-related musculoskeletal complaints?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We interview employers and workers from the construction industry.We examine facilitators and barriers to usefulness and ease of use of job rotation.Job and organizational factors influence usefulness and ease of use of job rotation.Individual factors influence usefulness and ease of use of job rotation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Job rotation,Musculoskeletal complaints,Qualitative research,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Job rotation is often recommended to optimize physical work demands and prevent work-related musculoskeletal complaints, but little is known about possible facilitators and barriers to its usefulness and ease of use. Following a qualitative research design, semi-structured interviews with employers (n = 12) and workers (n = 11) from the construction industry were conducted. Organizational climate, job autonomy, job characteristics and work processes were mentioned as either facilitators or barriers on an organizational level. Worker characteristics, work behavior and attitude were mentioned as either facilitators or barriers on an individual level. Following a structured approach to assess usefulness of job rotation to optimize physical work exposures and identifying barriers to usefulness and ease of use in relevant stakeholder groups is necessary in order to select or develop strategies to overcome these barriers, or to reject job rotation as a useful or easy to use intervention in the given context.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since musculoskeletal complaints contribute to reduced work productivity (Meerding et al., 2005), sick leave (Bergstrom et al., 2007) and early retirement (Van den Berg et al., 2010), there is growing interest for the potential of interventions to prevent musculoskeletal complaints and promote sustainable working life. Job rotation is a commonly used organizational measure for preventing work-related musculoskeletal complaints through changes in physical work exposures (Jorgensen et al., 2005). The principle of job rotation is rotating workers between activities with the purpose of minimizing accumulated exposures on a particular body region (Jonsson, 1988). This may be achieved by following exposure guidelines or, if this is not feasible, by alternating load on different body regions during a workday. However, little is known about job rotation practices. This includes a lack of research on its effects, practical guidance for practitioners and researchers, as well as knowledge about facilitators and barriers to successful implementation.Application contexts of job rotation are varied. For example, research has been done among meat cutters (Arvidsson et al., 2012), supermarket cashiers (Rissen et al., 2002), refuse collectors (Kuijer et al., 2004) and office workers (Fernström and Aborg, 1999). Most of the field studies on job rotation show inconsistent effects. For instance, studies found rotation to decrease physical workload (Kuijer et al., 1999; Fredriksson et al., 2001; Arvidsson et al., 2012) and physical work demands (Kuijer et al., 2004), but also to increase physical workload (Kuijer et al., 1999). Furthermore, studies found rotation to increase shoulder pain (Rissen et al., 2002), upper extremity complaints (Fredriksson et al., 2001) and low back complaints (Fredriksson et al., 2001; Kuijer et al., 2005), while one study found rotation to decrease upper extremity complaints (Fernström and Aborg, 1999).Shortcomings in implementation and evaluation of job rotation may partially explain the inconsistent effects on both exposures and musculoskeletal complaints. Often little attention is paid to possible facilitators and barriers to perceived usefulness and ease of use of job rotation in the given context. The modified Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) theorizes that influencing factors on intention to use any technical or organizational measure are mediated by perceived usefulness and ease of use (Aggelidis and Chatzoglou, 2009). Perceived ease of use also influences perceived usefulness, as the easier a system is to use, the more useful it can be (Venkatesh and Davis, 2000). Also, when attempting to improve health, practitioners often seek to gain acceptance of changes to the workplace or of alternative methods of working (Haslam, 2002). In this study, perceived usefulness is defined as the degree to which someone believes that using job rotation will be effective for the intended purpose (i.e. prevent musculoskeletal complaints or minimize accumulated exposures); perceived ease of use as the degree to which someone believes that job rotation will be easy to apply in the workplace. More insight into the factors that influence perceived usefulness and ease of use of job rotation may contribute to more successful implementation.Work-related musculoskeletal complaints may be caused or worsened by physical job demands. This is especially true for workers in the construction industry, as they are exposed to high cumulative physical demands and they start working at an early age (approx. 16 years old). This means they will have worked for 50 years when reaching retirement age. In the Netherlands, 72% of construction workers perceived their job as physically demanding, with 38% of workers reporting musculoskeletal complaints (Arbouw, 2014). In addition, back complaints accounted for 43% of all lost workdays in the construction industry in 2011 (Economisch Instituut voor de Bouw, 2011). Elimination of adverse physical work demands is not always feasible for construction trades, so minimizing accumulated exposures through job rotation is often recommended by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and Health and Safety Executive (HSE) as an alternative to technical measures. In addition, implementing an intervention in the construction industry is considered a challenge (Boschman et al., 2013; Oude Hengel et al., 2011). Therefore, we expect this industry particularly able to provide considerations for researchers and practitioners who are planning to conduct job rotation interventions.We aim to identify possible facilitators and barriers to perceived usefulness and ease of use of job rotation among workers and employers, since these two key actors have the knowledge and ability to influence both processes and outcomes of an intervention. By using a qualitative approach we addressed the following research questions:1.What are possible facilitators and barriers to perceived usefulness of job rotation to minimize accumulated exposures, prevent musculoskeletal complaints and promote sustainable working life?What are possible facilitators and barriers to perceived ease of use of job rotation in the construction industry?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
