@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems with k-fold cross-validation for energy expenditure predictions based on heart rate

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a practical approach based on neuro-fuzzy systems to estimate energy expenditure using heart rate monitoring.The proposed approach improves the standard Flex-HR method in that it does not require individual calibration.The proposed approach treats the uncertainty in human physiological systems and in various workplaces by using fuzzy logic.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Flex–HR method,Physical workload,Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a new model based on adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems (ANFIS) to predict oxygen consumption(V˙O2)from easily measured variables. The ANFIS prediction model consists of three ANFIS modules for estimating the Flex–HR parameters. Each module was developed based on clustering a training set of data samples relevant to that module and then the ANFIS prediction model was tested against a validation data set. Fifty-eight participants performed the Meyer and Flenghi step-test, during which heart rate (HR) andV˙O2were measured. Results indicated no significant difference between observed and estimated Flex–HR parameters and between measured and estimatedV˙O2in the overall HR range, and separately in different HR ranges. The ANFIS prediction model (MAE = 3 ml kg−1 min−1) demonstrated better performance than Rennie et al.'s (MAE = 7 ml kg−1 min−1) and Keytel et al.'s (MAE = 6 ml kg−1 min−1) models, and comparable performance with the standard Flex–HR method (MAE = 2.3 ml kg−1 min−1) throughout the HR range. The ANFIS model thus provides practitioners with a practical, cost- and time-efficient method forV˙O2estimation without the need for individual calibration.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Researchers in occupational health and safety have demonstrated the importance of designing jobs according to the physiological capacity of a particular workforce. Studies have shown that such design, based on the balance between physiological capacity of the workforce and energetic demands of physical work, is a key factor in maintaining workforce safety and productivity (Abdelhamid, 1999; Wu and Wang, 2002; Dempsey et al., 2008). Oxygen consumption(V˙O2)reflects energy expenditure (EE) and physical workload associated with physically demanding work (Smolander et al., 2008; Wu and Wang, 2002; Bouchard and Trudeau, 2008).Direct measurement ofV˙O2requires sophisticated and costly instrumentation; therefore attempts have been made to find alternative estimation methods (e.g., ISO8996, 2004; Smolander et al., 2008).The Flex–HR method is one of the most widely used methods based on heart rate (HR) measurements (Spurr et al., 1988; Ceesay et al., 1989; Schulz et al., 1989; Garet et al., 2005). This method assumes a linear relationship between HR andV˙O2above a transition point (Flex point) and a more variable relationship, which uses the average of HR values during rest, below this point (Garet et al., 2005; Valanou et al., 2006). The Flex point is empirically defined as the average of the lowest HR during exercise and the highest HR during rest (Valanou et al., 2006). Accordingly, the Flex–HR method is based on four parameters, namely resting oxygen consumption (V˙O2rest), the Flex point, the slope, and the intercept of the linear function describing theV˙O2–HRrelationship above the Flex point. The main criticism about the Flex–HR method is the impracticality of establishing individual calibration curves at workplaces with large populations, since it takes at least 45 min per participant (Rennie et al., 2001). Another criticism concerns the uncertainty in determining the Flex point due to several factors, such as the physical and physiological characteristics of the population under study, as well as the type and number of physical activities (Garet et al., 2005).Group calibration methods have been used to estimate energy expenditure from HR (Li et al., 1993; Luke et al., 1997; Rutgers et al., 1997; Rennie et al., 2001; Keytel et al., 2005). These methods were based on linear prediction models using regression and mixed-model analyses, which require a large sample size and lack the ability to capture nonlinearity, uncertainty and the true relationship between variables in the human physiological system (Shimizu and Jindo, 1995; Park and Han, 2004).In recent years, artificial intelligence (AI) techniques have been proposed as alternatives to conventional statistical methods (Jang et al., 1997; Kaya et al., 2003; Yildirim and Bayramoglu, 2006). One of the most effective AI techniques, particularly for nonlinear function approximation, is the adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS). It combines the unique ability of fuzzy logic to make decisions in uncertain conditions with the learning and adaptive capabilities of artificial neural networks. ANFIS has consistently been demonstrated effective in approximating nonlinear functions, particularly in biomedical engineering (Güler and Übeyli, 2004, 2005; Übeyli and Güler, 2005a,b).This study presents a new approach to estimatingV˙O2using HR without the need for an individual calibration test. The proposed approach attempts to improve the standard Flex–HR method so as to be suitable for large-scale workplaces. Three ANFIS modules forming the ANFIS prediction model were developed for the estimation of the Flex–HR parameters from measurements that can be easily obtained in field. Once the Flex–HR parameters are estimated, individuals'V˙O2during different activities can be determined. Laboratory and field data collection were conducted for the ANFIS prediction model development and testing. The ANFIS prediction model was compared with measuredV˙O2values and threeV˙O2estimation methods, namely the standard Flex–HR method, Rennie et al.'s and Keytel et al.'s models.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
