@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effect of cardboard under a sleeping bag on sleep stages during daytime nap

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We compared usage of sleeping bags on corrugated cardboard or flooring during naps.Using corrugated cardboard decreased the number of awakenings.Skin temperature and subjective warmth increased in the corrugated cardboard group.Increasing the thermal insulation under the body reduces cold stress.Results can be used for practical application in future disaster circumstances.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sleep,Sleeping bag,Mild cold,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Fourteen healthy male subjects slept from 13:30 to 15:30 under ambient temperature and relative humidity maintained at 15 °C and 60%, respectively. They slept under two conditions: in a sleeping bag on wooden flooring (Wood) and in a sleeping bag with corrugated cardboard between the bag and the flooring (CC). Polysomnography, skin temperature (Tsk), microclimate, bed climate, and subjective sensations were obtained. The number of awakenings in the CC had significantly decreased compared to that in the Wood. The mean, back, and thigh Tsk, and bed climate temperature were significantly higher in the CC than that in the Wood. Subjective thermal sensations were warmer in the CC than in the Wood. These results suggest that using corrugated cardboard under a sleeping bag may reduce cold stress, thereby decreasing the number of awakenings and increasing subjective warmth; the mean, back, and thigh Tsk; and bed climate temperature.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the Great East Japan Earthquake of 2011, approximately 105,947 victims (10% of the population of Sendai city) were evacuated to 266 shelters set up in structures such as schools, gymnasiums, and parks across Sendai city, Miyagi prefecture (Sendai and City, 2014). We found instances of severe sleep disturbance using actigraphic sleep measurements in elderly individuals who evacuated to the school gymnasium in the first several days after the earthquake; these disturbances were found to result from cold sensations from the floor, anxiety, and aftershocks (Mizuno and Okamoto-Mizuno, 2014). Environmental factors may thus have had a considerable impact on sleep in the first several days following an earthquake. In the days following this earthquake, available heating systems were limited to oil heaters because of an electrical blackout. However, these were not used while sleeping in the shelter, because aftershocks, which often occur immediately following an earthquake, could have caused a fire. Personal space in the shelter was restricted due to an excessive number of evacuees (Sendai and City, 2014); there were approximately 400 evacuees per shelter, which may have exceeded the capacity of the shelters, as was the case with the Hanshin earthquake (Tanida, 1996). Regular bedding cannot be used because of a lack of personal space and the difficulty of transporting bedding from evacuees' homes to the shelter. Under such conditions, using a sleeping bag has been proposed as a practical solution for both victims and rescue teams (Takeda, 2011).In cold ambient temperature (Ta), thermal insulation and type of the sleeping bag may affect thermoregulation as well as subjective sensation during sleep. Sleeping bags with polyester filling have been linked to higher skin temperature (Tsk), microclimate bed temperature, and greater subjective sensations of warmth during sleep than down filling owing to the higher weight that increased thermal insulation in polyester-filling sleeping bags under cold Ta (Kawabata and Tokura, 1990). Although the weight of the sleeping bags was equal, the sleeping bag with thicker padding for the lower half of the bodily area showed decreased rectal temperature, heart rate, chest Tsk, increased foot Tsk, and more positive subjective sleep evaluations than sleeping bags with either uniform padding or thicker padding in the upper half during sleep (Kawabata et al., 1995). These results indicate the importance of selecting an appropriate sleeping bag for the Ta in terms of thermal insulation, composition, and insulation distribution. The thermal insulation of the sleeping bags may also, however, change depending on the quality of the mattress underneath the sleeping bag. A sleeping bag placed directly on the floor was 0.5 clo below that of a bed underneath the sleeping bag and 1 clo below that of a bed with a bed mattress (Inagaki, 1985). Thermal insulation, as measured by thermal manikins according to the European standards for sleeping bag requirements (EN 13537: 2002), was affected by the insulation of the mattress under the sleeping bag (Kuklane and Dejke, 2010). A mattress with low thermal insulation may increase temperature values for safe usage limits of sleeping bags by 5–6 °C (Kuklane and Dejke, 2010). In light of these results and the cold sensation from the floor reported by evacuees sleeping on the floor after the earthquake, it is possible that thermal insulation under the sleeping bag positively affects sleep and Tsk during sleep. Previous studies have indicated a strong modulating effect of Tsk during sleep on sleep onset and depth (Raymann et al., 2008), suggesting that Tsk might act as an input signal for the sleep regulation system (Van Someren, 2006). However, as far as the authors know, no studies have focused on the effects of placing different types of thermal insulation under sleeping bags on both sleep and Tsk. In the shelter, it is difficult to change sleeping bags and the Ta can be lower than the thermal insulation capacity of the sleeping bag. Increasing the thermal insulation of sleeping bags using items that may be easily supplied for a large number of people might be the most important and practical way to avoid the cold. This study aimed to investigate the effects of thermal insulation of sleeping bags, achieved by using corrugated cardboard, on sleep stages and Tsk during daytime nap. Corrugated cardboard was selected because it is widely available at many shops, apartments, and homes, and is used for transporting relief supplies in an emergency. The study was conducted during daytime nap because the elderly (Mizuno and Okamoto-Mizuno, 2014) and victims (Okamoto-Mizuno, 2012) of the Great East Japan Earthquake of 2011 residing in shelters took daytime naps owing to a lack of nocturnal sleep. Furthermore, a change in the distal Tsk during sleep onset period did not differ depending on circadian phase (Lack and Gradisar, 2002). The increased distal Tsk and decreased rectal temperature during sleep onset was observed and no further thermoregulatory effects were induced after sleep stage 2, both during the afternoon nap and nocturnal sleep (Krauchi, 2007a, b). Taken together with the results of previous studies, our findings may shed new light on thermoregulation during the initial periods of nocturnal sleep.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In conclusion, these results suggest that increasing the thermal insulation under sleeping bags may reduce cold stress, thereby decreasing the number of awakenings and increasing the mean, back, and thigh Tsk; bed climate temperatures; and subjective sensations of warm and comfort. It is essential to keep in mind that increasing the thermal insulation under the body is effective in reducing cold stress during nap. In the case of disasters occurring during cold weather, insulating material placed under sleeping bags are recommended if mattresses are unavailable. Although the present study includes several limitations, our study findings can contribute in terms of practical application in future disaster circumstances as well as in disaster prevention.