@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mobile input device type, texting style and screen size influence upper extremity and trapezius muscle activity, and cervical posture while texting

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Input device type and texting style affect ergonomic exposures when texting.Touch screen texting requires less muscle activity than a physical keypad.2-Handed texting elicits less wrist extensor muscle activity than 1 thumb/hand.Muscle activity and cervical flexion increase as touch screen size increases.Fewer choose to use thumbs only when texting with larger touch screen sizes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Text messaging,Ergonomic exposure,SMS (short message service),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study aimed to determine the effects of input device type, texting style, and screen size on upper extremity and trapezius muscle activity and cervical posture during a short texting task in college students. Users of a physical keypad produced greater thumb, finger flexor, and wrist extensor muscle activity than when texting with a touch screen device of similar dimensions. Texting on either device produced greater wrist extensor muscle activity when texting with 1 hand/thumb compared with both hands/thumbs. As touch screen size increased, more participants held the device on their lap, and chose to use both thumbs less. There was also a trend for greater finger flexor, wrist extensor, and trapezius muscle activity as touch screen size increased, and for greater cervical flexion, although mean differences for cervical flexion were small. Future research can help inform whether the ergonomic stressors observed during texting are associated with musculoskeletal disorder risk.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Globally, the number of mobile device subscriptions is approaching 6.8 billion (ITU, 2013). It is expected that worldwide text messaging frequency will increase to 9.4 trillion annually by 2016, up from 5.9 trillion in 2011 (Clark-Dickson, 2012). In the United States, it has been found that 91% of mobile device users perform text messaging, e-mailing, or instant messaging (Rainie, 2010). Individuals in a one Canadian university community spent more than 3.5 h per day using mobile devices to text, email, or browse the Internet (Berolo et al., 2011).Case reports and epidemiologic studies indicate there is a potential risk of musculoskeletal symptoms and musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) in the neck, shoulder, and hands with increased exposure to mobile device use for text messaging (Berolo et al., 2011; Gold et al., 2009; Korpinen et al., 2013; Menz, 2005; Ming et al., 2006; Storr et al., 2007; Williams and Kennedy, 2011). Non-neutral and static postures and forceful exertions have been identified as risk factors for neck/shoulder and hand/wrist MSDs (Bernard, 1997; National Academy of Sciences, 2001). Texting on mobile devices requires muscle activity to hold the device and type while texting. The moment generated through key activation (typically by the thumb) must be counterbalanced, likely through activation of the finger flexors and wrist extensors.Aspects of mobile device design, including input device type (touch screen or physical keypad), device weight, and screen size may influence ergonomic exposures while texting. Ergonomic exposures may be different when performing the same texting task on touch screen tablets of different sizes. Young et al. (2012) observed increased cervical flexion with touch screen placement on one's lap vs. placement on a table. Due to their increased weight, mobile devices with larger touch screen sizes are more likely to be used on the lap as compared with smaller devices. Therefore, greater cervical flexion may occur with larger screen size. However, no previous studies have examined touch screen size and its influence on upper extremity muscle activity, upper trapezius muscle activity, and cervical posture.Texting styles (preferences for which digits and hands are used) may affect muscle activity, and joint angles. One observational study of texters (n = 859) found the most frequent styles were both hands holding the device with both thumbs typing (46.1%) and one thumb typing while the same hand holds the device (44.1%) (Gold et al., 2012). Literature is sparse with regard to comparisons of muscle activities in the fingers, forearm/wrist, and neck and forearm/wrist and neck posture while texting in these two different styles. However, Gustafsson et al. (2011) found that greater extensor digitorum muscle activity was used during texting while holding the phone with one hand rather than two, which was attributed to higher stabilizing forces required when texting and gripping the phone with one hand. The wrist extensors work synergistically with the extensor digitorum (Kendall et al., 1993). Therefore, wrist extensor muscle activity would likely be associated with texting style.Mobile devices with the QWERTY keyboard configuration are generally of two input types: physical keypad and touch screen. Keystroke forces as measured through a force plate were greater in physical keypads than in touch screen keyboards (Kim et al., 2014). Similarly, participants in texting studies have been found to increase their applied muscle activity with increased computer keyboard key activation force requirements (Lee et al., 2009; Radwin and Ruffalo, 1999; Rempel et al., 1997. Therefore, users will likely exert greater thumb muscle forces when using a physical keypad than a touch screen mobile device.Individual keys on touch screen devices cannot be identified through haptic feedback. Typically, users must view these virtual keys to identify them. Generally, smaller keys are present on devices with smaller screen sizes. Thus, individuals may prefer to hold touch screen phones with smaller screens closer to their line of sight, using less cervical flexion to view the screen.To understand the potential effects of text messaging exposures on MSDs, it is important to describe muscle activity and joint angles while texting on commonly utilized hand held devices with commonly used texting styles. The study of muscles forces and postures associated with texting on hand held devices with different input types or different sizes, and texting with different styles could identify potentially negative musculoskeletal impacts on users and could inform preventive guidelines. Any adverse effect of input device type would be of particular import for mobile device designers, while an effect of typing style would be critical for users.In this study, we used readily available, commonly used, off-the-shelf hand held devices.The primary aim of the study was to ascertain whether input device type and/or texting style affected upper extremity muscle activity and cervical posture during a short texting task. Because of the greater force required to activate physical keys, we hypothesize that greater thenar eminence activity will occur when using a physical keypad than a touch screen mobile device. Similarly, because the moment generated in texting must be counterbalanced by the finger flexors and wrist extensors, we hypothesize that wrist extensor and finger muscle activity will be also affected by input device type. Because of the increased need to stabilize and grip the phone with one-handed texting versus two-handed texting, we hypothesize that wrist extensor muscle activity will be influenced by texting style. We also sought to characterize participants' preferred texting styles with touch screen devices of different size screens. Additionally, we explored the effects of texting on upper extremity and upper trapezius muscle activity and cervical posture with respect to touch screen size while holding the device with two hands and typing with both thumbs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Input device type (physical keypad compared to touch screen), texting styles (right hand/right thumb compared to both hands/both thumbs) and touch screen size influence upper extremity and upper trapezius muscle activity, and cervical flexion during texting. Depending on the condition, there is a complex combination of potential benefits and costs with respect to demand on musculoskeletal tissues. Texting with a physical keypad device compared to a similarly sized touch screen device requires more muscle activity in distal upper extremity muscles. One-handed texting led to greater wrist extensor muscle activity than 2 thumbs/hands texting. Exploratory results also suggested that screen size had an effect on muscle activity; greater muscle activity in the forearm/wrist flexors and extensors and the upper trapezius was associated with larger screen sizes, most likely from the weight of the device. The small increases in cervical flexion associated with larger screen sizes may be a factor in the increased upper trapezius muscle activity observed. Study findings imply that smaller, lighter virtual keyboard mobile devices when used with both hands may reduce biomechanical exposures in the distal upper extremity muscles, the upper trapezius, and the cervical spine.This study builds on past mobile device research and can continue to help inform mobile device designers and ergonomists on the relationship between device design features or texting styles and their potential link with physical exposures and MSDs.