@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The collective construction of safety: A trade-off between “understanding” and “doing” in managing dynamic situations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analyses of anesthesia simulations enable understanding of how risks are managed collectively.Three modes of management for dynamic risky situations are described.Safety rests on teams' ability to make trade-offs between understanding and doing.Safety implies being able to accept suboptimal performance and approximations.Performance improvement for teams requires specific training sessions to develop meta-knowledge.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Teamwork,Safety,Adaptation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This exploratory research aims to understand how teams organize themselves and collectively manage risky dynamic situations. The objective is to assess the plausibility of a model of a collective trade-off between “understanding” and “doing”. The empirical study, conducted in the pediatric anesthesia service of a French university hospital, was supported by a “high fidelity” simulation with six teams. Data on the teams' behavior and on the verbal communications were collected through video recordings. The results highlight three modes for management of dynamic situations (determined management, cautious management, and overwhelmed management). These modes are related to the way in which teams manage their cognitive resources. More precisely, they are related to the teams' ability to collectively elaborate a trade-off between “understanding” and “doing”. These results question existing perspectives on safety and suggest improvements in the design of crisis management training (concerning for example the recommendation of “calling for help”).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
System processes are often dynamic, in the sense that they evolve without any intervention of the subjects, such as in nuclear power plants, traffic, and physiological processes (Hoc, 2001; Manser, 2009; Vicente et al., 2004). In such dynamic situations, decision-making is strongly influenced by time constraints, uncertainty, and risk management practices. Each decision requires an evaluation of the consequences of the action under consideration and of the consequences of inaction during the course of the process (Hoc, 2001). These decisions cannot be understood as a simple choice: They are embedded in a complex task setting and they required complex trade-offs (Norros, 2004, 2014; Vicente et al., 2004).At work, any activity can be described as “collective” and the work of others is itself a major source of situation uncertainty and dynamicity (Hollnagel, 2009; Leplat, 1994). Research must then be conducted to better understand the phenomena associated with collective decisions and their contributions to the management of risky dynamic situations (Salas et al., 2008). Thus, the objective of this research is to understand how teams organize themselves and collectively manage dynamic risky situations. More precisely, we seek to describe the cognitive mechanisms used in this adaptive management. To investigate this question, we rely on both the framework of activity theory and on the works of other authors (Marc and Amalberti, 2002; Marc and Rogalski, 2009a), who propose that the “trade-off model” initially developed to describe individual decision-making can be extended to collective decision-making. After a review of this individual “trade-off model”, we present a model of collective risk management in dynamic situations. An exploratory study was conducted with six anesthesia teams to assess the plausibility of the model. Implications of its results for the design of training programs are then discussed.Different cognitive activities are involved in the control of dynamic situations: collecting information, detecting problems, diagnosing cues, making sense of the situation, making decisions, acting to solve problems, and so on. Contrary to popular conception, these activities do not occur as a sequence of distinct stages. In reality, they are highly integrated and linked to each other (Amalberti, 1996; Vicente et al., 2004). Detecting a problem, for example, means being able to reconceptualize the situation in order to conceive of it as being problematic (Klein et al., 2005). This requires subjects to participate in the definition of their environment on the basis of knowledge they have elaborated through experience. Understanding in a real context is then an “overall sense-making” process and not a specific stage within a sequential process (detect, diagnose, understand, decide, and act). Basically, “understanding” and “doing” are neither independent nor exclusive activities: “Understanding” is necessary for “doing” just as “doing” allows one to understand (Vicente et al., 2004; Weick, 1993). In other words, these two cognitive activities involved in the management of dynamic situations are complementary and in close interaction (Amalberti, 1996).In real life situations, resources – especially time – are limited. Thus, these different cognitive activities are not merely complementary: They compete to gain attention (Amalberti, 1996). Many studies describe the dilemmas and the trade-offs that subjects must perform to choose between “doing” and “understanding”. In these studies, the term “trade-off” refers to the compromises and sacrifice decisions made by individuals to achieve success, as explained for example by Hollnagel's efficiency-thoroughness trade-off principle (or ETTO principle) (Hollnagel, 2009; Woods, 2006). These studies reveal that it is often better to do something in time, even approximately, rather than to achieve a complete understanding of events and provide a perfect answer too late (Hollnagel, 2009; Sebillotte, 1984; Senach, 1984). This means that under a time constraint, subjects regulate their performance to achieve the main objectives of the task without consuming too many cognitive resources. This regulation allows them to keep resources “in reserve” in case conditions change unexpectedly. Thus the goal of the subject in dynamic situations is neither to have a thorough understanding nor to perfectly control the process. Gaining a thorough understanding would require the subject to use all available pieces of information to detect inconsistencies. For instance, doing so could involve reading through the patient's file, getting in touch with the surgeon or with colleagues to know how the surgery was conducted, and so on. This refers to the elaboration of a detailed representation of the situation and of its evolution as a whole. The development of such an understanding takes time because it requires the collection and assembly of pieces of information that may be distant in time and space. In reality, under time constraints, the goal is rather to keep the system within a “safe enough” envelope, while preserving resources and the capacity to act in parallel. It is this reserve that ensures effective work in the long run: It saves resources, regulates the workload, and manages and prioritizes concerns (Hoc and Amalberti, 1999).Paradoxically, the optimal management of the current situation may then lead subjects to adjust their own performance in a suboptimal way (partial representations, misunderstandings, errors, approximations, non-compliance, etc.). For example, the subject can decide to act “without understanding everything”, that is, more or less approximately, following an “erratic mode”, in order to make the process converge towards a “window of stability” (Amalberti, 1996; Hollnagel and Woods, 2005). This window of stability allows the subject, in a second step, to invest in a deeper understanding of the problem with less risk. Conversely, subjects can also decide to postpone some emergency management actions that could a priori be seen as obvious responses. Such strategies aim to enhance their understanding of the problem, while waiting, for example, for the evolving situation to provide further information before they change its course (Amalberti, 1992). In summary, a large part of subjects' activity in dynamic situations consists in regulating their workloads over time to avoid being overloaded. Such regulation of their own workloads is based on their ability to make strategic trade-offs between “doing” and “understanding” (Hoc et al., 2004; Vicente et al., 2004).The relationships between teamwork and risk management have been investigated by several authors (Manser, 2009; Nyssen, 2007; Salas et al., 2008). They are often discussed from the perspective of traditional approaches concerning accident prevention and error management. From this perspective, the impact of “collective work” on safety is mainly evaluated in relation to the possible occurrence of failures. This impact is twofold. On one hand, collective work may be “a reliability factor” in addition to individual contributions; on the other it may also be a source of failure (Nascimento and Falzon, 2012; Sasou and Reason, 1999). Currently, much research (such as research conducted from the “resilience engineering” perspective) considers safety as an active front-line process and underlines the need to understand how safety and efficiency are both actually created and challenged in the real world by workers (Hollnagel et al., 2006). This perspective is particularly developed in the field of patient safety: “Balancing the work system and encouraging the active and adaptive role of workers are key principles for improving healthcare quality and patient safety” (Carayon et al., 2014).Many studies in high-risk systems, including medicine, are conducted to understand how teams manage dynamic conditions (Burtscher et al., 2010; Grote et al., 2010; Klein et al., 2006; Tschan et al., 2011). They show that “adaptation is a key coordination process” and that managing errors and preventing harm are “the main coordination functions of team coordination” (Kolbe et al., 2011; Manser, 2009; Zala-Mezö et al., 2009). Some studies try to depict the dynamics of team adaptation in dynamic situations but this term “is still a rather elusive and ill-defined concept within the psychological literature” (Kolbe et al., 2011). Generally speaking, in the above mentioned studies, adaptation is understood as “the response to actual or anticipated changes in the embedding contexts” (McGrath and Tschan, 2004, p. 6). Similarly, “team adaptation is defined as a change in team performance, in response to a salient cue or cue stream, that leads to a functional outcome for the entire team” (Burke et al., 2006, p. 1190). These models suggest that the activity of team members emerges from the context of a given situation.Activity theories consider that the activity of the human agent has a dual orientation: productive on one hand – that is, targeting task fulfillment – and constructive on the other – elaborating new resources and new knowledge (Daniellou and Rabardel, 2005; Kaptelinin and Nardi, 2006). Such a perspective brings out the active and creative dimension of human adaptation (Falzon, 2014; Rabardel and Pastré, 2005). It contradicts the model of a passive or reactive subject who adjusts to meet contextual demands. Here, the assumption is that the context can be a deliberate output of the action. “People consciously and deliberately generate contexts in part through their own objects; hence context is not just ‘out there’” (Nardi, 1996, p. 76). Adaptation is not seen only as the modification of behavior in response to external constraints. Adaptation is also (and above all) the active transformation of the context by subjects according to their objectives (Béguin, 2003, 2007; Norros, 2004).Based on the concept of “adaptation” in activity theory, some researchers have suggested that teams involved in real dynamic situations operate in a way compatible with the existence of a double trade-off between “understanding” and “doing” (Marc and Amalberti, 2002; Marc and Rogalski, 2009a,b). The first trade-off occurs at the individual level, where subjects continually adjust a trade-off between “understanding” and “doing” to regulate their own workload (cf. Section 2.1). The collective trade-off model suggests that a second trade-off is performed at the group level, as if the team operates as a “single subject”, with its own trade-off. The core idea of this collective trade-off model is twofold:1.The global performance that is sought is “imperfect” (i.e. not thorough, see Section 2.1).The team elaborates a trade-off between “understanding” and “doing”.These two points are explained below.First, the overall performance targeted by the team is not a perfect, error-free performance but a “safe enough”, suboptimal performance. The goal of the teams is primarily efficiency over time, sometimes taking risks and acting in a non-standard way (i.e. deviating from prescribed rules and committing “errors”). This is particularly evident in patient safety when “health production” sometimes means “to save the patient's life”. For example, in a study conducted in an Emergency Medical Service (EMS) unit, Marc and Amalberti (2002) show that errors produced within the team are not always detected and, when detected, are not systematically addressed and corrected. This tacit acceptance of a flow of errors and approximations in the group is explained by the objective to preserve cognitive resources within the team.Second, the model states that the team elaborates a trade-off between “understanding” and “doing”. This means that the team may “choose” (implicitly) at some time to focus on understanding the problem (gathering information, interacting with colleagues, thinking aloud, etc.), even if this may delay action. At other times, the team may “choose” to focus on action, without necessarily fully understanding the situation (without taking the time to read the file, without discussing the case, without identifying the causes of problem, etc.). The priority given to understanding or to acting (“doing”) according to the situation is the result of a trade-off decision-making process. The intent of the trade-off is to change the context, to alter the situation dynamic in order to adapt it to team resources (knowledge and skills of team members, problem representation, access to information, etc.). In other words, the trade-off allows the team to take command of the situation – to gain control of time. The goal is to produce context instead of suffering from it.The objective of our research is to understand how teams organize themselves and collectively manage dynamic situations: how groups manage risks and opportunities for the system to work under varying conditions and under time constraints. Specifically, what are the cognitive mechanisms of this collective adaptive management? Activity theory can open new paths to meet these goals. Some works suggest the existence of a “collective cognitive trade-off” (Marc and Amalberti, 2002; Marc and Rogalski, 2009a). This current qualitative and exploratory study attempts to assess the plausibility of that model (Le Moigne, 1995).Anesthesia consists of inducing a reversible lack of awareness to allow patients to undergo surgery without distress and pain. Classically, the process of anesthesia for a surgical operation is divided into three phases: the “induction” phase, the “maintenance” phase, and the “recovery” phase. During these three phases, the anesthetist supervises and controls the “patient-process”. This expression underlines the fact that the patient's condition can be characterized as a dynamic process because it evolves even in the absence of any action from the subject (De Keyser and Nyssen, 1993; Hoc et al., 2004; Xiao, 1994). The supervision and control of this “patient-process” is provided collectively. Anesthetists are accompanied by nurses, but remain the initiators of care protocols. In particular, the two phases of maintenance and recovery can be supported by nurses alone, provided that the latter are specialized in anesthesia and that the anesthetist can intervene at any time.Throughout the process, cooperation among members of the anesthesia team presents a synchronous dimension: It requires that teammates coordinate actions or events to maintain desired temporal interrelationships between them (Nyssen and Javaux, 1996). Moreover, cooperation in anesthesia teams is also a “vertical one” (Rogalski, 1994): Anesthetists are responsible for the “mission” and they delegate the fulfillment of some tasks to one nurse (or more). In a traditional view of risk management, this vertical dimension of cooperation is equated with the notion of “leadership”, in the sense that it refers to the idea of “making do” (Künzle et al., 2010a,b; Salas et al., 2007). However, recent works in the field of patient safety have shown that, to be effective, leadership must also include a horizontal dimension of cooperation. Such leadership approaches – where all team members perform leadership functions – are called “adaptive leadership” (Künzle et al., 2010b; Xiao et al., 2004). We observed this approach in the two hospitals under study. Thus, all team members can be involved in the process of problem solving, and so, in particular, in the two dimensions of collective activity: “understanding” and “doing”.Our research was supported by a high fidelity simulator which recreates, in the form of a mannequin, the physiological and pharmacological reactions of a 6-month-old infant (SimBaby™), including breathing, vocalizations, palpable pulses, and a realistic airway that can be intubated. The interactive mannequin reacts to the actions of participants based on a software program developed by anesthesiology trainers (Banerjee et al., 2007; Kofke and Nadkarni, 2007; Nyssen et al., 2002). This equipment was used to develop an exploratory study. The advantage of such a study is twofold. First, it makes it possible to observe the management of risky dynamic situations: situations that are difficult to observe and describe in actual practice. Furthermore, the realization of an experimental study using a simulator enables one to conduct a comparative analysis between teams on a single scenario and then to identify differences in how they manage critical events.The experimental scenario, designed by a senior anesthetist, is an emergency situation due to an airway problem in the recovery room (extubation). It is a classic and simple scenario in the sense that airway problems (such as extubation mishaps) are very common during the recovery phase: Anesthesia teams are used to handle them regularly. In other words, this scenario does not simulate a crisis or a severe event (such as a cardiac arrest or malignant hyperthermia, which are commonly simulated) but rather a “non-routine event” which “usually” does not have a substantial negative effect on the patient (Burtscher et al., 2010). Nevertheless, the anesthetist who designed the case considered it to be a plausible incident, in the sense that it could actually take place and presented real risks if not quickly understood and corrected. Subjects who took part in the simulation did not discuss the plausibility of the case.As a matter of fact, in France, when a child's medical condition is stable and considered safe, parents are allowed to enter the recovery room. In the scenario, the endotracheal tube, which ensures the artificial respiration of the baby patient, is moved “accidentally” (extubation) by his father (an actor). This blocks the flow of oxygen to the lungs. According to experts in anesthesia, in order to solve the problem the team must proceed in two steps:1.The emergency management step consists in manipulating and completely removing the tube accidentally moved by the father;The control step consists in re-intubating to oxygenate the child appropriately while ensuring protection of the airway.In these two tasks, one cannot dissociate activities related to the task to be performed (taskwork) and activities oriented towards the team and it coordination (teamwork) (Salas et al., 2008): The two aspects are impossible to separate. A team member's action always has a double orientation: toward the task and toward the other members. No action can be solely task-oriented, independent of the team, because all actions contribute to collective work. Similarly, no action can be solely team-oriented. Even communicative actions also have a task orientation. For example, requesting a colleague to pass the mask (a communicative action) is both team- and task-oriented. Likewise, performing an intubation (a behavioral action) is necessarily completed in interaction with a colleague; even if no verbal interactions occur, one can notice non-verbal communications and coordinated actions.The simulated scenario was performed by six anesthesia teams in order to make comparisons using a qualitative method (Santiago Delefosse, 2006). Because of constraints related to the use of the simulator and the availability of physicians and nurses, these sessions were conducted in the context of training sessions. These were short training courses (about one day), during which teams worked through several scenarios and were then debriefed. The test scenario was run during these days, to benefit from the installation of equipment and from the presence of the teams. Sampling could not be fully controlled. This generated some differences in the composition of teams (see Table 1). The anesthetists are senior residents (except one who is a junior anesthetist, not a resident, but this does not affect his functional role) and have approximately the same level of seniority. Nurses have different levels of seniority but have specialized in anesthesia for more than five years. Thus, they can apply anesthesia techniques (perfusion, tracheal intubation, mechanical ventilation, etc.) but only under the supervision of an anesthetist. Furthermore, the latter remains the sole initiator of care protocols. Members of these teams may know each other but do not work together regularly. This reflects the usual composition of teams: In practice, teams are formed in a “more or less” ad hoc way, depending on the presence and availability of each member, and on the schedules of services.Data were collected through video recordings. Data analysis was inductive and, in agreement with activity theory, was always completed considering “activity” and not only “task”. In short, that means that data analysis was completed considering “work as done” (i.e. what actually happens in the current variable conditions with an intrinsic viewpoint) and not “work as imagined” (i.e. work as designers, managers, regulators, and authorities believe it happens or should happen). This inductive analysis was carried out in two steps: First, the analysis focused on the teams' behavior, through observation of the patient's evolution and of the nurses and anesthetist's non-verbal actions; second, it focused on the verbal communications exchanged within teams. The first step (observation of the behavior) accounts for “doing” because it reveals the commitment of the team in action, while the second step (verbal communications) allows one to access the “understanding” dimension of the trade-off. The first author coded both the behavior and the verbal interactions, using coding units that are described in sections 3.4.1 and 3.4.2. The results were then validated by the second author and two expert anesthetists. Since we consider that all actions, verbal or not, contribute to teamwork and taskwork (cf. §3.2), these two analyses consider both taskwork and teamwork.The analysis of the behavior aims to describe and compare the actions performed by each of the six teams to solve the problem and manage the risks to the patient. The objective is to account for the commitment of the team in action, without considering who performs these actions within the team (collective doing). Systematic observations are based on the collection of four categories of observable events: “actions on ventilation”, “calls for help”, “team composition” and “saturation”. The “action on ventilation” is the most important category because it describes the various ways to ventilate the child (manual ventilation, automatic ventilation, natural ventilation, extubation, etc.). As the problem addressed in the scenario concerns ventilation, this category can account for the actions performed by teams to handle the critical situation, from its origin (extubation by the father) until its resolution. In particular, this category of observable events allows one to distinguish the two steps in the resolution of the problem: the emergency management step and the control step (see § 3.2.).The “calls for help” category indicates any requests for additional assistance made by the anesthesia teams to strengthen them team to face the emergency. The “composition of the team” reflects changes to team membership by mentioning the successive arrivals of new participants (not actors) and by indicating their function (anesthetists or nurses). The “saturation” is the numerical measure of the percentage of oxygen in the patient's blood. This value is recorded from the real-time monitoring of the child throughout the procedure. It allows one to account for changes in the health of the patient and therefore to describe the dynamic process that the team must control.This behavior analysis of video-recorded non-verbal actions was conducted with Actogram Kronos™ software (Kerguelen, 1991, 1997). The first author coded the observable events. This allows the analyst to establish sequences of actually performed actions. The results are presented in the form of chronological graphs known as “activity chronicles”. These graphs highlight in particular the two steps to be carried out (the emergency management step and the control step according to the task analysis) and the actual time used by teams to perform these two steps (d1 and d2 in Fig. 1).In addition to behavior analysis, verbal communications exchanged during the simulation sessions were recorded on video, fully transcribed, and analyzed by a single ergonomist using systematic coding. During transcription, the dynamic evolution of speech was taken into account through a timed record every 30 s. Transcribed communications were then categorized (Walker, 2005). This categorization was inductive and conducted independently from the behavior analysis. Following the activity theory approach, the analysis seeks to decipher the goals of team members (Engestrom, 2000; Kaptelinin and Nardi, 2006), rather than to identify entities or mechanisms. The coding scheme is based on a functional typology (Hoc and Amalberti, 1999) that accounts for different levels of representation of the situation by subjects according to the aims they pursue: from a “concrete” level about objects handled, to more “abstract” levels concerning concepts, models, and knowledge. Our functional typology is also in line with the time scale: It takes into account the temporal variables and actions vis-à-vis the changing dynamics of the situation – from the local management of the situation in the short term, to the management of data external to the process, the consequences of which are evaluated in the longer term. This coding scheme distinguishes four exclusive categories: action-oriented communications, informative communications, understanding-oriented communications and agreement-oriented communications (Table 2). The number of utterances in each category is computed during periods of 30 s to show the temporal distribution of communications.In this study, the analysis especially focuses on the “understanding-oriented communications” to identify periods more dedicated to the understanding of the problem by the teams (Fig. 2). These communications aim to collect “initial” or “complementary” data regarding the ongoing process to build a more elaborate, more coherent, and deeper representation of the situation. They reveal the commitment of the partners towards a collective reasoning to establish the logic underpinning the evolving process and to identify the causes of the problem. This category refers partially to the concept of “explicit reasoning”, as indicated by the occurrence of words such as “therefore”, “because” and the like (Tschan et al., 2009). Here, the influence of the data exchanged on the course of action takes place in the relatively long term, following the reasoning carried out by team members on the basis of their general knowledge. This category includes in particular communications such as “diagnosis”, which capture whether the problem is solved (valid diagnosis) or not (false diagnosis). It may be mentioned here that such “understanding communications” do not preclude acting (“doing”). Most of the time, the actions taking place along with such communications are related to the research and sharing of information (read medical records, phone call, etc.) and not to the immediate management of the “patient-process”.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
