@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The relationship between air layers and evaporative resistance of male Chinese ethnic clothing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The evaporative resistance and the air gap of male Chinese ethnic costumes were determined.The relationship between evaporative resistance and air gap was analysed.Clothing total evaporative resistance showed a downward-opening parabolic correlation with the air gap.Each body part also showed similar downward-opening parabolic curves but with different leading coefficients.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Air gap,Air volume,Local evaporative resistance,Non-western clothing,Thermal manikin,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, the air layer distribution and evaporative resistances of 39 sets of male Chinese ethnic clothing were investigated using a sweating thermal manikin and the three-dimensional (3D) body scanning technique. Relationships between the evaporative resistance and air layers (i.e., air gap thickness and air volume) were explored. The results demonstrated that the clothing total evaporative resistance increases with the increasing air gap size/air volume, but the rate of increase gradually decreases as the mean air gap size or the total air volume becomes larger. The clothing total evaporative resistance reaches its maximum when the average air gap size and the total air volume are 41.6 mm and 69.9 dm3, respectively. Similar general trends were also found between local mean air gap size and clothing local evaporative resistance at different body parts. However, different body parts show varied rates of increase and decrease in the local evaporative resistance. The research findings provide a comprehensive database for predicting overall and local human thermal comfort while wearing male Chinese ethnic clothing.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Clothing has a three dimensional shape and serves as a thermal and moisture barrier between the human body and environments. Both the fabric material and air layers inside the clothing affect heat and mass transfer through clothing and thereby, contribute to the clothing thermal insulation and evaporative resistance (Ding et al., 2011; Wilson et al., 2002). On the other hand, clothing thermal comfort is mainly determined by evaporative resistance and thermal insulation. Clothing with a high evaporative resistance can greatly impede moisture transfer through clothing. Hence, a low clothing evaporative resistance (i.e., vapour permeable) is always preferred for the majority summer wear and protective clothing. Previous studies (Cubric et al., 2013; Ding et al., 2011) have demonstrated that fabric physical properties (e.g., air permeability, thickness, mass per unit area) and clothing design features (e.g., covering area, clothing layer distribution, closures, vents) have a tremendous impact on clothing evaporative resistance. Also, clothing evaporative resistance can largely be affected by environmental conditions, human body movements and body postures (Bernard, 1998; Belghazi et al., 2005; Caravello et al., 2008; Clifford et al., 1959; Havenith et al., 1990; Nielsen et al., 1987; Wang et al., 2012). Generally, air and body movements can greatly decrease clothing evaporative resistance. Clothing evaporative resistance determined in sedentary and supine postures is normally greater than that determined in a standing upright posture. In addition, garment fit can greatly affect clothing evaporative resistance (Chen et al., 2004). Usually, a loose-fitting garment has a higher evaporative resistance than a tight-fitting garment due to larger air layers entrapped inside the clothing.Air layers may largely exist under, between and over clothing layers, on clothing fabric surfaces and in voids between adjacent yarns (Wilson et al., 2002). The determination of air gap distributions inside the clothing is complicated and challenging due to the complex geometry of clothing. Sullivan et al. (1987) developed a method to objectively determine the clothing microenvironment volume using an impermeable outer suit and a vacuum source. Chen et al. (2004) established a circumference model to estimate clothing air gap thickness. In recent years, advancement of modern technologies in three-dimensional (3-D) scanning has helped scientists to utilise 3D body scanners to determine the distribution of air layers inside the clothing (Kim et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2007; Lu et al., 2014; Mah and Song, 2010; Psikuta et al., 2012). Many researchers have explored the impact of air layers on clothing dry heat transfer, few studies have examined the effect of air gap on the moisture transfer property of fabric assemblies. Hes and de Araujo (2010) found that the relative water vapour permeability of the fabric with a small air gap is lower than that of the fabric with no air gap. Ding et al. (2011) discovered that fabric evaporative resistance increases with the increasing air gap size, but too big air gaps lead to a reduction in the evaporative resistance due to the occurrence of natural convection. It should be emphasized that all the aforementioned studies are focused on two dimensional textile fabrics. There is a lack of systematic study on the relationship between air layers and the evaporative resistance of full-scale clothing ensembles. Also, air layers entrapped inside the clothing vary greatly across the whole body and it is meaningful to investigate clothing local air layer distributions as well as to explore the relationship between local air layers and local evaporative resistances.Further, the vast majority of published studies on clothing air layers and evaporative resistance have been focused on regular fitting western clothing and protective clothing. Although the heat transfer property of non-western clothing has been extensively examined (Al-ajmi et al., 2008; Havenith et al., 2015), comparatively little research work has been carried out to investigate the moisture transfer properties of non-western clothing. Non-western clothing, particularly Chinese traditional clothing, is so unique in clothing structures, garment fit and wearing styles that these unique features may greatly affect clothing moisture transfer property. Hence, it is of paramount importance to study the moisture transfer property of Chinese traditional clothing as well as to explore the relationship between air layers and evaporative resistance of Chinese ethnic clothing. In this study, the total/local air gap size/volume and clothing total/local evaporative resistance of 39 Chinese male ethnic costumes were investigated. Relationships between air layers and clothing evaporative resistance for the whole body and local body parts were also explored. The results may serve as a further extension of the clothing database for ASHRAE 55 (2013), ISO 7730 (2005), and ISO 9920 (2009).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We investigated the air layer distribution and evaporative resistance of 39 sets of male Chinese ethnic clothing ensembles. All those clothing ensembles can be categorised as permeable clothing and they have a better moisture transfer capacity than western clothing and the majority non-western clothing studied in documented literature. Results have demonstrated that the air gaps are unevenly distributed over the body, and thereby the clothing local evaporative resistance at different body parts varies greatly. A downward-opening parabolic relationship between the mean air gap size and the clothing total evaporative resistance is discovered. The total evaporative resistance reaches its maximum when the average air gap size is 41.6 mm. Similarly, downward-opening parabolic relationships between local mean air gap size and clothing local evaporative resistance for different body parts are also found. Nevertheless, different body parts show varied rates of increase and decrease in the clothing local evaporative resistance. This paper contributes to the body of knowledge on thermal properties of non-western ethnic clothing and the relationship between clothing moisture transfer property and fit. This study also provides a scientific basis for designing non-western ethnic clothing with improved wear thermal comfort.The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.