@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluating the effect of four different pointing device designs on upper extremity posture and muscle activity during mousing tasks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We created a specific hand posture metric to assess interaction between hand and pointing devices.Pointing devices that do not require holding induced more neutral hand postures and lower forearm muscle load.Centrally located pointing devices induced more neutral shoulder postures.Device familiarity did not affect user's perception of pointing devices.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pointing device,Computer tasks,Musculoskeletal disorders,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The goal of this study was to evaluate the effect of different types of computer pointing devices and placements on posture and muscle activity of the hand and arm. A repeated measures laboratory study with 12 adults (6 females, 6 males) was conducted. Participants completed two mouse-intensive tasks while using a conventional mouse, a trackball, a stand-alone touchpad, and a rollermouse. A motion analysis system and an electromyography system monitored right upper extremity postures and muscle activity, respectively. The rollermouse condition was associated with a more neutral hand posture (lower inter-fingertip spread and greater finger flexion) along with significantly lower forearm extensor muscle activity. The touchpad and rollermouse, which were centrally located, were associated with significantly more neutral shoulder postures, reduced ulnar deviation, and lower forearm extensor muscle activities than other types of pointing devices. Users reported the most difficulty using the trackball and touchpad. Rollermouse was not more difficult to use than any other devices. These results show that computer pointing device design and location elicit significantly different postures and forearm muscle activities during use, especially for the hand posture metrics.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As computer usage increases both at home and in the workplace, the incidence of musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) associated with computer usage has also risen (Cook et al., 2000). Many attribute these increases to a rise in hours mouse use, as the association between MSDs (specifically of the hand, arm, and shoulder) and mouse usage is stronger than the association between hours of keyboard activity and MSD outcomes (Gerr et al., 2004; Ijmker et al., 2007). The specific design and placement of pointing devices, such as a mouse, has been evaluated to determine the effects on upper limb posture and muscle activity (Burgess-Limerick et al., 1999; Dennerlein et al., 2006; Jensen et al., 1998). Specifically, prolonged mouse use is associated with ergonomic risk factors including sustained muscle load and non-neutral postures related to extreme ulnar deviation, wrist extension and forearm pronation (Burgess-Limerick, 1999; Jensen, 1998; Karlqvist et al., 1998; Sjøgaard and Søgaard, 1998).Most of the previous studies have focused on wrist and shoulder postures, along with forearm and shoulder muscle activities. For instance, several studies have shown that placement of the mouse closer to the center line of the operator reduces non-neutral shoulder and wrist postures as well as reducing muscle activity of both the forearm and the shoulder (Sommerich et al., 2002; Dennerlein, 2006; Kumar and Kumar, 2008, Harvey, 1997). Other studies have shown that the design of the pointing device has little effect on neck and shoulder posture and muscle activity; however, they do have an effect on forearm muscle activity (Lee, 2005, 2008). Despite all of this work, few studies have investigated hand postures. Those that did investigated hand postures related only to the button design and placement (Lee et al., 2007) or the size of notebook mice (Oude Hengel et al., 2008). Overall, very little has been done to explore the effects of different pointing devices on hand or finger posture to provide a better link between the design of the device and effects on forearm muscle activity.Therefore, the goal of this study was to investigate the consequences of using four different computer pointing devices during typical computer tasks on the postures of the shoulder, wrist, and hand, as well as the muscle activity of the forearm and user perceptions of the devices. In a repeated measures experiment conducted in a laboratory environment, we evaluated four distinct device designs (a conventional mouse and three alternative pointing devices: a trackball mouse, a touchpad, and a rollermouse) placed on the work surface according to the users standard practices. We hypothesized that users would experience more non-neutral shoulder, wrist and finger postures, along with sustained forearm muscle load with some of the devices compared to the others.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Overall, the study demonstrates that different degrees of exposures to non-neutral postures and sustained muscle activity are dependent on the design and the placement of the pointing devices. The findings also suggest that hand postures should be monitored when evaluating pointing devices as the affordance of pointing devices can cause non-neutral finger and hand postures that induce significantly different forearm muscle activities.