@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Designing sustainable work systems: The need for a systems approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Describing the understanding of sustainability on different levels (society, corporation, work system).Discussing the similarities and differences between sustainability and human factors.Delivering a first frame work for designing sustainable work systems.Discussing the understanding of systems ergonomics in relation to sustainability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
System ergonomics,Sustainability,Sustainable work systems,Work system design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There is a growing discussion concerning sustainability. While this discussion was at first mainly focused on a society level – and sometimes regarding especially environmental problems, one can now see that this topic is of increasing relevance for companies worldwide and even the social dimension of this three pillar approach is gaining more and more importance. This leads to some questions: Is sustainability already a part of human factors thinking or do we have to further develop our discipline? How can we define sustainable work systems? What are the topics we have to consider? Do we need a new systems ergonomics perspective regarding whole value creation chains and a life-cycle perspective concerning products (and work systems)? How can we deal with potential contradictions about social, ecological, and economic goals?Discussing the relevance of sustainability for human factors means first of all to discuss the relevance of sustainability. In this paper sustainability shall be understood as the simultaneous pursuit of economic, ecological and social objectives with a development that “meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” (WCED, 1987) There are different reasons for an increasing interest in sustainability:•The current dramatic ecological changes,an increasingly critical discussion about the consequences of globalization,wrongly understood shareholder value concepts and the crisis of the financial markets,and – as a consequence – a growing demand for corporate social responsibility, including the need for a stakeholder orientation.From an ergonomics point of view aging workforces in Europe but also e.g. in China and other parts of the world are one reason among others why sustainability is also an important topic for human factors. Therefore, it is not surprising that various scientific societies such as the Italian, Nordic and German Human Factors Society organized congresses under the headline of sustainability. Even the 2012 congress of the International Ergonomics Association (IEA) in Recifé/Brazil dealt with this topic.On the one hand this may show a growing importance of sustainability also within our discipline. On the other hand there is a danger that sustainability is becoming a buzzword for all “modernistic” activities.Before asking whether sustainability is a strategic option for human factors we have to clarify the history and definition of sustainability.Sustainability (on a society level) is an old economic principle coming from forestry in the Middle Ages, when timber served as a main source for several economic processes (e.g. as energy source, building material etc.). The growth of population led to excessive overuse and clearings causing an economic and ecological crisis back then. As a consequence forestry anchored different regulations of felling and systematic afforestation allowing balancing the regeneration of timber resources and their use (Nutzinger, 1995). Sustainable forestry shows that sustainability is a primal economic principle and is finally necessary for the long-term survival of societies. Of course, our modern understanding of sustainability is much more complex than the example of forestry in the Middle Ages.Sustainable development (as a process) relies on three basic ideas (see Zink et al., 2008):•The focus on human needs: “Human beings are in the centre of concerns for sustainable development. They are entitled to a healthy life in harmony with nature” (UNCED, 1992).The normative claim for intra- and intergenerational fairness as it was stated in the well-known definition of sustainable development by the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED) in 1987 (WCED, 1987).And the concurrent combination of economic, ecological and social goals: the so-called three pillars of sustainable development, which should be considered equally (UNCED, 1992).Transferring this general definition on a corporate level (company level) leads to the concepts of “corporate sustainability”, coming along with the following definition elements (cp. Dyllick and Hockerts, 2002):•Not only economic but also social and environmental prerequisites and impacts as well as the interdependencies between them have to be taken into account.Corporate sustainability requires a long-term business orientation as a basis for satisfying stakeholders' needs now and in the future.The rule to live on the income from capital, not the capital itself has to be applied for all kinds of capital: financial, natural, human, and social capital.The discussion about the relevance of sustainability for human factors and ergonomics is also influenced by the definition of our discipline:1)If we look at the very early statements of Jastrzebowski (1857), we can find the following definitions of work and ergonomics: “The exertion of our vital forces for the common, which is called work […] by which we and our fellow creatures attain to all that is good for ourself and the common welfare. The Science of Work […] we shall venture to call Ergonomics”.In a definition of the German Human Factors and Ergonomics Society (Gesellschaft für Arbeitswissenschaft) (GfA, 1999), we find: “Ergonomics (or human factors) integrates social, economic, and ecological goals and is obligated to concepts, which are useful for all stakeholders”.And the International Ergonomics Association (IEA) defined in 2000: “Ergonomics (or human factors) is the scientific discipline concerned with the interactions among humans and other elements of a system, and the profession that applies theory, principles, data and methods to design in order to optimize human well being and overall system performance” (IEA, 2000).All three definitions have something in common with the idea of sustainability as they all share the joint focus on satisfying human needs while taking a systemic perspective that comprehensively covers the interdependencies and interrelations of human activities with their surrounding systems (according to the three pillar model of sustainability).Referring to the definition of corporate sustainability given by Dyllik and Hockerts and their understanding of sustainability as an approach to preserve or enlarge different forms of capital, human factors and ergonomics is mainly concerned with human and social capital – but also has to consider the two other dimensions of sustainability. Summarizing the definition of human capital in literature (see e.g. Osranek and Zink, 2013) one can find three main definition elements: The core refers to all individual social, professional and methodical skills and competencies useful and valuable for the organization, but also the health and motivation of individuals to make a contribution. Social capital is understood as an ability of actors to gain benefits by their membership in social networks or other social structures (Portes, 1998; Baker, 2000). Coleman (2000, pp. 27f) has indicated that human capital is also generated by social capital in the family and community. But social capital can be influenced by human capital as well, e.g. social competences as a part of human capital are necessary to use social networks and to build up trust in other people (Lewis and Weigert, 1985) respectively human capital can facilitate the effective use of social capital for task performance (Pil and Leana, 2009). These very few definitions show the interdependencies between human and social capital and first hints for designing sustainable work systems to preserve these categories of capital.As human factors is dealing (among others) with work systems it might be helpful to look at the current discussion about sustainable work systems (Docherty et al., 2009): It is not surprising that again the concurrent development of economic, ecological, human, and social resources engaged in work processes is the main goal. Therefore, sustainable work systems have to be able to function in their environment and to achieve economic or operational objectives, while there is also a development in various human and social resources engaged in their operations. Employees' capacity to deal with new demands in this context grows through concepts of work-based learning, development, and well-being. The growth of social resources is secured through equal and open interaction among various stakeholders, leading to better mutual understanding and a greater capacity for collaboration. The diversity and regeneration of ecological resources is safeguarded as well. There is no simple satisfaction of certain needs of certain stakeholders, but the need to satisfy the needs of many stakeholders. Here again the focus should not only be on short-term, static efficiencies, such as productivity and profitability, but also on long-term, dynamic efficiencies such as learning and innovation. There are no simple trade-offs between short-term and long-term goals or between different stakeholders, but there is a need for a just balance in development for them all. One important task is to bring the (often more short-term) requirements of competitiveness and those representing a long-term sustainability together. Sustainable work systems aim to regenerate all resources utilized. The development of one type of resource does not exploit resources of other types. And a sustainable work system does not build its existence on the exploitation of external resources. Exploitation of external resources can be seen in different ways: Outsourcing dangerous or less paid work to another company working under the same roof, or outsourcing work to other – mostly developing – countries with less pay and without “restrictions” of work and environmental laws (as in some Industrial Developing Zones of Industrially Developing Countries (IDCs)).These definition elements are based on the following basic assumptions formulated by Docherty et al. (2009, p. 7):•The opportunity to develop as a person, a professional and a member of a society through work experiences is a basic human right.The sustainability of human and social resources is one of the foundations of economic sustainability.Sustainability at work is one of the foundations for social development and sustainability of whole societies.Sustainability of human and social resources is needed to secure ecological sustainability, “because only people and groups who operate sustainably are able to grasp, prioritize, and work toward ecological sustainability.” (Docherty et al., 2009)If we now ask whether this understanding of sustainability is already a part of human factors thinking, we can conclude that theoretically the basic assumptions as well as all three pillars are included in “traditional” ergonomics approaches – in one way or another – as the following examples show:•The design of work processes is realized under time aspects (productivity; economic objectives).Job satisfaction and personal growth are also objectives for job design (social objectives), and“environmental” aspects such as noise or pollution are considered in the design of work systems (ecological objectives).But there are also some questions:•Does Human Factors call for a concurrent realization of all three dimensions of sustainability?Do we have a broad systems approach and a respective time dimension? Do we just design for the present or do we also care about the future working conditions of employees?Do we not exploit external resources (e.g. in international value creation chains)?How do we deal with changed basic conditions such as short-term orientation, work intensification, permanent change?Some first ideas shall be described in the following chapter.Describing a first frame work for the design of sustainable work systems from a human factors perspective one has to regard among others:•the human and social capital e.g. skills, knowledge, health, motivation, participation, trustworthiness, identification, common mental models, group memory,the changed frame conditions in different parts of the world: e.g. increasing short term orientation and work intensification, demographic changes, globalization, permanent change as normal situation,a systemic and holistic approach regarding whole value creation chains including all working conditions along the value creation especially those in IDCs but also precarious work situations in Western countries,a life-cycle-perspective regarding products (and work systems) design starting with the design process to manufacturing, assembly, maintenance and repair, disassembly, reuse and recycling,the inclusion of soft facts like leadership style and corporate culture (e.g. trust worthiness or the impacts on society e.g. because people who work in a sustainable “environment” learn how to grasp, prioritize, and work toward ecological and economical sustainability.the understanding that social sustainability has to be part of a three pillar model because social sustainability as “stand alone solution” will have the problem of acceptance – if not given as a legal demand,but there are also paradoxes one has to deal with because of goal conflicts (see e.g. Ehnert, 2009) and also knowing-doing gaps (see e.g. Pfeffer and Sutton, 1999).To cope with these demands human factors can contribute some concepts, but also has to develop new ones. Some of the known concepts have a strong connection to the demographic development in many countries and can be summarized on an individual level under the headlines of “workability” and “employability” (see Ilmarinen, 1999). These concepts shall be roughly described as examples for existing approaches.Using workability in a more narrow understanding (in the sense of having the health, physical, psychological and social functional capacity for being able to do one's work) is very much related to the concept of Corporate Health Management (CHM). CHM is more than “traditional” Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) or corporate health promotion concepts, because it is based on the health definition of the World Health Organization (WHO) and on a systematic management approach (Zink and Thul, 2006). The WHO health definition is not only based on the absence of disease or infirmity but defines health as a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being (WHO, 1946). A systematic management approach means e.g. to have health as part of the corporations' mission statement, to have a respective deployment process including the needed resources, to have a rewarding system for managers including health aspects, to have a health organization including participatory approaches such as health circles and to measure the results as part of a continuous improvement process (Zink and Thul, 2006).Taking a broader approach of workability as realized in the concept of Ilmarinen health (in the sense of functional capacity) is “only” the basement of his house of workability which also includes professional competence, values (attitudes and motivation) and the demands of work such as work conditions and work content, work community and organization supervisory work and management (Ilmarinen, 2006).This understanding of workability includes the concept of employability which is also discussed separately in HRM. Employability describes “an individual's ability to gain initial employment, maintain employment, move between roles within the same organization, obtain new employment if required and (ideally) secure suitable and sufficient fulfilling work, in other words – their employability more important than the simple state of being employed” (McGrath, 2009 referring to Hillage and Pollard, 1998). This definition reveals that employability is much more than professional skills and competences. Taking a narrow approach with a focus on the individual one has to add interdisciplinary social and methodological competences as well as respective attitudes (such as commitment or readiness to learn). In a broader perspective “the interaction of individual and external factors affecting the individual's ability to operate effectively within the labor market” have to be regarded (McQuaid and Lindsay, 2005, p. 207). Discussing the issue of social justice in the context of unemployment (in Europe) Schneider and Otto go beyond employability in using a capability approach to discuss viable perspectives for overcoming the fragmented employment biographies which are in the center of employability and to ensure that every citizen has the opportunity to live a good life (Schneider and Otto, 2009). But also in a more narrow understanding of employability e.g. attitudes are influenced by external factors “like a culture in which work is encouraged and supported within the family” (McQuaid and Lindsay, 2005, p. 209). For the discussion in the context of Human Factors (and HRM) the narrow definition leads to the question, what are organizations doing to enlarge the employability of their workers. As discussed in Becker's definition of human capital one has to differ between (company-) specific and more general competences which increase the employability in the labor market and therefore can contribute to a reduction of the feeling of insecurity, because to be employed is to be at risk, but to be employable is to be secure. From an economic perspective it is obvious that employers are not so much interested in this form of employability. Therefore, this will mainly be the responsibility of the employees.Seeing the growing dynamic of environments leading to a more or less permanent change, organizations should take care of the fact that their employees learn to learn and develop competencies “on the job”. One Human Factor's concept to support this process is generating working conditions which promote learning. “Individual learning in a work system is supported by varied and rich work experiences: by possibilities to have new experiences and to integrate thoughts and feelings from those experiences to what has been learned before. … More precisely, work that is variable and complex, transparent and informating, participative and collaborative, challenging yet manageable, and also personally and socially rewarding has been defined as work supporting learning or individual development” (Kira and Frieling, 2005, p. 2; Skule, 2004). In addition to this individual learning there is also a need for collective learning with a growing importance referring to the demographic changes and the danger to lose knowledge. In the frame of a sustainable work system a concurrent learning on the individual and group level has to be realized in a way, “in which the development of one contributes to the development of all” (Kira and Frieling, 2005, p. 4).Based on the assumption of a more or less permanent change, a sustainable work organization must be defined “as an organization that is continuously changing and developing” (Kira and Van Eijnatten, 2009, p. 234). Therefore, work systems have to be designed, which “promote employees' mental models and comprehension of work to grow more complex”, which “enable employees to take actions and learn to manage in various work situations”, and which “support employees' sense of meaningfulness at work” (Kira and Van Eijnatten, 2009, p. 236). This is not only relevant on an individual level but also in work groups, teams and networks (Kira and Van Eijnatten, 2009, p. 237). Again this must be realized without consuming human or social resources. Therefore, respective coping strategies for stress have to be provided. Within the demographic changes in addition the relationship between social capital and tacit knowledge gains importance (see e.g. Wang et al., 2009). This understanding of a sustainable work organization can be compared with the paradigms of resilience engineering but does not only focus on safety management, but on the general ability to cope effectively with complex situations (Woods and Hollnagel, 2006).Collective learning in an international context e.g. developing products in a 24-h day using the different time zones around the globe has additional challenges like cultural differences. Here the development of common mental models as described in Riemers' definition of social capital is essential for the quality of results (Riemer, 2005, pp. 129ff).Continuous change and complexity need – as described above – growing competencies, but also the design of socially responsible restructuring processes as e.g. described in the European project “Health in Restructuring (HIRES)” (European Expert Group on Health in Restructuring, 2009).Transferring workability and employability to less developed countries – taking e.g. the examples of so called Export Processing Zones (EPZs) in those countries – leads to the question: How can we contribute to sustainable working conditions in these zones or countries? A lot of research has been carried out how to improve working conditions especially in those companies producing e.g. sportswear or computer for Western companies (Locke and Romis, 2007). Voluntary self obligations in terms of codes of conduct have not been successful, even if they have been combined with “traditional” auditing processes: “Private, voluntary compliance programs, promoted by global corporations and nongovernment organizations alike, have produced only modest and uneven improvements in working conditions and labor rights in most global supply chains” (Locke et al., 2009, p. 319). So far research and experience is showing that “real” improvements in working conditions can only be gained if at the same time a contribution to the enhancement of competitiveness can be realized (see e.g. Locke et al., 2009). The responsibility for such approaches lies primarily not with IDCs but with Western companies, where the economic results are allocated. As defined before, a sustainable work system should not build its existence on the exploitation of external resources. If companies are doing so – and this is one of the negative sides of globalization – they should accept the responsibility for the working conditions in e.g. EPZs. This would mean not to concentrate on work analysis only for one's own company but to look at the whole value creation chain. To avoid public pressure companies should act proactive and then at least they do not lose their image. This new approach for Ergonomics could be named “Supply Chain Ergonomics”.But working conditions as described for EPZs can also be found in Western countries e.g. suppliers of huge food retailers being in an intensive price competition (see e.g. Hertel, 2010). Some of those companies also do not allow the election of worker's representatives which is part of the ILO International Labour Standards (ILO, 2011). Again designing sustainable work systems has to look at the whole value creation chain.Designing sustainable work systems also has to include life-cycle-perspectives especially of products (Zink, 2011a; Zink and Eberhard, 2006). To create possibilities of holistic work contents and abilities to develop new competencies on the job can depend on the “architecture” of a product – e.g. a product build up on modules delivers more chances for holistic work contents in assembly. But here again the whole value creating process i.e. the whole life cycle has to be regarded: Not only the development process itself and manufacturing and assembly are part of the analyses but also maintenance and repair, disassembly, reuse and recycling have to be considered regarding working conditions – as well as (negative) impacts on the users. As discussed above, the suppliers have to be included too. This leads to an approach which is called life-cycle-impact-assessment and used e.g. for ecological issues. Until now only a few papers exist describing a framework for social life cycle impact assessment (e.g. Dreyer et al., 2006). There is no doubt that such assessments cost time and money, but as formulated by Pfeffer when he analyzed the relevance of social sustainability: “Why are polar bears, for instance, or even milk jugs more important than people […]?” (Pfeffer, 2010, p. 35) Again a new sub-discipline of Ergonomics could be “Life-Cycle Ergonomics”.The necessity for sustainable work systems can also be discussed regarding their impact on society. As people spend most of their (awaken) lifetime in business, the role of organizations to promote sustainability in a society might be questioned. If people are not educated about a sustainable way of handling of resources yet the world of work is the most appropriate chance to learn sustainability. Because why should people act sustainably as customers or citizens if they never had a chance to have role models? But to get a respective attitude depends on the fact whether they are treated as “relevant” human resources at work. This includes not being a production factor like material or capital but being accepted as a unique human being with the chance of personal growth at and through work. Experiencing such a situation including participation will also contribute to play a better role as a citizen (e.g. in IDCs) (Zink, 2006). But the demographic change is a societal problem too, and human factors concepts in the frame of HRM can contribute to the extension of workability. Therefore, such investments in “human capital” cannot be understood as “only” altruistic. There is in addition a growing research showing that investing in human resources at least does not reduce positive financial results (Zink, 2011b). There are even authors – not coming from Human Factors but from management like Gary Hamel (2007) – who believe that investing in “human resources” is the best (or only) way to survive in international competition. Similar arguments are coming from O'Toole and Lawler in analyzing the “New American Workplace” (O'Toole and Lawler, 2006). Both publications refer to the concept of High Involvement Teams as part of a High Involvement Organization. These teams are characterized by (Gephart and Van Buren, 1996; pp. 22f):•participation in decision makingautonomy regarding one's own work and methodsopen communication with all relevant stakeholdersincentives to promote partnershipIn this sense there is some similarity with the above discussed conditions for sustainable work systems, if these approaches are not exploiting human resource but developing them.Sustainable work is only possible if there is work which contributes to earn one's living and to have a chance of personal growth. Insofar, sustainable work has been defined earlier as being competitive – but not competitive in consuming human resources. Therefore, not only work design but also respective labor laws based on ILO (2011) or OECD (2011) definitions of decent work have to be realized. This is not only a topic of IDCs but also a growing topic in so called developed countries where there are a number of circumstances that precarious work is growing and one job is no longer enough to earn one's living. Here, the measures increasing the Quality of Working Life gain a new importance (Zink, 2011c).This first global frame for designing sustainable work systems from a human factors perspective shows that the development of new methods or the further development of “old” methods is necessary. Two examples may be given: We need a holistic work system analyses for the whole value creation chain including all dimensions of sustainability and we need a life cycle assessment based on human factors criteria. To be successful in this field we also have to adopt human resource management concepts like training programs for sustainable behavior, again including all three dimensions and participatory problem solving approaches. We need training concepts for coping strategies dealing with psychological stress in complex working situations – but also for design approaches for the reduction of complexity. Complexity is created in workplaces where the boundaries of work “vanish”, where we have flexible, lateral organizations with reduced rules and structures, where responsibilities and tasks become impossible to predefine. Therefore, “the amount of possibilities is increasing and the need for personal judgments at work exposes employees more to social and performance demands” (Docherty et al., 2002, p. 8). And last but not least, leadership training based on well known concepts like “Investors in People” (Investors in People, 2012) or “Great Places to work” (GPTW, 2012).At the end it has to be re-called that the realization of sustainability is not free of contradictions or paradoxes. Therefore, the process of introducing such concepts needs the idea of balancing between different approaches and objectives. Lifvergren et al. have shown respective concepts for a healthcare project in Sweden (Lifvergren et al., 2009; pp. 180f):•Balancing the speed of change: There is a clear trade-off between the speed of change and the quality of change defined as shared ownership and understanding of decisions and policies.Balancing the different interests among key stakeholders (and system components): Inviting all stakeholders and giving them the possibility to integrate own ideas makes balancing easier.Balancing the short term and the long term: Short term results are necessary to foster motivation and involvement, but have to be aligned with long term strategies.Balancing static and dynamic efficiency: health systems demand a high level of productivity; to reach these results individual and organizational learning are necessary.Balancing specialization and integration: in healthcare this is the balancing between standardized pathways and individual needs of patients.So far the above discussion has shown that there are a lot of interdependencies which need a systems approach. Based on the definition of sustainability11Besides the basic definition of sustainability referred to in this paper, there is also a differentiation between a “weak” and a “strong” sustainability, which includes the question whether or not natural capital (e.g. natural resources or ecosystems as a whole) can be substituted by man-made capital (e.g. assets, technology or knowledge) (see Zink et al., 2008, p. 5f).we have to cope with economic, social and ecological goals the same time. To visualize these it is better to have, instead of the three pillars, a triangle-model as it clarifies the interdependencies (and possible conflicts) between the three dimensions and it can also include the time dimension (Fig. 1).If we refer to this time dimension for a life-cycle-perspective of product- and work-systems-design we get a second example for interdependencies: The interdependency between the product design or architecture and the possibilities for designing work systems and work contents, respectively the user-friendliness of products not only for users but also for the people producing, assembling, maintaining, repairing and dismantling these products.This second example shows that this approach goes beyond the limits of a socio-technical or socio-technological system (Zink, 2000) understood as one organization. While we generally discuss macro-, meso- or micro-levels of an organization within systems ergonomics (Friesdorf et al., 2007) we surely need a broader perspective when looking at the interdependencies found in international supply chains. This means to look at systems of systems analyzing and evaluating the working conditions in the whole value creation chain.Using only these two examples of sustainability and human factors shows that these challenges go far beyond our traditional understanding of ergonomics or human factors and also systems ergonomics. Globalization demands a broader perspective which – if we accept sustainable development as a sense making concept – should have consequences for the discipline. There are not too many ergonomists who are able to combine the three dimensions of sustainability because their training has been focused “only” on the social dimension of this concept. Systems Ergonomics dealing with interdependencies is a valuable basis for this further development when we review our training concepts to have at least some ergonomists who are able to include the economic and ecological dimension in their concepts and to look at whole value creation chains. At least in Europe, there is a growing interest in asking about the working conditions of companies but also the working conditions of their suppliers. Here, Systems Ergonomics in a further developed understanding could offer assistance which is only partly available on the market of consulting. This implies further research in this field which again demands a broader qualification.These few thoughts show that dealing with sustainability may demand a re-thinking of the definition of systems ergonomics (as it has been done in the discussion about the future of ergonomics (Dul et al., 2012)).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
