@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dutch police officers' preparation and performance of their arrest and self-defence skills: A questionnaire study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Officers are unsatisfied with the training of their arrest and self-defence skills.More experienced officers are more critical towards the taught skills.More experienced officers reported better performance but less use of taught skills.Results plead for more training, reality-based practice, and teaching other skills.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Anxiety,Deliberate practice,Perceptual-motor performance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We investigated how Dutch police officers perceive their preparation for arrest and self-defence skills (ASDS) and their ability to manage violence on duty. Furthermore, we assessed whether additional experience (i.e., by having encountered violence on duty or by practicing martial arts) and self-perceived anxiety have an influence on these perceptions. Results of an online questionnaire (n = 922) showed that having additional experience was associated with self-perceived better performance. Officers who experience anxiety more often, on the other hand, reported more problems. Although most officers report sufficiently effective performance on duty, they, especially those with additional experience, feel that training frequency is too low and that the currently taught ASDS are only moderately usable (at least with the current amount of training). Based on the results, we suggest that increasing officers' ASDS experience, teaching officers to perform with high anxiety, or reconsidering the taught skills, may be necessary to further improve performance of police officers on duty.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Although police work is largely sedentary (Anderson and Plecas, 2000), police officers occasionally have to deal with violence. Violence with which officers are confronted ranges from verbal threat to actual shoot-outs. Armed situations, especially handgun shootings, have already received considerable attention in the literature (Morrison and Vila, 1998; Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2010, 2011; Oudejans, 2008). However, officers are more frequently confronted with unarmed physical violence (Timmer, 2005). For example, officers may be confronted with suspects who threaten them, resist arrest, or punch them. In these situations, officers have to perform with appropriate force without using a handgun. Over the past decades violence against police officers has steadily increased, resulting in more work-related injuries and higher recovery and replacement costs (Timmer and Pronk, 2011). At the same time, however, there is little information about officers' ability to adequately manage violence on duty or factors that may influence this ability. Against this background – and to open up new ways for improving police effectiveness – the current study investigated Dutch police officers' perceptions of their preparation and performance of arrest and self-defence skills (ASDS).In preparation for violent situations, police officers in the Netherlands train a fixed set of arrest and self-defence skills ranging from techniques to control a suspect to actual combat techniques such as punching and kicking. For more threatening situations, officers have the option to use a short baton or pepper spray (cf. Nieuwenhuys et al., 2009). Dutch ASDS have been developed as part of a police assessment program on competences concerning violence control (Witzier, 2006). The motivation for this program is to ensure that officers have a certain level of competence in the line of duty. Each year, they have to pass an exam to be allowed to conduct active service. The exam consists of a theoretical test, a handgun shooting test, an ASDS test and a physical fitness test. Regarding ASDS, officers operate in pairs in which they have to execute prescribed skills on one or two colleagues. Besides the exam itself, officers receive two or three practice sessions per year, adding up to about 4 to 6 h of ASDS training per year (see Timmer and Pronk, 2011 for comparable situations in other EU countries).Training ASDS for 4 to 6 h per year seems hardly sufficient to reach a high level of expertise (cf. Ericsson et al., 1993). Indeed, it is well-known that individuals need many hours of deliberate practice (Ericsson, 1996) and hundreds of thousands of repetitions (e.g., Crossman, 1959; Kottke, 1980) to become an expert in perceptual-motor skills. For instance, Ericsson et al. (1993) found that expert musicians spent about 25 h of practice a week (over ten years), whereas amateur musicians did not spend more than 2 h a week. Because Dutch ASDS training does not even reach 2 h a week, it seems that officers are not optimally prepared to manage violence on duty. Moreover, performing in violent situations is often accompanied by increased pressure (e.g., Anderson et al., 2002) whereas typical ASDS training sessions in the Netherlands take place under low-pressure circumstances. This discrepancy between circumstances on duty and during training makes it even harder (next to the low training frequency) for officers to perform effectively in high-pressure situations on duty. Indeed, several studies have shown that officers do not perform as well under high-pressure circumstances as they do under low-pressure (training) circumstances (e.g., Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2010; Renden et al., 2014).Given the limited number of training hours as well as the difficulty of performing under pressure, it is worth investigating how experience (in performing ASDS) and anxiety are related to the perceived ability to perform effectively on duty. Insight into these issues may give leads to improve police training to better prepare officers for violence during their work. As no institution in the Netherlands has a systematic and conclusive overview of the use of legal force on duty (Timmer, 2005), we aimed to perform our study on a large scale to provide data based on officers' experiences from their work. Therefore, using an online questionnaire, we investigated police officers' perceptions of how well they feel prepared and able to manage violence on duty. We further explored the effects of i) additional experience with ASDS (e.g., obtained by encountering violence on duty or by practicing martial arts), and ii) how often officers experience anxiety in the line of duty (e.g., during the arrest of an aggressive suspect).Officers may gain more experience with ASDS (or comparable skills) in other ways than in regular police training. For instance, officers gain experience when they frequently have to apply ASDS on duty. Or they could train comparable skills in martial arts (such as kickboxing or krav maga) during their leisure time. Because additional experience11In the remainder of the article, ‘additional experience’ refers specifically to: (a) experience with violent situations on duty; and (b) experience with martial arts. General working experience as a police officer (in years) is not included in this factor.presumably leads to a higher level of skill (cf. Ericsson, 1996), we expect perceived real-life ASDS performance of officers with additional experience (on duty or martial arts) to be better than that of officers with no additional experience. Whether this is the case and whether officers with additional experience only apply the taught ASDS or also resort to alternative skills remains to be determined. Because officers receive limited practice, additional experience (on duty or martial arts) will often be greater than ASDS experience, which makes it plausible that officers might apply alternative skills rather than the fixed set of ASDS that is taught in police training. Thus, how Dutch officers perceive their ASDS training and how the assumed shortcomings in ASDS training become manifest on duty, could depend on the degree to which officers have additional experience.ASDS situations are often accompanied by increased pressure, possibly leading to anxiety (Anderson et al., 2002). Anxiety has often been put forward as an important influential factor regarding how well officers perform in the line of duty (e.g., Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2010). Several experimental studies have found that officers performed worse in high-anxiety situations compared to low-anxiety situations concerning handgun shooting (e.g., Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2010, 2011: Nieuwenhuys et al., 2012; Oudejans, 2008) as well as execution of ASDS (e.g., Nieuwenhuys et al., 2009; Renden et al., 2014). However, whether these effects can also be observed in officers' perception of their actual performance on duty, remains to be verified.Concerning situations that are potentially suitable for ASDS, officers may experience anxiety, for instance, during large fights, while arresting aggressive suspects (especially because of capricious behaviour of the suspect), or when acting without a partner (Anderson et al., 2002; Blijendaal, 2006). Given the established impact of anxiety on police officers' performance, how Dutch officers perceive their ASDS training and how the assumed shortcomings in ASDS training become manifest on duty, could depend on how often officers experience anxiety in the line of duty.Officers train their ASDS (against non-lethal violence) very little and several experiments have shown that officers perform worse in high-pressure circumstances (as on duty) than they do in training circumstances (e.g., Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2010, 2011; Nieuwenhuys et al., 2009; Renden et al., 2014). This study aimed to investigate how these matters relate with officers' perceived ability to perform effectively on duty, with a large sample of officers with varying levels of experience (e.g., years, situations). Our first aim was to investigate police officers' perceptions of how well they feel prepared and able to manage violence on duty. Our second aim was to explore whether and how additional experience influences these perceptions. Our third aim was to investigate whether and how anxiety influences these perceptions.On the basis of previous research, we had the following expectations. Regarding general attitude towards preparation and performance, we expected officers to be critical towards their preparation, especially towards the number of training hours (e.g., Witzier, 2006). Nevertheless, because officers are educated to perform at a certain level and they are generally able to perform their duties, we expected that they would still perceive their overall performance to be sufficiently effective. Furthermore, we expected that officers' perceived performance effectiveness would be positively influenced by additional experience (e.g., Ericsson, 1996), and that it would be negatively influenced by anxiety (e.g., Renden et al., 2014). In addition, we expected that more experienced officers22In the remainder of the article, we refer to officers with or without additional experience with violence or martial arts as more experienced officers and less experienced officers, respectively.would report applying alternative skills (instead of the taught ASDS) more often than less experienced officers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Our results showed that having additional experience was associated with better performance. Officers who experienced anxiety more often, on the other hand, reported more problems. Although most officers report sufficiently effective performance, they, especially those with additional experience, feel that training frequency is too low and they reported that the currently taught ASDS are only moderately useful (at least with the current amount of training). As such, ASDS training may need reconsideration. First, officers' experience would increase when they receive more training sessions. Second, quality of training is likely to improve when they are more comparable to the high-pressure situations that officers face in the line of duty (including realistic scenarios with actors, threat of pain [e.g., electrical knife; Renden et al., 2014]). Third, the currently used skills seem to be only moderately useful (at least with the current amount of training) in the line of duty. We suggest to consider teaching officers more basic reflex-like skills that may be easier to learn and execute in real-life situations. These suggestions could help to further improve police performance and reduce risk of injury.