@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An implementation evaluation of a qualitative culture assessment tool

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Evaluates a qualitative tool for assessing safety culture as it impacts on MSD.Cultural advancement was assessed across nine aspects in two organisations.Different safety culture aspects develop at different levels of advancement.There are important prerequisites for using the tool to assess MSD culture.The tool could be considered as part of a suite of methods to manage MSD risk.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Health and safety,Safety culture,MSD,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Safety culture has been identified as a critical element of healthy and safe workplaces and as such warrants the attention of ergonomists involved in occupational health and safety (OHS). This study sought to evaluate a tool for assessing organisational safety culture as it impacts a common OHS problem: musculoskeletal disorders (MSD). The level of advancement across nine cultural aspects was assessed in two implementation site organisations. These organisations, in residential healthcare and timber processing, enabled evaluation of the tool in contrasting settings, with reported MSD rates also high in both sectors. Interviews were conducted with 39 managers and workers across the two organisations. Interview responses and company documentation were compared by two researchers to the descriptor items for each MSD culture aspect. An assignment of the level of advancement, using a five stage framework, was made for each aspect. The tool was readily adapted to each implementation site context and provided sufficient evidence to assess their levels of advancement. Assessments for most MSD culture aspects were in the mid to upper levels of advancement, although the levels differed within each organisation, indicating that different aspects of MSD culture, as with safety culture, develop at a different pace within organisations. Areas for MSD culture improvement were identified for each organisation. Reflections are made on the use and merits of the tool by ergonomists for addressing MSD risk.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Safety culture has been identified as a ‘critical element of healthy and safe workplaces’ (Blewett et al., 2012; Zohar, 2010), and as such warrants the attention of ergonomists and others tasked with injury prevention (Bentley and Tappin, 2010). However, the concept of safety culture, while an attractive idea (Hopkins, 2006), remains for many a fuzzy psychological construct (Guldenmund, 2010) with little apparent practical value. Indeed, the practical value for health and safety culture within everyday workplace health and safety problems has, with rare exceptions (Lee et al., 2010; Arcury, O'Hara, Grzwacz, Isom, Chen and Quandt, 2012), been largely ignored by researchers (Bentley and Tappin, 2010). This paper presents an evaluation of the implementation of a qualitative tool for assessing organisational safety culture as it impacts a common occupational health and safety problem: musculoskeletal disorders. The motivation for this exercise is to contribute to the development of practitioner tools to assess cultural aspects of the work system.Organisational safety culture is defined by Cooper (2000, p 111) as ‘ … the sub-facet of organisational culture that is thought to affect members’ attitudes and behaviour in relation to an organisation's health and safety performance’. For some, safety culture is considered as the next era of safety, as the impact of the management systems approach on significant advances in health and safety performance appears to have reached a plateau (Hudson, 2007). Others see safety culture as a means of enlivening safety management and creating a working system (Guldenmund, 2010; Reason, 1997). Indeed, safety culture has become a familiar term and the challenge for researchers and practitioners is to leverage the growing body of knowledge in this field into practical value towards improved health and safety performance. This value is apparent for high-hazard industries (Guldenmund, 2007), such as nuclear safety (Wilpert, 2001), oil and gas (Cox and Cheyne, 2000; Høivik et al., 2009), aviation (Wiegmann, Zhang, von Thaden, Sharma, and Gibbons, 2004; Gordon et al., 2007), rail (Farrington-Darby et al., 2005; Blewett et al., 2012) and construction (Choudhry et al., 2007; Dedobbleer and Béland, 1991), where safety culture has been a focus for identifying and addressing suboptimal conditions.Perspectives on what elements comprise the construct of safety culture differ between commentators working in this field. Cooper (2000) conceptualised safety culture as a multi-faceted construct, comprising interacting psychological, behavioural and situational factors. Reason's ‘just culture’, incorporating reporting, learning, just and flexible culture aspects, is highly influential within the safety management profession (Reason, 1998), and is perhaps the most useful contemporary framework for applying the concept of safety culture to improving safety performance. Wiegmann et al. (2004) identified from the literature at least five global components or indicators of safety culture: “organisational commitment”, “management involvement”, “employee empowerment”, “reward systems”, and “reporting systems”. Organisational, or management, commitment concerns the willingness of senior management to identify health and safety as a core value or guiding principle of the organisation (Wiegmann et al., 2004; Lekka and Sugden, 2011). This commitment at senior levels is argued to be the single most critical factor in a positive safety culture as it facilitates sufficient resourcing and support for the development and implementation of health and safety initiatives.Most conceptualisations emphasise the critical link between safety culture and the health and safety management systems, through shared values and beliefs which influence behaviour patterns and the development of health and safety activities in the organisation (Bentley and Tappin, 2010; Blewett and Shaw, 1997). In their guide for managing OHS, the Health and Safety Executive (HSE, 2013) in the UK state that ‘effectively managing for health and safety is not just about having a management or safety management system. The success of whatever process or system is in place still hinges on the attitudes and behaviours of people in the organisation’ (p 12). The health and safety management system itself will also influence the work climate of the organisation (Clarke, 2000).It is through this association between the health and safety management system and the organisation's culture that the potential value of safety culture towards the management of MSD can be understood. While the large majority of organisations will have appropriately documented systems for managing MSD, these will only be effective where the culture of the organisation supports the health and safety management system (Bentley and Tappin, 2010). For example, where systems to capture reporting of minor incidents and near-miss events are supported by a strong reporting culture, the organisation's learning about MSD will be most effective given the gradual onset of musculoskeletal symptoms and their multifactorial causation. In organisations where cultural factors do not support a reporting culture, such as where contract workers are strongly discouraged by co-workers and management to report safety incidents because of risk of contract penalties, reporting systems will be far less effective.Work-related MSD are a consequence of sub-optimal conditions in work characteristics and organisational design, usually occurring over a prolonged period, which may also combine with individual factors. Over the past two decades, work-related MSD research has increasingly focused on three groups of risk factors – individual, psychosocial, and physical, as well as interactions between them, in seeking to explain the continued high reported incidence of MSD in many industry sectors internationally (Bernard, 1997; NRC-IOM, 2001; Tappin et al., 2008). While risk factors from all three groups can be considered as independent predictors of MSD, it is now well accepted that it is a combination of risk factors that result in MSD rather than one element of risk (Bongers, Ijmker, van den Heuvel, Blatter, 2006; Da Costa and Vieira, 2010; Hauke et al., 2011; NRC-IOM, 2001; Silverstein and Clark, 2004). Causation models continue to develop from industry-based research that also highlight some of the broader interactions that can occur in occupational settings, creating conditions under which MSD may be more likely to occur (for example, Faucett, 2005; Karsh, 2006; Lee et al., 2010; NRC-IOM, 2001; Tappin et al., 2008). Examples of such conditions might include supply chain influences on work scheduling and task exposure, and impacts of remunerations systems on workload, work pace and work hours.In line with these advances in knowledge of MSD causation, intervention design has similarly changed among practitioners tasked with preventing workplace MSD (Denis et al., 2008). Furthermore, many practitioners understand that an MSD prevention intervention will be less effective where cultural factors are not considered (Fathallah, 2010). As Blewett and Shaw (1997) have argued, practitioners need to be aware that irrespective of the technical content of potential ergonomics solutions, consideration of the wider socio-technical workplace systems is an essential part of their successful implementation.Assessing cultural factors in the process of analysis, design, implementation and evaluation is easier said than done, however. Indeed, many practitioners have expressed their frustration to these researchers at the lack of practical tools to facilitate investigations of MSD that address the broader work system elements, such as culture (Bentley et.al, 2012). The response has been to undertake research that aims to identify an effective method for assessing an organisation's ‘MSD culture’; those aspects of health and safety culture that relate to MSD risk factors and the prevention of MSD. This paper describes the evaluation of the implementation of a tool designed to assess MSD culture, using two New Zealand organisations (implementation sites) facing relatively high risk of MSD as the implementation sites for the tool: a timber processing company and a residential care provider. The MSD cultural assessment tool (MSD CAT) used in this research was derived from a qualitative safety culture assessment tool developed by the authors and evaluated in earlier research (Bentley and Tappin, 2008).The qualitative methodology for the MSD Culture Assessment Tool (MSD CAT) is based on a recently published framework for the qualitative assessment of health and safety culture, which has been found to be effective in identifying the level of cultural advancement for a broad range of health and safety culture aspects (Bentley and Tappin, 2008). Adapted from a set of cultural descriptors developed for the oil industry (Parker et al., 2006), the approach is based on the conceptualisation of health and safety culture as a multi-dimensional concept, for which different cultural aspects (e.g. reporting culture, communication culture, employee involvement in MSD prevention) may develop at different levels of advancement. The framework consists of a range of concrete (e.g. documents) and abstract (e.g. experiences) aspects of safety culture, and provides descriptors from which levels of health and safety cultural advancement can be determined for a number of aspects of safety culture.The purpose of these descriptors is to guide assessment of the level of advancement across five distinct levels (expanded from Westrum (1993) three levels of safety culture advancement), ranging from Pathological to Generative (Parker et al., 2006):•Pathological (who cares about safety as long as we are not caught?)Reactive (safety is important: we do a lot every time we have an injury)Calculative (we have systems in place to manage all hazards)Proactive (we try to anticipate safety problems before they arise)Generative (health and safety is how we do business around here)By way of illustration, Table 1outlines the descriptors used to rate the level of advancement in one of the nine aspects, ‘MSD reporting’.The tool user bases their assessment of advancement on each safety culture aspect by comparing data collected against the tool's descriptors. For the purposes of the current study, these levels of advancement were adapted for the MSD CAT tool to fit the MSD context:•Pathological (who cares about MSD as long as the job gets done?)Reactive (MSD are important: we do a lot every time we have an injury)Calculative (we have systems in place to manage MSD)Proactive (we try to anticipate MSD problems before they arise)Generative (MSD prevention is built into the way we do business around here

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The aim of the study was to evaluate the implementation of the MSD CAT framework within two contextually different organisations. This section examines the implementation against each of the evaluation criteria presented in Section 2.3 above, drawing on the researchers' perceptions of the tool's effectiveness in identifying evidence by which to establish MSD cultural advancement ratings. Within this discussion, the paper considers ways to improve the tool based on this evaluation, provides insights into how it might be used by practitioners, and outlines potential limitations with the tool.The methodology for adapting the framework for the organisational context for implementation sites #1 and #2 was effective. The exploratory interviews with the implementation site management provided sufficient information, alongside a reading of each organisations' OHS management information, to adapt the framework aspects, terminology, and other implementation site-specific contextual issues. Through this process the researchers ensured the assessment covered the necessary areas of concern for MSD, while less relevant areas were eliminated from the framework. This finding is encouraging as the two implementation sites were contextually very different, suggesting that the framework is readily adaptable for use in diverse organisational settings.This part of the evaluation was also effectively achieved. MSD CAT provided an analysis of the level of cultural advancement across each of nine MSD culture aspects for the two implementation sites, providing a useful baseline for each organisation against which to target improvements. While the majority of MSD culture aspects in both organisations were either calculative or proactive, suggesting an absence of serious (pathological) or lagging (reactive) areas of cultural concern, differences were identified in the level of advancement/maturity for different MSD cultural aspects across each implementation site, reflecting the fact that all aspects of organisational safety culture do not develop and mature at the same level (Bentley and Tappin, 2010; Parker et al., 2006).Areas for MSD cultural advancement were identified along with recommendations for progressing to a higher level of advancement for each implementation site organisation. This element of the assessment represents the practical value of assessing organisational safety culture as it has contributed to MSD prevention in each organisation by identifying underlying cultural factors that might otherwise be overlooked in MSD prevention initiatives (Burton et al., 2009; Denis et al., 2008). This reinforces the call to consider health and safety culture in MSD causation and intervention development (Lee et al., 2010).Rater agreement was high for each MSD culture aspect, with good correspondence between the tool's descriptors and participant responses. Agreement between raters' assessments (80% inter-rated reliability) was thought to be the result of consistency in the comments of different participants within the two implementation site organisations and due to the two raters both having exposure to each organisation during the collection of data. While these factors were important in achieving agreement between the independent assessments of the two raters, it is possible that ratings of cultural advancement level in other contexts in which the tool might be used would be more challenging – particularly where perceptions differ across sub-cultures within organisations or where peoples' perceptions differed considerably (between staff and management for example). In these cases, assessment of advancement level becomes more problematic and raters would need to spend more time discussing the evidence and perhaps collect wider archival evidence than was necessary in the present study. Moreover, the experience of the present study indicates that people using the tool need a thorough understanding of the work processes, tasks, organisational structure, and OHS performance before starting to collect data, as this will provide contextual information that will aid assignment of ratings.The study also highlighted the problem that MSD CAT may not work as well in multi-site organisations where the over-arching organisational culture (supported by policy and process) may be different to the culture of the individual site (‘how we do things around here, and how they want us to do things around here’). Hence, a single assessment of any given MSD culture aspect will be difficult to determine across sub-cultures and work units with differing assumptions, perceptions and norms of behaviour. For larger organisations, single site or departmental assessments may be necessary to overcome this. Conversely, using the MSD CAT across different sites could provide invaluable insight into differing safety and MSD culture characteristics, facilitating more targeted prevention measures.The tool appears to be effective for identifying MSD culture level of advancement. However, this may be dependent upon MSD being prominent in the organisation. Respondents need to have some knowledge or experience of dealing with MSD (through personal experience, accommodating colleagues with MSD, risk management, or training) to provide some context for when answering the questions. Even where MSD are a key concern for the organisation, respondents may still lack clarity of thought on MSD. Indeed, in the present study respondents reverted to thinking about OHS generally until reminded that the focus was MSD. Similarly, in implementation site organisation #2, a number of respondents believed the study was focused on residents' injury prevention rather than relating to MSD involving staff, despite high MSD frequency rates among the workforce. Questions therefore should ideally be piloted to ensure they convey the message intended by the researcher.Researchers using the tool in the present study found the interviewer often needs to be aware to ask supplementary questions to try and elicit further information where required. Possible reasons include: people who are not aware of MSD or their risks, people who do not perceive MSD to be an issue or believe there are more important priorities, people who do not understand the question, and those whose language limits their level of participation. Hence, experience in applying the tool (e.g. through piloting) becomes very important as researchers need to understand the basic principles of safety culture and the broad range of possible MSD contributory factors in order to stimulate responses to adequately assess MSD culture across the various aspects included in the model. Similarly, it is necessary to have some understanding of the industry, organisation, work processes and the lexicon to develop an element of trust and credibility with the interviewees, and to better understand their responses and ask appropriate supplementary questions where necessary. Conducting preliminary interviews first of key people (OHS personnel, production managers, H&S rep) is also necessary to enable the MSD culture aspects and the questions to be appropriately tailored before full data collection. The evaluation highlighted the need for adjusting the questions to suit the context of the organisation to which they are applied, and to reduce duplication, potential bias and ambiguity and so improve tool efficacy. Some MSD culture aspects included questions that were not applicable and a shorter list of less complex questions could be developed for future studies. The repository of prompts for assessing the level of advancement for each MSD culture aspect should also grow with experiences from using the tool in different organisations.A further limitation of the study, which may extend to the applicability of its use in other organisations, is the existing safety culture of the participating organisations. The two organisations were happy to be involved in this study, suggesting they were contemplative concerning MSD management. Findings may have differed with poor performing organisations. The implementation site findings also possibly demonstrated a central tendency in results – this may be a consequence of starting the rater assessment process at the mid-point (‘calculative’) advancement level which may have influenced rater decision making.Secondary data in the form of OHS management documentation concerning MSD were used to address the concrete aspects of MSD culture in this study, and considered alongside primary data collected in the interviews to assess level of cultural advancement across the two implementation site organisations. Ideally, corroboration between the archival records and interview responses would improve the reliability of the study findings. While this was not possible in the present study it would be advisable wherever possible when using MSD CAT.A further potential limitation with this methodology is the risk that a cultural assessment approach may miss detecting risk factors that more traditional approaches to MSD assessment might expose. However, the authors recommend this approach be used to supplement traditional approaches to MSD analysis and prevention (rather than using the tool in isolation), providing a method by which deeper analysis of upstream cultural factors can be undertaken. Moreover, the MSD CAT can help identify conditions impacting on the effectiveness and quality of traditional approaches, such as hazard management, incident reporting and MSD awareness communications.Further research should evaluate the efficacy of the MSD CAT tool, as part of a suite of assessment methods, in other industry settings and across different types of organisations. The present study has illustrated how a qualitative organisational safety culture assessment tool can be applied to a specific concern: MSD. The researchers are currently examing whether the tool can be applied to other OHS concerns, including aspects of the psychosocial work environment.