@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluation of thermal and evaporative resistances in cricket helmets using a sweating manikin

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cricket helmets impede the heat exchange between head surface and environment.The type and design of padding used may influence evaporative heat dissipation.Textile material and padding thickness influence the evaporative heat dissipations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sports helmet,Thermal comfort,Sweating manikin,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The main objective of this study is to establish an approach for measuring the dry and evaporative heat dissipation cricket helmets. A range of cricket helmets has been tested using a sweating manikin within a controlled climatic chamber. The thermal manikin experiments were conducted in two stages, namely the (i) dry test and (ii) wet test. The ambient air temperature for the dry tests was controlled to ∼23 °C, and the mean skin temperatures averaged ∼35 °C. The thermal insulation value measured for the manikin with helmet ensemble ranged from 1.0 to 1.2 clo. The results showed that among the five cricket helmets, the Masuri helmet offered slightly more thermal insulation while the Elite helmet offered the least. However, under the dry laboratory conditions and with minimal air movement (air velocity = 0.08 ± 0.01 ms−1), small differences exist between the thermal resistance values for the tested helmets. The wet tests were conducted in an isothermal condition, with an ambient and skin mean temperatures averaged ∼35 °C, the evaporative resistance, Ret, varied between 36 and 60 m2 Pa W−1. These large variations in evaporative heat dissipation values are due to the presence of a thick layer of comfort lining in certain helmet designs. This finding suggests that the type and design of padding may influence the rate of evaporative heat dissipation from the head and face; hence the type of material and thickness of the padding is critical for the effectiveness of evaporative heat loss and comfort of the wearer. Issues for further investigations in field trials are discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In Test Cricket, players typically spend considerable amounts of time under conditions of high thermal stress, both externally from environmental factors, and internally from increased heat production by the body, resulting in higher body temperature. To reduce the high temperature, the body perspires or produces sweat. As the perspiration evaporates and is transmitted to atmosphere, the body temperature is reduced and the body feels cooler (Özdil et al., 2007). Research has established that the human head plays an important role in thermoregulation; up to 50% of latent and sensible heat produced by the body is dissipated through the head, as an effect of increased temperatures and sweat production (Rasch et al., 1991; Desruelle and Candas, 2000; Jun et al., 2010).The primary function of protective helmets is to prevent wearers from impact-related head injuries. The helmet shell, generally constructed with either composite or polymeric materials, and foam padding have been found to impede the transfer of moisture and heat, and hence reduce the head's ability to cool through the evaporation of sweat (Brühwiler, 2003; Mccullough and Kenney, 2003; Song et al., 2011). As a result, helmet usage and design could have a considerable bearing on thermal comfort. Hence, understanding the thermal behaviour of the head is important to form a basis for design and optimization of helmets for thermal comfort and to reduce heat strain to wearers (Bogerd and Brühwiler, 2008; De Bruyne et al., 2010).Many researchers have developed a number of theories and models to analyse and understand thermal comfort (Lotens and Havenith, 1991; Fan and Chen, 2002; Mccullough and Kenney, 2003; Oğulata, 2007; Qian and Fan, 2009; Wang et al., 2011). In general, research in thermal comfort to date has primarily focused on how humans perceive thermal comfort of different textiles and apparel rather than on objective quantitative measures. For the purpose of this study, proven theories and models that are related to sports apparel comfort will be adopted.Most of the recreational and international cricket games are played in an environment with little wind effect or low air velocity conditions (McGrath and Finch, 1996; Joshi, 2009), hence, for a player wearing a helmet and standing in such an environment, and when the player's body is in thermal equilibrium with the environment, the heat gain from the body equals heat loss to the immediate surrounding, as follows:(1)Mnet±(C+R)−He=0where Mnet is the heat generated by metabolism in the human body (Mccullough and Kenney, 2003;ASHRAE Handbook, 2009). This heat will be transferred from the body to the environment through three basic mechanisms by: (i) conduction; (ii) convection; and (iii) radiation. However, conduction is not relevant in thermal interaction of human body and environment (ASHRAE Handbook, 2009). Hence, the mechanisms of heat transfer from the human body to the environment can be classified as (a) the dry heat transfer (C + R = the sum of the convection C and radiation R heat transfer), which is mainly governed by the mean temperature gradient between the clothed body surface and the environment (see Fig. 1), and (b) the evaporative heat transfer (He) governed by the difference between the water vapour pressure at the skin and that of the ambient air and by the degree of skin wetness (Mccullough and Kenney, 2003;Voelker et al., 2009; Cengel and Ghajar, 2011).The influence of clothing on heat stress depends on the extent to which the clothing affects the heat and moisture transfer between the wearer and the environment. The two main properties of the clothing that affect the thermal balance between the wearer and the environment are the thermal resistance (Rct) and the evaporative resistance (Ret) (Song et al., 2011). In helmets the intrinsic thermal resistance (Rcf) represents the resistance to heat transfer between the helmet surface and the skin and is a characteristic of the helmet ensemble itself, which is independent of the external environment and the body's condition.Previous research has concentrated on the evaluation of heat transfer of cricket helmets without taking into consideration the sweating effect (Pang et al., 2013). However, a complete understanding of human heat exchange requires not only the convective, conductive and radiative heat losses to be measured but also this other important mechanism of heat dissipation, namely sweat evaporation (Celcar et al., 2008). In recent years, in order to fully understand the thermal behaviour of clothing systems, thermal manikins with human features (i.e. capable of generating heat and perspiration), have been used successfully in experimental investigations (Chen et al., 2003; Oğulata, 2007; Celcar et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2011).Among several known sweating thermal manikins (Chen et al., 2003; Oğulata, 2007; Celcar et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2011), the thermal manikin ‘Newton’ from Measurement Technology Northwest is built in accordance with ASTM and ISO standards and is widely used for garment and environmental heat loss evaluation. The manikin surface is divided into separate sections, each of which has its own sweating, heating and temperature measuring system. Each thermal zone has sweat control through evenly distributed fluid ports on its surface and sweating rate can be controlled by an operator (Wang, 2008; Measurement Technology Northwest, 2010) The whole ‘Newton’ manikin system produced reasonable results as compared against human trial studies (Blood and Burke, 2010).The aim of this experimental study is to establish an approach to determine the thermal and evaporative resistance of a range of cricket helmets using the sweating thermal manikin measurements. These measurements would provide physical values related the heat and moisture transfer properties of helmet ensemble. Such values could contribute to the evaluation of the thermal comfort of helmet assembles, and could be used to improve helmet design by maximizing protection and minimizing thermal insulation and water vapour resistance for summer wear.Five different models of commercially available cricket helmets were selected and tested in this research (Fig. 2). These reference helmets were the same as those used in the previous study conducted by the authors (Pang et al., 2013) to quantify the net heat transfer of the headgear under non-sweating conditions.The sweating manikin called the ‘Newton’, operated by the automatic control software ThermDAC (Measurement Technology Northwest), was used in this research (Measurement Technology Northwest, 2010). The manikin was installed hanging in an upright standing position in the centre of a climatic chamber at the Manikin Laboratory of the School of Fashion and Textile, RMIT University. The manikin was operated statically without any body movement.The manikin consists of 20 independently controlled thermal zones (see Fig. 3). All thermal zones are fitted with heaters to simulate metabolic heat output rates and use distributed wire sensors for measuring skin temperatures. The surface temperatures of all zones were set to 35.0 °C. The surface temperature, heat flux and heat loss were measured continuously at 10 s intervals for at least 80 min.All the tests were conducted in a controlled laboratory within the acceptable ranges as specified in the International standards (ISO, 1995; ASTM F1291, 2010; ASTM F2370, 2010). The air was steady flowing from the chamber roof and was controlled under minimal air velocity at 0.08 ± 0.01 m/s for both dry and wet tests. Since the manikin ‘Newton’ is not design to measure clothing thermal insulation and moisture vapour resistance at the same time. Therefore, two separate measurements were required: (1) dry test, and (2) wet test (Measurement Technology Northwest, 2010).In the dry test condition the manikin was covered with a ‘skin’ suit where sweat is absent (Fig. 4). The testing environment was set at a Temperature (T) of 23 ± 0.5 °C, and a Relative Humidity (RH) of 50 ± 5% to simulate the dry conditions. The dry heat loss was measured for the ‘naked’ test, where no helmet is presence, and for each helmet respectively. The dry test measurements were then used as a reference for the wet test.For the purpose of measuring the evaporative resistance of the helmet on the ‘naked’ manikin, wet tests were conducted in an isothermal condition, whereby both ambient temperature of the climate chamber and the mean skin temperature of the manikin were set to T = 35 ± 0.5 °C. The relative humidity was controlled at RH = 40 ± 5%. The isothermal condition was used to ensure that no dry heat loss and no condensation would occur, thus enabling the evaporative heat loss to be measured alone (Havenith et al., 2008; Richards et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2011).The skin suit was pre-wetted by spraying the distilled water from a spray bottle over the skin. In addition to this pre-wetting procedure, the wet-naked test, without helmets, was run for about 1½ hours with a perspiration rate of 700 gm−2 h−1. The wet-naked tests were performed before the wet-test in order to evenly distribute the moisture over the skin to simulate skin saturated with sweat.During the wet-test, the perspiration rate of the manikin was set to 300 gm−2 h−1 to keep the manikin surface moist. Measurements were taken for 80 min after covering the manikin's head with a cricket helmet. The 80-minute duration was set to allow sufficient time for the helmeted-manikin to reach steady-state condition and at maximum saturation in moisture absorption, if there is any.The two main helmet properties—i.e. thermal resistance (Rct) and evaporative resistance (Ret) (Fig. 1)—which affect the thermal balance between the wearer and the environment, were calculated from experimental measurements. The equations used to calculate the relevant parameters are as follows (ASTM F1291, 2010; ASTM F2370, 2010; Measurement Technology Northwest, 2010; Song et al., 2011):When the manikin is not sweating, the average thermal resistance, which is used to define the insulation between the skin surface and the environment under dry conditions, is calculated for each zone in the following way:(2)Rct=(Tskin−Tamb)QA(m2·∘C·W−1)where Tskin is the corresponding zone average temperature (°C), Tamb is the ambient temperature (°C) and Q/A is the area weighted heat flux (Wm−2).The intrinsic thermal resistance of the clothing ensemble is determined using the clothing factor:(3)Rcf=Rct−(Rct0fcl)(m2·∘C·W−1)where Rct0 is the thermal resistance of the air layer in naked condition and ƒcl is the clothing area factor. The conversion to clothing insulation (clo) units is as follows:Rclo=Rct·6.45When the manikin is sweating, the total evaporative resistance under the wet conditions is calculated for each zone as follows:(4)Ret=Psat−PambQA−Tskin−TambRctm2·Pa·W−1where Psat is the saturation vapour pressure at skin temperature (Pa), Pamb is the vapour pressure at ambient temp (Pa), Q/A is the area weighted Heat Flux (W/m2), Tskin is the zone average temperature (°C) and Tamb is the ambient temperature (°C). The term [(Tskin − Tamb)/Rct] is equal to dry heat loss (W/m2), which is the heat flux under dry conditions. This has been subtracted from the heat flux, qwet, so that Ret captures the effect of the moisture alone.Using the clothing factor, the intrinsic evaporative resistance of the clothing ensembles is given by:(5)Ref=Ret−(Ret0fcl)where Ref is the intrinsic evaporative resistance of clothing (m2 Pa W−1), Ret0 is the evaporative resistance of air layer in naked condition (m2 Pa W−1) and ƒcl is the clothing area factor that was estimated according to ISO Standard 9920 (ISO, 1995).It should be noted that the Newton model measures the clothing thermal insulation in the dry test or the moisture vapour resistance in the wet test based on previous dry test at a non-isothermal condition.For a helmeted person, dry heat loss Hd and evaporative heat loss He may be determined by:(6)C+R=Asurf(Tskin−Tamb)Rct(7)He=Asurf(Psat−Pamb)Retwhere Asurf is the surface area of each zone (m2), Psat is the saturation vapour pressure (Pa), Pamb is the ambient vapor pressure (Pa), Tskin is the skin temperature (°C), Tamb is the ambient temperature (°C) (Qian and Fan, 2009). Rct and Ret represent the average thermal resistance under dry condition and average evaporative resistance under wet condition, respectively.Permeability is the ability of water vapor to move through clothing. It affects the amount of evaporative cooling that can occur, whereby it is calculated as follows:(8)im=K·RctRetwhere K is a constant = 60.6515 Pa/°C (EN ISO 9920, 2007;Measurement Technology Northwest, 2010).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This research investigated the thermal and evaporative resistances of five commercially available cricket helmets using the “Newton’ sweating manikin. All the experimental tests were conducted within an environmental chamber, where the temperature, humidity and wind velocity were controlled within the ranges specified in the relevant standards. The main conclusions stemming from this research are summarized as follows:1.Cricket helmets impede the heat exchange between the head surface and the environment. The dry heat dissipation was reduced by upto 50% due to the presence of a helmet in the non-sweating manikin test.There is no significant difference between the tested helmets in terms of the thermal resistance measured under the dry test condition when the air movement in the climate chamber is small.Tested helmets transmitted 68–78% of evaporative heat as compared with the naked head.The type and design of comfort padding may influence evaporative heat dissipation from the wearer's head: the textile material and thickness of the padding are critical factors that determine the effectiveness of evaporative heat dissipation.The findings reported here have been obtained through laboratory experiments using a sweating manikin, hence, currently it remains unclear if qualitatively similar results can be expected in other conditions, e.g., in the presence of radiant heat with different intensities and angles, and/or with the presence of wind, and how these results relate to comfort perception and possibly heat strain of athletes. Hence, these questions would need to be considered in future research and then through field trials involving cricket players. Such tests should be carried out in a range of realistic conditions to complement these reference studies and hence provide an effective test for thermal and evaporative heat transfer in diverse real world settings.