@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessment of a simple obstacle detection device for the visually impaired

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Obstacle detection is a major problem to be solved to ensure safe navigation for the visually impaired.Static obstacles that are not located on the ground are hardly detected by white cane.The obstacle detector developed might increase mobility performance and was well accepted by visually impaired participants.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Visually impaired,Obstacle detection,Travel aid,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A simple obstacle detection device, based upon an automobile parking sensor, was assessed as a mobility aid for the visually impaired. A questionnaire survey for mobility needs was performed at the start of this study. After the detector was developed, five blindfolded sighted and 15 visually impaired participants were invited to conduct travel experiments under three test conditions: (1) using a white cane only, (2) using the obstacle detector only and (3) using both devices. A post-experiment interview regarding the usefulness of the obstacle detector for the visually impaired participants was performed. The results showed that the obstacle detector could augment mobility performance with the white cane. The obstacle detection device should be used in conjunction with the white cane to achieve the best mobility speed and body protection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mobility refers to one's ability to identify the relation between their position and the objects in the environment and then move independently, safely and efficiently (Kuyk et al., 2010). The most obvious problem faced by blind persons is moving around in their environment without bumping into unexpected obstacles (Molton et al., 1998). Obstacle detection is thus one of the major problems to be solved to ensure safe navigation. The white cane is the most popular and traditional navigation aid for the visually impaired (Molton et al., 1998; Snaith et al., 1998; Dakopoulos and Bourbakis, 2010) in spite of modern technology-based devices (Clark-Carter et al., 1986; Schellingerhout et al., 2001). The white cane is the simplest, cheapest and most reliable device thus far. It can be generally applied to detect static obstacles on the ground, uneven surfaces, holes and stairs (Cardin et al., 2007). However, the reach of the cane is limited (Yasumuro et al., 2003) and obstacles not located on the ground are hardly detected.A number of electronic travel aids (ETAs) for the visually impaired have been developed for navigation and obstacle detection/avoidance. Dakopoulos and Bourbakis (2010) presented a comparative survey among portable/wearable obstacle detection/avoidance systems for the visually impaired. Cardin et al. (2007) also reviewed several obstacle detection devices developed in the literature.The common ETA features based upon new technologies in the literature may conclude that information was gathered from the environment using sonar, laser scanner or stereo camera vision. The user was generally informed through auditory and/or tactile sense (Cardin et al., 2007; Dakopoulos and Bourbakis, 2010). Other features and disadvantages of ETAs are briefly summarized as follows. The signal processing of many novel ETAs usually required complicated computer algorithms to provide more complete information about nearby obstacles (Cardin et al., 2007; Sainarayanan et al., 2007). The sensors in some ETAs could only detect obstacles on the ground just like the white cane. Other ETAs had more functional body protection capabilities (e.g., shoulder protection, Cardin et al., 2007). Some ETAs were small, light and handheld, e.g., Miniguide (Phillips, 1998), while other ETAs were bulky, e.g., Navbelt (Shoval et al., 1994) and GuideCane (Ulrich and Borenstein, 2001), making them difficult to hold or carry when needed. Although some aids were portable, they still required manual operation (e.g. Ghiani et al., 2009), making co-incident use of conventional aids difficult or impossible (e.g., white canes). One or more cameras in some ETAs required mounting on headgear (Sainarayanan et al., 2007) or the frame of eyeglasses for obstacle capture (Meers and Ward, 2005 cited in Dakopoulos and Bourbakis, 2010). Such devices may be not accepted by some visually impaired individuals because they may feel cumbersome or embarrassed to wear in public places. Some ETAs required extensive training periods (Snaith et al., 1998). The relatively high cost of ETAs available in the market is a discouraging feature.To fill the detection gaps in the white cane and overcome the disadvantages of ETAs, a compact size, lightweight, low-cost and simple detection feedback obstacle detection device was developed and explored in this study. The prototype of this detector was developed and evaluated using blindfolded sighted and visually impaired participants in travel experiments. This study hypothesized that different travel aid devices would alter walking efficiency and obstacle detection for visually impaired persons. The aims of this study were to compare ETA walking efficiency and obstacle detection capability using both blindfolded sighted and visually impaired participants under three test conditions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A compact, lightweight, simple detection feedback, easy-to-use, low-cost obstacle detection device for the visually impaired was developed in this study. The results showed that the developed detector could augment the user's performance with a white cane. To achieve the best mobility performance and body protection effect, the obstacle detection device should be used in conjunction with the white cane.