@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A systematic review of mixed methods research on human factors and ergonomics in health care

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Mixed methods research is increasingly used in healthcare HFE research.About two-thirds of mixed methods studies on healthcare HFE use the convergent parallel design.A large variety of methods is used to collect qualitative and quantitative data.The most frequent combination of qualitative and quantitative data collection involved interview and survey respectively.Formal mixed methods research approaches should be used in healthcare HFE research.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mixed methods research,Health care,Systematic review,Qualitative and quantitative data,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This systematic literature review provides information on the use of mixed methods research in human factors and ergonomics (HFE) research in health care. Using the PRISMA methodology, we searched four databases (PubMed, PsycInfo, Web of Science, and Engineering Village) for studies that met the following inclusion criteria: (1) field study in health care, (2) mixing of qualitative and quantitative data, (3) HFE issues, and (4) empirical evidence. Using an iterative and collaborative process supported by a structured data collection form, the six authors identified a total of 58 studies that primarily address HFE issues in health information technology (e.g., usability) and in the work of healthcare workers. About two-thirds of the mixed methods studies used the convergent parallel study design where quantitative and qualitative data were collected simultaneously. A variety of methods were used for collecting data, including interview, survey and observation. The most frequent combination involved interview for qualitative data and survey for quantitative data. The use of mixed methods in healthcare HFE research has increased over time. However, increasing attention should be paid to the formal literature on mixed methods research to enhance the depth and breadth of this research.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the publication of the US Institute of Medicine report on “To Err is Human” (Kohn et al., 1999), human factors and ergonomics (HFE) research in healthcare quality and patient safety has significantly increased (Carayon, 2010; Carayon et al., 2013; Gurses et al., 2012; Hignett et al., 2013) and is beginning to demonstrate impact on important care processes and patient outcomes (Russ et al., 2014; Xie and Carayon, 2015). HFE research on occupational safety and health of healthcare workers has a longer tradition (Hignett, 1996; Nelson et al., 2006; Owen and Garg, 1994; Smith et al., 1979). We believe that HFE research in general, and more specifically in health care, could be even more relevant and impactful if field research with multiple and mixed methods is used. This paper describes the results of a systematic literature review of mixed methods research in healthcare HFE. We propose recommendations for further extending the use of formal mixed methods approaches in HFE research, in particular in health care.Numerous research communities are now recognizing the value of mixed methods research. For instance, the US National Institute for Health has published a document on “Best practices for mixed methods research in the health sciences” (Creswell et al., 2011). After reviewing 19 definitions of mixed methods research, Johnson et al. (2007) proposed the following definition:“Mixed methods research is the type of research in which a researcher or team of researchers combines elements of qualitative and quantitative research approaches (e.g., use of qualitative and quantitative viewpoints, data collection, analysis, inference techniques) for the broad purposes of breadth and depth of understanding and corroboration.” (p. 123)This definition highlights the combination (or mixing) of different approaches at various stages of the research process. In this definition, the terms of qualitative and quantitative are applied to various areas, such as research viewpoints, data collection and inference; this can be confusing. For instance, interview is sometimes described as qualitative research. However, is the use of closed questions with specific response categories in an interview qualitative or quantitative research? In this example, the interview data collection method is used to collect quantitative data (i.e. responses to closed questions) that can be used in a statistical analysis. While describing different levels in science, such as ontology, epistemology, methodology, method and data, Åsberg et al. (2011) argue that the terms of qualitative and quantitative should be used to describe data, which is what we do in this paper. This avoids the ambiguity that can occur when calling interview a qualitative method that can actually produce quantitative data. Please note that this applies to many other data collection methods. For instance, observation can be used to collect quantitative data such as time spent on tasks as well as qualitative data such as rich description of workflow.Quantitative data involve numbers and categories and are typically analyzed with the means of statistical methods, whereas qualitative data involve a description with text. In this paper, we use the term of mixed methods research as one that collects and mixes qualitative and quantitative data. This allows us to examine how a single type of data collection (e.g., survey, interview) can be used to collect both qualitative and quantitative data. Mixing involves qualitative and quantitative data that are collected with various methods, such as observation, interview, focus group, survey, and archival methods. Mixing of qualitative and quantitative data can occur at the stages of design, data collection, data analysis and interpretation (Creswell and Plano Clark, 2011). Various taxonomies of mixed methods designs have been proposed; in this paper, we use the well-known taxonomy of Creswell and colleagues (Creswell, 2009; Creswell and Plano Clark, 2011) (see Table 4).We distinguish between the type of data (qualitative or quantitative data) and the nature of data (objective or subjective). The degree to which data are objective or subjective has been conceptualized as a continuum in which perceptual and emotional processes get involved in the measurement process (Carayon and Hoonakker, 2001). Relatively more objective data are produced when perceptual and emotional processes have little involvement and influence on measurement, whereas relatively more subjective data are produced when perceptual and emotional processes are important part of the measurement process. For instance, a question such as “How often did you think of quitting your job in the past week: (1) never, (2) once or twice in the past week, (3) three to four times in the past week, and (4) five or more times in the past week” is relatively more objective than the following question: “How happy or unhappy have you been with your job in the past week: (1) completely unhappy, (2) somewhat unhappy, (3) neither unhappy nor happy, (4) somewhat happy, and (5) completely happy”. Qualitative and quantitative data have different degrees of objectivity or subjectivity depending on the actual measurement process. In this literature review, we focus on mixing of qualitative and quantitative data, not on the objective or subjective nature of the data.Problems experienced and observed in health care tend to be complex, varied and uncertain, and, therefore, difficult to address. For instance, whereas patient safety has been identified as a major problem, little progress has been made and reported (Pronovost and Wachter, 2014; Vincent et al., 2008; Wachter, 2010). There has been increasing recognition that systems approaches, such as those provided by HFE (Carayon, Hundt, Karsh, et al., 2006; Carayon et al., 2014), can help in improving difficult healthcare quality problems such as patient safety (Kaplan et al., 2013). The HFE systems research needed to help understand and solve often-complex healthcare problems should use multiple methods and approaches. This can be done with mixed methods research.The complexity of healthcare work systems calls for HFE research that assesses work situations and problems in their context (Carayon, 2006; Dekker, 2012). This type of HFE research is typically conducted in the field (Wilson, 2014) and should use multiple data sources and data collection methods to assess the numerous facets of the work situation and their outcomes. The use of mixed methods research, therefore, allows for a broad and deep assessment of HFE issues involved in the healthcare delivery problem under study. For instance, quantitative data may help to assess the severity or causes of a problem such as the extent to which workload contributes to patient safety. This could be done with the use of a survey that measures perceived workload and self-reported patient safety problems, or with the use of observation that quantifies workload and captures errors made during patient care at different workload levels. Whereas this quantitative information is useful to understand the problem, the use of qualitative data can deepen the assessment of the problem by evaluating the reasons why and how workload may affect patient safety. This combination of quantitative and qualitative data can not only deepen our understanding of the relationship between workload and patient safety, but also provide specific guidance for work system or process redesign that can improve patient safety.There has been growing epistemological emphasis in HFE on the need to embrace and use a greater variety of research approaches, such as qualitative research (Hignett and Wilson, 2004). This has generated important discussion about the type of research and research paradigms needed for expanding the depth, breadth and impact of HFE (Dul et al., 2012a; Nathanael and Marmaras, 2012). Our paper contributes to this discussion by proposing that HFE research pay more attention to mixed methods research. The use of mixed methods research fits with the so-called “pragmatism” research paradigm or worldview (Robson, 2011; Tashakkori and Teddlie, 2003). A pragmatic researcher uses “whatever philosophical or methodological approach works best for the particular research problem at issue” (Robson, 2011, p. 28). An HFE researcher is likely to be a pragmatic researcher as s/he tackles real and practical work system design problems that are influenced by the context (Dul et al., 2012b; Wilson, 2000, 2014). Mixed methods research fits with HFE pragmatic research as it advocates the use of multiple research methods and approaches and the mixing of qualitative and quantitative data.HFE researchers have begun to recognize the value of formal mixed methods research as described by various experts (Creswell, 2009; Creswell and Plano Clark, 2011; Tashakkori and Teddlie, 2003, 2010). Healthcare HFE research conducted at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, USA, has used multiple data collection methods and then merged and combined quantitative and qualitative data in various ways. For instance, in a study of workload among ICU (Intensive Care Unit) nurses, we began the research by conducting in-depth semi-structured interviews with 15 nurses in a single ICU (Gurses and Carayon, 2009). Results of this qualitative data collection identified a range of performance obstacles and facilitators experienced by ICU nurses that could contribute to workload. This information was used to develop a survey that was subsequently administered to 272 ICU nurses to quantify the frequency of work system obstacles and their impact on ICU nurses' workload, quality of working life (fatigue, overall stress) and perceived quality and safety of care (Gurses and Carayon, 2007; Gurses et al., 2009). This is an example of a sequential exploratory design.In another study, we used multiple data collection methods (i.e. work sampling study, survey and interviews) to evaluate the implementation and impact of an Electronic Health Record (EHR) technology in a primary care clinic (Carayon et al., 2009). The quantitative data produced by the work sampling method assessed changes in time spent on various activities by different groups of clinic workers (i.e. physicians, clinical staff and office staff). The quantitative survey data complemented this analysis by examining changes in worker perceptions after the EHR implementation. For instance, we observed increased time spent on computer with the work sampling data collection; that fits with the survey data analysis on perception of increased dependency on computers. In addition, the survey data allowed us to assess the impact of the increase in computer use on clinic staff, such as increased self-reported back pain. The qualitative data collected through interviews provided useful information about the context and implementation of the EHR technology. Without this information, the results of the quantitative data analysis can be challenging to interpret and generalize. This study is an example of a convergent parallel design.The use of mixed methods to collect qualitative and quantitative data has allowed us to develop more relevant measures of work system obstacles and facilitators (ICU nursing study) (Gurses and Carayon, 2009), and to assess a technology from the viewpoint of different stakeholders (study of EHR implementation) (Carayon et al., 2009). The main benefits of mixed methods research for healthcare HFE are, therefore, to deepen and widen our understanding and interpretation of complex healthcare delivery problems.There is a growing use of mixed methods research in HFE; however, there may be ‘missed opportunities’ if the formal knowledge about mixed methods research is not recognized and used. Formal knowledge about mixed methods research is available in several books (Creswell, 2009; Creswell and Plano Clark, 2011; Tashakkori and Teddlie, 2010), as well as the Journal of Mixed Methods Research. The objective of this systematic literature review is to describe mixed methods research studies on HFE in health care. We assess published mixed methods studies in healthcare HFE for any trends and identify opportunities to use the emerging and formal body of knowledge on mixed methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
