@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intervention development to reduce musculoskeletal disorders: Is the process on target?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Effective MSD interventions require a systematic approach to identify and control all causal factors.Evidence suggests interventions are not appropriately targeted limiting their effectiveness.A stage of change model is proposed as a model to develop more targeted interventions to reduce MSDs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Musculoskeletal disorders,Stage of change,Transtheoretical,Interventions,Systems approach,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Work related musculoskeletal disorders remain an intractable OHS problem. In 2002, Haslam proposed applying the stage of change model to target ergonomics interventions and other health and safety prevention activities. The stage of change model proposes that taking into account an individual's readiness for change in developing intervention strategies is likely to improve uptake and success. This paper revisits Haslam's proposal in the context of interventions to reduce musculoskeletal disorders. Effective MSD interventions require a systematic approach and need to take into account a combination of measures. Research evidence suggests that in practice, those charged with the management of MSDs are not consistently adopting such an approach. Consequently, intervention development may not represent contemporary best practice. We propose a potential method of addressing this gap is the stage of change model, and use a case study to illustrate this argument in tailoring intervention development for managing MSDs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In his 2002 paper, Haslam proposed that Prochaska and DiClemente's stage of change (SOC) approach might usefully inform ergonomics activities, particularly when advising with respect to health and safety (p.241). This paper revisits Haslam's proposal, focusing more specifically in the context of interventions to reduce musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs). Reviews on the effectiveness of interventions for preventing work related MSDs indicate limited to modest success in many cases (Palmer et al., 2012). The multifactorial nature of MSDs and the associated complexity of their prevention (Denis et al., 2008) are contributors to this. A SOC approach takes into account an individual's readiness to change, which is another contributor to MSDs prevention efficacy. SOC has been widely used in the public health arena to help eliminate individual, negative behaviours such as smoking cessation and reducing alcohol consumption (Heather et al., 2009; Prochaska et al., 1993, 2001). Since 2002, the SOC approach has had limited uptake in the development of MSD interventions despite its apparent appropriateness for helping to address this significant OHS issue (Rothmore et al., 2013).Haslam (2002) proposed the SOC model as highly relevant to health and safety issues but with an added layer of complexity. In the workplace, individual readiness to change is reflected in the views of individual workers whereas organisational readiness to change is reflected in the views of company leaders and managers who determine the nature and extent of workplace changes and practices (Haslam, 2002) A further distinction between public health and health and safety applications of the SOC approach relates to individual versus group readiness to change. In public health interventions readiness to change and the subsequent interventions are targeted at the individual level only. In the workplace, while readiness to change is assessed at the individual level, interventions need to account for the range of stages present in the workgroup. Nevertheless, using SOC to develop MSD interventions may assist with more targeted approaches, increase uptake and sustainability of recommendations. In a study of 24 MSD interventions, those targeted to workers' stage of change led to greater behaviour change and a reduction of MSD symptoms than interventions that were not ‘tailored’ (Whysall et al., 2006a). Barriers to implementing change in workplaces have been widely documented and are often related to broader organisational issues not taken into account when the intervention is designed and implementation attempted (Whysall et al., 2006b). That is, the response to the problem was not targeted in a meaningful way for those in the organisation to implement the necessary changes to reduce hazards and risk associated with the development of MSDs.The concept of targeted interventions is aligned with a systems approach endorsed, but insufficiently applied in practice, by ergonomists (Wilson, 2014). A position paper outlining a strategy for the future of ergonomics, developed by a committee of International Ergonomics Association (IEA) members recommended several professional issues of pertinence to the current paper. The authors suggested that whilst ergonomics has great potential to enhance performance and wellbeing through system design, at present this is only done to a limited extent (Dul et al., 2012). They argue that whilst ergonomics has the potential to provide value to key stakeholders in systems design or work organisation, the perceived value is limited (Neumann and Dul, 2010). Therefore, there is a reticence to engage and then adopt changes recommended by ergonomists. A further observation was that relationships developed by ergonomists engaged to make recommendations to organisations were often established with people without sufficient influence to make, and sustain, the necessary changes. This suggests a need for a more nuanced language and better engagement with those who can make decisions if we are to make substantial improvements in reducing MSDs.A SOC model posits that underlying knowledge, attitudes and beliefs are linked to the behaviour and actions of managers, supervisors and workers (Haslam, 2002). These attitudes and beliefs are then strongly influential on the ultimate success of an intervention and go some way to addressing the issues outlined by Dul et al. (2012) around engagement and the current limited uptake of interventions by organisations.In this paper we will explore the role of SOC in the development of effective interventions to reduce MSDs and argue it is time to revisit the concepts proposed by Haslam in 2002, including considering the merits of participative ergonomics, safety culture and behaviour based safety as they relate to MSDs. We move on to suggest that taking into account SOC provides a method to identify organisational and individual barriers and facilitators to intervention design, implementation and reduction of MSDs. If we are to address the difficult and seemingly intractable problem of poorly targeted workplace initiatives, which fail to succeed in reducing the very high numbers of MSDs, a SOC approach may offer a way to support this goal.MSDs are a large and costly problem impacting individuals, industry and society (Murray et al., 2012). Furthermore an ageing population will mean increased pressure to work for longer, for income and to provide an adequate labour force (Harma, 2011), prolonging exposure to existing MSD risks. Reducing the current high numbers of MSDs is a critical part of this complex societal issue to ensure people are physically able to sustain a longer working life should they choose to, and that labour supply needs can also be met.Workplace interventions to address MSDs have reported some successes (Silverstein and Clark, 2004; Denis et al., 2008; Palmer et al., 2012). However, these successes are modest and the “MSD problem”, remains largely unresolved (Wells, 2009). Two questions posed by Wells were: “How effective are the recommended interventions in actually reducing MSDs in the workplace?” and, “How intensely and widely implemented are workplace interventions to prevent MSDs?” These questions suggest there is a gap between what is identified as needed and the actual uptake of the advice provided to the organisations. An ‘evidence to practice’ gap is a potential contributing factor to these issues (Rothmore et al., 2013; Chung and Shorrock, 2011).Despite an extensive evidence base, which supports the role of psychosocial and physical factors in MSD development, interventions to reduce the incidence of MSDs continue to focus primarily on the latter (Macdonald and Oakman, 2015; Oakman et al., 2014; Eatough et al., 2012; Gerr et al., 2014). In addition, systematic reviews analysing the effectiveness of interventions consistently report that multifactorial approaches are needed which take into account a range of relevant factors, but that this is not always borne out in practice (Westgaard and Winkel, 2011; Silverstein, and Clark, 2004). These two factors, consideration of psychosocial risk factors and the implementation of multiple control measures, provide an important basis for effective intervention design.Apart from the design, the nature of the intervention is important. As Haslam (2002) and others (Polanyi et al., 2005; Village and Ostry, 2010) mention, the knowledge, attitudes and beliefs of managers, supervisors and workers greatly influence the impact of advice provided by the ergonomist. The principle of targeting MSD interventions for a specific audience is well understood (Urlings et al., 1990; DeJoy, 1996; Haslam, 2002) and MSD intervention research reports on different approaches for achieving this. Participatory ergonomics programs are one approach commonly associated with MSD intervention development (Wilson et al., 2005) and such approaches have been found to be somewhat successful (Carrivick et al., 2005; Cantley et al., 2014). Targeting of interventions at multiple levels, including individual and the organisation are also critical to achieving sustainable improvement (Amick et al., 2009), while more recently consideration of organisational safety climate or health and safety culture has also been considered in targeting interventions (Lee et al., 2010; Tappin et al., 2015).A participative ergonomics approach draws on a long history of employee involvement research conducted for different reasons (e.g. industrial democracy, change management), and in different domains (e.g. product design, action research). The intentions of a participative ergonomics approach are well established. Interventions that are developed and applied by people involved with the work system are more likely to be appropriately designed and more widely accepted as a result (Wilson et al., 2005). People may also feel greater ownership and engagement through being involved in the change process, are able to identify and address implementation barriers along the way while also having opportunities for personal development (Wilson et al., 2005). A participative ergonomics approach is appealing for MSD prevention, where defining workable interventions can require an intimate understanding of the work system in which they will be applied, and where their implementation can be heavily nuanced by organisational precedence and custom (Hignett et al., 2005). Additionally, as interventions are more likely to succeed when implemented simultaneously (Silverstein and Clark, 2004), a participative approach can be of value in taking ownership of the possibly highly complex implementation process (Gyi et al., 2013).The effectiveness of participative programs is dependent on the approach that is taken, including whether the participation is meaningful or simply pays lip service to the principles. Additionally, factors such as resistance to participation, maintaining support over time, and mismatches in expectations can all be disruptive to programs (van Eerd et al., 2010). Vink et al. (2006) and Wilson et al. (2005) both describe a number of success factors for participation programs, among which stakeholder partnerships, management commitment and continuity of the participative processes are emphasised.In the case of MSD prevention, the breadth of the perspective applied to the project appears to be a key determinant of success (Rivilis et al., 2006). The importance of accounting for the complexities of conducting a participative process in industry and allowing for flexibility in the process/methods is also recognised (Theberge et al., 2006). These factors all assume a high level of organisational commitment and resourcing (people, time and costs), as they require that those involved in the process understand both MSD causation and prevention, and are able to maintain this commitment over time. Such levels of knowledge and commitment are associated with a generative and supportive organisational culture approach to health and safety management (Parker et al., 2006).According to Reason (1997, p 191) ‘few things are so sought after and yet so little understood’ than safety culture. Researchers debate whether it is an entity in itself or an aspect of organisational culture (Choudhry et al., 2007), and consequently terminology and definitions vary. One widely used description states it is ‘ … the sub-facet of organisational culture that is thought to affect members’ attitudes and behaviour in relation to an organisation's health and safety performance’ (Cooper, 2000, p 111), and includes psychological, behavioural and situational factors.The success of health and safety management systems is contingent on the attitudes and behaviours of people in the organisation (HSE, 2013), and whether the culture of the organisation supports these (Bentley and Tappin, 2010; Farrington-Darby et al., 2005). This applies equally to MSDs, where peoples understanding of their causation and prevention, derived in part through their shared values and beliefs, will influence the organisational response to MSDs and the efficacy of their efforts (Tappin et al., 2015).Training for MSD prevention provides a good example of how organisational culture can influence risk management strategies. Training that encompasses teaching workers how to identify all potential contributory factors to MSD development—psychosocial and physical— and encourages a participative approach to risk control development, is more likely to result in better uptake of controls. That is, the workers will own the solutions (Hess et al., 2004; Tappin et al., 2015).In contrast, those organisations with MSD training systems where content is narrow in scope, such as technique based training, have been shown to be ineffective in reducing the prevalence of MSDs (Amick et al., 2009; Hogan et al., 2014) and a more limited understanding of relevant hazards and risk is likely, impeding development of effective controls. Taking into account organisational safety culture should be an integral component of intervention development and is strongly linked with the SOC approach which considers the readiness of change in an organisation to be fundamental in intervention development.Behaviour based safety approaches, were popular from the nineties until the mid 2000s (Cox and Jones, 2006). Programs based on this approach are aimed at changing an individual's behaviour in relation to safety (DeJoy, 2005), and have been accused of taking a narrow approach, often targeting a person's adherence to administrative risk controls, for example wearing hearing protection or lifting in a “correct” manner. It is often referred to as a bottom up approach, whereas in contrast, a systems approach or top down approach is focused on ensuring workers are able to undertake their work in a safe manner, within a system which allows them to work sustainably. If a safety related issue arises, then a holistic approach is taken which examines all potential causes of the problem.In recent years little has been written about behaviour based safety programs, perhaps because it is no longer fashionable and other approaches have been deemed more appropriate or effective (Cox et al., 2006). Cox et al. argue that despite limitations this approach has merit if embedded in a broader systematic approach and that with strong leadership and an appropriate environmental context the use of behaviour-based approaches can result in changes to the way people work and reduce safety based problems.The critics of the behaviour based safety approach, as many ergonomists and occupational health professionals are, argue that the strong emphasis on the person rather than the environmental context, leads to a focus on individual causes (often behaviours) of accidents or injuries, but does not address the systems issues which have occurred further upstream (Borys, 2014). For outcomes such as MSDs, which are often the result of cumulative exposure, and where the causal factors are not proximal to the injury, a heavy focus on behaviour is likely to be inadequate in identifying the full range of factors linked to MSD development.One potential reason for the limited uptake of a SOC approach in risk management of MSDs is the perception that it targets individuals, as occurs with behaviour based safety, and therefore is not appropriate for the development of workplace interventions. An important distinction is needed, as SOC is not aimed at changing an individual's behaviour, but is focused on identifying an individual's readiness to change so that interventions can be targeted appropriately to increase their chances of uptake, their effectiveness and their sustainability. Furthermore, as this applies to all individuals a critical consideration is the engagement of management in the process, assessing and then appropriately targeting interventions taking into account their SOC. This addresses some of the issues previously raised by Dul et al. (2012) concerning the engagement of the “right” people in terms of decision making.The stage of change model (Haslam, 2002), makes an assumption that behaviour change is a dynamic process; and an individual's readiness to change is assessed using a short series of closed questions after which a participant is assigned to one of five stages:1.Pre-contemplation (unaware or unconcerned about workplace hazards);Contemplation (considering change but not yet ready to act);Preparation (intend to change in the near future);Action (made changes in the previous 6 months);Maintenance (made change and are working to consolidate gains and avoid relapse).Determining the range of stages at which individuals are operating allows advice to be ‘tailored’ so it is more likely to be effectively implemented. For example, in relation to MSDs those who are in the pre-contemplation phase will need to be educated on the relevant causal factors for MSDs, which are specific to their organisation. An option may be the use of survey results from the organisation where hazards relevant to the development of MSDs have been measured. These results could be used as a starting point for educating individuals on the links between workplace hazards and MSD development, specific to their organisation.The use of SOC for interventions targeted at MSDs has been limited (Village and Ostry, 2010; Barrett et al., 2005; Whysall et al., 2006a; Rothmore et al., 2015). Village and Ostry (2010) examined attitudes, beliefs and readiness for injury prevention in construction workers. They found three quarters of workers in the study population reported currently taking action to reduce injuries. This included: getting help with lifting (36%), stretching exercises (22.7%), being aware of hazards and planning (10.5%) and the use of a “proper” technique (8.8%). Very few reported engineering changes, although supervisors reported higher numbers in comparison to the worker groups.Whysall's study (2006a) examined the impact of tailoring interventions; measuring changes in discomfort levels and SOC four to six months after implementation and found some support for moving individuals from pre contemplation to action, and reduced discomfort levels. When followed up at 15 and 20 months post-intervention these health benefits and risk awareness changes were maintained (Shaw et al., 2007).Rothmore et al. (2015) examined SOC in organisations, and compared the impact of tailoring advice to ‘standard’ advice. A key difference of Rothmore's study compared to Whysall et al. (2006a) and colleagues concerned the development of interventions. In Whysall and colleagues study the interventions were developed prior to the study, whilst in Rothmore et al. they were an integrated component of the study. Rothmore et al. reported that those with advice ‘tailored’ according to SOC had implemented a greater number of control measures compared to organisations provided with ‘standard’ ergonomics advice (i.e. recommended interventions which were based on ergonomics principles but which were not ‘tailored’ according to SOC). Of particular interest was that in the 6–12 months following receipt of the targeted advice the organisations subsequently implemented significantly more controls of a higher order (i.e. engineering solutions) than those organisations which had received ‘standard’ advice. This suggests that time is needed to allocate appropriate resources, such as budget or skills, for the development of more extensive controls which may require changes to infrastructure or processes.Workplace interventions are not always implemented as recommended (Denis et al., 2008). Recommendations by ergonomists and OHS practitioners are developed based on an assessment of workplace conditions but the implementation of advice remains inconsistent. A plausible reason is that those responsible for developing the interventions have not taken into account the organisations understanding of their problem and what needs to be done to solve it. Many complexities exist, but the theme of poorly targeted interventions, including an over-reliance on training, is increasingly described in the literature and needs to be addressed if we are to improve the MSDs problem. A research to practice gap exists, where process and effectiveness evaluation of ‘tailored’ interventions using a SOC approach is needed. One such example of a ‘tailored’ approach to advice provided by ergonomists in relation to MSD prevention is presented here.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Effective interventions take into account a combination of variables. This is consistent with a sociotechnical systems approach which supports addressing problems in a systematic manner by taking into account all contributing factors to an identified issue, in this case MSDs. Of concern is evidence suggesting that in practice those charged with the management of MSDs are not consistently adopting this approach, and as such intervention development may not represent contemporary best practice. In addition, intervention uptake and sustainability is inconsistent, suggesting a need to improve the targeting of interventions. We propose a potential method of addressing this gap is the SOC model. Taking into account an organisation and individual's preparedness for change would appear to offer a critical link between implementation and intervention that is currently missing in practice. As stated by Haslam (2002) targeting of ergonomics interventions is needed. We suggest that his proposal offers a way to improve MSD risk management, and move the profession forward in the provision of more effective interventions to reduce musculoskeletal disorders.