@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Driving without wings: The effect of different digital mirror locations on the visual behaviour, performance and opinions of drivers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Digital mirrors can overcome many of the limitations of traditional reflective mirrors in cars.A driving simulator study evaluated 5 different configurations of digital mirrors.Digital mirrors allowed drivers to more rapidly pick up salient information from the road scene.Drivers preferred configurations that preserved elements of real-world mapping.Further work is required to validate results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Digital mirrors,Driving,Visual behaviour,Simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Drivers' awareness of the rearward road scene is critical when contemplating or executing lane-change manoeuvres, such as overtaking. Preliminary investigations have speculated on the use of rear-facing cameras to relay images to displays mounted inside the car to create ‘digital mirrors'. These may overcome many of the limitations associated with traditional ‘wing’ and rear-view mirrors, yet will inevitably effect drivers' normal visual scanning behaviour, and may force them to consider the rearward road scene from an unfamiliar perspective that is incongruent with their mental model of the outside world. We describe a study conducted within a medium-fidelity simulator aiming to explore the visual behaviour, driving performance and opinions of drivers while using internally located digital mirrors during different overtaking manoeuvres. Using a generic UK motorway scenario, thirty-eight experienced drivers conducted overtaking manoeuvres using each of five different layouts of digital mirrors with varying degrees of ‘real-world’ mapping. The results showed reductions in decision time for lane changes and eyes-off road time while using the digital mirrors, when compared with baseline traditional reflective mirrors, suggesting that digital displays may enable drivers to more rapidly pick up the salient information from the rearward road scene. Subjectively, drivers preferred configurations that most closely matched existing mirror locations, where aspects of real-world mapping were largely preserved. The research highlights important human factors issues that require further investigation prior to further development/implementation of digital mirrors within vehicles. Future work should also aim to validate findings within real-world on-road environments whilst considering the effects of digital mirrors on other important visual behaviour characteristics, such as depth perception.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A driver's ability to detect closing headway or possible lateral conflicts is critical when contemplating or executing lane-change manoeuvres, such as overtaking. Indeed, lack of attention to other road users has been widely cited as a causal factor in a large proportion of road traffic accidents (NHTSA, 2013). Consequently, a driver must maintain awareness of both the forward and rearward road scenes. While the forward road scene dominates a driver's normal field of view, their awareness of the rearward scene is largely dependent on glances to rear-view mirrors (internally and externally), which provide only an indirect view. Direct over-the-shoulder checks, or adjustments to a driver's seating position, may be used to compensate for the lack of visual acuity afforded by rear-view mirrors or to overcome issues of parallax that they pose (Schumann et al., 1996). However, performing additional checks, such as over-the-shoulder glances, require drivers to physically change their posture and head position, and thus may divert their full visual attention away from the forward road scene. This can result in deleterious effects on vehicle control – such as lateral instability – particularly amongst learner and novice drivers, and when travelling at speed. Furthermore, vehicle interior design (e.g. bulky head restraints on seats) can make over-the-shoulder checks difficult, and older drivers may be less able to perform these checks due to reduced mobility, especially when wearing a seatbelt (Dewar et al., 2000; NHTSA, 2006). Consequently, drivers are increasingly reliant on an indirect view of the rearward road scene via side (‘wing’) and internal rear-view mirrors when contemplating or executing lateral vehicle movements, particularly in the presence of other road users.In a driving context, there are a number of significant limitations associated with relying on mirrors to observe the rearward road scene. Notwithstanding potential confusion due to image reversal, relying upon planar (flat) mirrors to reflect the rearward road scene results in a blind spot, i.e. an area that cannot be seen from the normal driving position, either directly or indirectly via any of the internal or external mirrors (Rickesh and Naveen, 2011). Convex mirrors provide a more expansive reflective view and afford a greater coverage of the rearward road scene, thereby eliminating the blind spot. However, the convex surface causes image distortion, referred to as ‘minification’ that can lead to overestimation of the distance of following vehicles, misjudgements of speed and driver confusion (Schumann et al., 1996; Luoma et al., 2000). Consequently, in some countries (e.g. U.S.A. and Canada), a safety warning is required to be permanently engraved on the reflective surface of all convex mirrors of motor vehicles, stating “Objects in Mirror Are Closer Than They Appear” (U.S. National Archives and Records Administration, 2004). In contrast, multi-radius, or aspheric, mirrors are used throughout much of Europe. These comprise both planar and non-planar sections. Typically, the main body of the mirror surface is flat, but it curves away toward the outer edge thereby reducing the size of the blind spot area while also reducing the overall minification effect (Schumann et al., 1996).11The European ECE Regulation 46 used throughout most of the rest of the World permits planar, convex, and/or aspheric mirrors on either side of the vehicle; however, neither the U.S. nor the Canadian standard allows for aspheric mirrors (United Nations, 1995).Distance/depth perception in mirrors is also affected by drivers' eye-to-mirror distance. Convex passenger-side mirrors produce a larger overestimation of the distance of a following vehicle due to larger eye-to-mirror distances in comparison with driver-side mirrors (Flannagan et al., 1997). However, there is little evidence to suggest that poor distance estimation caused by non-planar mirrors actually affects the number of lane-change crashes. In fact, the use of non-planar mirrors appears to be beneficial in some circumstances, e.g. for ‘high risk’ driver groups, such as novice drivers, who are yet to develop optimum visual search strategies (Konstantopoulos and Crundall, 2008) or may be unaccustomed to over-the-shoulder checks (Underwood et al., 2002), or for older drivers, for whom these checks may be physically difficult (Dewar et al., 2000; Luoma et al., 2000; Schumann et al., 1996). Furthermore, it is suggested that drivers adapt their perception of objects in the side mirrors to automatically compensate for the minification effect (Luoma et al., 2000). Flannagan et al. (1996) found empirical evidence of this, but it is not clear if these effects were sustained, as drivers were not tested over extended periods of mirror use.A further limitation of using mirrors to reflect the rearward road scene is that mirrors require physical placement in the direct line of sight in order to reflect the desired image/view. This dictates that side mirrors are located externally. Even so, in some situations, the image may still be partially obscured by the rear car body or wheel arches, dirt on the windows, adverse weather conditions (e.g. rain drops on the window) or glare from sunlight (Dewar et al., 2000; Hucho and Sovran, 1993). Moreover, the quality and utility of the reflected view is determined to a large extent by the physical dimensions (primarily width in a driving context) of the mirror: bigger is most definitely better (Dewar et al., 2000). However, there are restrictions to the physical dimensions that are acceptable (e.g. there is limited space to physically attach a mirror to the exterior of a car), and there are also practical and legal limitations regarding how far an outside-mounted mirror can reasonably extend. For example, in the UK, The Road Vehicles (Construction and Use) Regulations 1986 dictates that mirrors must not project more than 20 cm beyond the overall width of the vehicle/trailer.Based on these concerns, and notwithstanding current legislation,22For example, in the UK, The Road Vehicles (Construction and Use) Regulations 1986 dictates that a typical passenger car must have, “at least one mirror fitted externally on the offside, one mirror fitted internally, unless a mirror so fitted would give the driver no view to the rear of the vehicle, and at least one mirror fitted externally on the nearside of the vehicle, unless a mirror which gives the driver an adequate view to the rear is fitted internally” (UK National Archives, 1986).it would seem prudent to consider utilising an alternative method to capture and display details of the rearward road scene to drivers that could overcome some of the limitations of using traditional reflective mirrors. For example, the rearward scene could be captured utilising rear-facing cameras and relayed to video displays that serve as digital mirrors, in a similar fashion to existing camera-based parking-assist systems that warn drivers of unforeseen objects, pedestrians or other vulnerable road users (VRU) in the path of their vehicle when reversing. In this situation, there would no longer be a requirement to reflect the desired view, so digital mirrors need not be physically mounted outside the car. The absence of externally protruding fixtures will naturally improve vehicle aerodynamics, thereby providing the additional benefit of increased fuel economy or, in the case of electric and hybrid vehicles, extended range (Hucho and Sovran, 1993).Digital mirror displays may also be used to provide richer, driver-centric information. For example, it would be possible to augment the image by digitally highlighting hazards, VRUs etc., though care would need to be taken to ensure that drivers are not distracted or overloaded by any additional information presented. Furthermore, many of the aforementioned concerns could be ameliorated. For example, digital image processing could be used to present a wider field of view, thereby eliminating blind spots without image distortion (Rickesh and Naveen, 2011), and image clarity could be enhanced, e.g. to remove glare/improve night-time visibility (Hollnagel and Källhammer, 2003).While it might appear tempting to thus argue that external mirrors should be replaced by in-vehicle digital mirror displays forthwith, there are nevertheless inherent problems using camera/video-based systems to relay information to drivers. For example, camera-based systems are equally susceptible to environmental factors that may limit the camera's effectiveness, such as rain, fog or other inclement weather. Even in clear daytime conditions, the visibility of objects viewed on the monitor may be impaired due to sun glare (NHTSA, 2006) or ‘blooming’ (an effect whereby over-exposure lowers the contrast and distorts the image) (Hogervorst and De Vries, 2010). The size of the internal display is equally important – for a rear-view camera-based parking assist system, NHTSA (2006) found that in addition to limiting the field of view, smaller screens appeared to complicate the judgement of the distance to rear objects.Utilising in-vehicle displays also disrupts drivers' normal visual scanning behaviour, diverting their attention away from the road, and may lead to situations of ergonomic discomfort and extend primary task-completion times (Lamble et al., 1999; McLaughlin et al., 2003; Mohamed Ali and Fatin Bazilah, 2014). McLaughlin et al. (2003) discovered that when presented with a rear-video parking assist system, participants’ visual behaviour changed to include more in-vehicle glances to the video display rather than externally, thereby resulting in an increase in total off-road glances. Participants also took longer to park when using the camera-based parking aids, though interestingly evaluated the quality of their parking and their ability to judge the distance to other objects as higher when using the video display (McLaughlin et al., 2003). As with digital mirrors, one could argue that the additional in-vehicle glances directed towards the displays were still fundamentally associated with primary task activities. Nevertheless, there are many concerns, such as distraction, deteriorations in driving performance and increases in cognitive load, that are inherently associated with increased in-vehicle visual scanning (De Waard, 1996; Bao et al., 2002; Noy et al., 2004).A more fundamental concern presented by replacing mirrors with in-vehicle video displays is that it can displace and reformat a driver's view of the road scene. Indeed, existing rear-view mirrors are currently located in standardised, well-understood locations (that are highly familiar to experienced drivers), where there is a clear one-to-one mapping with the outside road scene. When utilising digital mirrors, drivers are required to consider the road scene from an unfamiliar perspective that may be incongruent with their mental model of the outside world. This is likely to impose additional cognitive load and visual demand on drivers as they attempt to relate/re-orientate the video display with the real world before they act on the information it provides. The performance of camera-based video systems is therefore also likely to be dependent on a number of human factors that limit performance, such as the ability of drivers to interpret the information presented, the time taken to decide what to do, and the appropriateness/timeliness of drivers' responses. In the current context, it is expected that these factors will be influenced by the location/configuration of the in-vehicle displays.Relevant literature regarding the placement of displays in vehicles recommends that those which have high attentional demands, or that are frequently accessed by drivers, are located as close as possible to the driver's normal line of sight. This dictates that such displays are typically positioned on top of the dashboard or to the side of the steering wheel (Lamble et al., 1999; Wittmann et al., 2006). Spatial proximity to the outside road scene significantly minimises the detrimental effects on driving, indicated by reduced lane departures and improved reaction times and braking responses (Lamble et al., 1999; Wittmann et al., 2006). Moreover, improvements in lateral and longitudinal vehicle control and response times to hazardous signals are associated with reductions of in-vehicle display eccentricity (Burns et al., 2000; Summala et al., 1996). The studies conducted by Lamble et al. (1999) and Wittmann et al. (2006) focussed on displays used for secondary in-vehicle tasks. While it is tempting to argue that the findings are therefore equally applicable when locating digital mirror displays, it is recognised that the successful deployment of digital mirrors is also incumbent on drivers' ability to reconstruct the real world driving scene from the virtual/digital images presented. Consequently, the optimal location of digital mirrors may differ to that recommended for secondary displays and care should be taken with the unsolicited application of this guidance.Existing research in the application and integration of digital mirrors within vehicles (e.g. Mohamed Ali and Fatin Bazilah, 2014) has tended to employ exploratory investigations/discussions into the feasibility of the mirrorless car concept, rather than quantitative evaluations. Furthermore, this research has tended to consider only a single configuration/location of the displays, albeit guided by popular ergonomic wisdom. Although revealing, it is suggested that the successful integration of ‘digital mirrors’ within vehicles is not only determined by physical ergonomics, but also by the driver's ability to accommodate the digital representation of the rearward road scene within the real-world driving situation. This is also likely to be influenced by the layout of the digital displays within the vehicle, and thus further research is required to determine the performance associated with different candidate configurations.This paper reports a driving simulator study designed to investigate the effect of different locations and configurations of digital side (‘wing’) and internal rear-view mirror displays during lane departure and overtaking manoeuvres. During the study, the traditional reflective mirrors (rear, offside and nearside) were replaced by three digital mirrors, in five different locations/configurations.It is anticipated that digital displays would initially replace current reflective mirrors within existing or next generation cars rather than complimenting revolutionary new vehicle designs. As such, the possible locations and configurations are naturally limited and constrained by existing cabin space/equipment and current legal obligations (such as adherence to defined ‘vision zones’). Thus, the locations and configurations used during the study, although inspired by the aforementioned literature, were chosen in collaboration with industry experts. The configurations were intended to provide varying degrees of ‘real-world’ mapping, ranging from individual displays situated in existing mirror location (one-to-one mapping), to a digital mirror cluster mounted in the centre console (providing an integrated ‘behind you’ source of information rather than any discernible mapping to the real-world).Given that digital mirrors are most likely an enhancement to existing/next generation vehicles, driver expectancy is also important. Consequently, only experienced and active drivers were recruited to take part in the study. It is therefore not intended to compare the behaviour and opinions of novice and experienced drivers, although it is recognised that conducting the study using a cohort comprising only new or novice drivers, less accustomed to or constrained by the current mirror set-up, may reveal additional insights.During the study, relevant data were obtained to determine driving performance, visual behaviour and subjective evaluations of workload, distraction, situation awareness, trust and depth perception associated with the digital mirror configurations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
