@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Categorisation of visualisation methods to support the design of Human-Computer Interaction Systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Established an inventory of 23 Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) visualisation methods.Identified 5 selection approaches.Presented and provided evidence of how the visualisation methods are categorised in each selection approach.Discussed the limitations and benefits of each selection approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Visual artefacts,Selection approach,Human-Computer Interaction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
During the design of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) systems, the creation of visual artefacts forms an important part of design. On one hand producing a visual artefact has a number of advantages: it helps designers to externalise their thought and acts as a common language between different stakeholders. On the other hand, if an inappropriate visualisation method is employed it could hinder the design process. To support the design of HCI systems, this paper reviews the categorisation of visualisation methods used in HCI. A keyword search is conducted to identify a) current HCI design methods, b) approaches of selecting these methods. The resulting design methods are filtered to create a list of just visualisation methods. These are then categorised using the approaches identified in (b). As a result 23 HCI visualisation methods are identified and categorised in 5 selection approaches (The Recipient, Primary Purpose, Visual Archetype, Interaction Type, and The Design Process).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As a discipline, Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) has historically involved people from different fields (Lazar et al., 2010; Wania et al., 2007; Seffah et al., 2005; Carroll, 2003; Adamczyk and Twidale, 2007). Even though designing with people of varying background and expertise can help bring different perspectives together to generate new ideas (Rogers et al., 2011), it can also hinder the collaboration if the team members are restricted by discipline language and design approaches (Haesen et al., 2010; Mendel, 2012). The application of visualisation methods is widely discussed as a way to overcome the challenges of collaborative design (Bryan-Kinns and Hamilton, 2002; James Pierce, 2014; Zimmerman et al., 2007).This paper adopts the definition of Lengler and Eppler (2007, p.1) and defines a visualisation method as “… a systematic, rule-based, external, permanent, and graphic representation that depicts information in a way that is conducive to acquiring insights, developing an elaboration understanding, or communicating experiences.”The adoption of visualisation methods in design has a number of advantages, including:•Visualising something externalises your understandingExternalising internal understanding aids the sharing of knowledge. This is important in two ways. Firstly, the adaptation of physical prototypes and sharable tools within a design team can lead to more successful methods in design (Jang and Schunn, 2012). Secondly, the creation of visual artefacts acts to elicit information from users, which may otherwise be difficult to capture (Sanders and William, 2003).•Visual artefacts help to store mental representations physicallyCreating a visual artefact helps to relieve a person's working memory (Tversky and Suwa, 2009), therefore improving thinking capacity. Furthermore, the act of visualisation could provoke the creation of new ideas (Fallman, 2003) or refinement of a design (Römer et al., 2001).•Visual artefacts can group together relevant informationGrouping together relevant information can clarify how ideas and concepts are related (Tversky and Suwa, 2009). This reduces the effort, which would otherwise be required to search for elements to make problem-solving inferences (Larkin and Herbert, 1987).The purpose of employing a visualisation method is not simply to create an image or object; the challenge is to provide relevant information that furthers the design process (Houde and Hill, 1997). In fact, creating an artefact which does not assist a designer to communicate or develop their ideas in a useful way is “useless, incomprehensible, confusing, worse than no image at all” (Arnheim, 1969). Whether or not relevant information is provided can be affected by the expertise of the designer (Haesen et al., 2009; Self et al., 2014) as well as their awareness and understanding of available design methods (Weevers and van Kuijk, 2012).As HCI matures, there is an increasing demand to support selection amongst the growing number of design methods (Bryan-Kinns and Hamilton, 2002; Houde and Hill, 1997; Tidball et al., 2010). Current selection tools tend to focus on a facet of HCI methods, such as usability (Usability Net, 2006), UCD (Royal College of Art, n.d.; Weevers and van Kuijk, 2012; Maguire, 2001), and Service Design (Mendel, 2012; Tassi, 2009; Segelström and Holmlid, 2011; Stickdorn and Schneider, 2010; Alves and Nunes, 2013). To date, no research has been attempted to assemble a collection of HCI visualisation methods. A rare example of a visual-based selection tool is the periodic table of visualisation methods created by Lengler and Eppler (2007). They compiled over 100 visualisation methods and organised them into a periodic table format. Designers can make a selection based on a number of aspects, such as the complexity of the method and how similar they are to each other. These methods, however, are for management purposes and not HCI design.To fill this gap, this paper reviews the categorisation of visualisation methods used in HCI. The authors seek to establish an inventory of HCI visualisation methods and identify ways of electing amongst them. Creating the inventory of HCI methods would enable designers to discover and learn about methods that they may have not used before or be familiar with. Categorising the methods provides a structure for new and experienced designers to determine appropriate methods for their design project.This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 details the research methodology of how HCI visualisation methods and selection approaches are derived and categorised. Section 3 presents the resulting methods and selection approaches identified and the categorisation of the methods in each approach. Section 4 discusses the results and future work. Section 5 provides the conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
