@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exploring sub-optimal use of an electronic risk assessment tool for venous thromboembolism

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined use and views of an electronic risk assessment tool for VTE.We found the tool was used as intended only 36% of the time.Poor tool design was a key factor contributing to sub-optimal use.Sub-optimal use was also due to poor understanding and awareness of the tool.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Venous thromboembolism,VTE prophylaxis,Electronic risk assessment tool,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
International guidelines and consensus groups recommend using a risk assessment tool (RAT) to assess Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) risk prior to the prescription of prophylaxis. We set out to examine how an electronic RAT was being used (i.e. if by the right clinician, at the right time, for the right purpose) and to identify factors influencing utilization of the RAT. A sample of 112 risk assessments was audited and 12 prescribers were interviewed. The RAT was used as intended in only 40 (35.7%) cases (i.e. completed by a doctor within 24 h of admission, prior to the prescription of prophylaxis). We identified several reasons for sub-optimal use of the RAT, including beliefs about the need for a RAT, poor awareness of the tool, and poor RAT design. If a user-centred approach had been adopted, it is likely that a RAT would not have been implemented or that problematic design issues would have been identified.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Venous Thromboembolism (VTE – the formation of a blood clot in the deep vein of the leg or pelvis, and/or the clot travelling to the lungs) is reported to be the most common preventable cause of death in hospitals (Findlay et al., 2010; Michota, 2007). VTE results in approximately 5000 deaths per year in Australia (Access Economics, 2008) and in more deaths than AIDS, breast cancer, prostate cancer and traffic accidents combined in the USA and UK (John Hopkins Medicine, 2015). There is now overwhelming evidence indicating that mechanical and pharmacological prophylaxis are extremely effective in reducing VTE risk (Findlay et al., 2010; National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2010) but appropriate prophylaxis is not always prescribed and VTE remains a significant problem for hospitals (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2010; Kakkar et al., 2004; Ahmad et al., 2002; Learhinan and Alderman, 2003; Cohen et al., 2008; De Zylva et al., 2012). Many interventions (e.g. dissemination of guidelines, education, feedback, computer-based decision support) have been trialed and implemented to improve appropriate use of VTE prophylaxis in hospitals, but these demonstrate varying levels of success (Michota, 2007; Lau and Haut, 2014; Tooher et al., 2005). Interventions shown to be effective are those that are mandatory (e.g. a hard stop in an electronic system where the user is unable to proceed with ordering tests or medications for a patient until VTE prophylaxis is prescribed) and integrate well into user workflow (Lau and Haut, 2014; Streiff et al., 2012). However, to date, no comparative analyses of different interventions have been published to assess their relative effectiveness in improving VTE prophylaxis prescribing. Thus, there is limited quantitative comparative evidence to guide the design or selection of an appropriate strategy.International guidelines and consensus groups recommend using a risk assessment tool (RAT) to assess VTE risk prior to the prescription of prophylaxis (Cohen et al., 2005; The Australia & New Zealand Working Party on the Management & Prevention of Venous Thromboembolism, 2010; NSW Health, 2010a; National Health, 2011; Geerts et al., 2008). There is also evidence to suggest that use of a RAT, in combination with prescribing advice, can improve appropriate use of VTE prophylaxis and reduce VTE occurrence (Haut et al., 2012; Novis et al., 2010; Lau et al., 2015; Zeidan et al., 2013). In 2010, the New South Wales (NSW) government issued a policy directive stating that all patients admitted to any NSW public hospital must be assessed for risk of VTE (NSW Health, 2010b). Following dissemination of the directive, in 2011 the study site, a teaching hospital in NSW, designed and implemented an electronic RAT, and revised their VTE prophylaxis policy to specify that patients must be individually assessed for their risk of VTE using the electronic tool within 24 h of admission to hospital.Despite the requirement for all patients to be risk assessed, previous audits at the study hospital have shown that the electronic VTE RAT is rarely utilised. For example, only 69 (4.4%) of the 1582 patients admitted to the hospital in August 2013 (excluding day-only admissions) were risk assessed using the RAT. In this study, we set out to determine why this might be the case. In particular, we aimed to determine how the RAT was being used (i.e. if by the right clinician, at the right time, for the right purpose) and to identify factors influencing completion of an electronic risk assessment. With limited knowledge of current user perceptions of VTE prevention and of the RAT, we undertook an exploratory study with no a priori hypotheses.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Overall, our audit and interviews revealed that the stand-alone RAT was not being utilised as intended (i.e. to guide the prescription of prophylaxis within 24 h of admission). Our findings provide additional support for the notion that interventions effective in improving VTE prophylaxis are those that are mandatory and integrate well into user workflow (Lau and Haut, 2014; Streiff et al., 2012). The electronic RAT in this trial met neither of these criteria. It was only by evaluating the tool in practice that we were able to determine its impact on routine clinical work and to capture the views of experienced users. This study demonstrates that implementation of a system or tool does not necessarily result in uptake of the tool or optimal use of the tool. Evaluation of a tool following implementation is critical to determine how it is being integrated into practice and to identify any barriers to optimal use.The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest in the research.