@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predicting tool operator capacity to react against torque within acceptable handle deflection limits in automotive assembly

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Tool, workstation, and task parameters were measured for 35 tools, representing 69 installations in an automotive assembly plant.The dynamic forces acting against the human tool operator and resulting handle reaction deflections were predicted using a biodynamic tool operator model.The proportion of threaded fastener tool operators capable of maintaining published psychophysically derived deflection limits were ascertained.While handle deflection did not exceed the limit for most installations, changes in tool speed and operator position improved the six jobs that did.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Power hand tool,Upper limb biomechanics,Tool operator biodynamic model,Work related musculoskeletal disorders,Nutrunner,Dynamic strength,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The proportion of tool operators capable of maintaining published psychophysically derived threaded fastener tool handle deflection limits were predicted using a biodynamic tool operator model, interacting with the tool, task and workstation. Tool parameters, including geometry, speed and torque were obtained from the specifications for 35 tools used in an auto assembly plant. Tool mass moments of inertia were measured for these tools using a novel device that engages the tool in a rotating system of known inertia. Task parameters, including fastener target torque and joint properties (soft, medium or hard), were ascertained from the vehicle design specifications. Workstation parameters, including vertical and horizontal distances from the operator were measured using a laser rangefinder for 69 tool installations in the plant. These parameters were entered into the model and tool handle deflection was predicted for each job. While handle deflection for most jobs did not exceed the capacity of 75% females and 99% males, six jobs exceeded the deflection criterion. Those tool installations were examined and modifications in tool speed and operator position improved those jobs within the deflection limits, as predicted by the model. We conclude that biodynamic tool operator models may be useful for identifying stressful tool installations and interventions that bring them within the capacity of most operators.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Industrial power hand tools, such as nutrunners, are available in a variety of shapes, sizes, and capabilities (Radwin and Haney, 1996). In automotive manufacturing, these types of tools are used for a multitude of operations in different locations and orientations relative to the operator. Previous studies have shown that numerous factors affect the forces acting against the operator and hence the effort to operate them (Radwin et al., 1995; Radwin, et al., 1996; Lin et al., 2001). Tool geometry, mass, mass moment of inertia about the spindle axis, and center of gravity (CG) directly affect handle force (Lin et al., 2001, 2003a.) Torque build-up time has been found to affect handle displacement and operator discomfort (Armstrong et al., 1999; Lindqvist, 1993; Oh and Radwin, 1998; Radwin et al., 1989). Threaded fastener torque build-up time is dependent on the fastener joint rate. These properties have an effect on both static and dynamic handling of the tool by an operator. A dynamic model is necessary to estimate handle reactions because static models cannot account for the impulsive nature of these tools, particularly shutoff torque-controlled tools often used in automotive manufacturing.Our laboratory developed a biodynamic human operator model for predicting the dynamic forces acting against the tool operator and the associated handle reaction based on tool inertial properties, operator position, and torque build-up (Lin, 2001; Lin et al., 2001, 2003a, 2003b). By using the model to predict the tool handle response based on individual biodynamic parameters (i.e. mass moment of inertia, stiffness, and damping) for a sample of 25 subjects (13 males, 12 females) for various postures encountered in power tool operation as measured by Lin et al. (2001), the distribution (i.e. mean and standard deviation) of the predicted deflections of male and female operators can be ascertained.There are few established criteria for a tool operator's capacity to act against threaded fastener nutrunner reaction forces. Often in practice, target torque is used as the defining metric. Ku et al., (2007) found that predicted handle forces and predicted handle deflection for jobs where injuries were reported were significantly greater than those jobs free of injuries, whereas target torque did not show statistically significant differences among injury and non-injury jobs. Some researchers have applied psychophysical criteria (Kihlberg et al., 1993; Kihlberg et al., 1994).Kihlberg et al. (1995) reported that 90% of operators accepted right angle nutrunner handle displacements less than 3 cm (discomfort of 2 on a 0–10 scale). Lin and McCory (2009) found that for pistol grip tools on a horizontal surface, an angular displacement of 13° had discomfort of 2 or less for 91% (649/715) of the operators, and for a pistol grip tools on a vertical surface, an angular displacement of 9° had discomfort 2 or less for 91% (654/720) of the operators. They also found that for 80% (572/712) of the operators, a displacement of 2.6 cm for right angle tools on a horizontal surface had a discomfort less than or equal to 2, which agreed with Kihlberg et al. (1995). We therefore considered applying the biodynamic operator model for predicting a population of tool operators’ capacities to constrain tool deflection within these boundaries.The objective of this paper was to evaluate jobs by predicting tool deflection using our biodynamic model and comparing these deflections against values from psychophysical studies in the literature. The study was conducted in an assembly plant during actual production. The methods used for measuring parameters for the biodynamic power hand tool operator model to evaluate the capacity to react against power hand tool reaction forces are explained. In-plant procedures, including custom instruments for measuring tool mass moment of inertia are also described. These parameters were measured and the biodynamic model was used for predicting the capacity of a population of tool operators. When the analysis demonstrated that deflection limits were exceeded, the study explored changing model parameters in order to improve the job. The use of the model for identifying and quantifying specific ergonomic improvements are demonstrated.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
