@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Applications of integrated human error identification techniques on the chemical cylinder change task

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A number of execution procedures and frameworks of HEI techniques were integrated to assess latent human errors.Some latent human errors and error mechanism of a chemical cylinder change task have been identified.The human error probability of the case system has been calculated.Some strategies to prevent latent human errors of the case system have been proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human errors,Human reliability analysis,Safety management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper outlines the human error identification (HEI) techniques that currently exist to assess latent human errors. Many formal error identification techniques have existed for years, but few have been validated to cover latent human error analysis in different domains. This study considers many possible error modes and influential factors, including external error modes, internal error modes, psychological error mechanisms, and performance shaping factors, and integrates several execution procedures and frameworks of HEI techniques. The case study in this research was the operational process of changing chemical cylinders in a factory. In addition, the integrated HEI method was used to assess the operational processes and the system's reliability. It was concluded that the integrated method is a valuable aid to develop much safer operational processes and can be used to predict human error rates on critical tasks in the plant.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the industrial revolution, major industrial accidents have become more and more serious. The affected scopes have been broadened gradually due to the development of science and technology and the expansion of factories. Based on investigations of accidents during last few years, it was found that human error is still a critical contributing factor. The Major Accident Reporting System indicates that human error was responsible for 90% of accidents, most of which could have been prevented by management measures; thus, the importance of human factors in industrial safety and accident prevention is quite evident (Leva, 2005). Therefore, it is important to assess human reliability to ensure industrial safety.With the progress of technology, the design of the human-machine system has become more and more complicated. In response to rapid and complex changes in nowadays work, the study of ergonomics hazards needs to be established (Niu, 2010). The response strategy to minimize the risk of human error is the extensive use of automated processes, taking into account capacity constraints and the security of the operators. Automation improves the performance of operations and reduces the workload of operators, and it has successfully terminated human error at the behavioral level. However, automation introduces other safety issues caused by human cognition and social context that are usually ignored (Cacciabue, 2004). Therefore, in order to make the assessment results more precise and complete in the process of evaluating a system's reliability, it is necessary to realize the human cognitive process in various contexts and in the assessment of the system's design.Currently, the human error identification (HEI) technique is used extensively to analyze human operational errors. Even though these techniques have been available for decades and there are many methods for assessing human errors, they are not universal for each domain because the development process must match different industrial characteristics, e.g., nuclear power plants, aviation, and the traditional chemical industry. Baysari et al. (2011) have modified one of the HEI tool to include more systemic performance factors contributing to incident occurrence for Australian rail. Since the priorities and objectives of the analysis performed in each method are not entirely the same, the external behavioral responses of operators and the associated psychological reaction mechanisms are not completely understood. Thus, the objectives of this research are as follows:(i)To integrate the existing HEI methods with the methods used in various domains.To explore the logic of the analysis process to determine the pros and cons of each approach.To develop an assessment process that can predict human errors more effectively using complementary approaches and by integrating the various HEI approaches.Sheridan (2008) concluded that zero risk is not achievable, but a thorough analysis is bound to effectively make the system safer.The main objectives of this research were to examine the operational process of changing chemical cylinders in a manufactory and to use the integrated analysis method of the HEI approaches to assess the operational processes and overall reliability of the system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
