@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Should electric fans be used during a heat wave?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The effect of electric fan use on human heat balance during heat waves was modelled.Fans increase critical air temperature for elevated physiological strain by 3–4 °C.Model suggests fans would not have been harmful during any recent major heat wave.Current public health guidance seem to underestimate the evaporative power of fans.A simple guidance chart on electric fan use for healthcare practitioners is given.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Extreme heat events,Hydration,Air flow,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Heat waves continue to claim lives, with the elderly and poor at greatest risk. A simple and cost-effective intervention is an electric fan, but public health agencies warn against their use despite no evidence refuting their efficacy in heat waves. A conceptual human heat balance model can be used to estimate the evaporative requirement for heat balance, the potential for evaporative heat loss from the skin, and the predicted sweat rate, with and without an electrical fan during heat wave conditions. Using criteria defined by the literature, it is clear that fans increase the predicted critical environmental limits for both the physiological compensation of endogenous/exogenous heat, and the onset of cardiovascular strain by an air temperature of ∼3–4 °C, irrespective of relative humidity (RH) for the young and elderly. Even above these critical limits, fans would apparently still provide marginal benefits at air temperatures as high as 51.1 °C at 10%RH for young adults and 48.1 °C at 10%RH for the elderly. Previous concerns that dehydration would be exacerbated with fan use do not seem likely, except under very hot (>40 °C) and dry (<10%RH) conditions, when predicted sweat losses are only greater with fans by a minor amount (∼20–30 mL/h). Relative to the peak outdoor environmental conditions reported during ten of the most severe heat waves in recent history, fan use would be advisable in all of these situations, even when reducing the predicted maximum sweat output for the elderly. The protective benefit of fans appears to be underestimated by current guidelines.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the continental United States, the summer of 2012 was the hottest since records began. In 2013, record-breaking ambient temperatures were experienced across large parts of Eastern Australia (January) as well as the Western US (June). These heat waves continue to claim lives, with the elderly, poor and socially isolated at the greatest risk (Hajat et al., 2010). Public health recommendations for effective heat management strategies are absolutely essential to minimize heat-related mortality. A simple and cost-effective intervention is an electric fan. However, governmental public health messaging is often ambiguous and typically warns against their use. The suggested environmental limits for fan use has historically ranged from 32.3 °C (90 °F) (35% relative humidity (RH)) (Wolfe, 2003) to the “high 90s” (96–99 °F; 35.6–37.2 °C) with no RH stated (CDC, 2012). In contrast, a recent Cochrane review concluded that no evidence whatsoever currently exists in the literature supporting or refuting the use of electric fans during heat waves (Gupta et al., 2012). The authors did however suggest that the enhanced evaporation with fan use may lead to an increased risk of dehydration (Gupta et al., 2012).In order to maintain a fixed core body temperature, the human body must balance the rate at which it produces heat, arising as a by-product of cellular metabolism (approximately 80–100 W at rest), with the rate at which heat is dissipated to the surrounding environment. Human heat dissipation occurs via dry (i.e. conduction and convection) and latent (i.e. evaporation) avenues of heat transfer. All dry heat transfer follows a temperature gradient, which in this case, is between ambient air and the skin surface. It follows that if air temperature exceeds skin temperature (approximately 35 °C; 95 °F) the gradient for dry heat loss is reversed and heat is added to the body instead of lost. Since the vast majority of dry heat exchange occurs via convection, this problem is compounded with additional air movement (such as with a fan). However, the human thermoregulatory system elicits the secretion of sweat on to the skin surface which subsequently evaporates, promoting latent heat loss; and the potential for evaporation (Emax) is increased substantially with increasing air movement. However, the elevation in Emax with additional air flow is diminished with increasing ambient humidity. Furthermore, a greater sweat production may be needed to facilitate the greater rate of evaporation required to maintain overall heat balance (Ereq), and the elderly, who are considered a high risk group during heat waves, may be physiologically restricted (Kenney and Hodgson, 1987). The potentially greater requirement for sweat production with electric fans may also be elevated to the point of exacerbating physiological strain in terms of dehydration (Gupta et al., 2012) and cardiovascular strain.Using a human heat balance approach and employing parameters defined by the literature, the following can be conceptually determined: i) the various combinations of air temperature and humidity at which an electric fan is counter-protective; ii) the predicted critical environmental limits for elevated cardiovascular strain and thermal strain, with and without an electric fan; and iii) the predicted sweat losses and therefore the risk of dehydration with and without an electric fan.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Current public health guidelines regarding fan use during heat waves appear flawed. Some guidance partially violates fundamental physical laws, and according to our model, they all greatly underestimate the evaporative power of sweat and exaggerate the increased risk of dehydration with fan use. Irrespective of relative humidity, electric fans increase the critical air temperature at which both an elevated cardiovascular and thermal strain occurs, by approximately 3–4 °C in both the young and elderly. While the absolute air temperature at which these phenomena occur is lower with increasing relative humidity, even above these environmental limits, electric fans are still not harmful, and may provide marginal benefits, up to air temperatures that exceed all of the peak outdoor conditions reported during ten of the most severe heat waves over the past 20 years. The public should therefore not be advised to stop using electric fans during any heat wave. As extreme heat events continue to occur across the globe, a re-evaluation of public health guidelines regarding electric fan use appears necessary to help minimize heat wave related morbidity and mortality. In lieu of any other rational alternatives currently available, the present study provides a simple chart that can be used by healthcare practitioners to educate both elderly and young populations (Fig. 4).