@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Typing performance and body discomfort among overweight and obese office workers: A pilot study of keyboard modification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Alternative keyboards can receive positive gains without reducing worker productivity.Obese participants reported reductions wrist, upper back, and lower back discomfort.It took participants approximately 11 days to adjust to the alternative keyboard style.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Obesity,Body discomfort,Keyboard ergonomics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Obesity in the workplace is associated with loss of productivity, high medical care expenses, and increased rates of work-related injuries and illness. Thus, effective, low-cost interventions are needed to accommodate the size of today's obese office worker while alleviating potential physical harm associated with musculoskeletal disorders. Utilizing a sample of 22 overweight and obese office workers, this pilot study assessed the impact of introducing an alternative, more ergonomically-sound keyboard on perceptions about design, acceptability, and usability; self-reported body discomfort; and typing productivity. Data were collected using self-reported questionnaires and objective typing tests administered before and after the intervention. The intervention duration was six weeks. After switching from their standard work keyboard to an alternative keyboard, all participants reported significant decreases in lower back discomfort (t = 2.14, P = 0.044); although obese participants reported significant decreases in both upper (t = 2.46, P = 0.032) and lower (t = 2.39, P = 0.036) back discomfort. No significant changes were observed in overall typing performance scores from baseline to follow-up. Findings suggest that such interventions may be introduced into the workforce with positive gains for workers without reducing short-term worker productivity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Consistent with the obesity epidemic in United States experienced across all age groups (Committee on Accelerating Progress in Obesity Prevention and Institute Of Medicine, 2012; National Institutes of Health, 2005), the American workforce is becoming increasingly obese (Church et al., 2011; Rosen, 2008). These weight-related trends are attributed, in part, to the changing nature of work, which is increasingly being characterized by a reliance on computer-based technology and pressure for greater productivity in the workplace. Demands to meet employer expectations and high-paced business demands force employees to work longer hours, often in a seated position, which fosters longer durations of physical inactivity and subsequent obesity (Church et al., 2011; Benden, 2006; Smith et al., 2009; Juneau and Potvin, 2010). Sedentary behavior is widely recognized as a causal indicator of weight gain (Must and Tybor, 2005; Blanck et al., 2007; Pulsford et al., 2012), which can be exacerbated by employment-related responsibilities and activities such as computer use (Owen et al., 2012; Hamilton et al., 2008).More than half of the current workforce is composed of office workers who are overweight or obese (Fastenberg, 2013; Witters and Agrawal, 2011). The consequences of this epidemic include loss of quality of life, high medical care expenses and per capita costs, loss of productivity, and high rates of work-related injuries and illness (Gates et al., 2008; Poston et al., 2011; Barkin et al., 2010). As an example, obese workers file more than twice the number of worker's compensation claims (Ostbye et al., 2007) with costs that are dramatically higher than that of normal-weight workers (Finkelstein et al., 2010). Additionally, that cost has been shown to increase as worker BMI increases, even among obese worker populations (Finkelstein et al., 2010). Further, obese individuals and those who sit for longer periods of time may experience more back pain and discomfort, relative to their lesser-weight counterparts (Gates et al., 2008). These issues have been attributed to the awkward posture and limb positioning assumed by these overweight and obese individuals as they sit at workstations less accommodating of their body type (Kaleta and Jegier, 2007).Studies have shown that workers involved in heavy keyboard use are more likely to develop carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) (Fagarasanu and Kumar, 2003). Additionally, it has been shown that obese workers are more than twice as likely to develop CTS as compared to their normal-weight counterparts (Lam and Thurston, 1998). These results have been repeated in similar studies with results indicating that subjects with a BMI indicating obesity are significantly more likely to develop CTS; this association is even more strongly associated with women (Becker et al., 2002).For these reasons, interventions including workspace modifications are needed to improve workplace environments to accommodate larger and heavier employees. However, a more holistic approach that includes invasive strategies is warranted to address issues with back pain and overall health and wellness. Less invasive strategies are preferable because they are less expensive to the employer and less likely to disrupt work-related productivity for a computer-reliant workforce (Mirtz and Greene, 2005). One such inexpensive and effective strategy may be the modification of computer equipment such as computer keyboards.Keyboard modification (e.g., alternative-style keyboards that are split and/or adjustable) has been shown to reduce wrist and hand pain and discomfort for workers (Tittiranonda et al., 1999). This posture improvement is intended to minimize lateral arm positioning and reduce ulnar deviations of the hand, which reduce the risk of musculoskeletal disorders. Ergonomic keyboards are typically designed to place the wrists and forearms in a more neutral posture (Baker et al., 2007; Marklin and Simoneau, 2004) and can include slant/tilt features to alter key pressure and response.The aim of an ergonomic keyboard is to reduce the overall impact of typing on the upper extremities. This is done by changing hand and arm posture to reduce arm abduction, forearm pronation, extension of the wrists, and ulnar deviation of the hands (Fagarasanu et al., 2005). Static posture in a seated position is known to evoke pain among computer users (Tittiranonda et al., 1999; Gerr et al., 2004), and evidence suggests prolonged exposure to improper posture with repetitive movements can cause irreversible musculoskeletal disorders (Dadwal et al., 2013; Gerr et al., 2004). While the relationship between exposure, body discomfort, and musculoskeletal disorders is relatively well understood, less is known about these effects among the obese worker population with greater need for postural accommodations population. The result of the anthropometric change in obese workers is greater joint angles for the hands and wrists and more pronounced upper arm abduction, all of which contribute to this increase in likelihood for development of musculoskeletal disorders (Gordon and Bradtmiller, 2012).Since ergonomic (alternative) keyboards have quickly become the most frequently sold keyboards in the United States (Rempel, 2008), research has increasingly examined their effectiveness in terms of the keyboards' ergonomics and usability. Alternative keyboard use has been studied in relation to wrist/forearm posture, muscle activity, keystroke force, comfort, performance, and a myriad of other topics (Marklin and Simoneau, 2004; Marklin et al., 1999; Rempel et al., 2007, 2009; Smith et al., 1998; Swanson et al., 1997; Szeto and Ng, 2000). Studies have shown initial adoption of alternative keyboards is low because of their differentiation from traditional straight keyboards (Cakir, 1995; Tittiranonda et al., 1999). However, research suggests that even with an initial adoption bias, when used, overall productivity using alternative keyboards recovers to the initial rate of traditional straight keyboards within days (Swanson et al., 1997; Zecevic et al., 2000).As postulated by the authors, Fig. 1illustrates differing degrees of ulnar deviation between a normal-weight individual using a standard keyboard, an overweight/obese individual using a standard keyboard, and an overweight/obese individual using an alternative keyboard (i.e., adjustable open-angle keyboard). As seen in this figure, while the normal-weight individual using the standard keyboard experiences some degree of ulnar deviation, the degree of deviation is dramatically exacerbated among the overweight/obese individual using the standard keyboard. Additionally, as seen in this figure, ulnar deviation among overweight/obese individuals can be lessened if an alternative, split keyboard is introduced, which can alleviate the need for awkward arm positioning to account for larger torsos. Further, alleviating lateral arm positioning and associated ulnar deviation can reduce stress placed on an individual's arms, writs, hands, and back associated with unnatural posture.Utilizing a sample of overweight and obese office workers, the purposes of this study were to: (1) explore perceptions about the design, acceptability, and usability associated with standard work keyboards among a sample of overweight and obese workers; (2) assess the impact of introducing an alternative, more ergonomically-sound keyboard on aspects of self-reported body discomfort and typing productivity. As related to these purposes, the authors hypothesized that switching to the alternative keyboard would: (1) improve perceptions about keyboard ease-of-use; (2) decrease self-reported body discomfort; (3) not influence typing productivity; and (4) have a greater impact on obese participants compared to their overweight counterparts.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
