@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Understanding challenges in the front lines of home health care: A human-systems approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We use a human-systems perspective to understand home health care.We qualitatively assess challenges home health care providers encounter.Affect was a commonly mentioned challenge, as well as a high level of uncertainty.These findings inform a revised human-systems model of home health care.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Healthcare,Human-systems,Human factors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A human-systems perspective is a fruitful approach to understanding home health care because it emphasizes major individual components of the system – persons, equipment/technology, tasks, and environments – as well as the interaction between these components. The goal of this research was to apply a human-system perspective to consider the capabilities and limitations of the persons, in relation to the demands of the tasks and equipment/technology in home health care. Identification of challenges and mismatches between the person(s) capabilities and the demands of providing care provide guidance for human factors interventions. A qualitative study was conducted with 8 home health Certified Nursing Assistants and 8 home health Registered Nurses interviewed about challenges they encounter in their jobs. A systematic categorization of the challenges the care providers reported was conducted and human factors recommendations were proposed in response, to improve home health. The challenges inform a human-systems model of home health care.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Health care is moving from the hospital to the home. Home health care is described as a range of medical and therapeutic services delivered at a care recipient's home for the purpose of promoting, maintaining, or restoring health or maximizing the level of independence, while minimizing the effects of disability and illness, including terminal illness (Jones et al., 2012). Providing health care services in the care recipient's home is becoming a necessity due to expedited hospital discharge and ongoing care plans. With the aging of the baby boomer generation (Administration on Aging, 2006), and the increasing life expectancy for people in developed countries (National Center for Health Statistics, 2005) t people are at risk for experiencing chronic age-related health declines for an extended period of time.Home health care offers advantages over hospital-based health care, for example home health care may be more cost effective than that provided in a hospital (Naylor et al., 1999) and may reduce exposure to hospital-associated infections (Leff et al., 2005). Furthermore, home health care supports aging in place and independence, which are important for the quality of life for older adult care recipients.However, understanding the needs of care providers and care recipients is necessary to optimize the health care services provided in the home. The goal of this work was to use qualitative methods to explore home health care from a human-systems perspective. Improvements to home health care will contribute to the health care system as a whole, but also hold the promise of providing effective treatment, quality of life, and comfort for care recipients.A human-systems perspective is a beneficial approach to understanding home health care. This approach emphasizes the interaction between individual components of the system, specifically persons, tasks, equipment/technology, and environments – as well as the interaction between these components. A human-systems perspective also considers safety, effectiveness, and efficiency of the system as a whole, which is particularly applicable due to the complexity of the components that comprise home health care.There has been limited application of human-systems knowledge to the home health care domain; however, the National Research Council (2011) released a proposal to apply human-systems and human factors to home health care, recommending the model presented in Fig. 1. The model categorizes the components of the system – persons, tasks, and equipment/technology – with the multiple environments represented by overlapping circles (e.g., health policy, community, social, and physical). Persons, task, equipment/technology, and environments have characteristics that act as barriers and facilitators to the interaction of all of the components (represented by double arrows). A human-system perspective will consider the capabilities and limitations of the persons, in relation to the demands of the tasks and equipment/technology; thus, identification of mismatches between the person's capabilities and the demands of providing care will provide a basis for proposing human factors interventions. The following sections provide an overview of each of these components.The primary persons involved in home health care can be subdivided into two groups: the health care provider (formal or informal individuals providing health care) and the health care recipient (individuals receiving care). Note that family and friends who are not primary care givers are included within the social environment. In 1990, there were an estimated 288,000 professional home health care providers in the USA; in 2010 that number had increased to 1,081,000 (United States Census Bureau, 2012). There is a variety of formal care giver occupations, such as home health aides, nurses, physicians, pharmacists, therapists, and social workers. In particular, home health aides and home health registered nurses represent a significant proportion of all health care support occupations, comprising approximately 27% and 14%, respectively (US Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012). Some home health aides are Certified Nursing Assistants (CNAs); their job requirements include primarily personal care tasks, such as assistance with bathing, toileting, and medication reminders/encouragement. Registered nurses (RNs) perform skilled nursing tasks, such as using medical devices and equipment, wound care, and medication management.The number of home health care recipients (i.e., patients) has increased from 2.5 million in 2002 to 3.4 million in 2010 (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, 2012). The majority (70%) are 65 years of age and older (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, 2000). The consequences of the growing older adult population for the health care system are substantial. With the aging of the baby boomer generation, more services will be required for the treatment and management of chronic and acute health conditions at home, especially those most prevalent with aging (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) et al., 2004): hypertension, arthritis, heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and stroke.A variety of tasks are performed in home health care, with their successful completion dependent on the capabilities of the care provider to handle the task demands. Home health care tasks range in complexity, from simple tasks such as taking a care recipient on a walk to cognitively-challenging tasks (e.g., managing complex medication regimens) and physically-challenging tasks (e.g., bathing, toileting, transfer). Home health care tasks can be broadly categorized as health maintenance, episodic care, chronic care, and end of life care (The National Research Council, 2011). A description of these types of care and examples are provided in Table 1.Tasks commonly performed for older home health care recipients included skilled nursing services, physical therapy, assistance with activities of daily living (ADLs), homemaker services, occupational therapy, wound care, and dietary counseling (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) et al., 2012). These tasks require physical, cognitive, and perceptual skills on the part of the care provider. These tasks also require communication skills, including the ability to provide emotional support to the care recipient. For example, medication management is cognitively demanding (Lippa et al., 2008), compounded by multiple medications, side effects, and schedules. Unfortunately, many older adults have multiple health problems, and therefore have complex medication regimens. Bathing and wound care require simultaneous physical actions to promote balance, reach, flexibility, and proper hygiene (Murphy et al., 2007; The National Research Council, 2011). Given the challenges of health care tasks, it is necessary to evaluate both the task demands and the capability of the care providers to determine potential for adverse outcomes.Many home health care tasks require the use of technology and equipment by the health care providers as well as the care recipients. Innovations in technology have allowed a range of health care devices and tasks to move from the hospital to the home. However, much of the medical equipment used in home health care was designed by manufacturers to be used only in clinical settings by trained professionals (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2010). Examples include medication administration equipment, durable medical devices (i.e., hospital beds, wheelchairs), infusion pumps, dialysis machines, feeding tubes, catheters, Hoyer lifts, defibrillators, ambulation aids, blood glucose meters, and oxygen tanks. In an analysis of adverse events in the home (Marion, 2007), problems with infusion pumps, hospital beds, ventilators, and powered wheelchairs were reported – suggesting that the most complex medical equipment carried the highest risk of injury.Finally, it is impossible to consider the interaction of persons, tasks, and equipment/technology without consideration of the environment in which these components are interacting; namely, the home. The home environment differs in many ways from the controlled environment of a hospital or clinic. This imposes unique challenges, because each home a health care worker visits is different and may hinder their ability to provide adequate care. Many homes may not meet electrical codes, controlled temperature, lighting, or sanitary requirements critical in providing safe and effective care. Interview with home health care subject matter experts revealed that challenges in the home environment not only included environmental factors (i.e., crowded or dimly lit surroundings), but also socio-environmental factors such as family over- or under-involvement or access to support from other professional care givers (McBride et al., 2011).A human-systems perspective, such as the one provided in Fig. 1, is a fruitful approach to understanding home health care because it emphasizes individual components of the system – persons, equipment/technology, tasks, and environments –as well as the interaction between these components. To date, there has been limited application of human-systems knowledge to the home health care domain. The overarching aim of this research was to use the systems model to frame the challenges discussed by the health care providers in the interviews. The intention was not to validate or test the model; rather this qualitative research was conducted to investigate in depth the trends patterns of challenges, and add to the conceptual framework. In other words, the purpose of this research was to provide a descriptive account of how the human-systems perspective provides structure and insight into challenges related to home health care. Specific goals were to:•Goal 1: Identify challenges home health care providers encounter in the home.Goal 2: Consider how these challenges fit within a human factors and systems model of home health care.Goal 3: Propose potential human factors solutions for those challenges.We designed a structured interview, wherein professional home health care providers reported challenges they encountered within the context of seven tasks: medication management, transfer (sometimes ambulation was also discussed in relation to this task), bathing, toileting, wound care, infusion pump, and device use. This research is part of a large project, and preliminary results have been published (Beer et al., 2011; McBride et al., 2011, 2012; Mitzner et al., 2009). The current report differs from previous publications by:•including additional data, particularly data collected from interviews with RNs, and discussion of device use;reporting additional analyses to assess artifact-specific challenges, the role of affect, and differences between RNs and CNAs;including the results from seven commonly performed care tasks to move toward a more complete understanding of home health care;synthesizing the results to add to the human factors model in Fig. 1;and, discussing the identified challenges and the potential for human factors interventions.In sum, the results contribute to a better understanding of home health care from a human-systems perceptive, and provide potential human factors interventions supported by data collected from professional home health care providers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
