@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
L4–L5 compression and anterior/posterior joint shear forces in cabin attendants during the initial push/pull actions of airplane meal carts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Low back load (L4–L5) during cart acceleration was estimated.Working situations creating the highest low back load was identified.Effect of handling type, floor type, inclination and cart weight was investigated.L4–L5 load was not greater than accepted values for single exertions.Effect of decreasing external forces on L4–L5 load was smaller than expected.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Low back load,Cabin attendants,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of the present study was to assess the acute low back load of cabin attendants during cart handling and to identify working situations which present the highest strain on the worker. In a setup, 17 cabin attendants (ten females and seven males) pushed, pulled and turned a 20kg standard meal cart (L: 0.5m×W: 0.3m×H: 0.92m) loaded with extra 20kg and 40kg, respectively on two different surfaces (carpet and linoleum) and at three floor inclinations (−2°, 0° and +2°). Two force transducers were mounted as handles. Two-dimensional movement analysis was performed and a 4D WATBAK modelling tool was used to calculate the acute L4–L5 load.No working situations created loads greater than the accepted values for single exertions, however compression and anterior/posterior shear forces during pulling and turning were much higher when compared with pushing. There were significant effects of handling the cart on different floor types, at the varying inclinations and with different cart weights. Additionally, when external forces were reduced, the cabin attendants did not decrease push/pull force proportionally and thus the L4–L5 load did not decrease as much as expected.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Limited space, standardized work routines, standardized cart size and inclined vibrating floor present special physical challenges to cabin attendants working in commercial air travel (Lee et al., 2006, 2008). Low back pain (LBP) among such employees and an increased risk of sick leave related to LBP make it relevant to investigate work-related factors that could contribute to the development of LBP (Elders et al., 2003; Wickstrom and Pentti, 1998).In general, it is established that pushing and pulling may generate compression and shear forces which may increase the risk of developing LBP. (Hoozemans et al., 2004, 2007; Jäger and Luttmann, 1997; Jäger et al., 2007; Knapik and Marras, 2009; Laursen and Schibye, 2002; Lee et al., 1991; Lett and McGill, 2006; Marras et al., 2009a,b; Norman et al., 1998; Schibye et al., 2001). Also, limits of tolerance have been suggested for compression primarily based on epidemiological and biomechanical studies (Niosh, 1981; Jäger and Luttmann, 1997) and for shear based on tissue tolerance (Gallagher and Marras, 2012; McGill et al., 1998; McGill, 1997).Even though earlier studies have stated that pushing and pulling activities are related to an increased risk of LBP (Hoozemans et al., 1998; Pope, 1989), more recent work (Hoozemans et al., 2002a,b) and a review by Roffey et al. (2010) have stated that push/pull activities in general are not a main risk factor in relation to LBP (Roffey et al., 2010). However, the special working conditions in the cabin and the expressed need for more studies in this area (Roffey et al., 2010) make it relevant to investigate low back loading during manual cart handling for this particular group that worldwide includes an increasing number of people who operate under very similar working conditions.Factors such as handling type (pushing, pulling, turning), floor inclination, floor type and cart weight are expected to be related to the low back load (Al-Eisawi et al., 1999; Boocock et al., 2006; Jung et al., 2005; Laursen and Schibye, 2002), and it is important to evaluate which combinations of these factors are more likely to create the largest load on the lower back during work aboard the air craft in order to optimize future recommendations and interventions.Handling of commercial carts has been investigated in earlier studies (Glitsch et al., 2007; Jäger et al., 2007; Schaub et al., 2007; Winkel, 1983). In the study by Winkel, female subjects were asked to accelerate the cart (push and pull) with the maximum force they perceived acceptable for repeated exertions. This experiment caused the Swedish National Board of Occupational Safety and Health to reduce its recommended limit for repetitive push and pull in this task from 200N to 100N. The carts investigated were wide body carts weighting approximately 85kg which where pushed and pulled on level carpet floor. In 2007 a comprehensive work was published on work factors, muscular capabilities and work load among German flight attendants during pushing and pulling of trolleys (Glitsch et al., 2007; Jäger et al., 2007; Schaub et al., 2007). Some of the results from the project include hand forces, posture analyses and low back load during pushing and pulling with two different cart sizes each with three different masses and on four different floor inclinations (48 actions). The main results regarding low back load showed an effect of floor inclination (0°–8°) mainly during pushing and an effect of cart weight mainly at higher floor inclinations. They also showed that pulling as in many other studies resulted in a higher low back load compared to pushing (Hoozemans et al., 2002b, 2004; Kumar, 1994; Laursen and Schibye, 2002; Lee et al., 1991; Lett and McGill, 2006; Marras et al., 2009a; Resnick and Chaffin, 1995; Schibye et al., 2001; Straker and Stevenson, 1997; van der Woude et al., 1995), however primarily with the half size cart. These data reveals that adjustments in posture and action force occur depending on cart size, manoeuvre and floor inclination.The present study aims to further investigate lumbar spine load during cart handling, focussing on the following aspects. First, the floor type plays a role in relation to forces and low back loading during pushing and pulling because of differences in rolling friction (Al-Eisawi et al., 1999; Jansen et al., 2002; Laursen and Schibye, 2002; Marras et al., 2009b). In airplanes the floor space in the centre aisle is usually carpeted, and we hypothesized that cabin attendants are subject to a higher low back load on this kind of surface compared with floors with lower rolling friction (e.g. linoleum). Thus, recommendations to the industry to change the flooring to e.g. linoleum would depend not only on differences in friction between the two types of flooring but also on the attendant's push/pull force in the initial phase. E.g. if the linoleum reduces rolling friction by 17N compared to carpet, will we see a reduced push/pull force of about 17N on linoleum or will the attendants maintain the same push/pull force as on carpet thereby creating a faster cart acceleration and in real life, gain seconds during a stressful working day?Secondly, in addition to pushing and pulling movements, turning movements are also included in the present study as this manoeuvre is often performed, especially in the galley where meal carts are prepared for servicing the passengers. But small turning actions also occur when attendants are pushing/pulling the cart in a straight line, as corrections of the movement direction in the narrow aisle also affect the body asymmetrically (Lee et al., 2012). Finally, low back muscle activity was recorded in order to measure the relative muscle activation during different cart manoeuvres. The estimation of low back load during cart acceleration will be used to identify working situations which present the highest strain on the worker. We present a number of recommendations for handling carts, both ergonomical and technical, that aim at reducing the risk of developing LBP.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
