@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Does drywall installers' innovative idea reduce the ergonomic exposures of ceiling installation: A field case study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Focus groups with drywall installers in participatory manner.Workers' innovative idea for ceiling installation.Quantitative exposure data was collected at baseline and intervention.Exposure was reduced at the intervention.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Drywall ceiling installation,Innovative ideas,Exposure reduction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveThe study was conducted to assess an intervention suggested by the workers to reduce the physical or ergonomic exposures of the drywall installation task.MethodsThe drywall installers were asked to brainstorm on innovative ideas that could reduce their ergonomic exposures during the drywall installation work. The workers proposed the idea of using a ‘deadman’ (narrow panel piece) to hold the panels to the ceiling while installing them. The researcher collected quantitative exposure data (PATH, 3DSSPP) at the baseline and intervention phases and compared the phases to find out any change in the exposure while using the ‘deadman’.ResultsResults showed that ergonomic exposures (such as overhead arm and awkward trunk postures and heavy load handling) were reduced at the intervention phase while using the ‘deadman’ with an electrically operated lift.ConclusionThe concept of the ‘deadman’, which was shown to help reduce musculoskeletal exposures during ceiling installation, can be used to fabricate a permanent ergonomic tool to support the ceiling drywall panel.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to the direct and indirect costs associated with construction injuries, workers' safety has become a prime concern in the construction industry over the last few decades. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), around 7.7 million construction workers were employed in the USA in 2012. Among them, 129,600 workers worked as drywall and ceiling tile installers (BLS). In the same year, there were around 2.5 million drywall and ceiling tile jobs in the USA. The National employment matrix has projected that there will be around 166,900 (28% increase from 2010) drywall workers working in the USA in the year 2020 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2013).Due to the physically demanding nature of the drywall installation job including the requirement to handle (raise, hold and install) up to 110 lb drywall panels (Yuan et al., 2007) while being on a ladder, the workers health are threatened with risk of musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) affecting the back, shoulder, neck, wrist and hand (Chiou et al., 2000; Lemasters et al., 1998; Lipscomb et al., 2003, 2008, 1997). Dasgupta et al. (2014) assessed ergonomic exposures in drywall carpentry and found considerable exposure related to the drywall installation task. The main hazardous activity observed in this task was lifting the drywall panels to the ceiling and holding them up against the ceiling frame with both arms in an overhead posture.Workers themselves are aware of this issue. Pan et al. (1999) surveyed 60 carpenters about their perception of hazardous tasks during drywall panel handling. The workers perceived that lifting and/or holding a drywall panel in an overhead position caused the maximum physical stress.Hess et al., 2010a, implemented carrying tools to reduce the low back force of the installers. Although the risks of drywall installation have been identified by this group of researchers (Dasgupta et al., 2014) to date no study, except this piece of research, has attempted to implement an intervention in order to reduce the exposures for ceiling panel installation for drywall workers.Workers are excellent sources for feedback on the implementation of new tools or techniques as a solution to their workplace hazards (Hess et al., 2004; Kramer et al., 2009; Vander Molen et al., 2005a,b). Focus groups give the workers an opportunity to collectively discuss advantages or disadvantages of tools and techniques, and to brainstorm solutions to problems. It is not uncommon to have valuable ideas from workers during informal meetings at the construction sector and these have been documented previously by researchers (Buchholz and Moir, 1996; Hess et al., 2004; De Jong and Vink, 2000; Moir et al., 1997; Moir and Azaroff, 2007; Vander Molen et al., 2005 a,b). Studies that have engaged construction workers in focus groups or meetings to consider their ideas and suggestions in order to develop useful solutions showed successful reduction in musculoskeletal or physical exposures (De Jong and Vink, 2002; Hess et al., 2004; Vander Molen et al., 2005a,b; Kramer et al., 2009; Kramer et al., 2010; Williams et al., 2010;Hess et al., 2010b). Hence, engaging them in focus groups or participatory meetings to identify solutions to the existing issues of installation task was considered as a rational way to proceed towards an intervention.The objective of this study was to engage the drywall installers in focus groups (participatory manner) in order to discuss innovative ways to reduce the ceiling installation exposures of the drywall installation task. It was hypothesized that the installers will be able to give feasible solutions that will reduce the physical exposures during drywall installation. Hence, in case, the workers' ideas were translated and implemented as an intervention, this study aimed to evaluate the efficacy of that intervention.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
