@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Work demands and health consequences of organizational and technological measures introduced to enhance the quality of home care services – A subgroup analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Production system rationalization generates diverse worker responses.Management should be aware of diversity, stimulate worker feedback and implement individually-based corrective actions.Age and perception of tension were early indicators of worker problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rationalization,Musculoskeletal health,Work environment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study of home care workers in a Norwegian municipality aimed to examine the effect of two measures involving organizational (job checklists) and technological (personal digital assistants) job aids on perceived work demands and musculoskeletal health. Questionnaire data was collected in 2009 (n = 138, response rate 76.2%) and 2011 (n = 80, response rate 54%). Forty-six home care workers responded at both waves. Respondents were assigned into ‘high’, ‘moderate’ and ‘low’ strain groups based on their responses to open and closed survey questions regarding impact of the two measures. One-way ANOVA with post-hoc t-tests and regression analyses investigated group differences and examined development in variables. Perceived work demands and health effects over the two-year study period were unchanged overall, yet significant differences between subgroups were highlighted. Work demands and shoulder-neck pain remained high for high-strain workers, but were reduced for low and moderate strain workers. Management should be aware of diversity in worker responses to rationalizations and give priority to supplementary, targeted measures to counteract adverse effects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Private and public enterprises are continually striving for higher productivity; in particular, public enterprises attempt to transform rule-based, bureaucratic organizations to organizations efficiently delivering quality services to satisfied users. Municipal home care services (HCSs) is a good example of this trend. In Norway, as in other countries, there is a move towards shifting patients away from institutionalized care to care delivered at less specialized units or (preferably) patients' own home. Accordingly, the work duties of home care workers (HCWs) become increasingly complex, requiring an upgrade of individual nursing skills, as many HCWs were recruited at times when work activities could be less demanding. In parallel HCSs are frequently reorganized to ensure quality and efficiency in care to patients, and cost savings to the municipality. Although many studies report on work intensification of HCWs and musculoskeletal health problems in particular (Brulin et al., 1998, 2000; Cheung et al., 2006; Cloutier et al., 2008; Dellve et al., 2003; Fjell et al., 2007; Ono et al., 1995; Zeytinoğlu et al., 2001), few offer a detailed account of rationalization processes and their consequences for work environment.The present study is based on the HCS of a large municipality in Norway. HCWs in this municipality have been the subject of an ongoing study by our research group. High sick leave has been the norm since the early 2000s, and the municipality introduced a concerted action plan to reduce this sick leave, following inspection and receiving orders from the Norwegian Labor Inspectorate in 2003 (Andersen and Westgaard, 2013). The orders had a particular focus on job demands generating excessive time pressure. A survey of HCWs in 2009 showed that mentally demanding working conditions, more so than physical work demands, were a source of musculoskeletal pain predominantly centered at the shoulder-neck region and that such pain was mediated by perceived general tension (Andersen and Westgaard, 2014). Physical work demands had an additional, direct link to low back pain. The overall effect of interventions to improve working conditions and reduce sick leave was negligible, due to parallel measures (e.g., merging home care units, changes to unit management) introduced to rationalize the HCS (Andersen and Westgaard, 2013). One cause of low impact of the work environment interventions was large variation in priorities and beliefs within the organization, from practicing HCWs to municipal administrators, which hampered communication across organizational levels and served as a barrier to effective change management (Andersen and Westgaard, Submitted for publication). The result is consistent with production system rationalizations in general, including organizational change: it is difficult to avoid predominant negative effects of such measures on work environment and worker health, unless management pays attention to such secondary effects (Westgaard and Winkel, 2011).HCWs of the same municipality were from 2009 to 2011 exposed to further measures, primarily motivated to enhance the quality of patient care, but considered by decision-makers to make jobs more fulfilling, standardized and efficient by expanding on job duties and providing organizational (job checklists) and technological (personal digital assistants, PDAs) job aids. The measures involve elements that could be perceived strenuous, such as changes to work procedures and acquiring new skills; however, workers may appreciate the quality-enhancing aspects. The study aims to examine changes in perceived work demands of HCWs from 2009 to 2011, comparing those who have struggled with the changeover process with those who are coping with the new work practices. It is hypothesized that HCWs of the first group are distinguished by higher perceived work demands. A further aim, based on HCWs represented in both 2009 and 2011 surveys, is to examine whether perceived work demands or perceived general tension in 2009 are predictive of musculoskeletal pain in 2011. Such insight is potentially important to establish a best way of minimizing strain when introducing new work procedures.At study start in 2009, 6 of 11 home care units in the municipality signed up for participation. In the follow-up survey in 2011, one unit was omitted due to low response rate, resulting in five participating units. HCWs with employment fraction ≥50% were invited to fill in a questionnaire on the two occasions. At wave 1 in 2009, 138 HCWs responded to the survey (response rate 76.2%; (Andersen and Westgaard, 2014)). However, 20 HCWs from the unit omitted in the follow-up survey were excluded from the wave 1 survey in the present analysis to enable a more correct comparison of the two waves, leaving 118 respondents (90% female, 78% with professional health care education as either registered nurse or enrolled nurse). At wave 2 in 2011, 80 HCWs responded (response rate 54%; 90% female, 78% with professional health care education). Forty-six respondents filled in the questionnaire at both occasions. Thirty-four respondents, who participated in 2011 but not in 2009, included 23 HCWs who were employed in 2009 but did not respond at the time, 8 HCWs had been employed between 1 and 2 years, and 3 HCWs employed less than 1 year.In the present HCS, the municipality constitutes the superior ‘administrative’ authority responsible for ensuring overall good quality of services. Being the decision-making body, the commissioning of organizational changes and quality-enhancing measures resides at the municipal, administrative level. Table 1includes a description of the new work program (i.e. organizational measure involving job checklists) and the technological device introduced to the HCS, and shows anticipated positive effects and potential negative impact, as described by the decision-makers. Improved quality of care and efficiency were stated objectives for both measures. Supplementary measures implemented at changeover to the two new procedures were offered to all employees to ensure positive effects and reduce negative impact. These included a two-day training course, close follow-up by unit staff to ensure compliance, and assistance and additional individual training if individuals indicated such needs. Specifically for the new work program, these activities were embedded in a separate project focusing on competence and quality improvement, to ensure successful implementation. We were not in a position to observe these activities, which took place over a limited period and at different times at each unit. The new work procedures were well established at time of the wave 2 questionnaire.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Consideration of diversity in worker responses to rationalizations is crucial to ensure an implementation process that is gentle to both workers and organization. Management should give priority to supplementary, targeted measures to counteract adverse side effects and thereby secure successful implementation of rationalizations. Studies to document impact of rationalizations or other interventions benefit from approaching the data material in a way that enables identification of such diversity, as mean values alone may cause insufficient or misleading conclusions.