@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Correction factors for assessing immersion suits under harsh conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Immersion performance in marine accidents may differ from that measured in the lab.Our participants were immersed in harsh environments consisting of wind and waves.We measured immersion suit insulation change from calm water to wind and waves.Wind and waves caused significantly greater decrease in insulation.Correction factors for harsh environments were developed to test suits in calm water.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Immersion suits,Hypothermia,Correction factors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Many immersion suit standards require testing of thermal protective properties in calm, circulating water while these suits are typically used in harsher environments where they often underperform. Yet it can be expensive and logistically challenging to test immersion suits in realistic conditions. The goal of this work was to develop a set of correction factors that would allow suits to be tested in calm water yet ensure they will offer sufficient protection in harsher conditions. Two immersion studies, one dry and the other with 500 mL of water within the suit, were conducted in wind and waves to measure the change in suit insulation. In both studies, wind and waves resulted in a significantly lower immersed insulation value compared to calm water. The minimum required thermal insulation for maintaining heat balance can be calculated for a given mean skin temperature, metabolic heat production, and water temperature. Combining the physiological limits of sustainable cold water immersion and actual suit insulation, correction factors can be deduced for harsh conditions compared to calm. The minimum in-situ suit insulation to maintain thermal balance is 1.553–0.0624·TW + 0.00018·TW2 for a dry calm condition. Multiplicative correction factors to the above equation are 1.37, 1.25, and 1.72 for wind + waves, 500 mL suit wetness, and both combined, respectively. Calm water certification tests of suit insulation should meet or exceed the minimum in-situ requirements to maintain thermal balance, and correction factors should be applied for a more realistic determination of minimum insulation for harsh conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many industries require their personnel to work or travel over open water, which in the vast majority of cases is well below the thermoneutral water temperature of 35.5 °C for naked humans to maintain a deep body temperature of ∼37 °C (Park et al., 1983). As a result, supplemental thermal protection is required to increase safety and survival. An immersion suit is a lifesaving appliance (LSA) designed to provide flotation, reduce the severity of the Cold Shock Response (CSR), and delay the onset of hypothermia (CGSB, 2005). As prescribed by the International Maritime Organization (IMO), a certified insulated immersion suit should minimize the CSR and prevent a drop in deep body temperature from exceeding 2 °C after six hours of immersion in 0–2 °C calm, circulating water (IMO, 2010). Various standards across the world (e.g. Canadian General Standards Board (CGSB, 2005); International Organization for Standardization (ISO, 2002)) specify a similar test protocol for certifying the thermal protective properties of insulated and non-insulated immersion suits.Recent marine accidents such as the sinking of the Check Mate III (Frampton and Savage, 2008) and the crash of Cougar Flight 491 (TSB, 2010) have called into question the accuracy of predicting the performance of immersion suits under harsh conditions based on calm water certification tests. Previous investigations by others on the thermoregulatory responses of people in immersion suits compared the effects of wind and waves to calm water that have resulted in equivocal findings. Previous studies by Hayes et al. (1985), Steinman et al. (1987), and Ducharme and Brooks (1998) found that immersion in a wind and wave condition increased heat loss without any significant decrease in deep body temperature. A subsequent study by Tipton (1991) found that immersion in turbulent conditions caused an uncompensable level of heat loss that exceeded the capability of the thermoregulatory system which resulted in a significant decrease in deep body temperature.These discrepancies were the justification for our recent experimental investigation of the effects of wind and waves on predicted survival times (Power et al., 2015). We confirmed that immersions in wind and waves will significantly increase heat loss compared to calm water, and that predicted survival time is reduced as a consequence, which is exacerbated as water temperature decreases. However, with adequate insulation protection to ensure that the heat loss is compensable thus keeping deep body temperature stable, the predicted survival times can exceed 36 h, at which point factors other than hypothermia will most likely be the cause of death with continued immersion (Keefe and Tikuisis, 2008).The results from our previous work emphasize the importance of testing immersion suits in conditions more representative of those found during mid to high latitude marine accidents (i.e. wind, waves, and near freezing temperatures) since testing in “calm, circulating water” will likely overestimate insulation performance. Among the challenges associated with testing immersion suits in wind and waves, there are few facilities in the world capable of creating wind and wave conditions representative of offshore environments in a repeatable manner. Additionally, it is expensive and logistically challenging to test in these unique facilities, and the cost of doing so may be beyond the resources of immersion suit manufactures.A much more feasible and cost effective method for testing immersion suits is to convert the measured suit insulation under temperature-controlled calm conditions to harsher conditions by factoring in the increased heat loss due to wind and waves. The development of such correction factors is the aim of this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It is concluded that immersions in wind and waves significantly increase MSHL compared to calm water immersions. If this increase in heat loss cannot be compensated for by the thermoregulatory system, a drop in deep body temperature may occur that was not observed during more benign tests. Therefore, it is recommended that when measuring the performance of immersion suits, tests should be conducted in conditions that are as representative of the range of conditions which are expected in the operational area for the immersion suit. If this is not possible, then the conceptual approach and equations described in this paper should be considered with the knowledge that they provide correction factors (or a safety margin) for the reduction in clo value when conditions change from calm to rough water that includes wind, waves and leakage. Future work should be undertaken to extend and validate these correction factors given the important potential benefits for marine safety, as they could be used to compensate unexpectedly poor level of performance of immersion suits in wind and waves even when certified in calm water conditions.None of the authors have any conflicts of interest associated with this study.