@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Postural dynamism during computer mouse and keyboard use: A pilot study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Postural dynamism related to keyboard and mouse use is explored.Postural dynamism and spinal positions in three dimensions are used as parameters.Mouse use is associated with a generally fixated spinal posture.Keyboard use demonstrates a more dynamic spine than mouse use.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sitting posture,Computer use,Postural dynamism,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Prolonged sedentary computer use is a risk factor for musculoskeletal pain. The aim of this study was to explore postural dynamism during two common computer tasks, namely mouse use and keyboard typing. Postural dynamism was described as the total number of postural changes that occurred during the data capture period. Twelve participants were recruited to perform a mouse and a typing task. The data of only eight participants could be analysed. A 3D motion analysis system measured the number of cervical and thoracic postural changes as well as, the range in which the postural changes occurred. The study findings illustrate that there is less postural dynamism of the cervical and thoracic spinal regions during computer mouse use, when compared to keyboard typing.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Spinal pain is common amongst computer users (Janwantanakul et al., 2008; Smith et al., 2009). Spinal pain refers to pain experienced in the cervical, thoracic or lumbar regions. Of these, the most prevalent areas of pain among computer users are the upper thoracic and cervical spinal regions (Côte et al., 2008). When considering the increasing computer use worldwide, this burden of computer related spinal pain, particularly in the thoracic and cervical regions, is of public concern (Carroll et al., 2008; Côte et al., 2008).Risk factors associated with computer related thoracic and cervical pain is a topical research area (Andersen et al., 2011). These risk factors include, but are not limited to, gender, work stress, type of computer used, psychometrics, duration and frequency of computing, and posture (Andersen et al., 2011; Da Costa and Vierra, 2010). Although it is acknowledged that risk factors follow a multifactorial causal pathway, researchers often follow a pragmatic approach by investigating a specific individual risk factor. Posture is a potentially modifiable risk factor and knowledge about the relationship between posture and computer related musculoskeletal pain is thus clinically meaningful. Brink and Louw (2013) showed that the impact of sitting posture on upper quadrant (cervical, upper thoracic and upper limb) musculoskeletal pain remains controversial. Further research into postural risk factors of computer related thoracic and cervical pain is therefore needed.Research related to sitting computing posture has mainly focussed on postural alignment by measuring spinal position or angles (Brink and Louw, 2013, Marcus et al., 2002). The underlying rationale is that if a spinal position is maintained for a prolonged period of time, it will lead to micro-damage of soft tissue structures and consequent pain (Tittiranonda et al., 1999; Troussier et al., 1999; Ariens et al., 2001; Straker et al., 2010). While these studies have provided some insight into the relationship between computing spinal position and musculoskeletal pain, to our knowledge no published research has as yet investigated the number of three dimensional (3D) spinal movements (postural dynamism) during computer tasks.Postural dynamism refers to the number of frequent involuntary postural or movement changes whilst sitting. Dynamic chairs are designed to encourage postural changes during sitting, which may influence postural dynamism and spinal pain (Lewis and Fowler, 2009). A systematic review by O'Sullivan et al. (2012) indicated a lack of evidence to support postural dynamism as a stand-alone approach in the management of computer related lumbar pain, as the nature of spinal pain is multi-dimensional. However, in an isolated study of 105 subjects (aged 8–12 years), an increase in postural dynamism was shown to decrease spinal pain in scholars (Geldhof et al., 2007). Increased postural dynamism whilst sitting is associated with less intervertebral disc compression and reduced loss of disc height due to radial bulging in the lumbar region (Lewis and Fowler, 2009). It is possible that a similar response may occur in the cervical and thoracic spine with increased postural dynamism. This underlying mechanism may partially explain why increased postural dynamism is postulated to reduce spinal pain.Postural dynamism (measured as the number of postural changes in cervical and thoracic angles) varies between computer tasks (Van Dieën et al., 2001). Van Dieën et al. (2001) analysed only two-dimensional (2D) sagittal plane trunk kinematics, implying that there is currently no knowledge about postural dynamism in the transverse and coronal planes. Three-dimensional (3D) analysis adds to knowledge since postural dynamism is described in all three cardinal planes. 3D analysis thus provides an enhanced reflection of how postural dynamism occurs in reality. The specific aim of this study was to explore 3D postural dynamism during two common computer tasks, namely mouse use and keyboard typing. In addition, we describe a new method of postural dynamism where the number of changes in cervical and thoracic angles is analysed over a period of computing time (Van Niekerk et al., 2014).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
