@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effects of transfer distance on spine kinematics when placing boxes at different heights

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Twisting and lateral bending observed during lateral transfer tasks have been associated with increased risk of back injuries.Physical separation of the lift origin and destination encourages stepping and turning the body rather than twisting the spine.The current research explored the relationship between transfer distance and spine motion during a simulated palletizing task.Separating the lift origin and lift destination by 1–1.25 m yielded the best balance between spine kinematics and productivity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lifting,Back injury,Musculoskeletal disorders,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Twisting and lateral bending motions in repetitive lifting tasks are associated with occupational low back injuries and can be challenging to reduce with engineering controls. This study tested the hypothesis that twisting and lateral bending can be reduced by changing the transfer distance. Eighteen males, with no material handling experience lifted 10.9 kg boxes from 0.9 m above the floor and placed the boxes at a destination located 0.50, 0.75, 1.00, 1.25, 1.50, or 1.75 m away and at heights of 0.5 m, 0.9 m, and 1.3 m above the floor. Overall, twisting and forward bending decreased with increased transfer distance when placing the box. Conversely, the lateral bending when lifting and placing the box increased with increasing transfer distance. In short, having a transfer distance between 1 and 1.25 m when performing palletizing tasks to different heights may optimally balance spine kinematics, back injury risk, and productivity measures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Manual material handling tasks in industry that result in lateral bending and twisting motions of the spine have been associated with the onset of low back injuries (Kelsey et al., 1984; Marras et al., 1993; Punnett et al., 1991). Twisting and lateral bending movement velocities associated with asymmetric spine motions have been identified as two of the five risk factors in the Lumbar Motion Monitor risk model (Marras et al., 1993; Marras and Granata, 1995). The challenge faced by ergonomists attempting to prevent injuries in repetitive lifting tasks, that cannot be eliminated or automated, is how to control or limit the range and speed of these spine postural deviations. While spine motions and moments in the sagittal plane (forward flexion) can be reduced by raising lift origins and destinations (Davis and Marras, 2005; Lavender et al., 2003), controlling the postural deviations in the frontal plane (lateral bending) and the transverse plane (twisting) poses a greater challenge to industrial ergonomists. Some would argue that the exposure to lateral bending and twisting motions could be controlled through training on better lifting techniques. Lavender et al. (1995) reported that when instructed to step during an asymmetric lifting task, participants significantly reduced the amount of spine twisting and lateral bending. Unfortunately, the studies investigating the effectiveness of training on lifting techniques have shown few people actually adopt the techniques and there is little change in reported low back pain (Daltroy et al., 1997; Lavender et al., 2007; van Poppel et al., 1998).Alternatively, Marras and Allread (2006) advocated that asymmetric spine motions can be controlled through adjustment to workplace layout, for example, separating the lifts origin and destination. Jorgensen et al. (2005), however, reported that manipulating the transfer distance had limited effectiveness when trying to control spine kinematics. In our prior work, we found that separating the lift origin and destination by 1 m to be effective in reducing the degree to which participants twisted or laterally bent their backs (Lavender and Johnson, 2009) when lifting boxes with handles from and to conveyors 0.76 m above the floor. Additionally, when transferring boxes without handles from 0.5 m, 0.9 m, and 1.3 m above the floor to a conveyor 0.9 m above the floor, a task similar to that experienced when de-palletizing materials, Mehta et al. (in press) reported transfer distances between 1 and 1.25 m provided a balance between several spine kinematic variables. The present study, using a similar paradigm, investigated if the relationships between transfer distance and spine kinematic measures persist when transferring boxes without handles from near hip level to three different levels representative of a palletizing task. Specifically, this study tested the hypotheses that (1) changing the transfer distance between a lift's origin and destination affects the amount of twisting and lateral bending and the speed of these motions, and that (2) the relationship between the spine kinematics and the transfer distance depends upon the height to which boxes are placed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
