@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An anthropometric data bank for the Iranian working population with ethnic diversity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We measured 37 body dimensions of 3720 Iranian workers with different ethnicities.Comparing anthropometric data of Iranian with four Asian population.Anthropometric data of Iranian ethnical groups were statistically different.Observing anthropometric data differences of Iranian with the four nations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Anthropometric characteristic,Bodily proportion,Ethnicity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study constructed an anthropometric data bank for the Iranian working population. In total, thirty-seven body dimensions were measured among 3720 Iranian workers with different ethnicities (3000 male and 720 female; aged 20–60 years). Statistical analysis revealed significant differences for most of body dimensions among the ethnical groups. Moreover, the authors compared Iranian anthropometric characteristics with those of four Asian populations: Taiwanese, Chinese, Japanese, and Korean. Overall, 16 body dimensions for the five Asian populations were selected and compared. Accordingly, different morphological characteristics of these five populations were observed. The Iranian population showed wide shoulders and hips and long legs; the Chinese population showed narrow hips and shoulders and a short height relative to the other populations. The Korean sample recorded moderate body size comparing the other populations. The Taiwanese had large hands, relatively wide shoulders and short upper limbs. These differences in population dimensions should be taken into consideration for product and process design when expanding regional markets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The compatibility of all products and working environments with the dimensions of the human body is an inevitable requirement for designing an ergonomic product or workstation. This is not possible unless the anthropometric characteristics of users or workers are considered. Determining body dimensions is important to clothing design, forensics, physical anthropology, and ergonomic design of workplaces, tools, equipment, machinery, and consumer products (Agrawal et al., 2010; Botha and Bridger, 1998; Hanson et al., 2009; Hughes and Johnson, 2012; Ismaila, 2009; Paul et al., 2012). According to the principles of ergonomics, a workplace should be designed prior to use in accordance with worker characteristics. In this sense, anthropometry provides measurements of the human body that can be used to design an ergonomically fit workplace (Reis et al., 2012). The use of anthropometric data allows the development of more effective designs that enhance user performance and productivity (Agrawal et al., 2010; Gouvali and Boudolos, 2006; Klamklay et al., 2008; Kozey et al., 2009). In addition, health problems, such as musculoskeletal disorders, are the most important consequences of mismatching anthropometric dimensions (Dewangan et al., 2008; Grimes and Legg, 2004; Trevelyan and Legg, 2010; Westgaard and Aarås, 1984), and these health issues can be reduced using anthropometric data during the design process.Anthropometric dimensions vary based on factors such as age, gender, nutrition, socioeconomic status, ethnicity, and race (Agrawal et al., 2010; Chuan et al., 2010; Farkas, 1996; Lin et al., 2004; Mohammad, 2005). Anthropometric data are assumed to be different between nations and between regional populations (Chandna et al., 2010; Mandahawi et al., 2008; Roebuck et al., 1975). These factors can lead to problems in product design (Chandra et al., 2013). Pheasant (1996) found that mean anthropometric dimensions and the ratio of body dimensions are two suitable indicators to compare the morphological variation among different groups. Bodily proportion is calculated as the ratio of one body dimension to a specific reference dimension. The mean stature is the most common body reference dimension.A few anthropometric studies were conducted in Iran. In this regard, Mououdi (1997) reported on 28 body dimensions of 179 Iranian university students aged 20–30 years. In the study conducted by Mirmohammadi et al. (2011), 20 body dimensions of 911 Iranian university students aged 18–25 years (475 males and 436 females) were recorded. Dianat et al. (2013) measured nine body dimensions for 978 Iranian high school students (498 girls and 480 boys) aged 15–18 years. In all these studies, the sample size was small and specific populations or age groups were investigated, which limit the generalization of the reported data. Moreover, none of these studies have considered the ethnic diversity of the Iranian population as a factor that may affect body dimensions. Iran has a multiethnic population, settled in different regions of the country. Fars, Turk, Kurd, Lor, Arab, and Baluch are the most dominant ethnic groups of whom the Fars people comprise the largest proportion (over 65% of the total population).Considering the abovementioned points, and the fact that Iran is a country with ethnic diversity, the present study was carried out to provide an anthropometric data bank of the Iranian working population with different ethnicities.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
