@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The science behind codes and standards for safe walkways: Changes in level, stairways, stair handrails and slip resistance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Walkway safety standards should be substantially based on scientific research.We identify portions of such standards that are supported by empirical data.We identify parts of such standards that could benefit from more empirical data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fall,Pedestrian,Safety,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Walkway codes and standards are often created through consensus by committees based on a number of factors, including historical precedence, common practice, cost, and empirical data. The authors maintain that in the formulation of codes and standards that impact pedestrian safety, the results of pertinent scientific research should be given significant weight. This article examines many elements of common walkway codes and standards related to changes in level, stairways, stair handrails, and slip resistance. It identifies which portions are based on or supported by empirical data; and which could benefit from additional scientific research. This article identifies areas in which additional research, codes, and standards may be beneficial to enhance pedestrian safety.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Falls account for a leading cause of injury-related emergency department visits every year in the United States (U.S.), with over 10 million people injured from falls in 2010. Falls also are a leading cause of unintentional death in the U.S., resulting in more than 27,000 fatalities in 2010 (National Safety Council, 2014). Falls present a substantial problem in the workplace, comprising at least 20–40% of disabling occupational injuries in the U.S., the United Kingdom (U.K.) and Sweden (Courtney et al., 2001).One way to avoid falls is to design, construct, and maintain walkways so that pedestrians can utilize them safely and for their intended purposes. The authors' forensics experience, as well as previous research, has indicated that the causes of falls have many factors, including the construction components of the walkway, footwear, housekeeping and maintenance practices, and safety policies and practices (Bentley, 2009; Chang and Matz, 2001; Gielo-Perczak et al., 2006; Kemmlert and Lundholm, 2001; Leamon, 1992; Quirion et al., 2008; Verma et al., 2011). Some standards address some of these latter factors, such as ASTM F695 (2009), ASTM F1240 (2009), and ASTM F2948 (2013). However, these standards will not be addressed in this article. Instead, this article will focus primarily on construction components of the walkway and related standards.A walkway can be defined as “walking surfaces constructed for pedestrian usage including floors, ramps, walks, sidewalks, stair treads, parking lots and similar paved areas that may be reasonably foreseeable as pedestrian paths” (ASTM F1646-13). While surfaces such as footpaths and playing fields are excluded from this definition, a number of walkway standards such as ANSI/ASSE A1264.2-2012 and ASTM F1637-2013 note that walkways may be either interior or exterior surfaces intended for pedestrian use.Walkway codes and standards, just as many other codes and standards, are often created through consensus by committees based on a number of factors, including historical precedence, common practice, cost, and empirical data. The authors maintain that codes and standards that can have an impact on human safety and welfare should give significant weight in their formulation to the results of pertinent scientific research. To that end, the purpose of this article is to examine many elements of common walkway codes and standards, indicate which portions are based on or supported by empirical data, and which could benefit from additional scientific research. Further, the purpose of this article is to identify areas in which additional research, codes, and standards may be beneficial. The article is divided into four sections: level walkways, stairways, stair handrails, and slip resistance of walkways.Many codes and standards such as the International Building Code (IBC), ICC/ANSI A117.1, Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS, 2004), the Department of Justice (DOJ, 2010), and ASTM F1637 provide requirements for a level walkway, such as this requirement in ASTM F1637-13: “Adjoining walkway surfaces shall be made flush and fair, whenever possible and for new construction and existing facilities to the extent practicable”. The text continues by specifying how to manage walkways that deviate from “flush and fair”, which also reflects requirements in ICC/ANSI A117.1-2009, UFAS (2004) and the DOJ (2010):i)“Changes in levels up to 1⁄4 in. (6 mm) may be vertical and without edge treatment.Changes in levels between 1⁄4 and 1⁄2 in. (6 and 12 mm) shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2 (rise:run).Changes in levels greater than 1⁄2 in. (12 mm) shall be transitioned by means of a ramp or stairway…”These requirements for how to manage walkway changes in level were first implemented in the 1980 version of ANSI A117.1. The foreword for ANSI A117.1-1980 indicated that the revisions were based on research funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and started in 1974. Published research from this effort included Steinfeld et al. (1979a) and Steinfeld et al. (1979b).Steinfeld et al. (1979a) did not include any research on walkway changes in level other than door thresholds. The description of their research on accessibility of doorways (Steinfeld et al., 1979a, Chap. 10), indicated they only used a 9.5 mm (3/8 in) square edge threshold in tests with wheelchair users. The chapter concluded with recommendations to refrain from using thresholds at interior doorways, to limit threshold height in exterior doorways to a maximum of 12 mm (1/2 in), and to bevel the edges. This recommendation for door thresholds was extended to recommendations for other walkway surfaces (Personal communication, Edward Steinfeld with Kenneth Nemire, August 2013).The initial requirements for changes in level in the ANSI A117.1-1980 standard were created to make walkways more accessible for people who use wheelchairs, walkers and other ambulatory aids. Beginning about 1990, U.S. model codes began to mainstream selected requirements of ANSI A117.1 for the general safety of all users, a pattern also followed in the 1995 version of ASTM F1637. However, ASTM F1637-95 indicated that the standard was to make walkways safe for pedestrians, and may not be adequate for those with physical disabilities: “This practice is intended to provide reasonably safe walking surfaces for pedestrians wearing ordinary footwear. These guidelines may not be adequate for those with certain mobility impairments.”The research regarding walkway changes in level that provided the foundation for standards in 1980, and afterwards, was based on research with people who used wheelchairs. There is other research involving pedestrians who do not use ambulatory aids that show that the 1980 standards for changes in level may be applicable to them as well. Studies of foot trajectory and minimum foot clearance of younger and older pedestrians while walking at self-selected paces indicate that changes in level as small as 6 mm (0.25 in) in a walking surface, such as a sidewalk, can present trip hazards to healthy ambulatory pedestrians (Begg et al., 2007; Murray et al., 1969; Murray et al., 1966; Winter, 1992; Winter et al., 1990).Examination of data from these studies also shows that changes in level smaller than 6 mm (0.25 in) may disrupt gait and cause a trip and fall. For example, data from a sample of healthy elderly men showed that minimum foot clearance within two standard deviations of the mean (95% of the sample) included values of zero, indicating contact of the foot with the floor (Murray et al., 1969). Similarly, Begg et al. (2007) showed that minimum foot clearance at two standard deviations of the mean (95% of the sample) was 1.9 mm (0.076 in) for healthy younger adults (mean age 26.4 years), and −0.9 mm (−0.038 in; negative values are due to the skewed distribution of the data) for healthy older adults (mean age 72.1 years). These data indicate that minimum foot clearance in healthy adults can be lower than 6 mm (0.25 in).This research on pedestrian gait would indicate that changes in walkway levels up to 6 mm (0.25 in), acceptable by standards such as ICC/ANSI A117.1-2009 and ASTM F1637-13, may pose trip hazards for some members of the healthy ambulatory population.However, Begg et al. (2007) showed that the data for minimum foot clearance were not normally distributed, and had positive skew and positive kurtosis. Consequently, standard deviation would not accurately describe the variance in minimum foot clearance because it would provide an overestimate of the variance on the left side of the distribution. A more appropriate criterion for a change in level that may be vertical and without edge treatment, and that may pose an acceptable risk of tripping, may be at the 5th or 10th percentile minimum foot clearance. Begg et al. (2007) did not report data to determine either the 5th or 10th percentile values, so further analyses are needed. In addition, the results from Murray et al. (1969) and Begg et al. (2007) were based on a small sample of participants; a larger sample size would be useful.Since the cited research evaluated gait parameters for healthy adults, and did not evaluate gait parameters for those pedestrians with infirmities or other common conditions that may affect walking, further evaluations are needed. With a significant and growing U.S. population of elderly citizens (Administration on Aging, 2013), it is important to design walkways for their expected use as well. Research is needed to evaluate minimum foot clearance in these populations so that standards for change in level may be reduced accordingly.Section 4.5.2 of ANSI A117.1-1980 indicated that “Changes in level between 1⁄4 in and 1⁄2 in (6 and 13 mm) shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2”. This requirement has been retained by many standards and requirements including ASTM F1637-2013 and ICC/ANSI A117.1-2009. IBC (2015) provides similar requirements in Section 1010.1.7: “… Raised thresholds and floor level changes greater than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) at doorways shall be beveled with a slope not greater than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50-percent slope).”While Steinfeld et al. (1979a) did not conduct any research on what bevel slope, or range of slopes, would facilitate access by wheelchair users, they noted that Department of Health accessibility standards at the time allowed a door threshold with a maximum 8% beveled slope (Steinfeld et al., 1979a, p. 48).While it may be assumed that a beveled walkway transition with a slope no greater than 1:2 (rise:run) also may reduce trip and fall incidents by eliminating abrupt vertical surfaces that can abruptly stop a swinging foot, and cause a stumble and fall, there is no known research on what slope may be of greatest benefit for pedestrians in or out of wheelchairs.The requirements for governing walkway changes in level greater than 6 mm (1/4 in) and greater than 12 mm (1/2 in) led to requirements for other walkway transitions, such as door thresholds, carpets, mats and runners, and elevators (Personal communication, Edward Steinfeld with Kenneth Nemire, August 2013). Such requirements have generally been maintained in current walkway standards and regulations that mention door thresholds, carpets, mats and runners, and elevators. However, as discussed earlier, further research is needed to re-examine both the height of the thresholds and carpets, and the slope of the beveled transition for both ambulatory pedestrians and those who use wheelchairs.There has been some research that addressed transitions between carpets and other walkway surfaces. Both Kim (2005) and Nemire et al. (2010) have suggested that trips, characterized in the latter article as stick-and-falls, can occur when pedestrians walk from a smooth walkway to a textured surface of a carpeted walkway. Further research is needed to examine pedestrian performance and requirements under these conditions, with perhaps, the addition of new walkway standards to help mitigate falls in these transitional situations.Standards regarding speed bump changes in level appear to be extensions of the requirements for general walkway changes in levels. For example, ASTM F1637-13 indicates that: “All speed bumps which are in foreseeable pedestrian paths shall comply with 5.2 (walkway changes in level)”. While ASTM F1637-13 recommends avoiding the use of speed bumps, and it is foreseeable that speed bumps could pose trip hazards to pedestrians (Zohar, 1978), the authors are unaware of any research that specifically addresses the trip hazard presented by speed bumps. Speed humps and speed tables may be safer alternatives for pedestrians (Parkhill et al., 2007), but more research is needed.ASTM F1637-13 also recommends avoiding the use of wheel stops. Similarly, Australia/New Zealand Standard AS/NZS 2890.1 (2004), Section 2.4.5.1, states: “Wheel stops should be avoided in any situations where they may be in the path of pedestrians or wheelchairs moving to or from parked vehicles, or crossing a car park for any other purpose.”While it is foreseeable that wheel stops could pose trip hazards to pedestrians (Zohar, 1978), and the trip hazards posed by wheel stops are the subject of some forensic investigations, the authors are unaware of any research that specifically addresses the trip hazard presented by wheel stops.Detectable warnings are features built in or applied to walkway surfaces to warn pedestrians with visual disabilities about hazards in their path. Many countries extensively use such warning surfaces, including United States, United Kingdom, Italy, France, Germany, Australia and Japan (Bentzen et al., 2000). In the U.S. and other countries a detectable warning consists of a surface of truncated domes. The truncated domes on detectable warnings in the U.S. have a height of 5 mm (0.2 in) (e.g., Department of Justice, 2010, Sec. 705.1.1), which is less than the trip threshold of 6 mm (0.25 in) discussed earlier. If research on minimum toe clearance from much larger samples in the elderly indicate that the height of truncated domes may pose a risk of tripping, it remains possible that the sloped sides of truncated domes may mitigate that risk. It is notable that the authors and two of their colleagues have a combined fall litigation experience of more than 100 years, yet none of us have had cases in which a detectable warning was claimed to be the cause of a trip- or slip-and-fall. However, some research has shown more variable and less stable gait when navigating detectable warnings by those with mobility impairments and by those who are elderly; but these studies have not produced data showing an increased risk of trips or slips (O'Leary et al., 1995; Thies et al., 2011). Other research has shown little or no adverse affects on gait of pedestrians with mobility impairments navigating detectable warnings (Bentzen et al., 1994; Hauger et al., 1996).Additional empirical research is needed to provide more empirical bases for the standards and codes related to walkway changes in level. While the current standards and codes accept changes in level up to 6 mm (0.25 in) without edge treatment, research on minimum foot clearance of healthy ambulatory adults has shown that these requirements may need to be reduced further to minimize trip hazards. Additional reductions in acceptable changes in walkway level may be required to allow safe passage for those with infirm gait, or those who use wheelchairs or other ambulatory aids. Further, since relevant research on slopes of beveled transitions is limited, additional research is needed to evaluate which beveled transition would be needed for safe use by ambulatory pedestrians and those using wheelchairs. In addition, more research is needed to evaluate trip hazards that may occur when transitioning from smooth to textured surfaces.Further research issues may include tradeoffs in speed bump design with regard to reducing vehicle speed and reducing the risk as a pedestrian trip hazard, evaluations of alternatives to wheel stops such as bollards, and means for enhancing the conspicuity of speed bumps and wheel stops to both motorists and pedestrians.The mixed research on fall hazards presented by detectable warnings indicate that further research is needed to evaluate the risks these surface warnings may present to pedestrians who are elderly or have mobility impairments.In addition, a primary concern with any walkway change in level is to make them not only visible but also conspicuous so that pedestrians are more likely to notice them in time to avoid or navigate them successfully. More research is needed to determine how best to illuminate and mark changes in level so that they are noticeable to pedestrians (Cohen and Sloan, 2015).Stairs present one of the most serious safety hazards encountered in the everyday environment (Templer et al., 1985). Major factors that contribute to stair hazards, and which are addressed below, include variability in rise and run, stair steepness, and handrail design. Other important factors, beyond the scope of this article, include lighting, nosing contrast, and overhead clearance.Variations in stairway geometry are both unexpected and difficult for the user to perceive. A person must accurately place the ball of the foot near to, but back from, the nosing of the step. Any variation in riser height or run length increases the chance of a misstep called a “heel scuff” (Pauls, 2013a) or a misstep in which the ball of the foot is placed on or beyond the nosing. Then, when weight is transferred to that foot, it can pivot or slide over the edge and result in a fall.According to the NFPA 101 (2015), a variation of 4.8 mm (0.19 in) or more between adjacent risers or between adjacent runs (depth of treads) is not acceptable. Further, the tolerance between the largest and smallest riser, or between the largest and smallest run, is not to exceed 9.5 mm (0.38 in) in a flight (NFPA 101, 2015, Sec. 7.2.2.3.6). IBC (2015) does not address variations in step geometry of adjacent treads but does maintain that the tolerance between the largest and smallest risers, or between the largest and smallest runs, in a flight is not to exceed 9.5 mm (0.38 in (IBC, 2015, Sec. 1011.5).A number of studies have shown that variability in step geometry is associated with more falls on stairs. Templer (1992, pp. 151–152) reports that Velz and Hemphill (1953) found that 15 percent of stairs examined had variations, but on steps where people fell, 75 percent had variations. Templer also reports that Miller and Esmay (1958) found tread depth irregularities on 47.6 percent of the stairs where falls had occurred as compared to only 20.7 percent of the sample group of stairs where falls had not been reported. The average irregularity was 15 mm (0.6 in).In another analysis it was estimated that approximately 101,000 falls each year are caused by excessive step variability. Irregularities as small as 6 mm (0.25 in) between adjacent risers or runs “can disrupt the rhythm of the foot movements and cause a fall” (Alessi and Brill, 1978).Jones (1963) found that variations of 6 mm (0.25 in) or more in either risers, runs, or overhangs (nosing projections) were two to three times as common on stairs where falls had occurred compared to “sample group” stairs where falls had not happened.Miller and Esmay (1961) conducted a field study of 101 stairway falls in residences in which interviews of the people who had fallen were conducted and physical exams of the stairs were made. They report non-uniformities of 25 mm (1 in) or greater were found in 45 percent of the cases, and occurred most commonly in the top and bottom risers of the stairway flights. They also report that “slipping” was the most frequently cited cause of stairway falls (Miller and Esmay, 1961). However, there was no mention of any measurements being made of the slipperiness of the treads or nosings, and may have relied on the memory or perception of the person who fell. The perception that a slip has occurred is likely when a foot pivots over before slipping off the nosing. Roys and Wright (2005) and Wright and Roys (2005) found that such slips could be attributed to irregularities such as risers that are too high or runs that are too short.More recently Cohen et al. (2009) analyzed 80 actual stairway falls that resulted in injury, and which were the subject of forensic investigations; 80% of the falls occurred during descent. They report that the most common factor associated with falls was the variability between risers, and, secondly, the variability between runs. They found that in 60 percent of the cases there were riser variations in excess of 9.5 mm (0.38 in). In 34 percent of the cases there were variations between runs in excess of 9.5 mm (0.38 in).During descent, Roys and Wright (2005) estimated the variability in foot placement to have a standard deviation (SD) of about 3–7.5% of the shoe length. For a shoe length of 300 mm (11.8 in) the SD in foot placement would be about 9–22.5 mm (0.35–0.89 in). If this variability were to coincide with excessive dimensional variability between treads, the probability of a fall would be increased.IBC (2015) requires risers to be no greater than 178 mm (7 in) and the run length to be no less than 280 mm (11 in) in new public buildings. This produces a maximum slope of 32.5°. In residences, however, where most people spend more time than on stairs in the public sector, code allows risers as high as 197 mm (7.75 in), and runs as short as 254 mm (10 in). This produces a slope of 37.8° (IBC, 2015, Sec 1009.7.2).Studies have demonstrated that falls are more likely on steeper stairs (Roys and Wright, 2003; Templer, 1974; Templer et al., 1985; Wright and Roys, 2005, 2008). Templer (1974) found fewer missteps when the risers were between 117 and 183 mm (4.6–7.2 in) and when the runs were greater than 312 mm (12.3 in). The recommendations from these studies are for risers to have a maximum height of 180 mm (7 in) and runs to have a minimum length of 280 mm (11 in).Archea et al. (1979) report that one of the most prevalent stair fall scenarios involves tripping over or stepping past one- and two-riser stairs and encroachments. Templer et al. (1978) report that, in addition to other factors, more missteps were observed to occur on shorter flights than on longer ones.IBC (2015) allows short flights of stairs, of three or fewer risers, under some circumstances, such as in residential dwellings (e.g., Section 1003.5) Given the documented hazards to pedestrians, no short flights of stairs should be allowed by IBC (2015) or other codes, standards or regulations.As recommended by Pauls (1984), ASTM F1637-13 states that flights having three or fewer risers shall be avoided where possible. This standard is partly based on NFPA 101, an ANSI standard that was published as the 1988 Life Safety Code. If short flights are necessary, visual cues (such as handrails, contrast in surface colors, delineated nosing edges, accent lighting, and posted warnings) should be provided to facilitate improved step identification and to mitigate the hazard; however, more research is needed to understand the most effective lighting and markings (See Cohen and Sloan, 2015).There is a need to develop a method for evaluating the safety of a new stairway such that a builder can, before the stairway is completed, quickly ascertain whether any variability in step geometry exceeds the allowable standard. Pauls and Harbuck (2008) suggest that the crouch and sight method can point out some, but not all, instances of excessive variability.Given that research shows that step variability as small as 6 mm (0.25 in) can cause falls, codes and standards such as IBC (2015) and NFPA 101 (2015), which allow for greater variability in step geometry, should be revised accordingly.Research also is needed to determine whether falls on stairways in new residences continue to occur as a result of excessive variability as discussed by Johnson and Pauls (2012) and Pauls (2013b). Related to this is the issue of whether having shorter runs in private residences is justified, under the assumption that home owners will actually adapt over time to a steeper and less safe stairway as now allowed by building codes in both the U.S. and the U.K. (Roys, 2001).Stairs that are too shallow also may be hazardous. It would be helpful to have research showing the maximum length of runs for safe ambulation. While Wright and Roys (2005) report that runs as large as 425 mm (16.7 in) were preferable to runs of 300 mm (11.8 in) or less, and produced no major problem in foot placement, there has been no research on the maximum safe run length. For instance, on gently rolling terrain, an exterior stairway with runs in excess of 510 mm (20 in) between adjacent risers may cause a user to take an additional step or two on each tread, and disrupt their gait. However, the maximum safe run length between adjacent risers remains to be determined.Given the documented hazards to pedestrians, no short flights of stairs should be allowed by codes, standards or regulations related to pedestrian walkway safety. Existing walkway codes, standards or regulations should be revised accordingly.The presence of handrails at stairways enhances the safety of stairs. Factors that contribute to handrail usability and safety include the height, size and shape of the handrail, as well as rail continuity, terminations, fixing details, and surface characteristics. Only height, size, and shape of the handrail are addressed in this section.Both ICC/ANSI A117.1-2009 (Sec. 505) and IBC (2015, Sec. 10.12) state that handrails shall be provided on both sides of stairs and ramps, and that the top of the gripping section shall be 864–965 mm (34–38 in) above the nosing or walking surface. This requirement is based on research showing that, after a misstep, handrails less than 864 mm (34 in) above the nosing are not adequate for use by healthy adults attempting to arrest a fall; instead, handrails 910–1020 mm (35.8–40.2 in) above the nosings are needed (Maki et al., 1984). This would indicate that the codes and standards should be changed to allow only the taller railings.For optimal graspability the size of the handrail should be neither too small nor too large. ICC/ANSI A117.1-2009 (Sec. 505) requires the circular cross section shall have an outside diameter of 32–51 mm (1.25–2.0 in). Noncircular cross sections of handrails shall have a perimeter dimension of 100–160 mm (4–6.25 in). The 2015 IBC (Sec. 1014.3) has the same requirements for handrails in public facilities (Type 1 handrails). However, for residential facilities IBC (2015) allows the larger, and possibly more difficult to grasp, Type 2 handrail (Fig. 1). IBC (2015, Sec. 1014.3) allows the Type II rail in residences but not in public buildings. However, NFPA 101 (2015) allows only the Type I rail.Maki (1985) studied the maximum stabilizing forces and moments young and old subjects were able to generate while standing in an upright position and holding onto circular, square or rectangular rails. Based on this work, the recommended optimal handrail shape was circular with a diameter of 38 mm (1.5 in). He concluded that “narrow-top” rectangular and complex decorative shapes should be avoided. It follows that handrails that rely solely on “pinch grips” would probably not be adequate for a person attempting to arrest a fall on stairs.For the most part Type I handrails, having an outside diameter of 32–51 mm (1.25–2 in), conform to Maki's recommendations and allow a person who has experienced a misstep to exert a “power grip” on the rail by curling fingers around the rail.However, a decorative design, called the Type II, requires finger recess areas with a depth of 8 mm (0.3 in) on two sides of the rail. The minimum width of the handrail above the recess areas is to be 32–70 mm (1.25–2.75 in). This rail means that a person starting to fall may only be able to hold on with a pinch grip (Fig. 1). While some research has concluded that a person can grasp a Type I and Type II handrail equally well (Dusenberry et al., 2009), methodological concerns with that research; such as using seated participants, unnatural grasping tasks, and inadequate statistical analyses; indicate further research is needed.Codes and standards allow shorter handrail heights than have found to be optimal for study participants (Maki et al., 1984). Given the small participant sample in that study, further research is needed.Even if not using a handrail, research has shown that persons negotiating stairs typically place themselves within arm's reach of an available handrail (Cohen and Cohen, 2001; Pauls, 1980, 1984). Research is needed to determine whether the Type II handrail provides sufficient graspability for a person attempting to stop a fall in progress, whether utilizing or within arm's reach of the handrail, and to evaluate any differences due to age, physical fitness, or gender.The IBC, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), and various other codes, regulations, legislation and consensus standards; such as ASTM F1637-13, ASTM F2965-13, and ASTM F2966-13; mention the need for slip resistant surfaces, yet have not adequately defined what “slip resistant” means or how to measure it. The consensus standard ANSI/ASSE A1264.2 (2012) is the only standard that cites the generally accepted coefficient of friction (COF) guideline value of 0.50, and has indicated suitable methods for measuring the slip resistance of a walkway.Over the past 25 years considerable work has been done to further our knowledge of the variables that affect slip resistance, human factors, kinesiology, biomechanics, and tribometry. Much of this work has been done in conjunction with efforts initiated by the ASTM International committee F-13 on Pedestrian/Walkway Safety and Footwear.In most applications, measurement of coefficient of friction (COF) makes use of a scale that ranges from 0 to 1. Measurements nearer “0” are considered less slip-resistant, and measurements nearer “1” are considered more slip resistant. COF is a numerical descriptor of the resistance to sliding on a surface. The required friction necessary for a pedestrian to not slip – utilized friction (aka required COF or RCOF) (Chang et al., 2011, 2013; Kleiner et al., 2015; Li et al., 2006) – must not exceed the friction capabilities between the walkway surface and the pedestrian's shoe sole or foot bottom – the available friction (Powers et al., 2010). Utilized friction is typically measured using a force plate that records the forces imparted to a surface as a person walks across the force plate. A number of studies have shown that the minimum required static COF for slow, medium and fast-paced walking while unloaded on a level surface ranges between 0.2 and 0.4 (Gronqvist et al., 1990; Miller, 1983; Powers et al., 2002; Strandberg, 1983; Vaughn et al., 1999). The value of 0.50 is commonly referred to as that value of available COF, below which is unsafe, and above which is safe. The 0.50 value has a built-in safety factor over and above the utilized COF discussed above.Based upon historical precedent, current research and consensus guidelines, 0.50 remains the most recognized and accepted guideline value in the U.S. for pedestrian safety (see ANSI Technical Report TRA1264.3 (2007)).The term tribometry derives from tribology: the science and technology of friction, lubrication, and wear. Tribometry is defined as the measurement of friction on a surface, as carried out with a tribometer. A tribometer measures available friction. The term “slip resistance” refers to the relative force that resists the tendency of a shoe or foot to slide on a walkway, and is a function of the walkway surface, the footwear bottom, and the presence of foreign materials between them. Different tribometers claim to measure different physical quantities, such as static coefficient of friction (SCOF), dynamic coefficient of friction (DCOF), transitional coefficient of friction, and slip index. The presence of foreign material(s) is what differentiates “slip resistance” from “coefficient of friction” (COF) (ASTM F1646–13). Given the context of pedestrian traction/safety, and for the purposes of this discussion the above terms may be used interchangeably.ASTM F2508 (2013), Standard Practice for Validation, Calibration and Certification of Walkway Tribometers Using Reference Surfaces, is based on human ambulation studies conducted with a set of carefully selected materials at the University of Southern California (USC) Musculoskeletal Biomechanics Laboratory (Powers et al., 2010). Eighty study participants, aged 20–39 years old, were monitored with an 8-camera, digital motion analysis system as the subjects walked across the wetted reference materials (Reference Surfaces): polished granite (RS A), porcelain (RS B), Vinyl Composition Tile (VCT; RS C) and ceramic tile (RS D). A standard shoe-sole material was used on all footwear used in the study. The tiles were ranked according to the number of slips that were recorded on each tile. Heel slips were defined as slips longer than 40 mm (1.6 in) in length, whereas toe slips were defined as any posterior velocity of the toe marker before toe-off phase of gait. The most slips occurred on the polished granite (RS A); the second, third-most and least amount of slips occurred on porcelain (RS B), VCT (RS C) and ceramic tile (RS D), respectively. Ceramic tile (RS D) was the only reference surface that generated no slips. Table 1shows the slip results and ranking of the surface materials based upon the human subject tests.The researchers concluded that an “objective foundation for the validation and calibration of tribometers” was demonstrated, and that “the four (reference) surfaces could define a reference standard that tribometer manufacturers could use to validate their devices”. The suite of reference materials would also provide a means for users to “independently calibrate their instruments by verifying consistent results” (Powers et al., 2010). Subsequently, ASTM International published F2508 (2011)Standard Practice for Validation and Calibration of Walkway Tribometers Using Reference Surfaces, which is accompanied by an adjunct consisting of the four reference surfaces used in Powers et al. (2010). ASTM F2508 has since been updated to F2508-13 and includes a procedure through which an entity may certify a tribometer, signifying that the tribometer model has a completed and documented validation and interlaboratory study. Using F2508, a manufacturer/supplier can validate a tribometer design, and operators can assure their devices remain calibrated.A major difficulty with ASTM F2508 is that it was based on a single research study with multiple limitations. Some limitations were that the human subject studies were conducted with a generally younger population of healthy individuals who wore a study-specific shoe sole material, and walked in a straight line at a relatively fast speed (about 7 fps). Yet, older people are more likely to fall and be injured as a result of a fall (Kleiner et al., 2015), and many falls occur as a person changes direction while walking (Armstrong and Lansing, 1977). The faster walking speeds may have served to exaggerate the number of slips on each tile. It is worth pondering whether additional studies conducted in the same manner with different populations, walking tasks and shoe sole materials would yield the same result or show any practical differences in slip resistance between the three most slippery tiles.Another methodological limitation was that heel slips were not considered a slip unless they were at least 40 mm (1.6 in) in length. However, heel slips of shorter length can result in a fall (Redfern et al., 2001). Repeating the studies with a shorter heel slip criterion may result in different outcomes.An additional limitation is that some tribometers measured the slip resistance of the reference surfaces A, B and C (granite, porcelain and VCT, respectively) as relatively close to each other, on the low end of the slip resistance scale, and within the measurement variability of the tribometers. Consequently, there were no practical differences in slip resistance between the three most slippery tiles. Had additional trials been performed, it is likely that these tribometers would have ranked the tiles differently.In a validation study (40 tests on each reference surface) of an author's English XL tribometer (ExCel Tribometers, LLC), the following mean slip resistance results were reported: 0.10 for granite (RS A), 0.17 for porcelain (RS B), 0.27 for VCT (RS C), and 0.69 for ceramic tile (RS D). We know that 7 slips (all toe slips) occurred on the VCT (RS C) in the USC study. So, somewhere between VCT (RS C) and the ceramic RS D there is a theoretical surface that could result in no slips somewhere below 0.69 and somewhere above 0.27. All that can be said now if one tests an unknown surface to be 0.50, is that surface is safer than VCT (RS C) and is less slip resistant than ceramic tile (RS D). Further research is needed to identify reference surfaces with more practically relevant slip resistance measurements.As a result of the issuance of ASTM F2508, ASTM International procured an inventory of the four reference surfaces to be sold to manufacturers and users of tribometers. Most, if not all, walkway surfaces lack uniformity in texture and therefore register variability in slip resistance. Reference tiles of the same type should be substantially similar in terms of their slip resistance. Problems with these tiles have been noted. Wet VCT has been evaluated in numerous studies and found to wear quickly and produce erratic results after long term use when compared with red quarry tile and glazed ceramic tile (ANSI TR A1264.3 (2007), p.12). Another study has shown that the slip index of VCT (RS C) has varied 0.12 to 0.27 from one tile to another, and from 0.15 to 0.25 on different locations on the same tile (Excel Tribometers, 2013). Problems with the ceramic tile (RS D) also have been noted, with inter-tile variations ranging from 0.45 to 0.95, and intra-tile variation ranging from 0.55 to 0.95 (Excel Tribometers, 2013). Further effort is needed to identify reference surfaces, and quality control processes, with more reliable slip resistance measurements.Ruggedness-testing of test foot preparation techniques has shown that slip resistance measurements depend upon the method used in preparation of the test foot. Poor sanding techniques may have an adverse effect on tribometer slip resistance values regardless of the tribometer. Test foot sanding devices have become available from some manufacturers that reduce variability. Additional standards are needed to encourage standardized methods for preparing the test foot.Past studies have shown that traction demand may be as low as 0.20–0.4 for an ambulating person (Gronqvist et al., 1990; Miller, 1983; Powers et al., 2002; Strandberg, 1983; Vaughn et al., 1999). Most of the studies have used relatively young people walking in straight lines. However, in the real world, people do not walk only in straight-lines. Further research is needed to determine the traction demand required for various tasks under different environmental conditions so that slip resistance criteria of 0.50 or greater can be applied as needed (Chang et al., 2004; Chang et al., 2008; Cooper et al., 2007).With what tribometer is that “0.50” to be measured? Studies have shown that one tribometer may measure COF of a surface as 0.48, yet two other tribometers may measure the same surface as 0.35, and 0.85 (Powers et al., 2010). Which one is correct? Perhaps one day a chart will be developed that compares and correlates slip resistance values of frequently used tribometers. Efforts to incorporate human variability, as well as tribometer variability, may be a consideration in an effort to identify a slip resistance threshold that would apply to any given tribometer – test surface combination, and that could be used to assist in the evaluation of the safety of any surface.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Existing walkway codes and standards have made valuable contributions to pedestrian safety. The authors hold that in the formulation of codes and standards that impact pedestrian safety the results of relevant scientific research should be given significant weight. This article examined many elements of common walkway codes and standards, indicated which elements are based on or supported by empirical data, and which elements could benefit from additional scientific research. The authors hope that this article can point the way to further improvements in walkway codes and standards so that the safety of people using those walkways can be enhanced.