@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of wearing gumboots and leather lace-up boots on lower limb muscle activity when walking on simulated underground coal mine surfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Males walked on simulated underground coal mine surfaces in two different boots.Boot structure influenced thigh muscle activity when walking on uneven surfaces.Leather lace-up boots caused increased thigh muscle activity compared to gumboots.Increased thigh muscle activity appears to be a slip and/or trip prevention strategy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Boots,Mining,Surfaces,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study aimed to investigate the effects of wearing two standard underground coal mining work boots (a gumboot and a leather lace-up boot) on lower limb muscle activity when participants walked across simulated underground coal mining surfaces. Quadriceps (rectus femoris, vastus medialis, vastus lateralis) and hamstring (biceps femoris, semitendinosus) muscle activity were recorded as twenty male participants walked at a self-selected pace around a circuit while wearing each boot type. The circuit consisted of level, inclined and declined surfaces composed of rocky gravel and hard dirt. Walking in a leather lace-up boot, compared to a gumboot, resulted in increased vastus lateralis and increased biceps femoris muscle activity when walking on sloped surfaces. Increased muscle activity appears to be acting as a slip and/or trip prevention strategy in response to challenging surfaces and changing boot features.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Underground coal mine workers incur a high incidence of work-related lower limb injuries (Government of Western Australia, 2011), including sprains and strains caused by slips, trips and falls (Armour, 2003; WorkCover NSW, 2010). Annually, these lower limb injuries contribute to almost 19,000 lost working days (Government of Western Australia, 2011) and an average of $28 million in compensation claims in Australia alone (Armour, 2003). These figures are the highest rate when compared to all other Australian mining industries.The risk of experiencing a slip (Chambers and Cham, 2007; Lockhart and Kim, 2006; Oates et al., 2010) or trip (Austin et al., 1999) accident is influenced by the shoe–surface interface, particularly at the time of initial contact with the ground and during the pre-swing of the gait cycle. When walking on a level, even surface while wearing everyday footwear, healthy individuals usually make the necessary adjustments to maintain balance in order to avoid a slip or trip (Austin et al., 1999; Chambers and Cham, 2007; Tang et al., 1998). Underground coal mine surfaces, however, are often uneven, unpredictable due to poor light conditions or the surface being occluded by water, incorporate moveable materials such as rocks, and vary in gradient.To avoid slip and trip injuries while traversing these uneven surfaces, it is vital that underground coal miners recruit the appropriate lower limb musculature (Franz and Kram, 2012). This is particularly important when they negotiate steep gradients because additional muscle activity is needed to raise and lower the centre of gravity (Franz and Kram, 2012; Lay et al., 2007; Patla, 1986). The amount of muscle activity is also dependent upon the design of footwear worn by individuals (Böhm and Hösl, 2010; Noé et al., 2009; Nurse et al., 2005). For example, by manipulating sole flexibility the shoe–surface interface is altered, which can in turn change the lower limb joint angles and muscle activity displayed during walking (Nurse et al., 2005). Changing footwear support also potentially triggers a reorganisation of the muscle activity that is responsible for stabilising the ankle and knee joints (Noé et al., 2009). Mining work boots of varying sole flexibility and boot support may therefore influence how an underground coal miner's feet interact with an uneven surface, thereby dictating the amount of lower limb muscle activity generated to support a joint, such as the ankle or knee, in an attempt to reduce the risk of a slip or trip. This notion, however, is yet to be investigated.Coal mining work boots are usually made of either leather (e.g. a lace-up boot) or rubber (e.g. a slip on gumboot), and must incorporate a steel-cap to protect the worker's feet from undesirable external stimuli, such as rocks, gravel and dirt, and to satisfy minimum personal protective equipment standards (Marr and Quine, 1993). Mining boots also typically incorporate a high shaft (upper part of the boot that covers the shank), particularly in mines that require the miners to walk through water. Combinations of these boot characteristics and materials, while adhering to safety standards, result in structurally different boots in terms of overall mass, shaft stiffness, support and sole flexibility. The effects of these structural differences in boot design, however, on the gait of underground coal miners and their risk of slipping or tripping are unknown.If the structural characteristics of the underground coal miners' work boots require these workers to use additional muscle activity during walking, the potential for incorrect foot placement onto the supporting surface exists. As a consequence, the risk of incurring a sprain or strain injury, via slipping or tripping, might increase. Despite these negative implications, no study has systematically examined whether boot type affects lower limb muscle activity when walking on surfaces typically encountered by underground coal mine workers. Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the effects of wearing two standard underground coal mining work boots (a gumboot and a leather lace-up boot) on lower limb muscle activity when participants walked across simulated underground coal mining surfaces. It was hypothesised that differences in the mass, shaft stiffness and sole flexibility of the gumboot compared to the leather lace-up boot would influence lower limb muscle activity during gait. Specifically, when walking in a gumboot, which has a looser shaft, more flexible sole and lighter mass than a leather lace-up boot, participants would display decreased intensity of the quadriceps (rectus femoris, vastus medialis, vastus lateralis) and hamstring (biceps femoris, semitendinosus) muscle activity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Walking in a leather lace-up boot compared to a gumboot resulted in increased vastus lateralis and increased biceps femoris muscle activity when participants walked on sloped surfaces. The increased muscle activity appears to be a slip and/or trip prevention strategy in response to challenging surfaces and changing boot features. Whether the increased vastus lateralis and biceps femoris muscle activity is compensating for differences in boot mass, and/or shaft or sole stiffness and whether this is further influenced by prolonged walking, requires further investigation. By understanding the influence that specific boot structures have on lower limb muscle activity of underground coal miners, future work boots can be designed to be more surface and task specific, potentially reducing the high incidence of work-related lower limb injuries in this industry.This study was funded by the Coal Services Health and Safety Trust (HST Project No. 20620).None.