@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Delivering meat carcasses/cuts to craft-butcher shops: An investigation of work characteristics and manual handling hazards

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We gathered information about work techniques, and good practices, to characterise the handling practices.We gathered information about driver injury to determine underlying causes, and proneness to incidents.A number of factors that can increase the risk of injury are identified along with measures to mitigate them.An approach for risk assessment is suggested which could be applied in similar peripatetic delivery work situations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Shoulder,Anterior handling,Reported injuries,Retail Deliveries,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study investigated delivery scenarios of service drivers working in the retail meat industry. The methodology included analysis of accident reports, and field investigations of deliveries at craft-butcher shop premises, including semi-structured interviews with managers and workers. The findings provide greater clarity about the hazards in this job, and suggest for peripatetic delivery activities, four main factors on which decisions about risk and good practice may be made: composition of the orders; characteristics of the delivery vehicle/truck; handling method most often used; and, the road/access conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Despite the dominance of supermarkets in Europe over the past few decades, smaller retail shops are still fairly prevalent. These include craft-butcher shops (craft shops) where consumer-specified portions of meat are prepared and sold on needs basis, or used in affiliated ‘cottage’ food service establishments. An in-house survey of craft shops by one Local Authority in the South West region of England identified that there were 54 such premises across four Local Authorities, which when scaled across 407 Local Authorities in the UK, suggested the existence of 5500 premises. Unlike supermarkets, which are often large scale purpose-built businesses with mechanical aids and/or automated systems to move goods around, most craft shops (often family run businesses) lack the resources to install automated handling systems and rely on service drivers for delivery of their meat orders.Service drivers in the meat industry are responsible for driving a pre-stocked truck/van, from one craft shop to another, and transferring individual items into each premise, sometimes to awkwardly positioned storage areas and over distances of more than 30 m. Like many other delivery drivers, their work is primarily decentralised, and includes an alternation of driving and manual handling activities (Van der Beek, 2012). However, according to the needs of the industry, the work involves large non-uniform standardised loads (meat cuts and carcasses), which may weigh more than 25 kg, and self-selected male workers i.e., those with considerably more than average strength (up to 90% strength capability of the UK population). These factors often make it difficult to implement norms for management of the associated risks. Though the manual handling hazards and risks of injury for delivery drivers have received increased research attention over the last few decades, the efforts have mainly been concerned with movement/delivery of boxes/sacks and palletised loads (Hedberg, 1985; Okunribido et al., 2006; Friswell and Williamson, 2010; Shibuya et al., 2010), work within/around the delivery vehicle (Van der Beek and Frings-Dresen, 1995; Olson et al., 2009; Reiman et al., 2013), and work at a specific worksite or area (Magnusson et al., 1987; Venn-Brown, 1998; Wright and Haslam, 1999; St-Vincent et al., 2005). The scientific literature about peripatetic meat delivery activities and manual handling away from employer-controlled worksites is sparse (Sinsoiliez, 1984; INRS, 2002). Providing greater certainty about the work of meat delivery service drivers, in terms of the main factors affecting risk of musculoskeletal injury, is therefore particularly important.In Great Britain the Manual Handling Operations Regulations, 1992 (MHOR) (HSE, 2004) places a duty upon employers to avoid, as far as reasonably practicable, the need for workers to undertake manual handling tasks which involve a risk of being injured. Specifically, employers are required to: identify the tasks performed that present hazards; assess the risk of injury associated with these tasks; and, to eliminate or reduce the risk as far as is reasonably practicable. When considering such risks, employers can refer to the guidance on the regulations (HSE, 2004), and derived risk assessment help tools such as the Manual Handling Assessment Charts (MAC) (HSE, 2003). Employers whose employees undertake manual handling operations away from the home premises (for example delivery drivers), are also required, where possible, to liaise closely with those in control of premises where deliveries are made, to plan how the work can be done safely; those in charge of premises where visiting employees work are required to ensure that the premises and plant there are in a safe condition. The Regulations do not set any specific requirement such as weight limits; instead, they encourage an ergonomics assessment approach (based on a range of relevant factors), to determine the risk of injury and point the way to remedial action. An example risk assessment for a butcher's shop including manual handling during deliveries is also provided by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE, 2008).The present study was undertaken to investigate meat delivery scenarios to better understand the nature of the work. More specifically, it aimed to identify main aspects of the work that affect the risk of musculoskeletal injury and on which decisions about good practice may be made, i.e., macro risk factors. Hence the study was not aimed at quantifying the exposures to micro factors, i.e., those aspects associated with the individual and/or the immediate workstation. The study therefore involved:•Gathering information about the work techniques, including good practices (use of manual handling assist devices, dedicated loading bays, extended rail systems, minimal lifting) to determine whether the handling practices are efficient and suitable; and,Gathering information about worker injury during delivery of meat carcasses to craft shops to determine the underlying causes of any injuries, and also whether service drivers are particularly prone to incidents of injury.In the context of this study, the delivery activity begins when the driver arrives at the premises and ends when the last item in the order is deposited in a chilled storage or processing area.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Manual Handling in the delivery of retail meat carcases involves carrying weights of up to 85 kg, and environments that include obstacles en route and raised edges/flights of steps. However, a review of incident reports showed that delivery drivers were involved in a small proportion (3.7%) of the meat handling incidents reported on RIDDOR for the meat processing industry. For meat delivery activities, the results suggest an approach for risk assessment of deliveries to craft shops. The main conclusions are:•The normal custom and practice in relation to the handling methods applied (shoulder handling and anterior handling) are essentially low energy-cost and sufficient methods for the tasks. However, shoulder handling is a less physically demanding technique for moving the same weight compared to anterior handling.The risk of injury when carrying beef quarters is less, when a good shoulder handling technique is used, i.e., when the centre of mass of the load is located as close as possible to the centre of mass to the body and the body keeps an upright position similar to unloaded walking, compared to when it is not.Four main factors that can increase the risk of injury and on which decisions about risk and good practice may be made are: composition of the orders; characteristics of the delivery vehicle/truck; the handling method mainly applied; and, the road/access conditions.More generally, the results indicate that peripatetic delivery activities can be managed by paying attention to macro aspects, rather than traditional micro risk factors such as the load weight, instantaneous postures adopted, and position of the load relative to the body.