@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effect of volumetric (3D) tactile symbols within inclusive tactile maps

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We compare two tactile maps, one of them includes Volumetric (3D) tactile symbols.Improving the interaction between users and tactile maps using 3D symbols together with 2D ones.3D symbols can be located in less time and, generally, cause fewer errors than flat relief symbols-2D.3D printing opens new horizons for the design and production of tactile maps for blind users.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tactile symbols,Visually impaired,3D printing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Point, linear and areal elements, which are two-dimensional and of a graphic nature, are the morphological elements employed when designing tactile maps and symbols for visually impaired users.However, beyond the two-dimensional domain, there is a fourth group of elements – volumetric elements – which mapmakers do not take sufficiently into account when it comes to designing tactile maps and symbols.This study analyses the effect of including volumetric, or 3D, symbols within a tactile map. In order to do so, the researchers compared two tactile maps. One of them uses only two-dimensional elements and is produced using thermoforming, one of the most popular systems in this field, while the other includes volumetric symbols, thus highlighting the possibilities opened up by 3D printing, a new area of production.The results of the study show that including 3D symbols improves the efficiency and autonomous use of these products.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Tactile maps are a group of resources that show graphic information using relief (Picture 1). Tactile symbols are included within this type of resources and are normally used with their corresponding legends. These products help persons with visual impairment to understand features of the environment around them through the sense of touch and are often used, for instance, to communicate and teach geography or in the acquisition of orientation skills for facilitating mobility through specific environments (Edman, 1992).According to the literature, there are three types of morphological element used in the design of tactile maps (Picture 2), tactual symbols, or any tangible graphic for the visually impaired, namely: point, linear and areal elements (Amick et al., 2002; Correa Silva, 2008; Edman, 1992; Welsh and Blasch, 1980).However, a fourth category of design elements, volumetric (3D) elements (Wong, 1993), is barely used in the design and production of these types of products. This is partly due to some limitations of the most commonly used production systems (Picture 1): microencapsulation and thermoforming (Perkins, 2002; Rowell and Ungar, 2003b).In line with this, several notable studies have been conducted to compare these two, or other, methods of production, with varying results. Ungar et al. (2005) or Dacen Nagel and Coulson (1990) suggested that the microencapsulation method was a more appropriate system to produce tactile maps than thermoforming, although other researchers such Pike et al. (1992) obtained similar results in their experiments with children involving both types of systems. Finally, Gardiner and Perkins (2002) noted important advantages of thermoformed over microencapsulated paper maps, among others, because in their studies well-designed thermoformed maps offered consistently better results than microencapsulated ones. One of the main problems of the thermoforming system is the time cost involved in generating a master to produce the map. On the other hand, the microencapsulated system is cheaper than thermoforming if a single copy of the map or a short series of them needs to be produced; its resistance, however, is not enough for continued or critical use due to the known degradation of the swell paper used in their manufacture. In any case, both techniques allow light, flexible and, therefore, portable maps to be produced, for use in real contexts or in indoor situations.The novelty presented by this work is the study of some possible applications for volumetric elements, basic prisms (Picture 3), applied as punctual tactile symbols in order to improve the usability of tactile maps. In this case, 3D printing is the technique used to manufacture these symbols since it can produce more complex geometries than traditional methods (Chua et al., 2003).Through 3D Printing it becomes possible to produce final maps in short series or even rapid master pieces to evaluate the product before launching it. Nowadays, the price is constantly decreasing and the final cost of one piece consumes less time and expense than producing, for example, an industrial master (thermoforming system). Although they are not portable because the tactile maps produced by 3D Printing are rigid, they are durable.In any case, the use of one system or another to produce a tactile map depends on the aims and the requirements, and any system can be useful depending on the intended purpose of the map.In this study the researchers have selected the thermoform process to compare it with the 3D Printing system. The decision to choose thermoforming is mainly due to the fact that it offers better control over the height contrast of the elements of the map than in the case of the microencapsulation process; according to Gardiner and Perkins “establishing the relative height of features in multilevel design is an important part” (of the process of designing tactile maps and symbols) (Gardiner and Perkins, 2002). This fact makes it possible to produce more similar conditions between the selected methods in terms of geometry. Microencapsulation, however, does not allow the production of a multilevel of heights within the relief elements on the tactile map. This is why it was not considered in this experiment.Some of the most important factors to be mentioned for the design and use of these products are:•In general, the lower tactile acuity of the sense of touch, in comparison with the sense of sight (Schiff and Foulke, 1982).Secondly, the need for verbal assistance from a Mobility Instructor. These devices are normally used in audio guidance to make it easier to understand the tactile stimulus explored.Thirdly, user familiarity (previous experience) with these products. The ability to read a tactile map depends on the skills, exploration strategies, experience and training of the people using it (Jover et al., 2008). These factors allow blind users to recognize the information offered by a tactile product more accurately and effectively, even in real contexts (Perkins and Gardiner, 2003).Finally, it is worth noting that using haptic memory is necessary when exploring a tactile map, since blind people explore tactile graphics sequentially. In contrast, visual perception is simultaneous and less time is required to assimilate the same amount of information (Ballesteros, 1993). Thus, simplicity is an important requirement for tactile maps and symbols (Amick et al., 2002; Edman, 1992; Rowell and Ungar, 2003c).In addition, another factor worth noting is the context of use of the maps. As Blades, Ungar and Spencer demonstrated, tactile maps contribute to the correct construction of a cognitive map of a new area or route, i.e. to the learning of new environments for visually impaired people (Blades et al., 2010). A tactile map can be used in real contexts, although the main advantage for visually impaired persons is that they can explore and learn an unknown area before actually travelling through it. In fact, they prefer to use the maps quietly at home, before undertaking the real route, since in this way they reduce the anxiety caused by the experience of contact with unknown areas (Jacobson, 1998a,b; Rowell and Ungar, 2005). Obviously, they can also use a tactile map before and during the route, although the logical sequence to use a tactile map is, first, to learn the route at home (indoors) with the aid of a Mobility Instructor and then to try to follow the real route with the guidance of the Mobility Instructor several times until the route has been learnt. The time consumed depends on the complexity of the area and the skills and experience of the user, but finally, once the new area or route has been assimilated in accordance with this protocol, the visually impaired user will feel safer following the route or travelling through the area alone.The symbology of tactile maps has been widely studied taking into account the aspects mentioned above (Rener, 1993; Perkins, 2002; Rowell and Ungar, 2003a). Recognition, legibility and discrimination of symbols are the factors that are most widely examined in various studies conducted to verify the usability of these types of product and their efficient use on maps (Berlá, 1982; Lambert and Lederman, 1989).As regards the classification of the symbols, Edman talks about point, linear and areal texture symbols (Picture 2). Each of these is used to present specific information (Edman, 1992). On mobility maps, point symbols represent particular locations and lines can communicate direction, while areal symbols cover specific areas (Welsh and Blasch, 1980).Consequently, the representation of symbols on conventional tactile maps follows the guidelines established by the use of the three design elements or categories cited earlier. As a result of this, the symbols used on current tactile maps incorporate 2D features. A user can perceive the symbols through the sense of touch thanks to the contrasting heights of slight elevations of these shapes. In Berlá's studies this elevation ranged between 0.38 and 0.89 mm (Berlá, 1982).However, other fields of knowledge such as that of ergonomics (Pheasant and Haslegrave, 2006), which are also focused on the study of displays adapted to human use, show that it is possible to utilize volumetric elements in tasks where one of the requirements is a high degree of tactile discrimination. This is the case with the controls of an aircraft, which should be distinct and easy to discriminate by touch so that pilots can avoid fatal errors. These controls use keypads, which ergonomics studies from the standpoint of efficiency of use (Sanders and McCormick, 1987).In conclusion, it is important to mention that this study is focused on the use of the final category of design elements, that is, volumetric (3D) elements (Wong, 1993; Ching, 2007), as applied to tactile symbology. Volumetric symbols have not been addressed very extensively in the literature, although the work of Don McCallum, Simon Ungar and Sandra Jehoel (McCallum et al., 2006) should be noted as it deals with the analysis of different symbols using the TIMP (Tactile Inkjet Mapping Project) tactile process. The symbols studied included some with quite complex relief and volume (2.5D and full 3D features), such as a stairs symbol made up of three steps, each at a different height, or a ramp symbol produced in the form of a slope. The results of the study on these volumetric symbols were ambiguous, although they suggested a possible path of research on the possibilities of three-dimensional shapes (Z axis) for improving the usability of tactile maps.Thus, this paper presents new results and findings about the use of a new category of tactile symbols, i.e. 3D symbols (Picture 3), on a real tactile map. The selection of this sort of symbols was carried out in previous studies, in which the researchers observed how, from a set of 80 different and varied 3D and 2D shapes tested, simple volumetric symbols were easy to recognize by the sense of touch (Gual et al., 2012). The 3D symbols tested in the previous experiment had no literal meaning – they were abstract shapes without any type of translation from the visual domain. They could therefore be interpreted with the aid of a key with their corresponding meaning, and without the need for visual memory.On the other hand, the flat (2D) symbols selected in this study are conventionally used and described in the literature (Meihoefer, 1969; Lockwood, 1995; McCallum et al., 2006; Rener, 1993; Goodrick, 1987).The objective of this study is to analyse the effect, as regards the speed of identification and error rates, of the use of 3D symbols on a tactile map.The main research question is whether it is possible to improve the usability of tactile maps by including 3D symbols or, at least, if this inclusion does not have a detrimental effect on the performance of a tactile map, that is to say, whether they have the same level of usability as the traditional tactile symbols with 2D features.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Following the results, the study shows that it is possible to improve the interaction between users and tactile maps using volumetric symbols together with two-dimensional morphological elements of design (points, lines and areas). Volumetric symbols are easily identified, recognized and discriminated. They can be located in less time and cause fewer errors. Thus, this combination caused a positive effect on the usability of the map studied.When a symbol is correctly located, it is not only detected, but recognized and discriminated from the rest of the symbols on the map as a whole. Some of the most important factors when correctly locating a symbol are size, shape and texture (Berlá, 1982; Edman, 1992). However, using large contrasts in height could be another important factor, given the data compiled in this experiment as regards volumetric tactile symbols. Nevertheless, this should always follow a basic principle: ensuring simplicity for the sense of touch when designing (Amick et al., 2002; Edman, 1992; Rowell and Ongar, 2003c).Hence, it seems difficult to confuse the different morphological design elements (Amick et al., 2002; Correa Silva, 2008; Edman, 1992; Welsh and Blasch, 1980). For example, it is difficult to confuse a line with an area or a point. Similarly, volumetric symbols are difficult to confuse with other categories. In contrast, as this study shows, the inclusion of volumetric symbols on a map has an overall positive effect because it increases the variety of shapes and tactile attributes such as contrast height. Even so, this fact does not mean that a suitable tactile symbol in 3D could always be better than a 2D symbol. But at least they can assimilate the same level of usability as the current ones, thereby answering the research question of the study.On the other hand, although traditional systems of production of tactile maps like thermoforming (Rowell and Ungar, 2003b) enable the reproduction of volumetric symbols in some cases, such as cones and pyramids, 3D printing (Chua et al., 2003) opens up new horizons for the design and production of this type of maps, as it offers Mobility Instructors the chance to personalize the production of maps with complex and polychrome geometry at a higher resolution than current techniques.Despite the improvement explained here, it is necessary to meet the challenges of producing usable and autonomous tactile maps.