@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Interactive visualizations for decision support: Application of Rasmussen's abstraction-aggregation hierarchy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Rasmussen's abstraction-aggregation hierarchy was employed to develop two decision support systems maintenance and diagnostics.Experimental evaluations of both systems indicted that higher abstraction displays enhanced the performance of experienced personnel.Less experienced personnel found the higher abstraction displays less useful, in some cases even confusing.Training and/or aiding should focus on enhancing abilities of less experienced personnel to use higher abstraction displays when appropriate.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Interactive visualizations,Abstraction-aggregation hierarchy,Maintenance,Enterprise diagnostics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Data visualization has of late received an enormous amount of attention from both researchers and practitioners. Even the popular press often includes impressive visualizations of various data sets. Interactive visualizations frequently include data visualizations, but they differ in that users employ the visualizations to make inferences, reach conclusions, and make decisions that result in changed and/or new visualizations. Data visualizations emphasize “what is,” but interactive visualizations address “what if.” In this way, interactive visualizations are often intended for decision support. This article addresses the design of interactive visualizations for decision support. An overall methodology is presented; central to this methodology is Jens Rasmussen's abstraction-aggregation hierarchy. The results of two applications and evaluations of the outcomes of using this methodology are discussed. The first application focused on interactive visualizations for helicopter maintenance. The second application addressed “enterprise diagnostics” in the automobile industry where subjects were asked to diagnose the cause of failed automobile brands. The results of these two applications are used to assess the efficacy of the proposed methodology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Big data and visualization of data are “hot” topics in many areas currently. Large data sets and decreasingly expensive computation and display technologies have enabled many “wow” experiences. Yet the question remains of how best to employ these assets to improve human decision making and problem solving. This article addresses this question.Jens Rasmussen (1983, 1986, 1994) developed a principled approach to this question three decades ago – long before big data and pervasive portable devices. He argued that information at different levels of abstraction and aggregation would best support different modes of human decision making and problem solving. This article explores this possibility.We proceed as follows. First, we review background on the design of interactive visualizations. Next we consider purposes of visualizations and present a methodology for design of visualizations. We then consider two applications that experimentally evaluated the use of Rasmussen's abstraction-aggregation hierarchy. The results of both experiments support the value of the approach but also illustrate its subtleties. We conclude with an assessment of what we have learned and likely next steps.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper first briefly reviewed the basics of visualization to provide grounding for the subsequent sections. The next section addressed the purposes of visualization, the object of design being the fulfillment of purposes. A visualization design methodology was then presented and illustrated with two examples -- one for helicopter maintenance and the other for enterprise diagnostics.Rasmussen's abstraction-aggregation hierarchy provides an important framework for addressing such problems. Both experiments support the conclusion that levels of abstraction may be more useful and usable for users with higher levels of expertise. Nevertheless, some problems are not solvable at the lowest levels of abstraction. For example, simply focusing on the attributes of the twelve cars in the enterprise diagnostics experiment would only allow correctly diagnosing one case.We need to better understand how to train and/or aid users to take full advantage of interactive visualizations based on Rasmussen's abstraction-aggregation hierarchy. This is not too difficult for high expertise users, but low expertise users need help to be able to think about their systems at multiple levels. Of course, the ability to do this may be one of the hallmarks of expertise.