@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Safety climate, hardiness, and musculoskeletal complaints: A mediated moderation model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Psychological safety climate was not directly related to WRMSD complaints.Psychological safety climate was negatively related to frustration.Frustration was positively related to WRMSD complaints.Hardiness accentuated the psychological safety climate–frustration relationship.Safety climate had an indirect effect on WRMSD complaints via frustration.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders,Safety climate,Psychological hardiness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study explores the mechanisms linking the psychosocial characteristics of the workplace with employees' work-related musculoskeletal complaints. Poor safety climate perceptions represent a stressor that may elicit frustration, and subsequently, increase employees' reports of musculoskeletal discomforts. Results from an employee sample supported that when employees' perceived safety was considered a priority, they experienced less frustration and reported fewer work-related upper body musculoskeletal symptoms. Psychological hardiness, a personality trait that is indicative of individuals' resilience and success in managing stressful circumstances, moderated these relationships. Interestingly, employees with high hardiness were more affected by poor safety climate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WRMSDs) refer to a broad range of inflammatory and degenerative conditions that affect the body's muscles, tendons, ligaments, joints, and blood vessels (Punnett and Wegman, 2004). In the US, almost 70 million physician office visits each year can be attributed to WRMSD-related complaints and the economic burden resulting from these complaints, including costs associated with workers' compensation, and lost wages and productivity, is estimated at $45 to $54 billion annually (Research Council and Institute of Medicine, 2001). Moreover, in the US and other countries (e.g., Canada, Sweden), WRMSDs lead to more work absenteeism and disability than any other disease group (Punnett and Wegman, 2004). In 2011, WRMSDs accounted for 33% of all workplace injuries and illnesses that required employees to take days off from work (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012). Employees with WRMSDs took a median of 11 days to recuperate before resuming work (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012). WRMSDs represent a significant threat to the health and quality of life of individuals employed in a wide range occupations (e.g., nursing, clerical work, airplane baggage handling, cleaning, truck driving, firefighting) and industries (e.g., service, construction, transportation, manufacturing) (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012; Punnett and Wegman, 2004). In 2011, nursing assistants had the highest number of WRMSD cases (25,010) of any occupation, and heavy and tractor-trailer truck drivers needed the most days away from work (median of 21) to recuperate (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012). Beyond taking time off from work to recuperate, employees may choose a more permanent solution such as changing jobs or retiring (Long et al., 2012).Studies on WRMSDs have traditionally focused on how physical job demands can lead to WRMSD complaints by generating biomechanical strain (for reviews, see Muggleton et al., 1999; National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health [NIOSH], 1997). For example, repetitive work, handling heavy materials, working in awkward positions (e.g., working above shoulder level, kneeling), and frequently using vibrating tools are physical aspects of job tasks that have been associated with greater risk of WRMSDs (e.g., Engels et al., 1996; Hansson et al., 2000; Latza et al., 2000; Simon et al., 2008; Sobeih et al., 2006; Yassi et al., 1995). However, there is increasing evidence that psychosocial stressors at work can serve as additional risk factors for WRMSDs (e.g., Hauke et al., 2011; Kraatz et al., 2013; Lang et al., 2012; Simon et al., 2008; Sobeih et al., 2006). Psychosocial factors typically refer to aspects of the psychological and social (as opposed to physical) work environment that elicit a mental stress response in workers (Marras et al., 2009; Warren, 2001). High workload, time pressure, and monotony, and low job clarity, autonomy, social support, and job security are examples of psychosocial factors associated with increased WRMSD symptoms (Bongers et al., 1993; Lang et al., 2012; NIOSH, 1997; Sobeih et al., 2006). A meta-analysis by Hauke et al. (2011) estimated that adverse psychosocial working conditions increase the risk of WRMSDs in various body regions by 15–59%.Unfortunately, the mechanisms linking psychosocial factors to WRMSD symptoms are not well understood. Even though multiple theoretical models (e.g., Bongers et al., 1993; Faucett, 2005; Melin and Lundberg, 1997; Sauter and Swanson, 1996) articulate these mechanisms, research provides inconsistent support for the pathways these models propose (e.g., Kjellberg and Wadman, 2007; Larsman et al., 2011; Swanson and Sauter, 2006; Wadman and Kjellberg, 2007). Certain limitations in many of the studies in this area may have contributed to contradictory findings. First, although the stress process as conceptualized by the transactional job stress framework (e.g., DeLongis et al., 1988; Lazarus and Folkman, 1984) is relatively well accepted by stress researchers (Mark and Smith, 2008), few studies in the area of WRMSDs directly test the hypothesized pathway of stressor-strain-physical symptoms that this framework implies (for an exception, see Eatough et al., 2012). Instead, effects of stressors (e.g., qualitative job demands, role conflict, lack of control) are often examined in conjunction with those of strain (e.g., job dissatisfaction, negative mood, physical stress symptoms; e.g., Latza et al., 2002; Smith et al., 2004; Yip, 2002), making it difficult to evaluate their relative impact on employees' WRMSD symptoms. Likewise inconsistent with the transactional job stress framework, studies typically examine only the bivariate relationships between psychosocial factors and musculoskeletal symptoms, as opposed to hypothesizing more complex processes.Second, many studies have used single-item measures written specifically for the study (e.g., Bigos et al., 1991; Smith et al., 2004; Swanson and Sauter, 2006) to assess psychosocial stressors or strain (see Davis and Heaney, 2000 for a review). The use of single-item measures can result in lower reliability, greater imprecision, and narrower scope than the use of established, multiple-item measures (Spector, 1992). Third, although physical job demands are a significant risk factor in the development of WRMSDs (Muggleton et al., 1999; NIOSH, 1997), studies sometimes fail to control for physical demands when examining the effects of psychosocial stressors (e.g., Kjellberg and Wadman, 2007; Larsman et al., 2011). Finally, a lot of studies that examined the effects of psychosocial factors on WRMSDs failed to consider potentially important individual difference variables (e.g., self-efficacy, optimism, hardiness) that may influence employees' responses to psychosocial stressors (e.g., Kjellberg and Wadman, 2007; Larsman et al., 2011). Thus, some of the inconsistency in findings could stem from not separating out the effects of stressors from those of strain, using measures with poor psychometric properties, failing to control for physical job demands, and not taking individual differences into consideration.The current study provides a direct test of a model based on the transactional stress framework (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984), uses established measures of psychosocial stressors, strain, and WRMSD symptoms, controls for the effects of physical workload, and examines the role of an important individual difference variable in the stressor-strain-WRMSD symptoms process. The study aims to contribute to researchers' understanding of the mechanisms linking psychosocial stressors with WRMSD complaints. As shown in Fig. 1, we propose that when employees perceive poor psychological safety climate, such perceptions may function as a psychosocial stressor and elicit frustration. Frustration, in turn, may be associated with increased reporting of WRMSDs. Moreover, we explore employees' psychological hardiness, an individual difference variable that characterizes how employees handle stressful situations, as a moderator of the effect of poor safety climate perceptions on WRMSD complaints via frustration.In the paragraphs that follow, we provide an overview of the transactional job stress framework, explain how psychological safety could influence WRMSD complaints via frustration, and introduce psychological hardiness as a potential buffer of the effects of poor safety climate. We will present our hypotheses for this study, explain the methodology that was pursued, and summarize the findings. We will conclude the paper by discussing the implications and limitations of current findings, and providing a number of directions for future research.The classic model of occupational stress postulates stress as the process describing how work-related factors contribute to decrements in psychological or physical health (Beehr, 1995). Stressors are the work-related factors that elicit the stress process, and strain represents psychological or physiological responses to stress (Hurrell et al., 1998). The transactional approach expands upon the static framework linking stressors to strains, and treats stress as a dynamic process where personal and environmental variables interact over time to cause stress (Hart and Cooper, 2001). Lazarus and colleagues' (e.g., DeLongis et al., 1988; Lazarus and Folkman, 1984) transactional stress framework proposes that individuals appraise the stressors in their environment, including these stressors' potential costs, and plan which behavioral, emotional, or social strategies they will use to cope. Coping strategies may be adaptive and reduce strain (Higgins and Endler, 1995), or maladaptive and actually increase strain (de Jong and Emmelkamp, 2000).The transactional approach provides a framework for linking psychosocial stressors with WRMSD complaints. Various job demands and organizational constraints act as occupational stressors that threaten employees' ability to achieve desired work outcomes (Boswell et al., 2004). Because stressors, such as role ambiguity, role conflict, and negative perceptions of the organizational context (e.g., high perceived politics or bureaucracy), require employees to expend efforts to appraise and cope with the demands, they induce strain responses such as frustration, emotional exhaustion, and depression (Boswell et al., 2004; Lazarus and Folkman, 1984). These emotional strains, in turn, result in other attitudinal (e.g., low morale), behavioral (e.g., poor performance), or physical (e.g., muscle tension, hyperventilation) outcomes (Carter and Russell, 1979; Chang et al., 2009; LePine et al., 2005; Ley, 1999). In the current study, we view poor psychological safety climate as a psychosocial stressor that may be related to WRMSD symptoms through its association with employee emotional strain (in the form of frustration).Unlike other models, which focus mainly on the role of job characteristics or environmental factors in the stress process (e.g., demands-control-support model, Karasek and Theorell, 1990; effort-reward imbalance model, Siegrist, 1996), the transactional approach to occupational stress explains why different individuals exposed to the same level of a stressor may experience different levels of emotional or physical strains (Mark and Smith, 2012). Specifically, individuals who differ in their dispositions are likely to appraise and respond to stressors differently. Psychological hardiness (e.g., Eschleman et al, 2010), self-efficacy (e.g., Jex and Bliese, 1999), optimism (e.g., Scheier and Carver, 1985), and conscientiousness (e.g., Watson and Hubbard, 1996) are examples of attributes that have been associated with more effective coping with stressors. Certain other attributes (e.g., neuroticism, Watson and Hubbard, 1996) have been associated with less effective coping. In the current study, we focus on psychological hardiness as a moderator of the negative effects of psychological safety climate on emotional strain and WRMSD complaints. We next elaborate on our predictions regarding psychological safety climate and frustration before proceeding to a more detailed discussion of psychological hardiness.Safety climate refers to employees' perceptions of safety policies, procedures, and practices within their unit or organization (Zohar and Luria, 2005). Similar to other types of specific climates, safety climate may be considered at various levels within the organization (Hellriegel and Slocum, 1974; James and Jones, 1974; Zohar and Luria, 2005). Psychological safety climate refers to individual employees' own perceptions of their work environment concerning safety-related policies and practices, and is likely to be linked to individual-level outcomes. On the other hand, unit-level (e.g., work-team, organization) safety climate refers to the shared perceptions among employees of the same unit and is appropriate for unit-level analysis (Schulte et al, 2006). A recent meta-analysis demonstrated the importance of differentiating between psychological and unit-level safety climate (Beus et al., 2010). The current paper will focus on employees' individual perceptions of their work environment concerning policies and practices related to safety, as WRMSD symptoms are reported as an individual-level outcome.Research has demonstrated the relevance of safety climate for various safety-related outcomes. Multiple meta-analyses have supported safety climate's negative associations with accidents and injuries (Beus et al., 2010; Christian et al., 2009), and its positive association with safety performance (Christian et al., 2009; Clarke, 2006; Nahrgang et al., 2011). Safety climate perceptions may predict WRMSD symptoms as well. Specifically, studies have linked poor safety climate with arm pain, and back pain and injuries (Hofmann and Mark, 2006; Waters et al., 2007). Based on these findings, we expect that psychological safety climate will be negatively related to WRMSD symptoms.As mentioned above, stressors can induce strain responses such as frustration, emotional exhaustion, and depression (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984). In particular, inadequate organizational safety policies, poor safety training, and management's failure to model safety performance (e.g., wearing protective gear, maintaining protective equipment, adhering to safety procedures) can be stressful for employees in several ways. Such poor safety climate can generate ambiguity regarding appropriate safety behaviors, signal management's general indifference to workers' safety and well-being, and create conflicting demands for employees (e.g., follow formal safety policies and procedures designed to protect employees versus focus instead on production goals; Hemingway, 1999; Siu et al., 2004; Wallace and Chen, 2006).Indeed, evidence supports poor psychological safety climate functioning as a stressor that elicits emotional strains. For example, Clarke et al. (2002) found that nurses who perceived their hospitals to provide inadequate safety training and scarce resources (e.g., low staffing, lack of knowledge for using safety equipment) for protecting nurses reported higher levels of emotional exhaustion and frustration. In addition, Siu et al. (2004) found that when employees perceived their peers and managers to have low safety attitudes and considered safety a low priority, they experienced higher levels of anxiety and dissatisfaction. Thus, we expect poor safety climate to function as a stressor that may induce emotional strain such as frustration.According to Sauter and Swanson (1996), the physiological consequences of experiencing strain may partly explain the observed association between psychosocial stressors and WRMSD symptoms. For example, frustration may increase muscular tension (Carter and Russell, 1979), which may add to the biomechanical strain employees are under when performing physically demanding tasks and contribute to the development of WRMSDs (Krantz et al., 2004; Lundberg et al., 1994). Moreover, frustration may lead to increased physiological susceptibility to WRMSDs by affecting hormonal, circulatory, and respiratory responses. For example, frustration is often associated with hyperventilation (Ley, 1999), which disrupts the acid-based equilibrium in the blood stream and results in physiological reactions such as muscle spasms and tension (Schleifer et al, 2002). Frustration has also been found to decrease immune system response through activity inhibition (Schultheiss et al, 2009) and increase blood pressure (Landsbergis et al., 1994), which may increase employees' susceptibility to WRMSDs (Smith and Carayon, 1996). For example, the body's ability to repair tissue after microtrauma may be limited due to changes in individuals' physiobiological systems (Carayon et al., 1999).In addition to physiological mechanisms, other explanations exist for the linkage between frustration and WRMSDs. Frustration is associated with risky behavior (e.g., over-exertion), which increases the risk for WRMSDs (Smith and Carayon, 1996). In addition, frustration is often associated with increased pain sensitivity and reduced efficacy for managing pain (Muris et al., 2007). It has also been related to the higher reporting of pain experiences (Craig and Brown, 1984). Thus, it is possible that employees who experience frustration as a result of poor safety climate may be more likely to develop and report (due to lower tolerance for discomfort and pain) WRMSD symptoms.As discussed above, the transactional approach to occupational stress underscores the role of individual differences in the process of stress appraisal and coping (Mark and Smith, 2012). Psychological hardiness is one individual difference that has been examined in the context of the stress process (Eschleman et al, 2010). Psychological hardiness is a personality composite of three attributes that are important for how people experience and manage stressful circumstances (Cole et al., 2004; Kobasa, 1979). Specifically, Maddi and colleagues (Kobasa et al., 1982; Maddi et al., 2002) identified commitment, control, and challenge as characteristics that serve as buffers of the negative effects of stressors in organizational environments. Commitment refers to individuals' tendency to get deeply involved in whatever they do or encounter. Control refers to individuals' tendency to experience a sense of mastery over situations they encounter. Finally, challenge describes individuals' belief that change is normal and represents opportunities for growth and development (Kobasa et al., 1982). Commitment, control, and challenge are interrelated, but non-redundant constructs (Bartone et al., 1989) and together they form the higher order construct of hardiness that characterizes individuals' positivity and resiliency when facing situational demands or threats (Maddi and Khoshaba, 1994).Hardiness influences how individuals experience and cope with stressful circumstances (Britt et al., 2001; Cole et al., 2004). Those who are high in hardiness may react more positively to stressors because they tend to interpret stressful events as opportunities, stay engaged in difficult situations, and feel more in control of such situations (Cole et al., 2004; Maddi, 1999). Supporting this perspective, primary studies have indicated that hardiness influences how people experience and interpret stressful circumstances, insulates them from the effects of stress, and predicts future well-being (Bartone, 1999; Cole et al., 2004; Kobasa, 1979; Rosen et al., 2006). A recent meta-analysis examined these types of effects in the existing literature and argued that hardiness is “one of the best dispositional predictors of well-being” (Eschleman et al, 2010, p. 303).In this study, hardiness may insulate employees from the negative effects of poor safety climate. For example, highly hardy employees may remain committed to working safely even when their general environment is not supportive of their efforts. They may also feel a stronger sense of control over their safety at work. Finally, they may view poor safety climate as a challenge to conquer. As such, instead of experiencing frustration due to ambiguity and conflicting demands, psychologically hardy employees may actively engage in behaviors that can help improve the climate (e.g., form and get involved in safety committees to make management aware of safety-related issues). Thus, given that psychological hardiness has been shown to buffer the negative effects of stressors (Eschleman et al., 2010), we expect it to moderate the relationship between safety climate and frustration, and the indirect effects of safety climate on WRMSD symptoms.Hypothesis 1Psychological safety climate will be negatively related to WRMSD symptoms.Psychological safety climate will be negatively related to frustration.Frustration will be positively related to WRMSD symptoms.Psychological hardiness will moderate the relationship between safety climate and frustration, such that the negative relationship between safety climate and frustration will be weaker for highly hardy employees.Psychological hardiness will moderate the indirect effect of safety climate on WRMSD symptoms, such that the negative effect of safety climate on WRMSD symptoms will be weaker for highly hardy employees.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
