@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Validity of a small low-cost triaxial accelerometer with integrated logger for uncomplicated measurements of postures and movements of head, upper back and upper arms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new triaxial accelerometer was evaluated for measuring physical workload.The accelerometer is well suited for measuring postures and movements during work.The accelerometer is appropriate as objective method for ergonomic risk assessments.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders,Quantitative exposure-response relationships,Technical measurements,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Repetitive work and work in constrained postures are risk factors for developing musculoskeletal disorders. Low-cost, user-friendly technical methods to quantify these risks are needed. The aims were to validate inclination angles and velocities of one model of the new generation of accelerometers with integrated data loggers against a previously validated one, and to compare meaurements when using a plain reference posture with that of a standardized one. All mean (n = 12 subjects) angular RMS-differences in 4 work tasks and 4 body parts were <2.5° and all mean median angular velocity differences <5.0 °/s. The mean correlation between the inclination signal-pairs was 0.996. This model of the new generation of triaxial accelerometers proved to be comparable to the validated accelerometer using a data logger. This makes it well-suited, for both researchers and practitioners, to measure postures and movements during work. Further work is needed for validation of the plain reference posture for upper arms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Physical workload such as excessive and/or prolonged muscular load, repetitive work and work in awkward and constrained postures, are known risk factors for developing work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs) in the neck/shoulder region and in arms and hands (da Costa and Vieira, 2010; European Agency for Safety and Health at Work, 2010; National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), 1997; National Research Council (NRC), 1999; Nordander et al., 2009; Staal et al., 2007). As an example, the 3rd European survey on working conditions (ESWC) from 2000, displayed that 37% of the workers in the European Union, who reported repetitive hand or arm movements at least 25% of the work time, reported muscular pain in neck/shoulders (Paoli and Merllié, 2001). Even though the risk factors have been known for a long time, there is limited knowledge about the quantitative exposure-response relationships and therefore regulations are difficult to implement. Still, some guidelines based on observations and expert ratings for reduction of WMSDs have been implemented. One example is the threshold limit value (TLV) based on Hand Activity Level (HAL) and peak hand force, used for control of workplace exposures in order to prevent disorders in hand, wrist and forearm (American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH), 2001).Some exposure-response relationships have been found in studies where technical measurements were used. Nordander et al. have shown a relationship between prevalence of reported complaints in elbow/hand the past seven days and technical measurements of wrist movements, where the slope of the regression line (β) for wrist angular velocity vs. complaints during the past seven days was 0.6%/(°/s) (Nordander et al., 2013). Another example is a study about work related shoulder disorders, where a duration increment of 1% of the daily working hours with the upper arm elevated more than 90° was associated with an OR of 1.23 for supraspinatus tendinitis (Svendsen et al., 2004). Such quantitative relationships are necessary for interpreting the measured exposure as risks for WMSDs.Since technical measurements give numerical values in generic units, e.g. degrees (°) and °/s, of postures and movements, they are well suited for measuring exposure before and after changes in content and/or duration of work tasks and changes in the use of work stations, as well as when interventions, e.g. improved working techniques or use of new technical appliances, are implemented (Arvidsson et al., 2012; Forsman et al., 2012; Lindegård et al., 2012; Rislund et al., 2013).Observational methods have been considered to be cheaper and easier to use than technical measurements (Winkel and Mathiassen, 1994), and have often been used to identify the risk factors for WMSDs. However, quantitative generic information is difficult to achieve with observational methods and no single method appears to have a clear advantage over any other (Takala et al., 2010). Further, different observational methods for categorizing the risks for musculoskeletal complaints often give various results (Chiasson et al., 2012; Kjellberg et al., 2015). In a recent study, comparing observations and inclinometer measurements, Trask et al. concluded; “Since observations were biased, inclinometers consistently outperformed observation when both bias and precision were included in statistical performance” (Trask et al., 2014). Moreover, dynamic work is best quantified with technical measurements (De Looze et al., 1994; Spielholz et al., 2001).The general opinion about technical measurements is that they are time consuming, require expensive equipment and also demand technical knowledge to perform, and are therefore not suitable for actors in the work environment field, such as the occupational health services (David, 2005; van der Beek and Frings-Dresen, 1998). These actors need systematic and objective methods for their risk assessements that are user-friendly and cost effective (Kwak et al., 2011; Swedish Work Environment Authority, 2012), and until now, technical measurements have been considered to be too time-consuming and expensive. However, there are a number of low-cost (about $100–$300) technical devices available nowadays, used for monitoring human motions (Korshøj et al., 2014; Skotte et al., 2014; Yang and Hsu, 2010). This new generation of accelerometers with integrated data loggers would be an alternative to previous devices, since they do not have to be connected to a separate data logger. Still, the software for handling the data from some of these devices are rather time consuming and complicated, which makes the spreading to practioners limited. In addition to this study of validation, we have developed a protocol and user-friendly software, where the analysis process is fully automated as opposed to hitherto used software, and which give the same parameters of postures and movements as in scientific reports. The software for analysing data recorded with these new accelerometers is free to receive after contact with the authors (Forsman et al., 2015). With these improvements, actors in the work environment field will be able to use objective methods for ergonomic risk assessments. More feasible objective methods for measuring postures and movements during work may also extend the use of them among researchers, and thereby contribute to increase the knowledge about the relationship between exposure and WMSDs.The main aim of the present study was to validate one model of the new generation of the small, low-cost and user-friendly triaxial accelerometers with integrated loggers by comparing the derived inclination angles and angular velocities against a previously validated traditional triaxial accelerometer using a data logger (Bernmark and Wiktorin, 2002; Hansson et al., 2001) in terms of accuracy and precision for using it as an objective method for measuring postures and movements during work. For further simplification of technical measurements, a second aim was to examine the methodological significance of a plain reference posture compared to our current, by comparing derived inclination angles and percentage of time above certain arm elevations when using plain reference postures, i.e. reference postures that are easy to perform, for which no extra material is needed, with corresponding data when using our current standardised reference posture where a dumbbell and a chair is used (Hansson et al., 2006).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This model of the new generation of accelerometers with integrated data loggers proved to be fully comparable to a previously validated traditional triaxial accelerometer using an external data logger. With this new generation of accelerometers, in combination with the software and protocol, actors in the work environment field now have a cost effective, user-friendly and scientifically based objective method available for their risk assessments. The new accelerometers are also well-suited for researchers to measure postures and movements during work. However, different types of new accelerometers may have different properties regarding drift and noise level, which can contribute to methodological errors. Therefore we recommend testing other accelerometers concerning noise level and drift before use. Further investigation is needed in a larger material for validation of the plain reference posture for the upper arms.The authors declare no conflicts of interest.