@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Wrist rotations about one or two axes affect maximum wrist strength

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Maximum wrist torques in flexion/extension and radial/ulnar deviation were measured.Wrists were neutral or deviated about 1 axis or 2 axes (e.g. flexion and pronation).Maximum torque was significantly greater in male subjects compared to females.Maximum torque was significantly higher when the wrist was deviated away from neutral.These maximum torques and trends should be incorporated into ergonomic software.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wrist strength,Wrist torque,Wrist motion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractMaximum wrist torques in flexion/extension and radial/ulnar deviation were measured in complex wrist/forearm positions. Maximum torque was significantly greater in male subjects than females, and varied significantly between wrist postures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Strength limits of the upper extremities are of interest to ergonomists in light of the high prevalence of injuries in the workplace. The National Institute of Safety and Health reviewed epidemiological studies and observed strong evidence showing a positive association between work that requires extreme postures and the prevalence of hand/wrist tendinitis (Bernard, 1997). Risk factors and disorders associated with hand and arm injuries reveal that awkward postures of the wrist, along with repetitive tasks, high wrist velocities and high-force exertions, are related to an increased risk of injury (Muggleton et al., 1999; Nordander et al., 2013).Ergonomists use different tools, including computer programs, when assessing and designing workplaces (Roman-Liu, 2014). HandPak (Work in Progress Ergonomics, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada) and 3DSSPP (The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI) are two examples of software packages that are designed to determine recommended acceptable force and torque values for a wide variety of tasks commonly found in the workplace. These guidelines are valuable for determining the injury risk associated with tasks that have different grips, postures, frequencies, durations and effort requirements. These programs have a number of modules for specific task demands, one of which is torque. This module applies to tasks that require the application of a torque or moment to some object that has been grasped with the hand. Acceptable limits have been separately determined for pronation, supination, flexion, extension, radial deviation and ulnar deviation exertions.These ergonomic software packages have been developed by integrating a large body of scientific research from published literature. However, the limitation with most wrist strength studies, and thus most strength predicting software, is that maximum torques about a particular axis were only measured with respect to postural deviations about that same axis (eg. the effect of wrist flexion/extension angle on wrist flexion strength; Greig and Wells, 2004; Hallbeck, 1994; Jung and Hallbeck, 2002; Marley and Thomson, 2000; Snook et al., 1999, 1995, 1997). These previous studies have not investigated the potential effects of a rotation, or rotations, about axes other than that which is being tested for strength. For example, we are not aware of published studies that have evaluated the effect of radial, ulnar, pronation or supination deviations on wrist flexion or extension strength.Wrist joint motion in one direction affects the magnitude of the range of motion (ROM) in the other directions (Li, 2002; Li et al., 2005; Marshall et al., 1999). For example, there is coupling between flexion/extension and radial deviation/ulnar deviation directions in the wrist; the ROM in one direction (flexion or extension) decreases as the wrist moves away from neutral in the other direction (radial or ulnar deviation; Li et al., 2005; Marshall et al., 1999). Different anthropometrics (Kivell et al., 2013) result in females having greater wrist ROM than males (Marshall et al., 1999), and may result in females adopting more extreme postures in the workplace (Chen et al., 2010; Won et al., 2009).Both grip strength and wrist torque decrease as the wrist deviates away from neutral (Dempsey and Ayoub, 1996; Jung and Hallbeck, 2002). It has been suggested that naturally coupled wrist motion affects wrist strength, and thus should be accounted for in workstation design and rehabilitation practices (Li et al., 2005). On average, the physiologic cross-sectional area of muscles is smaller in females than males; therefore, on average, they do not generate as much force as males in pinch and grips, and wrist flexion and extension (Abernethy et al., 2005; An et al., 1986; Dempsey and Ayoub, 1996; Hallbeck, 1994; Hallbeck and McMullin, 1993; Harkonen et al., 1993; Mathiowetz et al., 1985; Maughan et al., 1983; Morse et al., 2006). However, data do not currently exist related to how torque production trends vary between male and female subjects when wrist posture deviations are combined (e.g. flexed and ulnar deviated).The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of wrist postures on wrist flexion, extension, radial deviation, and ulnar deviation torque strengths (e.g. flexion strength when the wrist is in a combined posture of pronation and ulnar deviation). We hypothesized that wrist strength about one axis will be affected by deviations about one or both of the other two axes. This is currently not being considered in most ergonomic assessments of tasks that place torque demands on the wrist and/or forearm. Furthermore, we hypothesized that male subjects will generate higher maximum wrist torques than female subjects in all directions of exertion, and that there will be similar effects of posture on maximum wrist torques for male and female subjects.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Maximum wrist torque differed significantly between wrist postures, sexes, and all four torque directions. Our data are consistent with trends from previous research with respect to sex, torque direction, and ROM coupling (Delp et al., 1996; Hallbeck, 1994; Jung and Hallbeck, 2002; Li et al., 2005; Marshall et al., 1999; Morse et al., 2006). This was one of the first studies to determine wrist strength for postures with rotations about more than one axis. The interactions seen with combined postures and differing torque directions show that the relationship between wrist strength and posture is complex; it depends on the magnitude of the rotations about all axes, not simply the axis of the torque.Due to the limiting effect of our handle on flexion and extension torque production, further work should be performed to evaluate the same wrist postures with different size, style and grips of handles as well as a different setup that does not involve twisting a handle.Our results are important when considering workplace injuries and ergonomic assessments. Our study is most relevant for tasks involving gripping a tool or part and creating flexion or extension torques (for example, when using tools such as screwdrivers with a power grip, hand tightening hose fittings and other maintenance operations). Therefore, the observed maximum torque values with combined posture trends should be incorporated into ergonomic software to improve task assessments and future workplace design.