@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predicting physiological capacity of human load carriage – A review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Physiological limits in occupational settings have previously been investigated.Existing workload limit guidelines are likely not appropriate for load carriage.A model to predict occupational load carriage performance has been proposed.Able to provide rapid assessments to inform task and personnel management.The predictive tool would be invaluable for planning in military and firefighting.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Load carriage,Relative task intensity,Physiological work capacity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This review article aims to evaluate a proposed maximum acceptable work duration model for load carriage tasks. It is contended that this concept has particular relevance to physically demanding occupations such as military and firefighting. Personnel in these occupations are often required to perform very physically demanding tasks, over varying time periods, often involving load carriage. Previous research has investigated concepts related to physiological workload limits in occupational settings (e.g. industrial). Evidence suggests however, that existing (unloaded) workload guidelines are not appropriate for load carriage tasks. The utility of this model warrants further work to enable prediction of load carriage durations across a range of functional workloads for physically demanding occupations. If the maximum duration for which personnel can physiologically sustain a load carriage task could be accurately predicted, commanders and supervisors could better plan for and manage tasks to ensure operational imperatives were met whilst minimising health risks for their workers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Load carriage is a core requirement of personnel serving in various physically demanding occupational settings, particularly military and firefighting (Louhevaara et al., 1986; Ruby et al., 2002; Knapik et al., 2004). In conducting military operations personnel are often required to conduct dismounted patrols and approach marches carrying heavy loads (e.g. >30 kg) over long distances (e.g. >4 km) and for prolonged durations (e.g. >4 h) to successfully execute mission requirements (Dean, 2004; Knapik et al., 2004; Henning et al., 2011). The composition of load for military personnel varies across missions but often includes protective ensemble (e.g. body armour, helmet), combat specific equipment (e.g. weapon systems, ammunition, power sources, radio) and sustainment stores (e.g. food and water) (Johnson et al., 1995; Orr, 2010). Both structural and wildfire fighters are also required to carry heavy loads for sustained periods (Eglin and Tipton, 2005; Cuddy et al., 2007). Wildfire fighters often hike to fire fronts inaccessible by vehicle whilst carrying specialist equipment (e.g. axes, rakes) and sustainment stores (e.g. food, water) with total loads in excess of 20 kg (Rodríguez-Marroyo et al., 2012). During structural fire suppression, personal protective clothing and self-contained breathing apparatus weighing approximately 15–20 kg (Louhevaara et al., 1986; Taylor et al., 2012) is often worn in conjunction with the carriage of specialist equipment (e.g. method of entry tools, fire suppression tools), resulting in total external loads approaching 30 kg (von Heimburg et al., 2006).Across occupations, there are differences in job tasks and the composition and body region upon which load is borne (e.g. back, hands, head). However there is a universal need for personnel serving in many physically demanding occupations to be capable of moving their body mass plus an external load. In order to plan for and manage tasks, the maximum amount of time that personnel can sustain a given work rate without fatigue, or maximal acceptable work duration, is required. Wu and Wang (2001) first described ‘maximum acceptable work duration’ in examining workload limits for physically demanding jobs. The term refers to workloads that can be sustained by an individual in a physiologically steady state and which will not cause fatigue or discomfort. The maximum acceptable work duration model relates relative task intensity (i.e. %V˙O2max) and work duration (Wu and Wang, 2001, 2002). Other researchers have investigated allied concepts related to physical workload tolerance in occupational settings (e.g. industrial, manual handling) (Saha et al., 1979; Jorgensen, 1985; Ilmarinen and Tuomi, 1992). The recommendations from this body of work have fundamentally focused on the physical workloads that can be sustained in a safe manner hence the reference to ‘acceptable’ workloads. The current authors suggest extending this work by developing a maximum acceptable workload duration model for load carriage could be an operationally relevant tool for physically demanding occupations such as military and firefighting. Personnel in these occupations are often required to perform very physically demanding tasks following prolonged tasks with little or no recovery between tasks. In the military context this may represent engaging the enemy following a long approach march and for firefighters a high-rise building casualty evacuation following prolonged fire suppression. Therefore, understanding the duration for which personnel can sustain tasks ‘safely’ or without undue fatigue could serve as critical information for operation/mission planners and those commanding personnel on the ground.Existing guidelines for workload duration predictions are based upon cycle ergometry (Wu and Wang, 2001, 2002), unloaded walking/running data (Saha et al., 1979) or modelling (Bink, 1962). The correlation between these laboratory-derived and modelled guidelines and actual tolerance time in occupational settings is unclear but it is suggested these guidelines may overestimate work duration (Jorgensen, 1985). The inappropriate management of firefighting and military personnel may risk the health and well-being of the personnel themselves, their colleagues and those they are endeavouring to protect. Working longer shifts/undertaking longer missions than personnel are capable of, reduced rest breaks and increased work rates could all reduce physical performance and/or degrade decision making ability. Load carriage related fatigue is attributed with changing tactics during the first World War (Lothian, 1921) and recent evidence suggests that load carriage related fatigue is still an issue in modern warfare (Dean, 2004). Whilst there are limited studies examining the effect of load carriage on physiological capacity (V˙O2max) and/or tolerable workload duration there is evidence to suggest that both are reduced (Raven et al., 1977; Louhevaara et al., 1986; DeMaio et al., 2009). The results from this load carriage work however, do not allow for the establishment of evidence-based maximum acceptable work duration guidelines for load carriage tasks in the field. The U.S. Army provides guidance on sustainability for load carriage tasks based upon rate of energy expenditure (Field Manual 21-18) (Department of the Army, 1990). However the empirical basis (i.e., experimental or predicted data) for this load carriage performance prediction tool is not well defined and the validity is yet to be tested.Several studies with an interest in physically demanding occupations have shown correlations between load carriage performance andV˙O2max, muscular strength, body fat and body weight (Rayson et al., 2000; Bilzon, Allsopp et al., 2001; Williams and Rayson, 2006; Ricciardi et al., 2007). Whilst these findings are informative, they do not provide clear guidance pertaining to the ability of personnel to undertake specific load carriage tasks or the duration that they can sustain their performance in the field. There is considerable research investigating the energy cost of load carriage (Louhevaara et al., 1986; Bilzon, Allsopp et al., 2001; Scott and Christie, 2004; Crowder et al., 2007), however it is not always possible to apply this previous work to current (and future) occupational load carriage requirements given differences in conditions (e.g. footwear, load distribution, terrain surface and worker populations). Practitioners can also estimate the energy cost of load carriage tasks, using metabolic equivalent tables (Ainsworth et al., 2000), heart rate derived energy expenditures (Rissanen et al., 2007) and predictive models (Pandolf et al., 1977; Epstein et al., 1987; Santee et al., 2001). These tools vary in both their ease of use and their accuracy. As per load carriage performance correlates, energy cost alone does not provide clear guidance to mission planners and commanders as to the likely duration that personnel can sustain operational tasks involving load carriage. If maximum acceptable work duration is under-estimated then operations may be unnecessarily constrained. Conversely, if maximum acceptable work duration is over-estimated, then commanders and supervisors may be unwittingly exposing personnel to excessive work demands, potentially leading to adverse health outcomes and/or compromise the operation.This review article will explore the establishment of an evidence-based maximum acceptable work duration model for physically demanding occupations involving load carriage. In doing so, this review will assess the strengths and weaknesses of the concept and identify scientific gaps that would improve the utility of the proposed model.Military commanders are often required to plan missions and deploy personnel within very short timeframes. Similarly for firefighters, task requirements may change on a daily or hourly basis depending upon a multitude of factors (e.g. fire behaviour, fuel load and type, climactic conditions, available firefighting equipment and personnel). Therefore it is not conceivable that well-controlled research trials can be conducted prior to these activities being undertaken and/or capture all possible conditions in order to understand the physiological burden of each specific operation. Robust predictive tools do, however, provide a time efficient alternative.The maximum acceptable work duration model is related to the critical power concept, which is based upon a hyperbolic relationship between power output and time to exhaustion (Hill, 1993). The critical power concept was first described in 1965 (Monod and Scherrer, 1965) and has since been further explored (Moritani et al., 1981; Hill, 1993). Results have shown that critical power is significantly correlated with endurance exercise performance lasting two to 95 min (Hughson et al., 1984; Housh et al., 1989; Kolbe et al., 1995). The accuracy of predicted performance outside of this duration range remain unclear (Hill, 1993). Similar to the critical power concept, the relationship between task intensity and duration forms the basis for the maximum acceptable work duration model (Wu and Wang, 2001; 2002).Current maximum acceptable work duration guidelines (based upon cycle ergometry and unloaded walking/running) suggest that the average worker in a physically demanding occupation can sustain 29, 31, 35 and 44%V˙O2max for 12, ten, eight, and four hours respectively (Bink, 1962; Saha et al., 1979; Wu and Wang, 2002, Fig. 1). Limited evidence suggests that the ability to achieveV˙O2max, when compared to unloaded exercise, is reduced by ∼1% per kg external load (load range 9.8–15.8 kg) (Raven et al., 1977; DeMaio et al., 2009). Submaximal performance capacity in the loaded state, when compared to an unloaded, also appears to be diminished (Louhevaara et al., 1986; DeMaio et al., 2009). Impaired respiratory function is likely to account, at least in part, for these reductions in performance (Raven et al., 1977; Legg and Mahanty, 1985; Brown and McConnell, 2012; Dominelli et al., 2012). Mechanical factors (e.g. altered ground reaction forces and gait) may also account for reduced performance whilst carrying an external load (Harman et al., 2000; Attwells et al., 2006). The current maximum acceptable work duration guidelines may therefore be appropriate for some (unloaded) occupational settings however their accuracy for load carriage tasks are yet to be validated.Beyond verifying the accuracy of the maximum acceptable work duration model, the effect of moderators on fatigue and/or limiting factors through the relative intensity range are also yet to be clearly established. The maximum acceptable work duration model is based upon physiological capacity. The model does not consider factors such as muscle discomfort, fatigue, injury and perception of effort during load carriage tasks, which may impact upon load carriage performance capacity (Derrick et al., 1963; Johnson et al., 1995; Knapik et al., 1997; Koerhuis et al., 2009). For instance, there is some evidence that suggests that mission/task profiles may need to be adjusted (i.e. reduced) when heavy (>40 kg) and/or prolonged (>2 h) load carriage is required due to the potential for muscle discomfort and/or minor injury, e.g. blisters (Knapik et al., 1992; Reynolds et al., 1999). Understanding the intensity range that is primarily limited by physiological factors will enhance the utility of the model across a range of operational conditions. The model could also be used to establish a framework for predicting load carriage performance from which other factors can be integrated and contextualised and may identify where interventions such as physical conditioning, nutritional strategies and ergonomics (e.g. load carriage equipment fit and design) may positively influence load carriage performance.To assist in the understanding of the maximum acceptable work duration model and factors that moderate the curve, a reference load carriage task has been provided. The reference task involves an individual (body mass; 81.2 kg,V˙O2max; 3.83 L∙min−1, Table 1) walking on a flat dirt road at 5.0 km∙h−1 carrying 20 kg on the torso in a temperate environment at sea level. The external load of 20 kg was chosen as it is relevant to both military and firefighting load carriage tasks (Department of the Army, 1990; Louhevaara et al., 1994; Rodríguez-Marroyo et al., 2012). Based upon these variables the predicted relative task intensity is 35%V˙O2max and estimated maximum acceptable work duration is 8.2 h (Pandolf et al., 1977). Using the reference load carriage task and the regression equation from the proposed maximum acceptable work duration curve (Fig. 1), the estimated impact of various factors on maximum acceptable work duration will be illustrated throughout the review. Where energy cost was not reported by the original researchers it will be estimated using an established predictive model (Pandolf et al., 1977). Pandolf et al. (1977) established a model from experimental data to predict the energy cost of loaded (up to 70 kg) walking (up to 7.9 km∙h−1) on level and graded terrain (up to 25%).The determination of energy cost and relative task intensity is essential to the estimation of maximum acceptable work duration. Energy cost and relative task intensity can be directly measured, estimated or a combination thereof. However, the utility of the maximum acceptable work duration model may be diminished if these variables are inaccurately measured and/or predicted. For example, based on the reference task, an under- and over-prediction of energy cost of 10% for example, will increase and decrease estimated maximum acceptable work duration by 23 and 19% respectively (Table 2). A number of factors can influence measurements ofV˙O2 andV˙O2max. Laboratory-based assessments are typically the most accurate means for determining maximal aerobic power (V˙O2max). However, even laboratory-based measurement (i.e. indirect calorimetry) ofV˙O2max is associated with a degree of error (≤5%) attributable to biological variability in exercise performance (Stuart et al., 1981; Katch et al., 1982; Pivarnik et al., 1996) and/or device measurement error (Duffield et al., 2004; Macfarlane and Wong, 2012). In occupational settingsV˙O2max is commonly predicted from submaximal and/or field-based assessments (e.g. Astrand-Ryhming submaximal cycle test, multi-stage shuttle test) (Vogel et al., 1978; Williams and Rayson, 2006). Prediction ofV˙O2max from submaximal testing can result in 3–21% error, compared to direct measurement (Hartung et al., 1995; Stevens and Sykes, 1996). Over- and under-estimations ofV˙O2max have similar effects on maximum acceptable work duration to under and over-estimations of energy cost respectively. For example, a 10% under-estimation of energy cost is comparable to a 10% over-estimation ofV˙O2max as both result in a similar relative intensity for the reference task. Errors in estimating both energy cost andV˙O2max could potentially have an additive effect on the inaccurate estimation of maximum acceptable work duration. Based on the reference task a 10% under-prediction of energy cost combined with a 5% over-prediction ofV˙O2max will increase estimated maximum acceptable work duration by 35% (Table 2). An over-estimation of maximum acceptable work duration may risk the health of personnel and compromise operational effectiveness. The measurement and/or prediction ofV˙O2 and/orV˙O2max therefore introduces a potential source of error to the maximum acceptable work duration model and subsequent estimation of load carriage performance capacity. The inherent variability associated with predicting human performance necessitates that any predictive model should provide confidence or predictive intervals around a curve rather than a single line. This approach openly acknowledges the variability inherent in any prediction, whilst still offering the practitioner/commanding officer a practicable and time-efficient tool to guide their decision making in the field.Numerous moderators, broadly categorised as task (e.g. external load, walking speed, terrain gradient, terrain surface) and personal (e.g. body mass, maximal aerobic power) characteristics that influence the energy cost and/or relative intensity of a load carriage task, and in doing so influence the maximum acceptable work duration. Conversely there are factors that do not necessarily impact energy cost or relative task intensity (e.g. climate, muscle discomfort) that also impact upon maximum acceptable work duration. The following section provides a brief overview of a number of these factors, or moderators, suggested to influence maximum acceptable work duration for load carriage. It must be emphasised that whilst the general principles surrounding these factors are relatively well described and perhaps intuitive (e.g. altered energy cost and/or relative task intensity), quantifying their effect on maximum acceptable work duration for load carriage may have a profound impact on personnel management in physically demanding occupations (military and firefighting). The trade-off between operational/task imperatives and individual health and safety can be difficult to navigate and a tool that informs decision-making may yield individual- and organizational-level benefits via improved operational capability/outcomes, improved health and safety of personnel or a combination thereof.It is well-established that as external load increases, the energy cost of load carriage in standing, walking, and running also increases (Pandolf et al., 1977; Epstein et al., 1987; Quesada et al., 2000; Beekley et al., 2007). Evidence indicates a linear increase in energy cost with increases in absolute loads ranging from 0 to 65 kg, and relative loads of 0–70% of body mass at walking speeds up to 6.5 km∙h−1 (Quesada et al., 2000; Bastien et al., 2005; Christie and Scott, 2005; Beekley et al., 2007). However the precise nature of the relationship between external load and energy cost has not been systematically investigated through a more extreme, but relevant load range to determine at what point the relationship stops being linear. With regard to maximum acceptable work duration a 10-kg increase in external load for the reference task would decrease estimated maximum acceptable work duration, via increased energy cost and relative task intensity, by 21% (Table 2). Beyond the impact of external load on energy cost and relative task intensity it may also limit maximal exercise performance when compared to the unloaded state. Raven et al (1977) reported that the weight of self-contained breathing apparatus was a causal factor contributing to a 17.5% decrement (p < 0.05) inV˙O2max in fire fighters. A reduction in maximal aerobic power will increase relative task intensity, assuming no change to task demands, thereby reducing maximum acceptable work duration. Based upon the reference load carriage task, a 17.5% decrease inV˙O2max would reduce estimated maximum acceptable work duration by 36%. Regardless of the mechanism, an increase in physiological burden will be associated with a concomitant decrease in estimated maximum acceptable work duration. These results reinforce the requirement for a maximum acceptable work duration model for load carriage, as the current occupational maximum acceptable work duration guidelines, which are based upon unloaded exercise, likely over-estimate load carriage duration and could put personnel under undue expectations and increased risk in the field.An increase in walking speed for a given external load will increase the energy cost of a task (Soule et al., 1978; Keren et al., 1981; Bastien et al., 2005). Patton et al. (1991) observed a 56.5% increase inV˙O2 when speed was increased from 4.0 to 5.8 km h−1 when carrying a 31.5-kg load. An increase in walking speed to 5.8 km h−1 for the reference task (5.0 km h−1) would decrease estimated maximum acceptable work duration by 40% (Table 2). In the field this may require increased rest breaks or shorter shift cycles to preserve physical capability of personnel otherwise operational success may be compromised. Conversely more personnel may be required to achieve task imperatives due to (inefficiencies and risks associated with) degraded physical capability.Furthermore evidence suggests when all other variables are held constant, walking speed is a more potent moderator of maximum acceptable work duration than external load. The previously described increase in walking speed to 5.8 km h−1 (from 5.0 km h−1) would require an increase in external load of ∼20 kg (to 40 kg) to achieve a similar decrease in estimated maximum acceptable work duration.Personnel are often required to perform load carriage tasks in a variety of environments (e.g., jungle, desert, urban). The terrain gradient (e.g., flat, incline, decline) and surface characteristics (e.g., swamp, sand, bitumen) are important factors when considering energy cost and load carriage duration (Soule and Goldman, 1972; Santee et al., 2001). Numerous studies have demonstrated that the energy cost of load carriage increases when walking up inclined terrain, compared to flat walking (Pimental et al., 1982; Kirk and Schneider, 1992; Sagiv et al., 2000; Crowder et al., 2007). Results indicate a linear increase in energy cost with increases in gradient up to 10% independent of changes in external load or walking speed. Walking at 5.0 km∙h−1 with a 24.8–35 kg load at a 5 and 10% gradient increases (p < 0.01)V˙O2 approximately 50 and 100% respectively, when compared to level walking (Sagiv et al., 2000; Crowder et al., 2007). The addition of a 5% gradient to the reference task would decrease estimated maximum acceptable work duration by 71% (Table 2). Walking on negative gradients up to −12% has been shown to decrease energy cost when compared to walking on flat terrain (Laursen et al., 2000; Santee et al., 2001). However the apparent linear relationship for positive gradients cannot be applied to negative gradients as energy cost appears to reach a minimum value at ∼8% and then increase towards level walking as gradient further decreases (Santee et al., 2001). Regardless, walking on negative gradients, at least up to −12% will increase estimated maximum acceptable work duration when compared to walking on level terrain. Terrain surface is also known to influence the energy cost of load carriage (Soule and Goldman, 1972). Moving from a flat dirt road to heavy brush would decrease estimated maximum acceptable work duration for the reference task by 41% (Table 2). Alternatively, shifting the terrain surface to soft snow (15 cm deep) would decrease estimated maximum acceptable work duration for the reference task by ∼ 85% (Table 2).Certain physical characteristics, such as body mass, fat free mass, muscular strength andV˙O2max can impact load carriage performance (Rayson et al., 2000; Bilzon, Allsopp et al., 2001; Pandorf et al., 2002; Lyons et al., 2005). The absolute energy cost for a given load carriage task will be greater for an individual with a large body mass, when compared to an individual with a lower body mass (Pandolf et al., 1977). The increased body mass may however, may be associated with an increased muscle mass and a larger absoluteV˙O2max, which could result in a similar relative task intensity to a lighter individual and hence a similar maximum acceptable work duration between individuals. An increase in body mass (i.e. fat mass) of 7.7 kg (mean + 1 SD, Table 1), without a concomitant increase inV˙O2maxwould however, decrease estimated maximum acceptable work duration for the reference task by 15% (Table 2). As with task characteristics (e.g. external load, walking speed), personal characteristics can have a compound effect on the capacity for an individual to undertake a load carriage task. Personnel with higher fat mass and lower absoluteV˙O2max (mean ± 1 SD, Table 1) will have an estimated maximum acceptable work duration reduced by 41% when compared to “average” personnel (Table 2). Inter-individual differences inV˙O2max and body mass and composition can clearly result in large differences across personnel in estimated maximum acceptable work duration for a load carriage task. Personal characteristics cannot be changed in response to immediate task requirements however these examples highlight the importance of personnel maintaining a physical state commensurate with occupational requirements.The duration a load carriage task is performed may also impact upon energy cost. Some studies (Epstein et al., 1988; Patton et al., 1991; Blacker et al., 2009; Blacker et al., 2011) but not all (Sagiv et al., 1994) have shown that the energy cost of load carriage progressively increases during prolonged (i.e. ≥ 120 min), constant load walking. It appears that heavier external loads (e.g. ≥ 40 kg) and/or faster walking speeds (e.g. ≥ 4.9 km∙h−1) may augment the progressive increase in energy cost during prolonged load carriage (Epstein et al., 1988; Patton et al., 1991; Blacker et al., 2011). An increase in the energy cost of constant load walking is attributed, at least in part, to decreased mechanical efficiency due to altered biomechanics (Patton et al., 1991). The mean reportedV˙O2 drift of 13.5% would decrease estimated maximum acceptable work duration for the reference task by 25% (Table 2). AV˙O2 drift associated increase in energy cost (and relative task intensity) could potentially put personnel at risk and/or decrease operational effectiveness, particularly those personnel challenged by the maximum acceptable work duration guidelines (e.g. less fit, fatter). Alternatively, accounting forV˙O2 drift could also lead to an over-estimation of relative task intensity if finalV˙O2 is used in the prediction model, which would decrease estimated maximum acceptable work duration. For this reason it is recommended that a meanV˙O2 that captures both starting and finishingV˙O2 is used in estimating maximum acceptable work duration.Military and firefighting operations often require the deployment of personnel into mountainous environments with minimal or no time for physiological acclimatisation (Ruby et al., 2002; Muza, 2007; Rodway and Muza, 2011). In 2002, 85% of armed conflicts across the world were being fought in mountainous regions, i.e. > 1500 m (Rodway and Muza, 2011). A progressive decline in maximal oxygen uptake has been observed from low to extreme altitudes (i.e. 580–6300 m). Evidence demonstrates thatV˙O2max is reduced, on average by 6.6% for every 1000 m gain in altitude from sea level to 6300 m (Stenberg et al., 1966; Cymerman et al., 1989; Gore et al., 1997; Calbet et al., 2003; Wehrlin and Hallén, 2006; Clark et al., 2007; Mollard et al., 2007). In contrast to maximal oxygen uptake, submaximal oxygen uptake remains similar for a given activity at sea level and at altitude (Fulco and Cymerman, 2002; Mazzeo, 2008). Based on the mean reported altitude-induced decline inV˙O2max, if the reference task was undertaken at 2000m the maximum acceptable work duration would decrease by 69% (Table 2). For load carriage tasks undertaken at altitude exceeding 1000 m counter-measures such as decreased work-rate (walking speed, external load) expectations, increased rest periods or shorter shift cycles may be required to enable or prolong safe work.Fire fighters and soldiers are often exposed to challenging climatic conditions (e.g. high ambient temperature, high radiant heat, high humidity) (Budd, 2001; Sawka and Pandolf, 2002; Eglin et al., 2004; Cuddy and Ruby, 2011). In addition, significant increases in thermal strain have been demonstrated for numerous occupational ensembles relevant to firefighters and military personnel, including fully encapsulated hazard suits, body armour, and firefighting turn-out equipment (Holmer et al., 1999; Rissanen et al., 2007; Caldwell et al., 2011; Larsen et al., 2011). Whilst energy cost or relative task intensity may not altered, thermal stress can diminish the capacity for personnel to perform work due to factors associated with elevated core body temperature (Montain and Coyle, 1992; Gonzalez-Alonso et al., 1999; Havenith, 1999; Barr et al., 2010). Therefore, occupational specific ensembles and/or climactic conditions may decrease the maximum acceptable work duration. Current evidence does not allow for definitive guidance on quantifying the effect of various thermal stressors on maximum acceptable work duration however commanding officers, mission planners and practitioners may need to consider more conservative maximum acceptable work duration guidelines in hot or humid conditions.Energy expenditure during military operations in cold environments has been shown to increase (Burstein et al., 1996; Tharion et al., 2005). Cold weather and rainfall alter the terrain surface (mud, snow) and/or increase the clothing and equipment burden (weight, bulk) which can increase energy cost (Gray et al., 1951; Soule and Goldman, 1972; McCarroll et al., 1979) and decrease maximum acceptable work duration. Even with a decrease in walking speed to 4.0 km h−1 in soft snow (15 cm depth), the estimated maximum acceptable work duration would be reduced by ∼ 49% Table 2; Soule and Goldman 1972).It may be suggested that separate sex maximum acceptable work duration models should be developed given the physical and physiological differences, on average, between men and women (Schwartz et al., 1988; Shephard et al., 1988; Gallagher and Heymsfield, 1998). These differences are typically manifested as reduced physical capacities in females (e.g. muscular strength, muscular endurance and aerobic capacity) when compared to males. Carrying the same absolute load will therefore represent greater physiological strain (i.e. greater percentage of maximum tolerance limit) for an average female, when compared to an average male. However, differences in physical capacity between males and females appear to be largely related to size and stature rather than sex per se (McLennan et al., 2008). Whilst on average, women have a reduced load carriage capacity (compared to males) there are examples of females out-performing males during prolonged (15 km) load carriage (Patterson et al., 2005). When comparisons in strength and power are made relative to lean body mass or muscle cross-sectional area the sex differences largely disappear (Miller et al., 1993; Hurley and Hagberg, 1998). Therefore the principal reason for the discrepancy in physical performance capacity between men and women appears to be that, on average, women have lower absolute body and muscle mass and a higher relative body fat mass (Gallagher and Heymsfield, 1998). Whilst sex tends to confer certain physical attributes and capacities, these capacities (e.g. muscular strength and aerobic capacity) are highly trainable regardless of sex (Eddy et al., 1977; Staron et al., 1994; Castro et al., 1995). On this basis, sex differences per se do not require specific consideration within the maximum acceptable work duration model, rather differences in physical and physiological characteristics. This is especially important consideration for occupational settings such as military and firefighting where both males and females may be integrated together into teams and/or completing the same task.Beyond potential limitations of the proposed maximum acceptable work duration model (e.g. determine validity), there are existing gaps that relate (to the maximum acceptable work duration model and) more broadly to load carriage research, including;1.Transferring treadmill load carriage studies to overground locomotion.Establishing work guidelines for physically demanding occupations.All of the experimental load carriage energy cost data used in this review article was sourced from treadmill studies. Further work is required to understand whether the physical and physiological responses observed on a treadmill (e.g. energy cost,V˙O2 drift) are similar during overground load carriage under the same conditions. Only two studies have compared the energy cost of treadmill and overground load carriage under relevant conditions (Daniels et al., 1953; Custance, 1970). Daniels et al. (1953) showed that the energy cost of treadmill load carriage (5.6 km∙h−1, 20.9 kg), when compared to overground, was 8.9% lower. Custance (1970) similarly reported a lower energy cost for treadmill walking (5.6 km∙h−1, 12.7 kg), however the magnitude of the difference was greater (23%). Both studies included only one speed and load combination, and it is unclear whether these results can be applied to a range of speed and load combinations relevant to military and firefighting. Therefore it is yet to be determined how energy cost from treadmill based research relates to overground load carriage. This is critical to determining whether future load carriage research can continue to be primarily treadmill-based or should alternatively be undertaken overground. Should systematic differences between treadmill and overground load carriage exist it may be possible to apply correction factors to allow for the ongoing comparison of laboratory-derived data to field conditions.A further consideration in predicting load carriage performance is whether the use of mean values is appropriate when establishing occupational guidelines. Assuming that personnel are normally distributed around the mean, there may be large differences in estimated maximum acceptable work duration between a person 1 SD above and another person 1 SD below the mean. For the reference load carriage task, personnel with aV˙O2max 1 SD above or below the mean, the estimated maximum acceptable work duration would decrease or increase ∼30% respectively. In working environments such as military and firefighting settings it is not feasible to construct teams based entirely upon homogeneity of physical and physiological characteristics. Consequently, large differences in a number of variables, including maximum acceptable work duration are probable. The introduction of appropriate physical employment standards may help to reduce this variability in estimated maximum acceptable work duration or set maximum acceptable work duration such that it manages at risk personnel. Loaded cardio-respiratory fitness standards would assist in the utility of a maximum acceptable work duration model by establishing a minimum performance capacity.On this basis it could be argued that maximum acceptable work duration guidelines should be established upon mean values minus 1 SD, or 95% confidence interval, thereby increasing the number of personnel likely to achieve (and exceed) the estimated maximum acceptable work duration. Whilst a more conservative approach, previous work in occupational performance standards have used the mean minus 1 SD approach to set performance standards (Jamnik et al., 2010). This approach may help to preserve the health of personnel and facilitate more achievable load carriage tasks for heterogeneous teams of personnel. An alternative to this approach is to provide a range, i.e. mean ± 95% confidence intervals or ±1 SD. Whilst less prescriptive than the other approach cited, providing a performance range may be more beneficial to the practitioner, commander, mission planner in expectation management. Regardless of the maximum acceptable work duration model adopted, optimising task success whilst preserving health of personnel will likely be an ongoing balancing act. This may be particularly true for volunteer-based organisations (e.g. rural firefighting) where operational effectiveness needs to be balanced against having some personnel on hand in emergencies, even if they perform tasks more slowly or for shorter periods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The ability of personnel to undertake load carriage tasks is fundamental to many physically demanding occupations (e.g. military, firefighting). The high metabolic demands of load carriage tasks are well-documented, as are the deleterious effects of load carriage-induced fatigue on operational effectiveness and human health. Despite the critical nature of load carriage tasks to these occupations there is no validated model capable of predicting the maximal acceptable work duration for individuals to successfully perform load carriage tasks. The maximum acceptable work duration model has been proposed as a physiological model for load carriage performance prediction in physically demanding occupations.The maximum acceptable work duration model is based upon existing workload guidelines for physically demanding occupations. These current guidelines however, are based upon unloaded exercise performance and it's accuracy for load carriage tasks is yet to be determined. A variety of factors are known to influence the capacity for individuals to perform load carriage tasks, and in turn the accuracy of the maximum acceptable work duration model. The degree to which some of these factors ‘moderate’ estimated maximum acceptable work duration is likely understood with some confidence (e.g. external load, walking speed, terrain gradient) whilst the effect of other moderators (climate, discomfort, perception of effort) are less clear. Task characteristics (e.g. walking speed, terrain characteristics, external load) however, are likely to have a larger impact (i.e. decrease) on maximum acceptable work duration, when compared to personal characteristics (e.g. muscle mass,V˙O2max). With regard to acute task and personnel management, task characteristics are also potentially more ‘modifiable’ when compared to personal characteristics. Other considerations such as measurement error (e.g. prediction ofV˙O2max), biological variability, impact of external load onV˙O2max and energy cost of overground load carriage (as compared to treadmill based load carriage) also impact estimations of maximum acceptable work duration and represent priority areas for future research.Despite potential limitations of the proposed maximum acceptable work duration model the authors contend such a predictive model (perhaps with error bands around a curve) has practical value for certain physically demanding occupations. When planning load carriage tasks and/or managing personnel undertaking load carriage tasks, the ability to predict likely load carriage capacity in a timely fashion would be an invaluable tool. The maximum acceptable work duration model could also assist in mission planning and/or risk appreciation via rapid assessment of different scenarios. Whilst the proposed maximum acceptable work duration model may not predict load carriage capacity with absolute precision the utility of a practical model with known but consistent errors is likely to far outweigh having no model/planning tool at all.Nil.None declared.