@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Anthropometric characteristics of female smallholder farmers of Uganda – Toward design of labor-saving tools

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Development of hand-tools to reduce labor burden requires rich anthropometric data.Western anthropometric databases do not adequately represent sub-Saharan women.Results from measuring 89 women show differences among different groups.More measurements are needed for more conclusive results and predictive models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hand-tool design,Mechanization,Anthropometric data,Ethnic difference,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractThe plot below reveals general body dimensions’ differences among Ugandan women of Bantu (Kiboga, Mbarara and Ngoma locations) and Nilotic (Kotido location) ethnolinguistic groups. Principle components (PC1 and PC2) were obtained from analysis of 28 anthropometric measurements from a total of 89 women. The co-clustering of Ngoma and Mbarara women suggest they are identical while the “spread out” along PC2 of the Kiboga women is intriguing and suggests more women should be measured to be able to gain better understanding of the difference there might be between Kiboga women and their other two Bantu “sisters”.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In sub-Saharan Africa, agricultural production predominantly occurs on smallholder farms (Herrero et al., 2010), where women carry a disproportionately higher labor burden (Yisehak, 2008), which is one of the main reasons contributing to the gender asset gap – women are unable to produce for both home and the market (FAO, 2011; Quisumbing et al., 2014). One way to reduce both the labor burden and the gender asset gap is to come up with labor-saving interventions or innovations for these women. In a recent Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation grand challenge exploration, “Labor Saving Strategies and Innovations for Women Smallholder Farmers”, over 50% of the initial funded intervention explorations were hand-tools. This is not surprising; almost a decade ago, a limited range of hand-tools as a productivity problem was identified in a comprehensive FAO report on farm power and mechanization for smallholder farms in sub-Saharan Africa (Sims and Kienzle, 2006).Optimal design of hand-tools requires applicable comprehensive and context-specific anthropometric or body dimensions and strength data. Although many anthropometric databases are available to inform design, e.g., the repository at the Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories, Dayton, Ohio (USA) and Anthropology Laboratory of Paris University, such data may not be applicable for tool design targeting sub-Saharan women, since the repositories contain data from U.S Army, Air Force personnel, and civilians, or Europeans (Vyavahare and Kallurkar, 2012). However, some data for foreign populations are available in the NASA data bank (Agrawal et al., 2010), but even in this case, sub-Saharan Africans are not well represented.Most anthropometric measurements made on sub-Saharan Africans have been limited or are completely lacking in parameters that are important for hand-tools design. For example, in one of the studies with a large number of participants, Cheserek et al. (2012) measured six parameters of importance in nutritional status, but no parameters like arm-span or eye-height in sitting and standing positions, that are important in hand-tool design, were measured. In other anthropometric characteristic studies with ethnically different participants, it is evident that there are significant differences in most of the mean dimensions as well as all the body proportions (or prediction equations, e.g., eye height seated from seating height) among the ethnic groups (e.g., Lin et al., 2004; Dewangan et al., 2005; Vyavahare and Kallurkar, 2012). It follows that significant differences are likely to be found between the ethnic groups and the American or European databases’ values, lending credibility to the need for large scale anthropometric measurements from sub-Saharan African women for parameters relevant in informing hand-tool design.Absence of applicable anthropometric measurements may partly be responsible for disappointing results from investments in research and development aimed at producing equipment for smallholder farmers (Sims and Kienzle, 2006). This may also be partly the case for higher incidence of work related injuries such as musculoskeletal disorders among farm workers (Singh and Arora, 2010). However, it should be recognized that, low-adoption rates of hand-tools may also be due to other non-anthropometric or strength factors, such as the tools not fitting well in cultural practices. For example, Muyanja et al. (2009) designed a milk churner for standing operation while women who traditionally churn, do it in a seated posture.This study was undertaken with the aim of providing preliminary results toward answering two questions. First, how well are existing databases applicable in the design of hand-tools for sub-Saharan African women? Second, given that body dimensions vary according to ethnicity and that sub-Saharan Africans can be grouped on ethnolinguistic basis or as a surrogate for physical characteristic grouping, how different are sub-Saharan women within and across ethnolinguistic lines. To answer these questions, we made anthropometric measurements from women populations from two sub-Saharan ethnolinguistic groups (Nilotic and Bantu) from the cattle corridor of Uganda.The study populations were recruited from five locations along the cattle corridor of Uganda namely; Ngoma village/town in Nakaseke district, Nyamilinga and Kabuye villages in Kiboga district, Kanyaryeru village in Kiruhura district and Losilanga village in Kotido district. All procedures performed in this study involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the University of Georgia Institutional Review Board (STUDY00001461) and the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (SS 3422). Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in this study. We targeted women who were already organized in groups with missions of increasing incomes through ghee-making for home and markets (Katimbo et al., 2015). Our interest in ghee-making was based on the present study objective synergy with a separate objective of the study of working with the same women groups to corroboratively reengineer a labor-saving churner for separating butter-fat from fermented milk (Muyanja et al., 2009; Kisaalita et al., 2015). This process precedes ghee-making (Sserunjogi et al., 1998). Three cohorts (Ngoma, Nyamilinga/Kabuye, and Kanyaryeru) were selected from location inhabited by Bahima/Bahororo (Bantu ethnicity). One cohort was selected from a location (Kotido) inhabited by Jie (Nilotic ethnicity). Ethnicity for each participant was confirmed by directly asking before being accepted as a participant. As is the custom in the cattle corridor, before conducting any measurements, we obtained permission from the local leadership. A token gift of a bar of soap and a kilogram of sugar were provided to each participant.The land marks of dimensions measured in standing and sitting postures are shown in Table 1and Fig. 1. Twenty-eight variables from a list of 37 recommended by Kroemer et al. (1997) were chosen on the basis of relevance to informing hand-tool design and cultural appropriateness from a practical measurement viewpoint. Standard descriptive terminologies (Kroemer et al., 1997) are used. Measurements were conducted following ISO 7250 recommendations (Dewangan et al., 2008). In the standing posture, 15 measurements were made. They included nine lengths form both direct and derived projected heights, five circumferences, and one reach. In the sitting posture, 13 measurements were made. They included seven heights, three breadths, two diameters, and one skinfold thickness.Body dimensions were measured using equipment from a kit (Rosscraft Centurion Kit, The Human Solution, Austin, TX). A portable weighing scale (0–140 kg, Model S100, Escali, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was used for body weight. A Campbell 20 (54 cm) wide sliding caliper with AP branches was used for measuring foot dimensions. Campbell 10 (18 cm) caliper was used to measure small bone dimensions like breadths of the hands. Segmometer 4 was used to measure height and segmental lengths of different bones. A head square together with a retractable centimeter measuring tape were used to measure both the standing and sitting heights. Slim guide skinfold calipers were used to measure the triceps skinfold thickness. Also anthropometric steel tapes and calipers were used for other length and diameter measurements.For the standing posture, the participants stood on flat surface (measuring box) with their feet closed, body straight, and the rearmost aspect of the body touching a vertical wall. For the sitting posture, the participants sat with their bodies upright, while the head and shoulders were against a vertical wall. During the measuring process, minimal pressure was exerted when handling the instruments. To achieve a greater uniformity, measurements were taken in accordance with the right hand convention. In addition measurements were mostly collected in the morning hours. The average time taken for measuring one participant was approximately 35 min.Insights in general differences based on ethnicity and location were gained through Principle Component Analysis (PCA). PCA examines the correlations among a set of variables, in this case measurements, and creates linear combinations of these variables that are uncorrelated with one another. These linear combinations are called principle components (PCs), and usually only a few PCs capture a large portion of the overall variability among the measurements (Hair et al., 1998). The PCs can illustrate differences between subjects. More specific comparative statistical procedures used included ANOVA with tukey adjustment in each case and Student t-test. In all cases differences were considered significant at p-levels of less or equal to 0.05.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
