@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of child restraint system features on installation errors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
32 Volunteers installed 16 different child restraints using seatbelt or LATCH.LATCH connector type and adjustor type and the presence of belt lockoffs affected CRS installation tightness.Harness adjustor type affected rate of achieving a snug harness.Results indicate that feedback on correct installation would be helpful.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Motor-vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death for children in the U.S. ages 3–18 (Subramanian, 2003). In 2008, 1633 children under the age of 16 died and 220,000 were injured as a result of motor-vehicle crashes in the U.S. (NHTSA, 2009). The use of a child restraint system (CRS) reduces the likelihood of fatality in a towaway crash by 71% for infants and 54% for toddlers, depending primarily on the restraint type and orientation (NHTSA, 2002).Several studies have documented high rate child restraint systems (CRS) “misuse”, which includes a large range of both safety-critical and minor deviations from manufacturers' instructions and best practices on installation and use (Eby and Kostyniuk, 1999; Decina and Lococo, 2005; Koppel and Charlton, 2009; Lane et al., 2000). Over 20 types of misuse have been identified, with loose vehicle installation and loose restraint harness consistently observed across studies as the most frequent types of misuse. Lane et al. (2000) surveyed the CRS installations for 109 subjects and found that 84% had between 1 and 3 installation errors with an average of 2 errors per installation.Several studies have identified factors correlated with misuse. Koppel and Charlton (2009) found statistically significant differences in misuse rates between CRS types, with forward-facing (FF) harness restraints having the higher observed level of misuse than rear-facing (RF) seats or belt-positioning boosters. Brown et al. (2010a, 2010b) found higher frequencies of misuse and higher numbers of errors per installation in convertible child restraints compared to those used in a single mode. Eby and Kostyniuk (1999) found that higher levels of misuse were associated with lower educational levels, situations where the driver was not the child's legal guardian, the number of times that the seat was moved/reinstalled into different vehicles, and children who were younger and smaller. Lane et al. (2000) found a trend for less misuse with higher education attainment level and participation in a private insurance program. Tsai and Perel (2009) tested experienced and novice CRS users to determine why CRS installation errors occurred. Both groups made common mistakes, but experienced subjects made the errors less frequently. Brown et al. (2009) examined the amount of physical force required to perform child restraint installations and suggested that the high amounts of exertion needed may contribute to installation error.Several tactics have been employed to improve child passenger safety (CPS), reduce misuse and increase use of CRS in the US. Since 2000, at least 38 states and the District of Columbia have improved and upgraded their child restraint laws, which has substantially improved the overall CRS usage rate and particularly increased booster seat use (SafeKids Worldwide, 2007; Decina and Lococo, 2005). However, while laws tend to increase usage, they do not necessarily increase correct usage (Brixey et al., 2010). In 1998, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) introduced their National Child Passenger Safety certification training program that has established a cadre of specially-trained child seat technicians across the nation to educate parents/caregivers and be advocates for safe travel practices for children. These programs have increased the availability of hands-on CRS instructional opportunities that have been shown to be a more effective educational method than information alone (Lane et al., 2000).Introduction of the Lower Anchorages and Tethers for CHildren (LATCH) system for securing CRS in vehicles has helped reduce misuse in some instances but has also led to new forms of misuse (Decina and Lococo, 2007). In the US, LATCH consists of a pair of dedicated lower anchors near the vehicle seat bight plus a top-tether anchor located behind the vehicle seatback. Child restraints are now equipped with hardware that usually consists of a LATCH strap (webbing with connectors on either end) that replaces the seatbelt as the primary means of securement and a tether strap that offers a third point of attachment. In situations where top-tether use was required and all the tether hardware was available, only 51% of those surveyed were using the top tether. Loose tethers were observed in 18% of cases and loose LATCH straps (attached to the lower anchorages) were seen in 30% of cases. In 20% of cases, CRS were installed using both LATCH and seatbelt, which is considered to be misuse.The NHTSA has established an ease-of-use rating system for CRS (NHTSA, 2002, 2006) in an effort to encourage CRS manufacturers to include features that may reduce misuse and enhance usability. The system provides an incentive for CRS manufacturers to improve products, labeling, and instruction manuals with respect to usability. As a result, many of the most difficult-to-use CRS features are no longer produced and designs continue to evolve to improve usability.Features on CRS products have evolved as manufacturers have responded to the implementation of LATCH and NHTSA Ease-of-Use. This project was conducted to explore how CRS installation errors are affected by features on the most recent CRS systems, while considering subject factors of education and child restraint installation experience. The research questions are:•Do CRS features affect misuse rates?Do CRS features affect the perceived ease-of-use?Are CRS ease-of-use ratings correlated with misuse rates?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
