@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluating the physical demands when using sled-type stair descent devices to evacuate mobility-limited occupants from high-rise buildings

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We simulated evacuating people with motor disabilities from high-rise buildings.This study compared 6 sled-type devices designed for stair descent.Surface EMG, heart rate, trunk motion, and perceived exertion data were collected.There are significant differences across devices, particularly on the landings.Two-evacuator devices, did well on biomechanics, evacuation speed, and usability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
EMS/firefighter,Healthcare facility evacuation,Evacuating individuals with dissabilities,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The physical demands on evacuators were investigated when using different types of sled-type stair descent devices designed for the emergency evacuation of high rise buildings. Twelve firefighters used six sled-type stair descent devices during simulated evacuations. The devices were evaluated under two staircase width conditions (1.12, and 1.32 m). Dependent measures included electromyographic (EMG) data, heart rates, Borg Scale ratings, and descent velocities. All stair descent speeds were below those reported during pedestrian egress trials. With the exception of the inflatable device, the devices operated by two evacuators had higher descent speeds than those operated by a single evacuator. High friction materials under the sleds facilitated control and reduced the muscle demands on stairs but increased physical demands on the landings. Usability assessments found devices with shorter overall lengths had fewer wall contacts on the landing, and handles integrated in the straps were preferred by the evacuators.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When high rise buildings need to be evacuated in emergencies or non-emergencies, for example during extended power outages, first responders (firefighter/paramedics and emergency medical service (EMS) providers) often need to transport individuals with mobility limitations down multiple flights of stairs. When these high-rise structures are hospitals or skilled nursing facilities, many of the facility staff will also be engaged in these evacuation activities given that many of the evacuees are immobile on their own (Manion and Golden, 2004). However, first responders, and even military personnel, may be called upon to serve as evacuators and assist in such evacuations.In prior work, firefighter/paramedics indicated that stair transport was one of their most physically demanding and frequently performed work tasks (Conrad et al., 2000). Prior biomechanical studies have confirmed that the transporting of people can be very physically demanding (Fredericks et al., 2002; Lavender et al., 2000) and there is epidemiological evidence that such tasks performed by EMS workers are often associated with injury development (Gershon et al., 1995; Hogya and Ellis, 1990; Karter and Molis, 2011; Maguire et al., 2005). Furber et al. (1997) in their study of 477 worker compensations claims, specifically found that stair transport within private residences was a strong factor contributing to injuries reported by ambulance officers.When disaster strikes, people use whatever is available in terms of equipment to conduct evacuations. A report of the 1994 evacuation of hospitals following the Northridge, California earthquake indicated that, for the six hospitals without electric power that were evacuated, no specialized devices were used (Schultz et al., 2003). Instead, evacuators used blankets or sheets, backboards, wheelchairs, and gurneys. However, different types of equipment are available to assist first responders and healthcare personnel in transporting individuals down flights of stairs. Most common are hand-carried stair chairs. These are minimally carried by two individuals, and depending on staircase width, patient weight, and evacuator availability, carried by as many as four individuals. Prior work by our research team and others has documented that stair descents with hand-carried chairs is a physically demanding task (Fredericks et al., 2002; Lavender et al., 2000, 2013). Track-type stair chairs, which eliminate the need for lifting/carrying and instead have evacuators gliding or rolling the chairs down the stairs on long tracks that bridge two or three stair nosings, reduce the load experienced by the evacuator (Fredericks et al., 2006; Mehta et al., 2015). Alternatively, sled-type devices are another option. As the name implies, patients in these devices are slid along corridors and slid down the stairs. These devices may be attractive to building owners and health organizations in that their cost is substantially lower than the track-type and some of the hand-carried devices and they are suitable for transporting patients that would be unable to maintain a sitting posture. Moreover, sliding should be easier than carrying and will therefore reduce the physical demands on the evacuators and possibly the number of evacuators required for each evacuee.There are several variations of sled-type devices that are commercially available. Some require two evacuators for safe operation while some are designed to be used by a single evacuator. Some are made from hard plastic material, some are made from flexible plastic material that can be rolled up when not in use, some are made from fabric, and one product includes inflatable sections akin to an air mattress. Some of these devices have small rollers on the bottom which are designed to facilitate movement on horizontal surfaces. Some of the devices have two straps for the evacuators to hold on to while descending the stairs, while others have just one. In all cases, the sleds would be able to transport IV medications, however, they would not be in a position to drip during the transport period. Likewise, oxygen canisters could be transported along with the patient if necessary.In addition to considering the physical demands on the evacuators, the evacuation performance also needs to be considered. For example, hand-carried evacuation devices, particularly those where the lead evacuator must descend the stairs walking backwards, have stair descent velocities that are slow relative to published pedestrian evacuation speeds (Peacock et al., 2012) and therefore may disrupt evacuation flow in emergency situations (Lavender et al., 2013). On the other hand, track-type devices have stair descent velocities that are well within the range of Peacock et al.'s (2012) evacuation speeds (Mehta et al., 2015). Adams and Galea (2010) reported vertical descent speeds on the stairs when using a drag mattress that were very similar to a hand-carried chair device yet significantly slower than that observed for a track-type stair chair.Environmental features, such as the width of the staircase and landing are expected to impact both the physical demands on the evacuators and descent speed, particularly if the stair descent involves landings where there are changes in the direction of travel. Drury (1985) provided evidence that task performance measures, such as task duration or movement speed, are dependent upon the available space, at least up to the point where space no longer potentially restricts movement. Likewise, Karwowski and Hashim (1991) reported a trend towards a lower acceptable weight of lift with more restricted lifting spaces. This implies that staircase and landing dimensions could impact performance measures and muscle recruitment levels as sled-type devices are maneuvered through smaller versus larger landings.The objectives of this study were to (1) compare the physical demands experienced by seasoned fire service personnel who served as evacuators as they used six sled-type devices, each representing a different design approach to transport individuals who are ill or who have ambulatory disabilities down multiple flights of stairs of varying widths; and (2) to assess usability issues with the tested devices through video analysis and a structured interview process. Specifically, the following hypotheses were tested:1.There are differences among sled evacuation device designs with regards to the physical demands placed on evacuators as measured via heart rate, electromyographic measures, spine postures, and ratings of perceived exertion while descending the stairs and transporting evacuees through landings.The physical demands on the evacuator increase with narrower staircases.There are differences in occupant evacuation times across sled evacuation devices and as a function of staircase width.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
