@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Novel ventilation design of combining spacer and mesh structure in sports T-shirt significantly improves thermal comfort

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Spacer and mesh structures were combined to increase ventilation of sports T-shirt.Effects of the ventilation design are examined by thermal manikin and wearer trials.Ventilation design of sports T-shirt increases wearer's thermal comfort.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ventilation design,Thermal comfort,Sports T-shirt,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper reports on novel ventilation design in sports T-shirt, which combines spacer and mesh structure, and experimental evidence on the advantages of design in improving thermal comfort. Evaporative resistance (Re) and thermal insulation (Rc) of T-shirts were measured using a sweating thermal manikin under three different air velocities. Moisture permeability index (im) was calculated to compare the different designed T-shirts. The T-shirts of new and conventional designs were also compared by wearer trials, which were comprised of 30 min treadmill running followed by 10 min rest. Skin temperature, skin relative humidity, heart rate, oxygen inhalation and energy expenditure were monitored, and subjective sensations were asked. Results demonstrated that novel T-shirt has 11.1% significant lower im than control sample under windy condition. The novel T-shirt contributes to reduce the variation of skin temperature and relative humidity up to 37% and 32%, as well as decrease 3.3% energy consumption during exercise.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Different from daily wear, sportswear tends to accumulate more sweat during exercise, which leads to heat stress and affects sport performance of athletes. Hence, thermal comfort is an important consideration when designing active sportswear.It has been recognized that efficient dry and evaporative heat transfer through clothing is critical to thermal comfort during exercises (McCullough et al., 1983; Fan, 1989). Past research revealed that air exchange between clothing microclimate and external environment has a significant effect on the wearer's evaporative and dry heat loss (Bouskill et al., 2002; Gao et al., 2012; Havenith et al., 1990). For a sweating man, the convection current accelerates the rate of convective heat transfer and the rate of evaporative cooling by wind or by pumping during body motion (Breckenridge, 1977; Oliveira et al., 2011). Therefore, in order to maintain thermal comfort of the body, it is important to improve ventilation cooling by use of ventilation features at appropriate positions of garments (Ruckman et al., 1999; Havenith et al., 2003).Mesh opening, as a method to increase ventilation, has been widely applied in garments in order to maintain wearer comfort. Previous research showed that mesh opening design increases the total heat loss considerably during body movement (Bakkevig and Nielsen, 1995; Ho et al., 2008). However, the fabric still tends to stick to the skin (particularly in the chest, shoulder and upper back area of the body) after heavy sweating, which creates “clingy” discomfort and hinders the convection around the body. Ho and Fan (2011) developed a ventilation garment with mesh opening and additional arch-shaped spacer parts to address this problem. However, the additional spacers tend to create tactile discomfort for its undesirable big size and heavy weight, especially during exercises. Hence, it is desirable to develop a novel sportswear with ventilation features without affecting tactile comfort.In this study, a knitted fabric that combining spacer and mesh opening was fabricated and used at the chest and back area of the ventilation sports T-shirt to prop the garment up, thus improving air flow by reducing the contacting area between the fabric and human skin. We hypothesized that the novel sports T-shirt contributes to sweat evaporation and thermoregulation. Both manikin tests and wearer trials were conducted to investigate the effectiveness of the garment in terms of thermal comfort, as well as the sweat accumulation, which is related to the potential of post-exercise chill.Three different kinds of fabrics were knitted by circular knitting machine using polyester and nylon core-spun yarn (Fabric composition is 20% nylon and 80% polyester). The appearance of the fabrics is shown in Fig. 1. The fabrics were tested in accordance with ASTM: D1776 by the Kawabata Evaluation System (KES). Some of the physical characteristics of the three fabrics are listed in Table 1. Fabric 1 is a regular single jersey fabric. Fabric 2 is a single jersey based fabric with spacer structure. Fabric 3 is a fabric combining of mesh opening and spacer structure. The spacer structure was knitted by successive float on a single needle. While mesh opening was achieved by float plating technique with elastic yarns. The spacer structure lifts up the fabric to reduce the contact area and creates a gap between the fabric and skin surface, while mesh offers some ventilation holes which allow the exchange of warm air in the clothing microclimate and cool air in the environment.The material used for the three garment samples (Fig. 1) is same, their size and weight (104 ± 2 g) are also similar, except for different fabric structures. Sample A is made of a single jersey fabric (Fabric 1), which was used as a control sample. Sample B is a combination of Fabric 1 and Fabric 2, where Fabric 2 was designed at upper trunk area of the garment. Sample C is the novel T-shirt which is made of Fabric 1 and Fabric 3, where Fabric 3 was located at the chest, shoulders and upper back area.A sweating thermal manikin-Walter (Fan and Chen, 2003; Fan and Qian, 2004) was used to measure the thermal property of different T-shirt samples (Fig. 2).Samples A, B and C were all used in sweating thermal manikin test. Before testing, all samples were laundered and air dried to eliminate any finishing chemicals in the fabric. In order to maintain consistency during testing, the same pair of gym shorts, made by 100% polyester knitted fabric, was used for all experiments.The tests were carried out in a climatic chamber controlled at a temperature of 20 ± 0.5 °C and a relative humidity of 65  ±  2%, aiming to simulate the indoor thermal environment of a gymnasium. They were conducted at three air velocities of 0.2 ± 0.1 m/s, 1.0 ± 0.1 m/s, and 2.0 ± 0.1 m/s, respectively. Since the effect of body movement on clothing thermal properties bears resemblance to the effect of wind on clothing thermal properties, as both increase convective air exchange, from the effect of air velocity, we can also understand the effect of exercise level on clothing thermal properties (Qian and Fan, 2006). The mean skin temperature of the manikin was set at 35 °C; all samples were conditioned in the chamber for 24 h before testing. All tests were repeated for three times, the samples were put off and on again between repetitions.The thermal insulation of the garment samples was calculated by using the following formula:(1)Rc=As(Ts−Te)/Hd(°Cm2W−1)where Rc is the thermal insulation of the garment sample (°C m2 W−1); As is the total surface area of the manikin (m2); Ts is the core temperature of the manikin (°C); Te is the environment temperature (°C); and Hd is the dry heat loss of the manikin (W).The evaporative resistance was calculated by(2)Re=As(Pss−PasRHa)/He−Res(Pam2W−1)(3)He=Qλ(W)where Re is the evaporative resistance of the clothing (Pa m2 W−1); As is the surface area of the manikin (m2); Pss is the saturated vapour pressure at the skin temperature (Pa); Pas is the saturated vapour pressure at the ambient temperature (Pa) and RHa is the ambient relative humidity (%); Res is the moisture vapour resistance of the fabric skin which was calibrated in advance (Res = 8.6 m2 Pa W−1); He is the evaporative heat loss (W); λ is the heat of evaporation of water at the skin temperature (λ = 0.67 W h g−1); and Q is the rate of perspiration per hour from the manikin (g h−1).Moisture permeability index (im) is calculated according to equation (4) with reference to Qian's work (2005):(4)im=Rc/0.0165Re=60.6Rc/Rewhere Rc and Re are in ISO standard units, and the theoretical range of im is from 0 (for the completely impermeable system) to 1 (for the ideally permeable one).Seven healthy male college students volunteered to take part in this study. Their physical characteristics were as follows: age of 22 ± 3, weight of 76 ± 8 kg and height of 1.74 ± 0.03 m. Before recruited, all subjects were informed of the purpose of the study, the procedure of the experiments, their rights, the potential risks and benefits as well as the privacy and confidentiality clauses by a face-to-face dialogue and a written information sheet. And then the subjects gave their individual consent to participate this research on an informed consent form.The novel T-shirt (Sample C) and control sample (Sample A) were selected as testing samples to investigate the effect of spacer and mesh structure on wearer comfort by recording the physiological changes and human subjective sensations during exercises. The same pairs of gym shorts, socks and shoes were used for all wearer trials. All garments were conditioned in the climatic chamber for 24 h prior to the wearer trial.A couple of temperature (RS, Platinum Sensing Resistor-Pt100, UK) and humidity (Honeywell, HIH-4000, US) sensors were attached on the chest, shoulder and upper back area of the volunteers to record the thermo-physiological changes every 10 s during the whole test period. The sensors were connected to the Compact Field Point System (National Instrument), which automatically received the data and recorded it on a computer by the data acquisition interface (LabVIEW, v.8.5, National Instrument, US). A chest belt and a mask with volume sensor were worn to monitor the heart rate and respiratory parameters during the period of running using cardiopulmonary diagnostic system (Meta control 3000, Germany). Both direct and indirect test data regarding heart rate (HR, bpm), oxygen inhalation (VO2, ml/min), and energy expenditure (EE/kg, kcal/d/kg) were saved to the computer by CORTEX MetaSoft®.During the experiments, the subjects were asked to report their thermal sensation, moisture sensation and clingy sensation in different experimental phases, and both local body sensation and overall sensation were recorded. Overall comfort, as an important assessment index, was also included in the questionnaire. The questionnaire is shown in Fig. 3.The wearer trials were carried out in a climatic chamber at 20 ± 0.5 °C and 65.0 ± 5% RH. The testing conditions were designed to mimic the real situation of heavy exercise, where the air flow passes through the garment, the sweat and post exercise chill occurred. The test was divided into two periods, including 30 min run and 10 min rest. During the running period, the subjects ran on a treadmill (Fig. 4) with a speed of 6.0 km/h and an air velocity of 0.8 ± 0.1 m s−1 to simulate the body movement during exercise. During the rest period, the subjects sat in the chamber with an air velocity of 0.1 ± 0.1 m s−1 to simulate the static condition.Before experiment, the subjects were pre-conditioned by sitting in the climatic chamber for 30 min. Then randomly selected garments were worn by the subjects, and the recording instruments were attached. During the experiment, core temperature was measured by a digital ear infra-red thermometer before running and on 30th min, 35th min and 40th min, respectively. All subjects were asked to evaluate the subjective perceptions during the course of the experiment (before running and on 10th min, 20th min, 30th min, 35th min and 40th min, respectively).Since individual physiological characteristics vary every day, it will affect the temperature and perspiration levels. The change of skin temperature and humidity during the experiment was recorded and used to investigate the effect of ventilation design. The recorded skin temperature and humidity were used to calculate the change of temperature and humidity in percentage by using the formula below:(5)Change of Temperature=T1,2,3…n−T0/T0×100%(6)Change of Humidity=RH1,2,3…n−RH0/RH0×100%where T0 is the skin temperature at the initial time point; RH0 is the relative humidity at the initial time point; and RH1,2,3 … nis the relative humidity at the first, second … time point.All the statistical data analyses were carried out with SPSS (IBM SPSS Statistics, v.19.0, IBM, US). One-Way ANOVA analysis was carried out to compare the different clothing thermal insulation, evaporative resistance and moisture permeability index on different air velocities. Repeated-measures ANOVA were employed to examine the differences in physiology parameters when dressing two samples. Paired t-test was also used when investigating the results of questionnaire. All the statistical analyses were performed at a level of 95% statistical significance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It can be concluded that the novel T-shirt design, which has a combined spacer and mesh structure, significantly increase the air circulation next to skin and ventilation cooling under windy condition and/or active body movement. Under windy condition, the moisture permeability index (im) of T-shirt with ventilation structures decreased about 11.1% compared to that of conventional one. Under the real exercise situation, the sports T-shirt with the new ventilation design contributed to the reduction of heat accumulation, the increase of skin relative humidity, and the decrease of hot and chill discomfort. The variation of skin temperature and relative humidity reduced up to 37% and 32% respectively. The wearer felt more comfort with the novel ventilation designed garment during exercise, especially in the post-exercise phase. Moreover, the new ventilation design also contributed to the reduction of 3.3% energy expenditure during exercise, which is expected to be applied on the active sportswear like those for jogging, racket sports, and ball games, etc.