@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimization of healthcare supply chain in context of macro-ergonomics factors by a unique mathematical programming approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Macro-ergonomics optimization of healthcare supply chain.A unique data envelopment analysis approach is used.This study identifies weights of each factor and preferred alternatives.Results showed that the influential shaping factor is teamwork.First macro-ergonomics study of healthcare supply chain by DEA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human factors,Healthcare supply chain (HCSC),Data envelopment analysis (DEA),Macro-ergonomics,Sensitivity analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study presents an integrated approach for analyzing the impact of macro-ergonomics factors in healthcare supply chain (HCSC) by data envelopment analysis (DEA). The case of this study is the supply chain (SC) of a real hospital. Thus, healthcare standards and macro-ergonomics factors are considered to be modeled by the mathematical programming approach. Over 28 subsidiary SC divisions with parallel missions and objectives are evaluated by analyzing inputs and outputs through DEA. Each division in this HCSC is considered as decision making unit (DMU). This approach can analyze the impact of macro-ergonomics factors on supply chain management (SCM) in healthcare sector. Also, this method ranks the relevant performance efficiencies of each HCSC. In this study by using proposed method, the most effective macro-ergonomics factor on HCSC is identified as “teamwork” issue. Also, this study would help managers to identify the areas of weaknesses in their SCM system and set improvement target plan for the related SCM system in healthcare industry. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study for macro-ergonomics optimization of HCSC.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A supply chain (SC) is a value chain network in every industrial system. In healthcare industries, SCs are the most costly part of system. Thus, evaluating of management in healthcare supply chain (HCSC) is evident (McKone-Sweet et al., 2005). Human factors play an important role in SCM (Kim, 2005). This paper analyzes the impact of macro-ergonomics factors on HCSC. The basic theory in this matter is focusing on the role of human factors and managerial decisions in a real hospital in Tehran, Iran.Regarding SCM in healthcare sector, Kelle et al. (2012) and Narayana et al. (2014) proposed an approach to improve the current management of the pharmacy SC. Bendavid and Boeck (2011) studied SCM of a hospital to redesign the renewal process. Kim (2005) developed a pharmaceutical SCM system to optimize the costs and inventories. Also, McGrath and More (2001) presented an integrated approach to improve HCSC efficiency. Although dealing with complexity in the SC is difficult, a large number of studies support this complexity to achieve the better performances (Bozarth et al., 2009; Koudal and Engel, 2007; Perona and Miragliotta, 2004; Vachon and Klassen, 2002; Van der Vorst and Beulens, 2002; Behzad et al., 2011).Time and cost play an important role in performance of the hospital and the importance of these factors on healthcare performance are expressed by some researchers such as Cheng and Whittemore (2008), Haszlinna Mustaffa and Potter (2009), and Kehrel (2015).There are several studies on performance of the healthcare issue. In this regards, an improvement approach for HCSC is presented by Rossetti (2008). Kim et al. (2013) and Konrad et al. (2013) applied simulation method to model performance of healthcare system. Wang and Chou (2015) and Lowndes and Susan (2014) evaluated healthcare systems to improve safety.The role of human elements in complex systems is inevitable (Paillé and Boiral, 2013; Clegg, 2000; Serdarasan, 2013) and there is lack of study with respect to human factors issues. In this regard, Khan et al. (2014) presented an integrated mathematical model considering human errors. Barnes and Liao (2012) studied the effect of individuals and network in SCM by considering human resource management. Other studies considered human resources and aspects of SC (Fung and Chen, 2010; Koulikoff-Souviron and Harrison, 2006; Harrison, 1999).Improvement of SCM performance is the aim of many industries (Khan et al., 2014). Healthcare industries are one of the most important sectors in every society. SC costs are the greatest part of healthcare industries (McKone-Sweet et al., 2005) and the effect of humans in this matter is indispensable. In this case, Sinclair et al., 1995 discussed certain ergonomics issues involved in simultaneous engineering from the perspective of SCs.Siemieniuch and Sinclair (2000) classified different sectors of SCM to several roles such as supervisor, inspection, project management, suppliers, finance management, security, marketing, costumers and purchasing. The SCM can be defined as a social network. Workers and decision makers in this network are human elements that are connected with technology and played a significant role in the development of the system (Paillé and Boiral, 2013). People work better when they have comprehensive understanding of their works (Davis, 1982). Moreover, they are the set of characteristics which Ulich (1989) mentioned as concepts of humanization of work.It is clear that, healthcare industry has a key role in human health and quick access to the medicine is one of the important issues that has the significant impact on healthcare department. It is therefore quite essential to evaluate medicine SC to enhance performance of the healthcare department. Hence, medicine SC of a real hospital is evaluated by incorporating ergonomics and macro-ergonomics factors, cost and time of delivering medicine to customers. Based on experts' opinions, aforementioned factors play a vital role in medicine availability, system reliability, and delivery time and cost. Therefore, considering the ergonomics and macro ergonomics factors for evaluation medicine SC performance is justified.This study proposes a method for analyzing the impact of macro-ergonomics factors in HCSC systems. It demonstrates how data envelopment analysis (DEA) enables a hospital to simultaneously analyze multiple output/input indicators to precisely determine performance and also identify the most effective macro-ergonomics factors. In this regard, 28 units in a SC of a hospital are took into account as decision making units (DMUs). Cost and time of delivering medicine to customers are considered as inputs whilst human factors about SCM in healthcare issue are proposed as outputs. The system of delivering medicine from main factory or depot to the hospital's patients is considered as SC system. After data gathering through questionnaire, DEA approach is presented with respect to the set of comprehensive ergonomics factors obtained in previous steps in order to rank all units of SC to find the best one. Moreover, sensitivity analysis is performed to identify the most important factors. Finally, management decisions are derived from ergonomics viewpoint to improve the performance of SC in this particular case study.Healthcare industry has significant role in growth of national economy and health. In addition, medicine SC is one of the most costly divisions of healthcare. Given the costly nature of these issues, the management system could play an important role to reduce the costs and delivery time and increase medicine availability and system reliability. Furthermore, the impact of traditional ergonomics in addition to macro-ergonomics factors in a HCSC becomes quite considerable and important. Moreover, both human and organizational elements can cause errors and reduction of efficiencies in HCSC and the reliable and available system can be achieved by incorporating ergonomics and macro-ergonomics factors. This study for the first time presents concurrent evaluation and optimization of micro- and macro-ergonomics factors in healthcare SCM. Moreover, previous studies have not considered the human, organizational, and technological issues of HCSC. The results of this study would applied total human factors issues in context of healthcare SCM.This study is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the methodology which is used in this study. Section 3 shows the application of the approach on real case study. Analysis and discussion are presented in Section 4. Concluding remarks are provided in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Healthcare industry plays an important role in each society. Medicine SC is one of the most costly divisions of healthcare industry. Also, human effects in such systems are inevitable. This study presented an efficient approach for analyzing impact of macro-ergonomics factors on medicine SC of an actual hospital. To do this, DEA approach has been applied to recognize the influential factors. The proposed approach enables managers of hospital to propose developmental strategies for each division with respect to human factors issues. Moreover, this approach can indicate strengths and weaknesses of each division in medicine SCM. In addition, auditing and monitoring is applied to improve system performance. Moreover, this approach formulates improvement strategies for medicine SC system with respect to human factors issues and can ensure improvement for managers.In this study, the term human factors actually are composed of conventional human factors, organizational factors and macro-ergonomics factors. For future studies, it is recommended to categorize the general format of this study into human factors, organizational features and macro-ergonomics factors. Also, certain parameters may have uncertain nature and therefore fuzzy DEA may be used in this perspective. Additionally, developing and applying novel methods and approaches in this matter is highly recommended.Table 11presents the features of the proposed methodology. This study presents the impact of macro-ergonomics factor on a healthcare SC through DEA model. It also is capable of presenting improvement in medicine SC system in healthcare industry. Furthermore it is capable of modeling macro-ergonomics and organizational factors in addition to human related factors. It also helps managers to identify errors and weaknesses in their system and provides solutions to optimize system performance.