@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Perceived discomfort functions based on joint moment for various joint motion directions of the upper limb

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We formulate the relationship between perceived discomfort and joint moment ratio for the upper limb.The relationships for twelve joint motion directions are formulated by considering between-subject variability.The L-R fuzzy number was applied to deal with the variability of perceived discomfort among subjects.We compare three approximation models (linear, exponential, and logistic function models) in terms of their accuracy.The logistic function model provides the best fit to the history of perceived discomfort among the three models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biomechanics,Function approximation,Human diversity,Perceived discomfort,Fuzzy numbers,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of the present study was to formulate the relationship between the perceived discomfort and the joint moment ratio for twelve joint motion directions of the upper limb by considering the between-subject variability, and to investigate the effect of joint motion direction. Three approximation models (i.e., linear, exponential, and logistic function models) were compared in terms of the accuracy of predicting the perceived discomfort, and the logistic function was selected because its average error was lowest. The concept of L-R fuzzy number was used to consider the individual variability of perceived discomfort, and a simplified distribution of perceived discomfort was represented. Cluster analysis showed that the twelve discomfort functions formed two clusters: one for elbow flexion and a second for the remaining joint motions. The data show that elbow flexion is more sensitive than other joint motions to increases in the joint moment ratio.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Biomechanical analysis and electromyogram (EMG) recordings are widely used to evaluate physical stress and fatigue; they are also applied to design problems of work environments and consumer products in order to reduce physical work load (Chaffin et al., 2006; Tsang and Vidulich, 2006). EMGs record the actual electrical activity of a muscle. However, EMG recordings require preliminary measurements, such as measurement of the maximum voluntary contraction for normalization (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1992); hence, it is time consuming and imposes strain on subjects. In addition, measured EMG recordings evaluate muscle load on only the intended motion; thus, re-measurement of EMGs is necessary when the design variables of work environments and consumer products are changed.Physical load evaluation based on a biomechanical model with the joint angle and joint moment requires the measurements of only the joint angle and external force. Therefore, the experimental cost and strain on subjects may be lower for a biomechanical analysis than for EMG measurements. Biomechanical analysis does not necessarily require experimentation, because the analysis can be performed if the joint angles and external forces are given; hence, a biomechanical analysis can be used for the re-evaluation of the physical stress with a design change more effectively. The time that can be allocated to improving work environments or designing consumer products is decreasing with each passing year, in conjunction with the shortening of the development period. That is, an ergonomic physical load evaluation should be performed effectively in a short time. Thus, it is essential to develop an ergonomic design using a biomechanical analysis model that performs physical load evaluation more efficiently than EMG measurements (Lestrelin and Trasbot, 2005; LaFiandra, 2009).Research on postural discomfort imposed by varying joint angles has been reported (Kee and Lee, 2012). The relationships between the perceived discomfort and joint angle have been studied (Kee and Karwowski, 2001, 2004; Chung et al., 2003). Miedema et al. (1997) studied the effects of joint angle and duration on perceived discomfort, whereas Carey and Gallwey (2005) along with Khan et al. (2010) investigated the effects of joint angle and repetition. The ranking of perceived discomfort of joint motions have been investigated (Genaidy and Karwowski, 1993; Kee and Karwowski, 2003). The relationship between perceived discomfort and joint angle can be used to evaluate the discomfort of arbitrary human postures. However, in real situations of working or using a product, arbitrary external forces will act on the human body, and arbitrary moments will act on each joint. In addition, because perceived discomfort is affected more by the joint moment than the joint angle (Carey and Gallwey, 2002; Dickerson et al., 2006), the relationship between perceived discomfort and joint moment should be quantified to improve the accuracy of perceived discomfort evaluation.The maximum joint moments that subjects can exert have been measured (Amundsen, 1990; Chaffin et al., 2006; National Institute of Technology and Evaluation, 2009). In these reports, the average maximum joint moment among subjects was measured, and the relationship between the maximum joint moment and joint angle was represented. Boussenna et al. (1982) investigated the relationships between the perceived discomfort and joint moments of the hip, knee, and ankle. Wang et al. (2004) investigated the relationship between the perceived discomfort and biomechanical parameters, including the joint moments when depressing a clutch pedal. Mukhopadhyay et al. (2007) investigated the effects of the joint moment of forearm pronation, forearm rotation angle, elbow angle, and exertion frequency on the perceived discomfort. However, they did not investigate the quantitative effect of the joint moment magnitude on perceived discomfort.Dickerson et al. (2006) investigated the effects of the shoulder joint moment, position of operation object, and stature of subjects on perceived discomfort in a simulated workstation. Perceived discomfort, which was measured by varying the direction and magnitude of external force, was mostly affected by, and represented as a linear function of, the shoulder joint moment. However, they did not investigate the effect of joint motion direction of the shoulder joint (i.e., extension, flexion, abduction, adduction, internal rotation, and external rotation). In addition, the perceived discomforts of the elbow and wrist joints were not considered, although the discomfort of other joints may be as important as that of the shoulder joint. Moreover, the abovementioned reports on the relationship between the perceived discomfort and joint moment or joint angle did not quantify individual differences. The perceived discomfort function for upper limb joints should be formulated by considering the variability so as to take into account human diversity during developing ergonomic design.The objective of the present study was to formulate the relationship between the perceived discomfort and joint moment by considering the variability of subjective evaluation, and to consider differences among the joint motion directions of the upper limb (i.e., shoulder extension, shoulder flexion, shoulder adduction, shoulder abduction, shoulder internal rotation, shoulder external rotation, elbow extension, elbow flexion, wrist extension, wrist flexion, wrist ulnar deviation, and wrist radial deviation). In this study, the perceived discomforts of subjects were measured when they exerted joint moments of arbitrary magnitude in each joint motion direction. The response surfaces of perceived discomfort were approximated by three different approximation models: linear, exponential, and logistic function models. The logistic function model was selected as the best approximation model because its accuracy was highest among the three models. The concept of fuzzy number was used to represent the variability of perceived discomfort among subjects. Finally, clustering the evaluation functions of perceived discomfort for each joint motion direction revealed that the function for the upper limb could be divided into two clusters.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, an approximation method of the perceived discomfort function for upper limb joint motion directions is proposed. The major findings are as follows:1.The perceived discomfort caused by joint moment exertion shows a nonlinear trend. In addition, the logistic function provides the best fit as the perceived discomfort function among the three function approximation models tested: the linear, exponential, and logistic function models.The perceived discomfort scores vary widely because of individual differences between subjects. However, using the personal factors of stature, weight, and gripping force as the state variables of the perceived discomfort function is difficult.The twelve perceived discomfort functions are divided into two clusters: one for elbow flexion and another for the remaining eleven joint motion directions. In addition, the perceived discomfort of elbow flexion is more sensitive than that of other motions to an increase in the joint moment ratio.The proposed model is useful for proactive work environment design when the perceived discomfort of the upper limb is the main determinant factor. The joint moment can be calculated by using a biomechanical model; for example, many commercial software can be used (LaFiandra, 2009). In addition, the maximum joint moments have been measured by many researchers (Amundsen, 1990; Chaffin et al., 2006; National Institute of Technology and Evaluation, 2009). Therefore, the joint moment ratio can be calculated for an intended task, and then the perceived discomfort is evaluated by the proposed method. The combination use of the proposed model and the biomechanical model gives predicted value of perceived discomfort of workers without time-consuming experiment. It is expected that the proposed model may contribute to the efficient work environment design.