@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ergonomics Climate Assessment: A measure of operational performance and employee well-being

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The Ergonomics Climate Assessment assesses a value for performance and well-being.A discrepancy between values is associated with more work-related pain.An equal value for performance and well-being is associated with less pain.Organizations should show a value for performance and well-being equally.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ergonomics climate,Well-being,Performance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ergonomics interventions have the potential to improve operational performance and employee well-being. We introduce a framework for ergonomics climate, the extent to which an organization emphasizes and supports the design and modification of work to maximize both performance and well-being outcomes. We assessed ergonomics climate at a large manufacturing facility twice during a two-year period. When the organization used ergonomics to promote performance and well-being equally, and at a high level, employees reported less work-related pain. A larger discrepancy between measures of operational performance and employee well-being was associated with increased reports of work-related pain. The direction of this discrepancy was not significantly related to work-related pain, such that it didn't matter which facet was valued more. The Ergonomics Climate Assessment can provide companies with a baseline assessment of the overall value placed on ergonomics and help prioritize areas for improving operational performance and employee well-being.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
To maximize success, organizations must have a climate that supports operational performance (e.g., production efficiency, product or service quality) as well as employee well-being (e.g., health and safety). Researchers (e.g., Aryee et al., 2012; Pousette et al., 2008) have examined operational performance and employee well-being climates individually; however, few studies have considered how to simultaneously promote a climate for both performance and well-being. One comprehensive way to demonstrate both of these values is by promoting a systems approach as is frequently done in ergonomics. The field of ergonomics aims to increase efficiency by designing or modifying the job to eliminate non-value added processes and hazards that increase the risk of employee injury (Wickens et al., 2004). Professionals who use ergonomic principles adapt work tasks to the physical and mental capabilities of the workers. Implementing ergonomic principles in an occupational environment can directly benefit the worker and the organization by reducing physical and mental strain, lowering the risk of occupational related injuries and illnesses and improving work performance (Sanders and Mccormick, 1993). By embracing the principles of ergonomics, and establishing a positive ergonomics climate, organizations can enhance both operational performance and employee well-being.Ergonomics climate represents employee perceptions of the extent to which the organization emphasizes and supports the design and modification of work such that both performance and well-being are maximized. We use “performance” here to refer to an organization's successful functioning in an economic context, which can include (but is not limited to): maximizing productivity and efficiency, quality of product or service, sustainability as a company, maintaining a competitive edge in the market, and completing the tasks necessary for the organization to succeed (Drucker, 1991). Employee well-being often refers to a focus on ensuring that employees are happy and healthy, which can include (but is not limited to): reducing their risk for injuries and illnesses, addressing quality of work life issues, improving job satisfaction, and supporting work-life balance (e.g., Cotton and Hart, 2003; Sears et al., 2013). Although some efforts to design or modify work target only performance or only safety, we argue that a positive ergonomics climate reflects a value for both improved process and safety outcomes, consistent with the traditional values of the field of ergonomics. Thus, a company with a positive ergonomics climate promotes the design and modification of work to support both types of outcomes, rather than favoring one over the other.In this paper, we outline the development and use of a novel measure of ergonomics climate. We conducted focus groups to qualitatively assess the framework of ergonomics climate, developed and pilot tested an ergonomics climate measure (the Ergonomics Climate Assessment), and obtained preliminary criterion-related validity evidence for the measure by examining the association between ergonomics climate and self-reported work-related pain. Further, we examined the effect of perceived differences in emphasis between performance and well-being, to test our contention that the best outcomes should result for organizations that emphasize both.Although the importance of both operational performance and employee well-being for organizational success are intuitive, organizations often perceive a conflict between them. For example, there is some evidence that employees who are more productive are also increasingly unsafe (Allen et al., 2007; Probst, 2002). In addition, safety climate and productivity may be negatively related (Wallace and Chen, 2006). However, other researchers have suggested that safety and productivity are independent (Hofmann and Tetrick, 2003; Wallace et al., 2005), suggesting that the relationship between safety and productivity depends on the organizational context (Jackson and Mullarkey, 2000). If the climate of an organization is supportive of both safety and process quality goals, employees can be safe while producing a quality product (Gehring et al., 2013; Landsbergis et al., 1999). Thus, the context, or the climate, of an organization, can impact the relationship between performance and employee well-being.Within the field of ergonomics, many view the facets of operational performance and well-being as not only compatible, but inextricably linked. Ergonomics aims to simultaneously improve outcomes such as productivity, efficiency, quality, and safety (Wilson et al., 2009). The ergonomics field is committed to a systems orientation in which nothing exists in isolation and each element has the potential to impact another (Sanders and Mccormick, 1993). Ergonomic interventions, for example, are often designed to promote both performance and well-being simultaneously (Genaidy et al., 2007; Goggins et al., 2008). Maudgalya et al. (2008) reported that following ergonomics initiatives, there was an average increase of 66% in productivity, 44% in quality, 82% in safety records, and a 71% average decrease in workers compensation costs. Taking a systems approach wherein operational performance and employee well-being are simultaneously valued has many benefits for organizations (Hofmann and Tetrick, 2003).The climate of an organization helps employees understand and interpret organizational norms, and employees shape their behavior based on their perceptions of what is valued by the organization (Schein, 1990). Although there is little research on the concept of an “employee well-being” climate, there is a body of research on safety climate (e.g., Neal and Griffin, 2006; Pousette et al., 2008; Zohar, 2002) as well as performance climates (Aryee et al., 2012; Cappelli and Neumark, 1999; Wriston, 2007). Although there are some exceptions (e.g., Allen et al., 2007; Probst, 2002; Wallace et al., 2006), most climate research has not examined performance and well-being simultaneously. For example, safety climate is often conceptualized as a company's value for only safety on the job. Various dimensions related to safety are measured, such as management commitment to safety, the safety system, and risk (Flin et al., 2000). Safety climate by itself does not reflect a company's simultaneous value for both employee well-being and performance. Ergonomics climate also relates to employee safety; however, ergonomics climate is a more robust construct that reflects broader values. Ergonomics climate reflects a perceived value for employee well-being, which includes worker health and safety, quality of work life, and job satisfaction. Ergonomics climate also reflects the perceived value that management places on operational performance. Thus, employees responding to ergonomics climate measures will be asked to refer to practices that affect both their well-being and operational performance.Therefore, we propose ergonomics climate as one example for how an organization may seek to balance performance and well-being objectives. It is possible that an organization might use ergonomics principles to improve one, but not both, of these facets. In doing so, they do not take full advantage of ergonomic principles. Thus, we expect the best outcomes for organizations that value both facets, consistent with the holistic, systems-oriented philosophy of ergonomics.If organizations that foster a positive and balanced ergonomics climate should reap the greatest outcomes from ergonomics initiatives, then organizations who use (or intend to use) such initiatives should benefit from assessing, tracking, and understanding their ergonomics climates. We therefore sought to develop a measure for ergonomics climate. We began with two focus groups (N = 12) at a manufacturing facility to discuss how an understanding of the relative priorities of performance and employee well-being might be useful to the company. To analyze the qualitative data from the focus groups, we used open coding and content analysis processes (Janis, 1965; Weber, 1990; Woike, 2009). Interrater agreement of the measure was not assessed, because only one researcher coded the responses. The coder read transcripts to identify common themes that occurred while the group discussed what an ergonomics climate could look like. This resulted in a total of eight core themes extracted from the focus groups (Table 1). We then outlined, from a range of resources, the “best practices” in occupational ergonomics. The resources included a review of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health's (NIOSH) Elements of an Ergonomics Program, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's (OSHA) Voluntary Protection Program, the rescinded federal ergonomics standard promulgated by OSHA, and state ergonomics guidelines (Washington and California). Following this review, we examined research literature related to ergonomics, occupational health and well-being, productivity, and organizational climate, as outlined in Table 1. The combined results from the focus groups, national resources and literature review revealed four common factors central to organizational climates that involve ergonomics: management commitment, employee involvement, job hazard analysis, and training and knowledge (see Table 1). These four factors have been identified many times in a range of literatures, with the most relevant being the safety climate literature. Although researchers have yet to agree on a single factor structure of safety climate (Cox and Cheyne, 2000; Coyle et al., 1995; Vinodkumar and Bhasi, 2009), many measures share the common factors of management commitment (e.g., Brown and Holmes, 1986; Cooper and Phillips, 2004; Griffin and Neal, 2000; Probst, 2004; Zohar, 1980), employee involvement (Cheyne et al., 1998; Cox and Cheyne, 2000; Dedobbeleer and Beland, 1991; Neal and Griffin, 2004), job hazard analysis (Cheyne et al., 1998; Cox and Cheyne, 2000; Griffin and Neal, 2000; Probst, 2004), and training and knowledge (e.g., Cooper and Phillips, 2004; Evans et al., 2007; Griffin and Neal, 2000; Lu and Tsai, 2008). Thus, we acknowledge that the four factors described here are similar to factors seen in many safety climate measures; however, we believe that these dimensions are applicable to climate in general, and therefore also to ergonomics climate.To develop the Ergonomics Climate Assessment, we created two parallel measures to assess the design and modification of work in relation to operational performance and well-being, respectively. A value for both of these is necessary for an ideal ergonomics climate; however, it is possible for a company to place more emphasis on one than on the other. The parallel nature of our measure allowed us to test how a relative priority for each can influence relevant outcomes.All questions specifically reflect the key ergonomic concept of designing and modifying work to improve the focus of interest (performance or well-being). Thus, there is a scale for the facet of well-being-focused (WE) ergonomics climate and another scale for the facet of performance-focused (PE) ergonomics climate. It is important to note that these facets are not overarching measures of an organization's value for well-being or performance, but rather measures of the organization's climate for ergonomic practices related to those goals. More specifically, ergonomics climate is not overall organizational climate; it is specifically focused on the climate surrounding ergonomic practices, such as designing and modifying work, with the goal of aiding organizations who wish to adopt or expand such practices.We developed items that reflected policies and practices that corresponded to each of the four ergonomics climate factors (management commitment, employee involvement, job hazard analysis, and training and knowledge). The company involved in the study had “factory metrics” that were analogous to “performance metrics,” and because employees were accustomed to this terminology, “factory metrics” were referenced in the survey. Parallel versions of each questionnaire item were written to reflect the different facets. For example, an item under management commitment read, “My supervisor emphasizes the importance of designing and modifying work to improve factory metrics,” and its parallel item was, “My supervisor emphasizes the importance of designing and modifying work to improve worker well-being.” On the actual questionnaires, these items were placed side-by-side to draw attention to the different facets, and the terms were printed with bold text. The dimensions and items of the Ergonomics Climate Assessment were tested in a pilot study before any further validation efforts were undertaken, as described in the Methods section.To validate the newly developed Ergonomics Climate Assessment, we first assessed the concurrent validity of the Ergonomics Climate Assessment as a predictor of employee self-reported work-related pain. Many studies have supported the relationship between safety climate and employee safety outcomes (e.g., Christian et al., 2009; Nahrgang et al., 2011), and we believe that both PE and WE facets of ergonomics climate should function similarly to safety climate in this way. Work-related pain was chosen as the focal outcome for this study because other safety indicators, such as accidents or incidents, are low-base-rate behaviors and can be problematic in self-report surveys because individuals may hesitate to report such occurrences (Probst et al., 2008). Work-related pain can be viewed as a leading, rather than lagging, indicator of employee well-being, and ergonomics interventions often specifically aim to prevent pain. There is an intuitive negative relationship between the WE facet of ergonomics climate and pain; if an organization values designing and modifying work to improve well-being, and if their efforts in this direction are at all successful, employees should experience less work-related pain.The relationship between the PE facet of ergonomics climate and pain may be less obvious. Although it would not be unusual to increase work pace in the hopes of productivity gains, product quality as well as safety can be compromised. In an environment that values a systems approach to occupational ergonomics, productivity gains are designed concurrently with worker well-being goals. For example, manually attaching hydraulic hoses to a subassembly with a hand wrench can be performed faster by increasing the expected yield of the worker, which would likely lead to greater hand fatigue, work stress and poorer quality. Using a systems approach to ergonomics, a redesign may include the use of a power driven wrench that results in greater output, less physically demanding hand motions, and less worker stress. Poor work design however, has been associated with greater injuries to employees (Genaidy et al., 2008).Hypothesis 1Both WE and PE facets of ergonomics climate will be negatively related to work-related pain.It is also important to consider the congruence between PE and WE facets of ergonomics climate. As stated previously, a positive ergonomics climate is one in which the organization strives to improve both performance and well-being. The structure of the Ergonomics Climate Assessment allowed us to explore how PE and WE facets of ergonomics climate relate to self-reported work-related pain individually, as well as their joint effect. The conceptually parallel measures of PE and WE facets in the Ergonomics Climate Assessment facilitate the use of response surface methodology (RSM; Box and Draper, 1987), a technique that is useful for understanding how the congruence or discrepancy between two predictors relates to an outcome.The use of RSM allowed us to answer three important questions about the relationship between the two facets of ergonomics climate (Shanock et al., 2010). We first tested how the facets of WE and PE were jointly related to reported pain when they were in agreement. In other words, when values for the design and modification of work to promote PE and WE facets of ergonomics climate were equal, how did this combined level of ergonomics climate relate to pain? We also tested whether that relationship was linear or curvilinear. Following the logic of Hypothesis 1, we propose that:When PE and WE facets of ergonomics climate are in agreement, there will be a significant linear relationship with work-related pain, such that when they are in agreement at a low level (i.e. both are rated low), the employee-reported pain will be higher than when they are in agreement at a high level (i.e. both are rated high).The second question we answered was how the degree of discrepancy between climates was related to employee-reported pain. If, as we have argued, a positive ergonomics climate is one in which PE and WE are valued equally, a climate in which they are valued unequally should result in less positive outcomes. Therefore, we expected that:When PE and WE facets of ergonomics climate are in disagreement (i.e. unequal), the amount of disagreement will be significantly correlated with work-related pain, such that the higher the discrepancy between the two climates, the more work-related pain will be reported.Finally, we tested whether the direction of the discrepancy was related to pain. Therefore, we not only assessed whether the disagreement between these values was important, but also whether employees reported more work-related pain if the PE facet of ergonomics climate was rated higher than the WE facet of ergonomics climate, or if the WE facet was rated higher than the PE facet. In light of the research suggesting that a strong emphasis on productivity may have negative effects on safety outcomes (Allen et al., 2007; Probst, 2002), we propose:When employees perceive a discrepancy between PE and WE facets of ergonomics climate, those who rate the PE facet higher than the WE facet will report more work-related pain than those who rate the WE facet higher than the PE facet of ergonomics climate.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
