@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A literature review on optimum and preferred joint angles in automotive sitting posture

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Overview over the state of the art of optimum automotive sitting posture.We did a literature review in the field of automotive optimum and preferred joint angles.We compared the methods and the results of the actual available literature.We give recommendations for further research in this field.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Joint angles,Optimum sitting posture,Automotive,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, a survey of the scientific literature in the field of optimum and preferred human joint angles in automotive sitting posture was conducted by referring to thirty different sources published between 1940 and today. The strategy was to use only sources with numerical angle data in combination with keywords. The aim of the research was to detect commonly used joint angles in interior car design. The main analysis was on data measurement, usability and comparability of the different studies. In addition, the focus was on the reasons for the differently described results.It was found that there is still a lack of information in methodology and description of background. Due to these reasons published data is not always usable to design a modern ergonomic car environment. As a main result of our literature analysis we suggest undertaking further research in the field of biomechanics and ergonomics to work out scientific based and objectively determined “optimum” joint angles in automotive sitting position.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In today's consumer society the availability and affordability of luxury products grows worldwide (de Looze et al., 2003; Yeoman and McMahon-Beattie, 2006). For this reason, ergonomics and comfort design get more attention from industrial designers because designing ergonomically optimized products leads to popular products as seen by Apple's iPhone (Walker et al., 2009). In sales promotion ergonomic design is a growing factor and contentment and comfort is a frequently used phrase. The same development can be noted in the automotive industry (Kolich and Taboun, 2004; Franz et al., 2011). To be ahead of competition in the automotive industry, ergonomics and seating comfort need to be more focused on the car interior designing process (Zenk et al., 2009, 2012). The main reasons are the suburbanization of the cities, the increase of traffic jams, growing business and leisure travel. As such, people are spending more time in their cars (Hasselbacher and Schwaighofer, 2001; Frank et al., 2004; Lyons and Urry, 2005; Zenk et al., 2009). To avoid discomfort and fatigue it is necessary to investigate an optimum seating posture which can be adapted to the car (Andersson et al., 1974; Hanson et al., 2006).To analyze seating posture and components needed for driving (e.g. steering wheel, pedals, gear selection lever, navigation systems or displays) manufacturers use 2D and 3D tools, especially CAD and digital human models (DHM). Most of DHM can be used to investigate vision, comfort, reachability, clearance and the driving posture in general. Although there are lots of studies, theoretical and laboratory/fieldtests (e.g. Hosea et al., 1986; Harrison et al., 2000; Oudenhuijzen et al., 2004), customers often complain of postural discomfort especially in the neck and shoulders, as well as of low back pain, which is an increasing disease in modern society (Magnusson and Pope, 1998; Andersson, 1999; Ebe and Griffin, 2001).In order to achieve correct ergonomic design and comfort it is necessary to work with joint angles in DHM which have to be deduced from scientific studies in literature. On this topic Kyung and Nussbaum (2009) related to Reed et al. (2002), Hanson et al. (2006) and Chaffin (2007) claimed that: “With expanding use of digital human models (DHMs) for proactive as well as retrospective ergonomic analysis of automotive interior design, there is a concomitant need for accurately predicting and specifying driving posture” (p. 939). To obtain knowledge of sitting posture a few studies have been undertaken with biomechanical methods, e.g. EMG, spine disc pressure investigations and shearing load in human joints in the field of sitting on office chairs (Andersson and Oertengren, 1974; Goossens and Snijders, 1995; Hasegawa and Kumashiro, 1998; Harrison et al., 1999). Research on the driver's workspace during car designing processes, and on optimum sitting posture with a focus on joint angles is mostly done with values of subjective comfort (e.g. Hanson et al., 2006), while studies using biomechanical methods like Andersson et al. (1974), Zenk (2009), Franz (2010) or Hosea et al. (1986) are rarely found. In addition, published material shows a large variance concerning optimum and comfort joint angles. Because of these differences described in literature it is necessary to decide on one source as discussed by Vogt et al. (2005).The main aim of this work is to show which recommendations exist on optimum and preferred sitting posture and scientific evidence.Nowadays, factors like human strength do not play an important role in cars anymore. Therefore, it is questionable whether optimum driving posture should be defined on objective or on subjective comfort and discomfort values.Articles found in literature with available joint angles were discussed and compared in order to obtain a general overview. It was no matter whether the sitting angles were defined based on studies with biomechanical or physiological facts, or on the subjective preferred posture.Moreover, quite often a mixture of the expressions optimum and preferred joint angle is found in literature. Therefore we created a clear predefinition for these two expressions which we followed throughout the paper to make it easier for the reader.In order to make clear statements we defined ‘optimum joint angles’ and ‘optimum joint posture’ to be dependent on biomechanical and physiological factors that, for example, lead to less muscular fatigue which in turn results in greater safety. 'Preferred joint angles' as well as 'comfortable joint angles' are indicated by subjective impressions and defined by the drivers' preferences.However the preferred posture is only one part which influences the comfort and discomfort of the driver (Kyung et al., 2008).In general there is a need for additional research for the optimization of DHM with biomechanical methods. Precise joint angles for comfortable driving positions will improve ergonomic design when these factors are implemented in digital human models (Kyung and Nussbaum, 2009).Therefore, this study focused on the investigation of similarities and discrepancies in methods, results and recommendations of scientific papers dealing with optimum and preferred joint angles in automotive sitting posture.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
