@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effects of obesity, age, and relative workload levels on handgrip endurance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The impacts of obesity and age on handgrip endurance across relative workload levels were examined.Obesity was associated with increased fatigability and perception of effort in younger adults.Current prediction models overestimate endurance times for the younger obese adults.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
BMI,Fatigue,Aging,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purpose of the study was to examine obesity and age effects on handgrip endurance across a range of relative workload levels. Forty-five non-obese and obese younger and older females performed fatiguing handgrip exercises at 20, 40, 60, and 80% of relative handgrip strength. The younger obese group demonstrated ∼7% greater strength, 32% shorter endurance times, and ∼34% faster rate of strength loss, accompanied by heightened perception of effort, than the younger non-obese group. However, these obesity-related differences were not observed in the older age group. Moreover, there were no interactions between relative workload levels, obesity, and age on any of the fatigue measures. Findings obtained here suggest that work-rest schedules computed from existing force endurance prediction models may not be protective of the younger obese working population.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the increased prevalence of obesity (defined as having a body mass index (BMI) ≥30 kg/m2), particularly in the U.S. workforce, the ergonomic consequences of obesity have gained increasing attention in the literature. Obesity is correlated with increased lost workdays from workplace injuries and other health conditions (Finkelstein et al., 2010; Østbye et al., 2007). In the most obese, those with BMI >40 kg/m2, distal upper extremity injuries occur twice as often (Pollack et al., 2007). Changes in job demands, from added segment masses, and in worker capacities may alter risk of injury with obesity. In addition, there are implications for task performance and fatigue development, important workplace outcomes.Obesity is associated with slower movement during manual handling and controlled hand-based tasks (Berrigan et al., 2006; Tetteh et al., 2009) (Berrigan et al., 2006; Tetteh et al., 2009) and poorer performance during handgrip and fine motor control tasks (D'Hondt et al., 2008; Mehta and Shortz, 2014). A growing number of studies have examined obesity-related changes in muscle strength (Cavuoto and Nussbaum, 2013b; Hulens et al., 2001; Maffiuletti et al., 2007), however little is known on its effect on endurance and fatigue. When performing sustained contractions, decreased capillary density and lower blood flow to the muscle, observed with obesity (Kern et al., 1999), may lead to a faster onset of muscle fatigue (Newcomer et al., 2001), which can result in decreased muscle capacity (Looze et al., 2009; Visser and Dieen, 2006).Eksioglu (2011) reported an inverse relationship between BMI and endurance time during sustained isometric grip contractions at 30% of maximum strength. Similarly, trunk endurance was shown to be reduced during a modified Sørensen back endurance test (Fogelholm et al., 2006; Kankaanpää et al., 1998), although the results from the latter may have been affected by higher load levels caused by the additional body mass of obesity. For both of these studies, correlation between body mass and endurance was a secondary outcome, since neither was focused on determining obesity-related differences in fatigue resistance and only included a small sample of overweight and obese participants. This prior work was also limited to a single exertion level for each task. It is unclear to what extent fatigue resistance of the upper extremity is impaired in overweight and obese individuals, and whether this relationship is workload and muscle dependent.In ergonomics practice, maximum holding time (endurance time) during a sustained isometric contraction is a commonly used measure for fatigue development. Dating back to the presentation of Rohmert's curve in 1960, it has been used to understand work demands and define work-rest schedules for the prevention of work-related injury (El ahrache & Imbeau, 2009; El ahrache et al., 2006; Frey Law and Avin, 2010; Gnaneswaran et al., 2013; Rohmert, 1962, 1973). Models of the relationship between the relative demand of the task and endurance time are used as an indicator of fatigue resistance and the rate of fatigue development (Dieen and Vrielink, 1994; Ma et al., 2009). Updated versions of the force-endurance model have been presented over the past 50 years, with data to account for differences by muscle and age group. For instance, aging has been shown to result in longer endurance times and increased fatigue resistance for static tasks (Avin and Frey Law, 2011). However, to date none of the studies have systematically considered individual differences based on level of both obesity and age across a range of workloads. Given that reduced capacity with obesity may result in shorter endurance times and faster fatigue development, and that these changes may vary with age, the purpose of this study is to evaluate the main and interactive effects of age and obesity on handgrip strength and endurance for multiple levels of relative workload. It was hypothesized that the interaction between age and obesity would impact fatigue development, particularly in the older obese group, and that this relationship would be workload-dependent.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
