@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluation of an anthropometric shape model of the human scalp

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The human head shape can be predicted using a statistical shape model.Anthropometric measurements can be used as intuitive parameters for shape models.At least 90 scans are required to build a representative shape model.Measurement errors for the arc length have the least effect on the prediction.Shape models have applications for research and for industrial design.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer-aided design,Shape modeling,Anthropometry,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents the evaluation a 3D shape model of the human head. A statistical shape model of the head is created from a set of 100 MRI scans. The ability of the shape model to predict new head shapes is evaluated by considering the prediction error distributions. The effect of using intuitive anthropometric measurements as parameters is examined and the sensitivity to measurement errors is determined. Using all anthropometric measurements, the average prediction error is 1.60 ± 0.36 mm, which shows the feasibility of the new parameters. The most sensitive measurement is the ear height, the least sensitive is the arc length. Finally, two applications of the anthropometric shape model are considered: the study of the male and female population and the design of a brain-computer interface headset. The results show that an anthropometric shape model can be a valuable tool for both research and design.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Parametric shape modeling is a popular technique to describe a population of 3D shapes with a limited set of parameters (Wang, 2005). When applied to the human body, it enables medical doctors, product designers and researchers to study the human body through high-quality 3D representations (Magnenat-Thalmann et al., 2004). For the sake of simplicity, people working in these fields will be referred to as ‘ergonomists’ throughout the remainder of this article. The parameters that yield the most accurate shape predictions of the body are usually found by statistically analyzing a sample of 3D polygonal surfaces. Although the resulting statistical shape models (SSM) accurately describe the object's shape, these statistics are often difficult to interpret and non-intuitive for design specialists. Therefore, several methods have been proposed to compute a new set of parameters to characterize the human body shape. Most of them were focused on the full body (Allen et al., 2003; Wang, 2005; Chu et al., 2010; Baek and Lee, 2012; Wuhrer and Shu, 2012), the face (Blanz and Vetter, 1999) or head (Xi and Shu, 2009). This research shows that head shapes can indeed be predicted from either semantic parameters such as age, gender and ethnicity or from various body size measurements.While more recent techniques were suggested as solutions for industrial designers (Meunier et al., 2000; Niu et al., 2009; Xi and Shu, 2009; Baek and Lee, 2012), it is not clear how they should interpret and use the results. Custom GUI applications have been suggested, in which the model can be varied according to statistical parameters (Meunier et al., 2009; Zhuang et al., 2013). However, statistical parameters are not intuitive enough to be used by ergonomists. Other suggestions include generating 3D models based on anthropometric measurements and then using these static shapes in 3D software (Lin and Wang, 2012), which is not far off from traditional anthropometry. Furthermore, only the average geometric (i.e. vertex-to-vertex) fit of the shape models to the scanning data was usually validated. While this is a valuable parameter, it only gives a very limited indication of the predictive capabilities of the models. Finally, despite the advent of head-centered products such as EEG-recording devices (Allison et al., 2012), to the best of the authors' knowledge no parametric models to date focus on the scalp.In this work, a statistical 3D shape model of the human scalp is created and a linear mapping is made between statistical parameters and ten anthropometric measurements. The prediction accuracy of the model is examined by using three different error metrics, i.e. vertex-to-vertex, normal and tangential error. Both the average and point-to-point errors are evaluated for several combinations of anthropometric measurements. Cross-validation is used to verify both the statistical and the anthropometric shape model. The sensitivity the prediction to measurement errors for individual parameters is shown and the effect of measurement errors on the prediction is evaluated. Such extensive analysis will allow ergonomists to select the minimal required set of anthropometric measurements, determine the influence of measurement errors and accurately locate shape variation.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes how the shape model is built, including the segmentation and parametrization of the MRI scans, the principal component analysis (PCA) of the 3D scalp geometry, the selection of the anthropometric measurements, and the correlation between these measurements and the PC weights. In Section 3, the shape model is evaluated in terms of prediction accuracy, the data set size is verified for the statistical as well as the anthropometric model, and the sensitivity of the prediction to measurement errors is discussed. The results are shown in Section 4, as well a discussion on how to select the right anthropometric measurements and an application for anthropometric research and for industrial design. Finally, the conclusion is formulated in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
