@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Potential of adjustable height carts in reducing the risk of low back injury in grocery stockers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Adjustable height cart reduced the probability of LBD risk during stocking of larger items.Adjustable height cart reduced sagittal flexion but increased twist motion.Adjustable cart reduced the NIOSH lifting equation indicating a safe task.Targeted intervention was marginally effective due to impact at the cart and not the shelving.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Posture,Kinematics,Ergonomic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
While the workers of the Wholesale and Retail Trade industrial sector suffer from musculoskeletal disorders at an alarming rate, there have been few investigative studies into potential effective interventions to reduce the ergonomic stress. The objective of the study was to determine whether a cart with an adjustable shelf could reduce awkward postures and motions while stocking products in a grocery store. Fifteen workers at a small grocery store in Puerto Rico completed stocking tasks with two types of carts: traditional and adjustable height cart or Ergo Cart. Trunk kinematics, LBD risk index, NIOSH lifting index, subjective ratings, and productivity indicators were collected during four typical stocking tasks. The Adjustable Ergo Cart reduced the sagittal trunk flexion by 7° and velocity by about 5°/s but increased twisting by about 2° and twist velocity by 4°/s as compared to the traditional cart. The LBD risk index was reduced by a small 2.4% in probability although greater reductions were found for larger items (e.g. bags of dog food and 2-L of Soda). The consensus among workers was that the adjustable cart would be easier to use. Overall, the study provides objective evidence that an ergonomically designed cart (e.g. adjustable height) has some potential to reduce sagittal trunk flexion, LBD risk index, and the NIOSH lift index. Overall, the results indicate that any intervention such as an adjustable cart can only have marginal effectiveness unless the entire systems perspective is considered.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During the period of 1999–2004, the retail trade sector had more than 70,000 Workers Compensation musculoskeletal disorder (MSD) claims in the state of Ohio, which accounted for about 12.5% of all claims and more than $350 billion in medical and indemnity costs (Dunning et al., 2010). The top three body regions suffering a MSD were low back (29.2%), hand/wrist (20.1%), and knee (15.1%) (Dunning et al., 2010). In 2000, according to Bureau of Labor & Statistics, there were more than 20,000 musculoskeletal disorders in grocery stores in the United States (Bureau of Labor and Statistics, 2000). More than 50% of these MSDs were linked to lifting of material in the stores (Bureau of Labor and Statistics, 2000). The injury and illness rate for retail in Puerto Rico is 3.5 per 100 full-time workers and more specifically 5.5 per 100 FT workers for grocery store workers (Bureau of Labor and Statistics, 2000). Thus, the retail and trade industry, specifically grocery stores workers, suffer from significant number of MSDs related to lifting of boxes and bags typically with varying weights.One research group reported significant loading on the spine when lifting boxes during palletizing and depalletizing of boxes, in a simulated warehouse order selector task (Marras et al., 1999a,b; Davis et al., 1998). Lifting from lower heights also was found to be more detrimental indicating the importance of lifting at mid-thigh height or above (Marras et al., 1999a,b). The bottom line is that item selectors in grocery stores handle a plethora of products while stocking shelves in the stores. In general, the stocking of shelves includes the loading of a cart with product from the temporary warehouse, transferring the cart, and unloading product onto the shelves in the store. Traditional carts have a bed that is low to the ground (less than 20 cm high) so that the product can be stacked. However, the low cart requires the stocker to bend forward significantly to place the product similar to the lower layers of a pallet, which has been shown to have the highest loads on the spine (Marras et al., 1997).One potential intervention that may have utility for the stocking of product in grocery stores is an adjustable height cart where the cart platform height starts at mid-thigh height and lowers as product is added to allow the height of the product to remain at or slightly below waist height. In order to be an effective intervention, the cart would need to reduce the awkward postures that traditionally accompany stocking of orders without influencing the productivity of the stockers. Thus, the objective of the study was to determine the effectiveness and feasibility of an adjustable cart as a potential intervention for the handling of products in a grocery store setting. Specifically, the project quantified the kinematic responses and ergonomic risk indicators (LBD risk and NIOSH lifting index) for stock handlers in a grocery store in Puerto Rico when utilizing two carts: 1) traditional low flat bed and 2) an adjustable height cart that allows product to remain at mid-thigh level or higher at the origin of the lift.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
