@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of flooring on required coefficient of friction: Elderly adult vs. middle-aged adult barefoot gait

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Barefoot gait on carpet revealed higher required coefficient of friction than vinyl flooring.The results of the present study showed different behavior between EA and MA subjects with respect to RCOF.Females presented higher RCOF values during heel contact.Friction on barefoot gait is affected by flooring types, gender and age.Carpet was the safer flooring in terms of required coefficient of friction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gait,Elderly,Barefoot,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of flooring on barefoot gait according to age and gender. Two groups of healthy subjects were analyzed: the elderly adult group (EA; 10 healthy subjects) and the middle-aged group (MA; 10 healthy subjects). Each participant was asked to walk at his or her preferred speed over two force plates on the following surfaces: 1) homogeneous vinyl (HOV), 2) carpet, 3) heterogeneous vinyl (HTV) and 4) mixed (in which the first half of the pathway was covered by HOV and the second by HTV). Two force plates (Kistler 9286BA) embedded in the data collection room floor measured the ground reaction forces and friction. The required coefficient of friction (RCOF) was analyzed. For the statistical analysis, a linear mixed-effects model for repeated measures was performed. During barefoot gait, there were differences in the RCOF among the flooring types during the heel contact and toe-off phases. Due to better plantar proprioception during barefoot gait, the EA and MA subjects were able to distinguish differences among the flooring types. Moreover, when the EA were compared with the MA subjects, differences could be observed in the RCOF during the toe-off phase, and gender differences in the RCOF could also be observed during the heel contact phase in barefoot gait.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The causes of falling are multifactorial and can be due to individual limitations, environmental conditions or the interaction of both effects. Among the individual limitations that can increase the probability of falls are balance and gait disorders, side effects of certain medications and the effects of aging (Salzman, 2010; Silva-Smith et al., 2013). In particular, many falls experienced by older adults occur when a change in body position is required, such as walking on different flooring (Soriano et al., 2007).Previous research has investigated the effects of age on the ability to walk on different flooring, e.g., carpet versus vinyl (Willmott, 1986; Dickinson et al., 2001). However, contradictory results were found depending on the gait velocity adopted while walking on these flooring types (Willmott, 1986; Dickinson et al., 2001). Willmott (1986) found that elderly people walk faster on carpet than in vinyl flooring, and the Dickinson et al. (2001) had the opposite conclusion. Changes in gait speed and step length during ambulation over different floorings may influence the outcome of slips and falls, especially for the elderly. Understanding how older adults adapt to walking on different flooring types may provide useful information for the design of interventions to reduce falls in older people.The surface roughness of the shoe and floor surfaces affects slipperiness significantly (Kim et al., 2013; Kim and Nagata, 2008, Chang et al., 2012; Lockhart et al., 2003), and dangerous slips are most likely to occur when the required coefficient of friction (RCOF) at the shoe–floor interface exceeds the available coefficient of friction of the floor (Kim et al., 2013; Kim and Nagata, 2008). The RCOF is one of the most critical gait parameters in predicting the risk of slipping (Chang et al., 2012). It is defined as the minimum coefficient of friction necessary at the shoe–floor interface to support walking, and its value relative to the available coefficient of friction is used to assess the probability of slipping (Chang et al., 2012; Redfern et al., 2001; Hanson et al., 1999). Consequently, slip severity increases as the RCOF increases above the available coefficient of friction of a floor surface (Kim et al., 2013; Kim and Nagata, 2008; Chang et al., 2012; Lockhart et al., 2003; Hanson et al., 1999).At the interface between the foot and the ground, footwear is likely to influence balance control and the risk of experiencing slips and trips while walking. The shoe type and sole material affect the available friction between the foot and the support surface. Because many falls occur when older adults walk barefoot inside their home or in a familiar environment (Menz et al., 2006), understanding their behavior while walking barefoot on different flooring should provide new insights about the risk of falls in the elderly population.In general, elderly adults walk slower than young adults, with a higher heel contact velocity and a shorter step length (Lockhart, 1997; Lockhart et al., 2003; Burnfield and Powers, 2003; Kim and Lockhart, 2006; Menz et al., 2006; Seo and Kim, 2013a,b). It has been suggested that these age-related gait adaptations influence the likelihood of slip-induced falls (Lockhart et al., 2003). Another factor that should be taken into account is gender differences. According to Lach (2005), gender is the most important covariant associated with the fear of falling. Women with balance and gait difficulty resulting in unsteadiness, multiple falls, and low self-rated health are at greatest risk (Lach, 2005).Although fall risk factors among the elderly have been well studied (Lockhart, 1997; Lockhart et al., 2003; Burnfield and Powers, 2003; Kim and Lockhart, 2006; Menz et al., 2006; Seo and Kim, 2013a,b), it could be interesting to understand the strategies adopted by middle-aged and elderly adults when walking over different flooring. We are interested in comparing older adults (60–70 years old) (O'Loughlin et al., 1994), whose risk of falling is relatively high, with a group of adults close in age (40–50 years old) with a lower risk of falling (Rubenstein and Josephson, 2002).Previous studies (Lockhart, 1997; Lockhart et al., 2003; Burnfield and Powers, 2003; Kim and Lockhart, 2006; Menz et al., 2006; Seo and Kim, 2013a,b) have assessed the gait parameters under slippery conditions and compared RCOF strategies in the elderly with control groups of young adults (20–30 years old). In this study we are considering the barefoot gait in the day-by-day flooring without slippery conditions and the aging process comparing middle aged individual with elderly individuals.The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of flooring on the RCOF during barefoot gait according to age (middle-aged versus elderly adults) and gender. We expect in this study: (a) to find differences in the RCOF variables in barefoot gait on different dry flooring; (b) differences can be observed in the RCOF when elderly adults are compared with middle-aged adults; and (c) gender differences in the RCOF can be observed during barefoot gait.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
