@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Management of personal safety risk for lever operation in mechanical railway signal boxes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
First published results on acceptable weights/forces for pulling long levers in rail mechanical signal boxes.Development of an injury risk management plan for health and safety in lever operation.Identification of lever pulling strategies and postures.Comparison of operator estimates of heavy (or difficult), medium and light lever weights/forces with actual weights.Comparison of measured lever weights and subjective estimates of risk with biomechanical modelling estimates.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rail,Signal boxes,Levers,Manual handling,Pulling force,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Despite increased implementation of computer control systems in managing and regulating rail networks, mechanical signal boxes using lever operation will be in place for years to come. A rolling risk assessment programme identified a number of levers in mechanical signal boxes within the UK rail network which potentially presented unacceptable personal safety risk to signallers. These levers operate both points and signals and the risk is primarily the weights which have to be moved when pulling and pushing the levers. Operating difficulties are often compounded by the design and condition of lever frames, the linkages to the points/signals, maintenance regimes, the workspace and the postures and strategies adopted by signallers. Lever weights were measured as from 15 kg to 180 kg at over 160 boxes, using a specially designed and constructed device. Taken together with examination of injury and sickness absence data, interviews and field observations, and biomechanical computer modelling, the measurement programme confirmed the potential risks. A risk management programme has been implemented, comprising lever weight measurement, training of operations staff, a structured maintenance regime and renewal or redesign for boxes/levers where, after maintenance, a criterion weight level is still exceeded. For a feasible management programme, the first alert (or 1st action) value for further assessment is 55 kg, a second action level requiring specified maintenance is 80–99 kg, and a third action level requiring the lever to be signed out of use is 100 kg.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For industries in complex and often safety critical environments the human factors contribution to safety is increasingly at the socio-technical systems and safety management level. It is perhaps easy to assume that all or most physical ergonomics concerns are by now fully understood in such systems and industries. Their physical health and safety potential problems may not have been entirely designed or managed out but we possibly assume that at least all the research needed to address problems of manual handling (in all its senses) has been completed.This paper concerns just such a particular physical health and safety problem which emerged whilst a rail infrastructure company was largely concerned with human error and organisational failure at a systems and safety management level. Indeed from the earliest research in rail human factors through to the current day there has been very much a concentration upon socio-cognitive issues such as train driver vigilance and attention and signals passed at danger, and signaller/controller expert strategies and mental workload (see Wilson et al., 2005, 2007, 2012). The physical health and safety problem covered in this paper exists due to the continuing use, for good operational reasons, of legacy signalling technology alongside much newer and more sophisticated operating systems. In the UK and other countries, rail network control is moving into larger, computer-based and centralised control centres and using advanced train control and traffic management systems. However, for now the signal boxes in the UK are a mix of NX (entry–exit) control panels and VDU-based systems, but also with many mechanical lever operations. Levers are used in more than 500 of Network Rail's signal boxes and centres, with between 8 and 200 levers in each. Levers are used for two main operations – setting signals and changing points.The first author (BM), an operations expert with ergonomics training, had been called to a mechanical signal box as part of a rolling programme of assessment of mental workload, irregular working and human error. What became apparent, through observation and subsequent discussion, was that signallers in that box were struggling physically to operate the levers. Over the next three years, in large part because of the investigations reported here, increasing numbers of reports of difficulty, discomfort and injury, claimed as the consequences of working with levers, were identified across the UK network. Difficulty in operating rail signal box levers is not a new phenomenon as seen from a report of early last century (and see Fig. 1):“Mrs Kathleen Willingham, 36 years old and married with children, worked from 9 a.m. until 10.30 p.m., a 91-hour week, at a level crossing near Colchester. She had to pull a very heavy lever 144 times a day. The LNER provided a stand-in for only seven hours a week ‘shopping leave’. Her application for a pay rise to compensate for taking over her husband's duties was declined. She asked to get her hours reduced but the LNER treated her as a part-time employee because she could ‘run home between trains’. They argued further that she knew the duties of the job when she accepted employment. Men were allowed to work only eight-hour shifts.” (Fig. 1).(Excerpt from article on a web site called Signal Box. (Quote and picture inFig. 1appear with permission ofWojtczak (2005)).This paper reports research initiated by the Network Rail Ergonomics Team to understand the level of physical injury risk from operating in lever frame signal boxes. This was a study to decide on whether there is a problem, the extent of it, and to set a management strategy to go forward in mitigating any risks in future. Initial observations generated research questions, the most important of these being: What is the safest method of pulling levers? What are safe limits to the weight to be operated? And what methods could be used to limit and manage any risks? The lever frame technology is particular to the railway, has been in place for a long time, and is therefore not compliant to modern standards. Moreover, there was nothing in the established literature to help in answering the questions. A project was set up to include observation and analysis of methods of lever operation, measurement of the weights being moved, and recording of environmental and other influences on the methods of operation. Data collected were to support recommendations for a programme of maintenance and modifications to those levers and frames where risk is assessed as the greatest, and of training in improved pulling techniques. It is recognised however that without a substantial longitudinal study it might be difficult to categorically attribute any signaller's injury to their work, as activities outside the workplace may have triggered or contributed to the physical problem.The paper first of all explains the background to rail signal box lever operations, reports any related literature and attempts to interpret some relevant guidance from this. Then the methods of the study are described, consisting of field observation, direct measurement, interviews and self-rating, analysis of injury and lost work time statistics, and some limited computer biomechanical modelling work. Details are then given of the management programme which Network Rail will initiate as a result. The main objective of the research and of this paper is to detail and support the development of the feasible risk management programme rather than focus on the more narrow issues of lever weights and consequent forces in the human body. It is emphasised that the risks referred to are ones of personal safety through the actions of pushing and pulling levers. Although the railway has many areas of systems safety concern, this is not one of them since the secondary safety back-up will prevent safety problems from train routing even in the event of sudden signaller injury.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has reported the development of a programme to manage the risks of injury to rail signallers using large levers in mechanical signalling boxes for the operation of signals and points. The key risk was identified early on as being the weight being moved by pulling or pushing a lever, and therefore the main need was to establish limits to such weights. However, due to the nature of the task, the moved element being fixed at one end, there being a defined arc of movement in one plane and the great variation in frequency of operation, none of the existing manual handling regulations and guidelines seemed directly applicable. For similar reasons, the literature on pushing and pulling (maximal or recommended forces) was of limited value. Therefore an innovative programme of measurement and assessment was set up. Amongst other findings, the lever pulling and pushing postures and strategies used were identified, the ability of signallers to consistently and relatively accurately distinguish light, medium and heavy levers was confirmed, and generally acceptable limits were identified for weights which should initiate alert, initiate action and lead to lever withdrawal from service. Due to the wide sample taken in the field, and the biomechanical modelling which took different genders and body sizes, there is confidence that these limits, and the other risk factors identified and communication, have provided the basis for a sound management programme. Nonetheless, until more evidence is available from the operation of the plan, and also more laboratory research has been completed, the management of injury risk is being approached with caution and the outcomes are under continual review.