@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Breakdowns in coordinated decision making at and above the incident management team level: An analysis of three large scale Australian wildfires

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Breakdowns and disconnects occur during emergency management.There are three main types of disconnects: operational, informational and evaluative.Some disconnects occur in a temporal sequence.Informational and operational disconnects were often unresolved.Unresolved disconnects may lead to impaired team functioning.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Incident management,Teamwork,Shared mental models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Emergency situations are by their nature difficult to manage and success in such situations is often highly dependent on effective team coordination. Breakdowns in team coordination can lead to significant disruption to an operational response. Breakdowns in coordination were explored in three large-scale bushfires in Australia: the Kilmore East fire, the Wangary fire, and the Canberra Firestorm. Data from these fires were analysed using a top-down and bottom-up qualitative analysis technique. Forty-four breakdowns in coordinated decision making were identified, which yielded 83 disconnects grouped into three main categories: operational, informational and evaluative. Disconnects were specific instances where differences in understanding existed between team members. The reasons why disconnects occurred were largely consistent across the three sets of data. In some cases multiple disconnects occurred in a temporal manner, which suggested some evidence of disconnects creating states that were conducive to the occurrence of further disconnects. In terms of resolution, evaluative disconnects were nearly always resolved however operational and informational disconnects were rarely resolved effectively. The exploratory data analysis and discussion presented here represents the first systematic research to provide information about the reasons why breakdowns occur in emergency management and presents an account of how team processes can act to disrupt coordination and the operational response.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wildfires11In this paper we use the term ‘wildfire’ which is considered to be synonymous with the Australian term ‘bushfire’.are both becoming more common and are increasing in complexity and duration due to factors such as climate change, increased carbon emissions and deforestation (Liu et al., 2010). Wildfires are also doing more damage in terms of mass casualties and infrastructure/economic damage (Chen et al., 2008). Increasingly wildfires require coordination between multiple agencies to provide effective response and recovery (cf. Owen et al., 2013). At the same time financial constraints from government, declining volunteer numbers, an aging workforce and workforce restructuring are presenting agencies with significant challenges (cf. Canton-Thompson et al., 2008). One consequence of this growing number of challenges in complex emergency situations is the likely increase in the frequency of degraded operational situations, breakdowns within and between teams and the occurrence of errors. This research considers three large-scale Australian wildfires and how differences in shared understanding between teams can effect coordination by interfering with situational assessment, planning, and plan execution.In Australia, large-scale wildfires are typically managed at three organisational levels: Local, Regional and State. The local level consists of personnel (many of whom are volunteers) who are at the frontline of emergency response and are responsible for direct management of the fire. Regional and State level personnel (who are typically paid staff) provide strategic support and oversight, as well as managing inter-agency coordination. Regional and state levels of coordination have been referred to as the ‘many second coordination cycle’ during incident management to reflect the larger time window for operations (Chen et al., 2008). This is distinct from the ‘mini second coordination cycle’, which refers to the local onsite response coordination and has a smaller time window for operations (Chen et al., 2008).Wildfires are typically managed using an Incident Command System (ICS), or one of its variants (Bigley and Roberts, 2001). In Australia, the Australasian Inter Service Incident Management System (AIIMS) provides an ICS framework to be used by emergency services for incidents of all sizes and it ‘provides the basis for an expanded response as an incident grows in size and complexity’ (AFAC, 2011, p. ii) (As shown in Fig. 1.). AIIMS is structured around four functions of: Planning, public information, operations, and logistics. Each of these functions can be further sub-divided (see Fig. 1). In a small wildfire an incident controller will carry out all these functions. In a larger wildfire some or all of these functions will be delegated to others, with the incident controller in overall charge of coordinating the response.Managing natural events (such as a wildfire) is arguably more challenging than managing a technical system (such as a power plant) because of the uncertainty, unpredictability, time criticality and involvement of multiple stakeholders in managing natural events (Owen and Hayes, 2014). According to Owen and Hayes (2014) when managing a natural event, emergency services personnel are required to operate in uncertain and sometimes degraded conditions, making time-critical decisions using information that may be incomplete, inconsistent, or ambiguous.Managing a natural event is also different from managing a technical system in that emergency events are often unpredictable and don't ‘play by the rules’ (Weick and Sutcliffe, 2007). Many other safety-critical domains are largely proceduralized, where safety is attained through adherence to well-established doctrine and protocols together with reflection on the way those procedures are functioning (Owen and Hayes, 2014). While these processes are important in the emergency services sector there is also a reasonable degree of flexibility in decision making required to deal with the unpredictable nature of the events (Elliott and MacPherson, 2010; Owen et al., 2013).Emergency incidents are also characterised by condensed time-lines, which means that people need to pay particular attention to the management of stress, fatigue and information-overload (Owen and Hayes, 2014). Finally, there are frequently multiple stakeholders involved in the operational response who may have differing objectives that need to be reconciled. Stakeholders in the management process may be from different emergency management agencies, but may also include people who are injured, traumatised or distressed by events (e.g., community members, Owen and Hayes, 2014).In Australia, emergency incidents (such as wildfires) are separated into three distinct levels depending on their severity (AFAC, 2011). A Level 1 incident can be resolved at the local level using the available resources on-hand. Level 2 incidents are more complex in nature due to increasing size, need for resources or community risk and can last from a few hours to several days. Level 3 incidents require divisions to be established to effectively manage sections of the incident and support from numerous external agencies. In Level 3 and some Level 2 incidents, Incident Controllers are supported by Regional and State Coordination Centers that provide strategic coordination and additional resources. We are particularly interested in Level 3 incidents in this paper where Regional and State levels of coordination are required and there is a large amount of complexity.A large scale emergency response requires a variety of implicit and explicit relationships between actors and technical systems (Johansson and Hollnagel, 2007). Effective coordination is dependent on individuals and teams of people working together to coordinate their activity through these relationships. Teams may be defined as a group of two or more people who interact dynamically, interdependently and adaptively towards the same goal (Baker and Salas, 1992). In order to coordinate effectively teams need to share information appropriately (Johansson and Holnagel, 2007; McLennan et al., 2006). To do this the team needs to have a certain amount of shared information about the knowledge, beliefs and assumptions of the team (Bigley and Roberts, 2001; Klein et al., 2005). Such information forms the shared mental models of the team and provides a basis for interactions, placing all communication in an appropriate context (Burke et al., 2006).The development and maintenance of shared mental models allows individuals in the team to interpret information and develop a shared understanding of a situation (or shared situation awareness) with other team members, which is crucial for the development of coordinated plans and actions (Bigley and Roberts, 2001; Salas et al., 2005; Burke et al., 2006; Parush and Ma, 2012). A greater overlap of shared knowledge, beliefs and assumptions has been shown to lead to better task performance and enhanced system flexibility (Marks et al., 2000; Mathieu et al., 2000; Weick and Roberts, 1993), although it is not clear how much overlap of shared knowledge is required for effective team performance (Kozlowski and Klein, 2000). This is an issue that we will not attempt to address here.While there is often a large degree of overlap between the mental models held by the team (because of familiarity; role expectations; and organizational coordination frameworks, such as AIIMS) it is also likely that subtle yet crucial differences will exist. For example, Bearman et al. (2010) have identified subtle differences in the way pilots and air traffic controllers understood concepts that were expected to be highly shared, such as operational safety. It is also the case that in dynamic situations, the shared team understanding can become degraded and needs to be continuously updated and repaired by team members (Burke et al., 2006; Klein et al., 2005; Johansson and Holnagel, 2007). Inconsistencies in the team's shared understanding set the scene for breakdowns in coordinated team functioning.A team breakdown can be defined as a situation, or state, where there is a failure in coordination, cooperation or communication due to a difference in shared meaning that leads to a temporary loss in the ability to function effectively (Bearman et al., 2010; Comfort, 2007; Wilson et al., 2007). These breakdowns can last for a short or long time and remain until the team is able to resume functionality to a typical or near typical standard.At a more fine grained level a singular instance of disparity between team members is referred to as a disconnect (Bearman et al., 2010). A breakdown state may therefore contain several disconnects between individuals or teams. Bearman et al. (2010) have identified three key types of disconnects: operational, informational and evaluative. Operational disconnects occur when there is “either a difference between the actions of one party and actions expected by the other party or a mismatch in the plans that each party has about the physical operations of the response.” (Bearman et al., 2010; pp178). Informational disconnects occur when there is a difference in information that each party possesses and evaluative disconnects occur when there is a difference in the evaluation or appraisal of information that is available to both parties (Bearman et al., 2010). Considering breakdowns in terms of disconnects allows for simple identification of recurring events that contribute to both causes and consequences of breakdowns. The focus on disconnects also highlights the different components that must be managed by the team and the potential consequences of not resolving these components, such as reduced team effectiveness. Breakdowns and disconnects are distinct from errors and can be conceptualized as temporary disruptions to team performance.A useful way to understand how breakdowns occur in teams is through a phase model of teamwork. In a phase model the team is theorized to pass through a number of stages or phases in order to solve problems or respond to opportunities (Bales and Strodtbeck, 1951). Phase models are a common way to frame the decision making of experts in naturalistic settings (Lipshitz and Bar-Ilan, 1996; Van Den Heuvel et al., 2012) and have been used by a number of Emergency Service agencies to conceptualise the tactical decision process (cf. South Australian Country Fire Service, 2011).Generally a phase model of teamwork involves the team identifying problems, building an understanding of the situation, generating possible solutions, evaluating these solutions and choosing a course of action (Lipshitz and Bar-Ilan, 1996). The Adaptive Team Performance model proposed by Burke et al. (2006) is considered to be particularly representative of teamwork phase models (Van Den Heuvel et al., 2012) and has been proposed as a suitable teamwork model for investigating strategic emergency management (Owen et al., 2013). Given our interest in the relationships between individuals in teams we have chosen a phase model of teamwork to frame the analysis rather than a more management inspired model (such as the Emergency Response Coordination Life Cycle proposed by Chen et al., 2008). Fig. 2presents a modified version of Burke et al.’s model that emphasises the cyclical nature of each phase of teamwork.Although Burke et al.’s model is concerned with team adaptability the mechanisms of the model provide an explanation of team functioning that is useful in understanding how breakdowns can interrupt the dynamic flow of teamwork by interfering with the formation of shared information and the development and execution of plans.Burke et al. proposed four main phases within the adaptation framework: situational assessment, plan formulation, plan execution and team learning, each of which has its own emphasis on shared mental models and shared situational assessment. The initial phase focuses on information gathering based on environmental cues that signal a need for change or adaptation. These cues are shared with other members of the team thus allowing others to use different perspectives to aid in the formation of a shared mental representation of the unfolding event. This shared perspective allows individual team members to predict and identify future states and cues regarding the actions of other members.The situation assessment stage is followed by the plan formulation stage which uses information gathered in the previous stage to shape team strategies. This includes setting goals, attributing tasks and responsibilities, clarifying expectations and sharing task related requirements amongst team members (Stout and Salas, 1993). Sharing a plan allows individuals to align with a mutual goal, thus both shared mental models and team situational assessment are strengthened. Similarly the plan execution stage uses this shared goal to drive member actions towards the shared outcome. This provides benefits in regards to increased ability to monitor performance and assist team members due to a shared understanding of the outcomes. The final phase is team learning, which facilitates the development of a common understanding about lessons learned within the team. It also incorporates past team experience in the development of future strategies.Burke et al.’s model provides a useful tool that identifies where disconnects can occur but also how they may impact on future phases of team activity. A disconnect that occurs during the situational assessment phase for example, would be highly likely to negatively impact the subsequent plan formulation, plan execution and team learning phases due to the dynamic cyclical nature of the model. It also shows how important team elements interact and feed back into the framework at various stages to allow for adaptive team performance.The research presented here investigates the way that coordinated decision making breaks down at the incident management team level and above in three separate large scale fires in Australia (the Kilmore East fire, Victoria, 2009; the Wangary fire, South Australia, 2005; and the Canberra Firestorm, ACT, 2003). Of particular interest is the response of team members to these breakdowns and disconnects and whether the disconnects were resolved.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
