@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using Signal Detection Theory and Time Window-based Human-In-The-Loop simulation as a tool for assessing the effectiveness of different qualitative shapes in continuous monitoring tasks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Our findings suggest design principles for continuous monitoring multi-task environments in oil and gas refineries.Combinations of flow and level gauge shapes and a small set size promote effective performance.Combinations of pressure and temperature gauge shapes and a large set size elicit ineffective performance.In general, a smaller set size will elicit faster and more sensitive performance.However, smaller set sizes elicit more false alarms so the cost of false alarms must be considered in the design.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Signal Detection Theory,Human-In-The-Loop simulation,Continuous monitoring task,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper provides a case study of Signal Detection Theory (SDT) as applied to a continuous monitoring dual-task environment. Specifically, SDT was used to evaluate the independent contributions of sensitivity and bias to different qualitative gauges used in process control. To assess detection performance in monitoring the gauges, we developed a Time Window-based Human-In-The-Loop (TWHITL) simulation bed. Through this test bed, we were able to generate a display similar to those monitored by console operators in oil and gas refinery plants. By using SDT and TWHITL, we evaluated the sensitivity, operator bias, and response time of flow, level, pressure, and temperature gauge shapes developed by Abnormal Situation Management® (ASM®) Consortium (www.asmconsortium.org). Our findings suggest that display density influences the effectiveness of participants in detecting abnormal shapes. Furthermore, results suggest that some shapes elicit better detection performance than others.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
User-centered design of a process monitoring display is important for supporting proactive monitoring by console operators, which not only prevents critical mistakes, but also improves users' acceptance and satisfaction level (Quintana et al., 2012). Recently, a significant challenge of the information age is overcoming the information gap between data produced and information needed (Endsley, 2009). Advanced technology provides an almost unlimited ability to instantly process data while human's abilities to simultaneously understand this data is limited. This problem is exacerbated when an operator has a very high workload. Console operators in oil and gas refineries are a good example of workers that experience a high workload task. Most control room operators are responsible for continuously monitoring at least 200 control loops for long periods of time (Tharanathan et al., 2012). A high level of sensitivity for detecting a process parameter deviating outside of normal variation is necessary to safely manage a plant. For that reason, the Abnormal Situation Management Joint Research and Development Consortium (ASM Consortium) initiated a Visual Thesaurus project to research and create a set of graphical objects that can support operator monitoring tasks. In 2006, the Visual Thesaurus research began by creating the set of graphical shapes (Peter Bullemer, 2009). In 2007, the research team focused on the effectiveness of the 2006 Visual Thesaurus objects to support proactive monitoring. To measure the accuracy of change detection, Geoffrey Ho and his research team used Signal Detection Theory (Geoffrey Ho, 2008). Based on this result, an illustrative Overview Display (OD) was designed for an actual coker process plant at one of the consortium members' refinery sites (see Fig. 1).The limitation of 2007 Visual Thesaurus research was the team conducted an experiment based on the single-task environment. The experiment was held in a dark room, where the only source of light was the computer monitor. This is an unrealistic condition for console operators in oil and gas refinery plants because they commonly perform other work activities while monitoring their process displays. There is a significant difference between the single-task and the dual-tasks environment to detect process deviation from normal range. According to Bundesen's TVA (Theory of Visual Attention), visual search performance can be influenced by the strength of the visual stimuli as well as the perceptual decision bias (Bundesen, 1990). In the dual-task environment, the model of visual attention should include switching time between the dual-tasks for changing parameters compared to the single-task environment (Logan and Gordon, 2001) because the requirement to switch from one task to another task creates an emergent need to organize and schedule the elementary, subordinate processes (Allport et al., 1994). Hence, in the dual-task environment, operators must quickly switch their attention from one task to the other in order to keep pace with performance for both tasks continuously (1972). In addition, the usage of channels of visual information (referred to as foveal and peripheral vision) in dual-tasks interference is different compared to single-task interference (Wickens, 2002). Human observers use foveal and peripheral vision based on the location of the subject (Thorpe et al., 2001). These visions are working together to produce the entire visual perception. Foveal vision is required in order to look at the subject with high acuity. Peripheral vision is the region outside a person's gaze. Peripheral vision consists of parafoveal, mid-peripheral, and far peripheral vision (Rayner et al., 1981). For that reason, there is a significant difference between the single-task and dual-task in most visual scanning environment.To create a more realistic testing environment using a dual-task assessment approach was developed to reflect the control room task environment to the participants (Tharanathan et al., 2010). Tharanathan and his colleagues used a flag-matching task for the additional task because this task demanded the use of similar cognitive resources as needed when performing typical console operations activities. The results showed that operators' situation awareness was significantly higher when they monitored the process on the OD compared to a traditional display in the dual-task test environment (Tharanathan et al., 2010). However, they could not evaluate the effectiveness (e.g. sensitivity, operator's bias, and operator's response time) of change detection in different graphical gauge shapes. In order to supplement the limitations of these previous Visual Thesaurus research, we developed the Time Window-based Human-In-The-Loop (TWHITL) simulation test bed and focused on evaluating the effectiveness of the abnormality detection in process changes at flow, level, pressure, and temperature shapes from Visual Thesaurus in the dual-task test environment.The purpose of this research effort is to investigate the impact of shapes and display density on the following:•detection effectiveness in terms of sensitivity (d’) and bias (β);detection response times;perceived workload; andperformance on the secondary task.Process monitoring displays using qualitative shapes can become very dense when showing a large number of process parameters. Based on the rationale of the visual attention difference between single-task and dual-task environment, the performance of both tasks might be significantly influenced by the increment of the display density level of the primary monitoring task. In our experiment, display density was manipulated using different set sizes for the display. Set size refers to the number of shapes that were in the display. Time Window-based Human-In-The-Loop (TWHITL) simulation provided different levels of set size.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
