@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intense illumination in the morning hours improved mood and alertness but not mental performance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
High intensity illumination negatively impacted sustained attention.Melatonin suppression was not altered as a result of the brief bright light exposure.Bright light induced an increase in subjective mood and alertness, which dim light did not.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sustained attention,Bright light exposure,Melatonin,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cognitive performance and alertness are two determinants for work efficiency, varying throughout the day and depending on bright light. We conducted a prospective crossover study evaluating the impacts of exposure to an intense, early morning illumination on sustained attention, alertness, mood, and serum melatonin levels in 33 healthy individuals. Compared with a dim illumination, the intense illumination negatively impacted performance requiring sustained attention; however, it positively impacted subjective alertness and mood and had no impact on serum melatonin levels. These results suggest that brief exposure to bright light in the morning hours can improve subjective measures of mood and alertness, but can also have detrimental effects on mental performance as a result of visual distraction. Therefore, it is important that adequate lighting should correspond to both non-visual and visual demands.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With its increasing economic and social demands, the Western world has developed more and more into a meritocracy, desiring the optimum in almost every aspect of life, no matter the time of day or night, demanding top performance and productivity, particularly in the working sector. Many factors, such as fatigue and the duration and quality of sleep, account for the quality of work performance. Excessive sleepiness is one major cause of sleep-related errors in tasks requiring cognitive performance (Haavisto et al., 2010) and accounts for many accidents in driving professions (Braeckman et al., 2011). Selective attention contributes to mental performance and is therefore decisive for work efficiency (Spaeth et al., 2012) and safety (Rajaratnam and Arendt, 2001). In order to adapt to exogenous factors, most endogenous processes vary in a distinct circadian pattern, determining the quality of psychological and physical performance, including performance that requires alertness (Monk et al., 1997; Carrier and Monk, 2000; Wright et al., 2002).Blue light with 420–480 nm wavelengths has a strong biological impact (Revell et al., 2006) and influences cognitive as well as physical performance (Dollins et al., 1993; Fraschini et al., 1999; Atkinson et al., 2003). Daytime absence of short wavelength light was proven to phase delay sleep onset (Figueiro and Rea, 2010). However, light of long wavelength seems to have stronger effects on brain activity associated with alertness as compared to short wavelength in the afternoon hours (Sahin and Figueiro, 2013). Light acts in the intrinsic photosensitive ganglion cells of the retina through melatonin and its metabolites (Zeitzer et al., 2000), which are strongly involved in the circadian variations of rhythmic physiological systems (Cajochen et al., 2003), as well as performance (Chellappa et al., 2011). Exposure to bright light (BL) causes cognitive and behavioural changes not only during the biological night (Lockley et al., 2006), but also during the day (Sahin and Figueiro, 2013). Brief exposure to light enhances thalamic and frontal and parietal activities that affect fatigue (Lockley et al., 2006; Vandewalle et al., 2006, 2007a,b). The extent of the physiological changes depends on whether the light exposure occurs before or after the midday hours (Lockley et al., 2006). Dynamical lighting systems with variations in illumination and colour temperature are proposed to benefit productivity and health (van Bommel, 2006; Hoffmann et al., 2008). BL interventions can be effective for treating depressive disorders, especially seasonal ones (Terman and Terman, 2005); they can also positively affect cognitive (Lockley et al., 2006; Vandewalle et al., 2006, 2007a,b) as well as physical (Kantermann et al., 2012) functions in healthy individuals.Besides those inputs from the circadian system (light and melatonin level), homeostatic factors, and most importantly, the elapsed time since awakening, must be taken into consideration for day-dependent variations; because circadian factors and homeostatic factors interact strongly with one another (Carrier and Monk, 2000). The time of the start of work and/or the time of awakening determine the amount of perceived sleepiness (Kecklund and Akerstedt, 1995; Braeckman et al., 2011).Recently it was shown that 1 h of exposure to bright, white light in the morning not only advances sleep and wake-up parameters, but also affects cognitive performance and alertness (Corbett et al., 2012), amending previous research and suggesting that an adequately applied light intervention could positively affect alertness, and thus performance, at work. We hypothesised that a brief, early morning BL intervention would effectively enhance attention, alertness, and mood parameters and, additionally, would cause a decrease in serum melatonin levels.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
