@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A case study of the implementation of an ergonomics improvement committee in a Brazilian hospital – Challenges and benefits

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Improvement committees (ICs) can elevate the discussion of ergonomics in the organizational structure.ICs allow workers to engage effectively in these processes, in an emancipatory perspective.ICs do not have to provide answers for everyone, but should be of a more political nature.ICs should be given strategic prominence in order to facilitate ergonomic changes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Macroergonomics,Improvement committees,Work organization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article discusses the creation of an improvement committee (IC) to implement policies aimed at improving working conditions in a public health institution in the city of São Paulo. Suggestions were proposed for future implementations of this organizational mechanism, pursuant to the presentation of the process of its formation and the main results achieved. The findings led to the conclusion that good outcomes require autonomy and support from management, and the adoption of effective measures to improve and legitimize the improvement committee's existence. Another important issue is facilitating worker involvement and creating a locus for dialog among people with different visions within the organization. Thus, two approaches converge: a top-down approach in which policies are defined and improvement actions are actually implemented based on a general outlook of the production and work system, and a bottom-up approach specific to employees who are also engaged in improvement policies and in putting them into practice. It is also possible to point out problems and opportunities arising from actual work situations to the higher levels of management. This kind of approach fits with macroergonomics, because it integrates strategy, organization and work issues. It is possible to discuss the benefits of this approach for companies and provide conditions for workers to engage effectively in these processes. In conclusion, these proposals can be considered from an emancipatory perspective, given that different actors should be able to codetermine working conditions and work content, thus directly influencing their individual and collective experiences. The support and commitment of upper management are essential elements of success in maximizing the effectiveness of this organizational approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The purpose of this article is to describe and analyze an experience in implementing an improvement committee (IC) at a university hospital in Brazil. Based on a macroergonomic perspective, what can be learned about implementing an improvement committee in a healthcare organization and about its role and impacts? The principal aim of this paper is to describe the process that led to the formation of an improvement committee in an organization and to analyze the interest in implementing this kind of organizational approach in order to achieve benefits for the organization as well as for workers. The point of view supported by this paper is that the improvement of working conditions is an issue not limited to specialists, since different actors within production systems have contrasting experiences and can contribute to those processes, as proposed by various macroergonomics-based participatory approaches and activity-centered ergonomics. As such, a focus of this paper is the role played by hospital management, technical divisions, supervisors, and workers directly involved in different operations.The main requirement for the intervention that served as the basis for this case study was to incorporate an ergonomic approach into institutional policies and into the organizational structure, given that various improvement actions proposed in the past produced only partial, limited or short-term results. This was attributed to the fact that ergonomics was not a reference for conceiving tasks and production processes (Seim and Broberg, 2010).One of the concepts of macroergonomics is the implementation of ergonomics committees to address issues that go beyond purely workplace-based approaches. Work design must be treated at a broader level (Haro and Kleiner, 2008; Hendrick and Kleiner, 2001; Hendrick, 2005; Imada and Carayon, 2008). Implementing this type of mechanism is essential for participatory processes, just as it is central to an activity-centered ergonomics approach (Wisner, 1997; Guérin et al., 2001; Falzon, 2004). Participatory processes are considered essential for obtaining better and more permanent results (Haines et al., 2002; Hendrick and Kleiner, 2001). Participatory approaches consider that workers have different kinds of knowledge about the reality of the work they do, and their engagement is important for analysis and to devise solutions (Daniellou, 2004).Innovating within the organizational structure is a major challenge for companies (Nelson, 1991). One possible innovation is the establishment of committees. Snook (1993) defines committees as working groups that may be permanent or temporary, usually composed of people from different areas who share common goals, such as the completion of specific projects or the management of a process that involves many areas. Committees in an organization, for example, aim to increase productivity and efficiency (Sajjadi et al., 2011) as well as quality (Jiang et al., 2009). Committees can also be established to address health and safety issues or to devise improvements aimed at providing the conditions required for workers to develop professionally and safeguard their health.Ergonomics can be introduced into organizations through one or more specialized professionals or by specialized departments. However, the scope and size of projects, as well as the number of workers involved, have revealed the need to bring together a larger number of professionals from different areas of expertise. When the field of ergonomics was expanded to include organizational design, new corporate initiatives for the organizational implementation of ergonomics were introduced, which included ergonomics committees – EC (Hagg, 2003), a type of improvement committee. The EC is an application that is set up according to the needs and opportunities of each specific situation. Improvement committees deal with safety and health problems, but their purpose is to provide a broader view of working issues, relating them to strategic decisions rather than leaving the discussion to specialist groups, such as ergonomics teams.Ergonomics committees have been established in different business sectors to address different requirements and purposes (see Table 1).One or more committees may be established, depending on the size of the company and the number of manufacturing plants. In larger companies, two types of committee are introduced at different organizational levels, with a central committee responsible for the overall activities and other local committees with operational responsibilities (Hagg, 2003; Moore and Garg, 1998; Silverstein et al., 1991). Up to three types of committees with separate but complementary mandates can be introduced in a large-scale project (Villeneuve et al., 2007). It is also possible to have two different structures working cooperatively: a steering committee and a technical committee. The former, which defines the project guidelines and makes strategic decisions, comprises all the key stakeholders and should be clearly supported by senior management (Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007; Villeneuve et al., 2007). The technical committee is responsible for designing and carrying out the project. It is also useful to propose a user committee in order to define requirements and offer informed opinions about the design proposals, based on executives' and workers' expertise in the field (Villeneuve et al., 2007).The participants in ECs (divided among committees of different levels) are from heterogeneous areas. According to Marras (1997), there should be a balanced representation of management and workforce, and it is advisable to have the presence of people involved in the physical layout of the work area, who are empowered to control scheduling. ECs may include ergonomists (Hagg, 2003; Moore and Garg, 1998; St-Vincent et al., 1998) and representatives from the plant manager's staff and health and safety, medical, engineering, and maintenance sectors (Silverstein et al., 1991; Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007). Engineers responsible for projects and other professionals may also play a helpful role in the articulation of different viewpoints. There should also be an initial training phase to help the committee gain an understanding of ergonomics and foster more effective dialogue among the members, as ergonomics is not the only concern at hand – there is also the challenge of exchanging experiences and developing a common and shared language (More and Garg, 1998; St-Vincent et al., 1998; Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007).ECs are proposed based on needs identified by top management and are chaired by individuals at senior management levels (Acosta and Morales, 2008; Marras, 1997; Moore and Garg, 1998; Villeneuve et al., 2007). However, in some cases, they are implemented based on a middle-out and bottom-up vision (policies drawn up with the participation of operational workers), in which one of the priorities is to facilitate information collected from the workplace to be discussed by the participants (St-Vincent et al., 1998; Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007). It is possible to have a dedicated professional within the organization, whose role is that of coordinator and facilitator. This responsibility may, but does not necessarily have to, be taken on by an ergonomist (St-Vincent et al., 1998; Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007; Dul and Neumann, 2009; Seim and Broberg, 2010). The participation of specialists from outside the company may be necessary in some situations – for example, to assist in the implementation of the EC or to answer specific questions.The proper functioning of the EC depends on a number of important elements. Top management commitment from the beginning of the project and its continued support are crucial (Neumann et al., 2009; Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007; Villeneuve et al., 2007). The success of this type of program depends not only on statements (words), but also on making financial resources available and on providing access to company information (Marras, 1997; Hendrick, 2003).Dul and Neumann (2009) state that linking ergonomics to the company's strategy can give managers greater “positive” motivation to apply ergonomics and to potentiate its impacts. In a top-down approach, it is top management that can act upon organizational factors, which, according to Ku and Smith (2010), have a direct impact on the social aspects and welfare of the people in the organization.Hasle and Jensen (2006) show that more effective results are achieved when professionals linked to health and safety change their mode of action in companies and act as agents of transformation. Dawson and Jensen (2001) discuss experiences that produced interesting results, such as the “experimentarium,” which focuses on problem-based learning rather than on the development of specific projects. In a similar context, Mathiesen and Hvenegaard (2001) focus on workers' participation in discussing broader issues, and their contribution to more strategic decisions in cooperation with managers is a major challenge, given that, while such participation could be beneficial, worker attitudes, views and responsibilities differ from those of management.Maggi (2006) describes worker empowerment from an emancipatory perspective, meaning that favoring actions that enable workers to engage actively in these processes could result in better implementation of ergonomic projects, which underscores the importance of combining a bottom-up and top-down approach. Dejours (2008) states that a path toward emancipation is the effective participation of individuals in organizations that encourage rather than discourage cooperation, enabling individuals to participate in in-house deliberation processes (Dejours, 2009). According to Torma-Krajewski et al. (2007), people should feel they are part of the process so as to ensure the success of endeavors such as ergonomics committees, preventing procrastination and the delegation of responsibilities. Another reason for encouraging emancipation is that people possess crucial information about their own work (although their knowledge is sometimes not explicit or underpinned by a specific rationale) and should therefore participate actively in studies and in improving processes (Abrahão et al., 2009; Falzon, 2004). These authors believe it is important to obtain more specific knowledge about what people actually face in work situations, and to improve participatory processes.Not only participation but also employee involvement seems to drive satisfaction and could potentiate positive results. However, the outcomes of interventions in this field are difficult to assess because of numerous variables and the lack of adequate data (Morag and Luria, 2013). Another difficulty is that modifications in work situations do not immediately produce tangible changes in companies.Facilitating communication among people from different areas of the organization allows for more successful projects, favoring an alignment that starts with employees providing information and assistance in decision-making processes (Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007). To this end, similarly to the “workspace design” group proposed by Seim and Broberg (2010), the IC must work autonomously and be a bureaucracy-free means of dissemination in the organizational structure, a place of dialogue among people from different organizational levels and a catalyst for improvement actions.The IC experiences that have been described were all introduced at institutions operating under quite traditional and functionalist forms of organization. In every case, the implementation of ICs was adapted to the needs of the institution, albeit without attempting to change its organizational structure. The experience analyzed in this article contributes to the discussion about ensuring organization alignment in order to attain better outcomes in IC implementation programs. The proposal here is based on a less functional and more integrated and organic IC that empowers people to make decisions about their work. Empowerment and autonomous decision-making processes should be considered part of an emancipatory path for everyone, enabling them to improve their specific working situation regardless of their hierarchical position in the organization.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The topic discussed in this article is challenging and should be considered from a complex point of view. During the development of this work, numerous variables affected the success (or failure) of the implementation of sustainable and far-reaching ergonomic actions. Other elements could have been examined and analyzed in greater depth in this study, but many of them were not perceived at the time of implementation, and were only understood more clearly afterward. The focus was on a number of prioritized elements, seeking to stay as close as possible to the points of view expressed by the participants in the project. Other elements could emerge with a more extended longitudinal approach, for example, considering the possibility of analyzing the outcomes several months or years after the IC experience was concluded. One of the main reasons for discontinuing the IC was the change in the composition of the hospital board. The new managers did not see eye to eye with their predecessors and did not propose to continue the experience. What effectively remained as a policy in the organization?Our results demonstrate the potential for the adoption of macroergonomics and activity-centered ergonomics in the development of improvement actions in a company. Some results obtained through the actions of the IC indicate that profound changes can be fostered in terms of enriching different points of view and effectively implementing work transformations and improvements. The challenge lies in ensuring longer continuity of actions and their dissemination throughout the institution.As for the main objectives of this paper, which include discussing the experience of an improvement committee project in a specific institution, it is important to analyze the achievements and difficulties faced by participants. First of all, the main outcomes clearly indicated the need to create an effective policy to discuss and improve working conditions, given that most of the actions adopted before the IC was set up were isolated and not tied to an overall strategic view. The work developed by the IC so far shows that the main problems the participants face, as well as the difficulties in disseminating the policy to others in the organization, stems from the fact that no other organizational changes were introduced. For example, the participants did not have sufficient time to develop actions related to the committee's aims, ergo, the IC's main suggestions were not implemented. Another problem was the fact that this experience could be considered a top-down policy, since there was no demand from the workers for a more equitable participatory approach that would include different workers directly involved in the hospital's operations. However, even if this experience cannot be deemed an unqualified success, it is important to stress that it shows a new stance on the part of managers, since they implemented and sustained the initiatives, at least at first. Another positive aspect is the fact that other actors in the hospital understood the need to introduce changes in working conditions and work content. Those issues should be addressed starting from the first steps in the conception and design of processes related to the production system.To achieve these goals for future projects, it will be essential for the highest echelons of the hierarchy in the organizational structure to be engaged, since implementing new ergonomics-based work-related policies is not a simple action. This is not a process to be overseen solely by ergonomics specialists, but rather a political process that must be supported by different stakeholders. Another point worth mentioning is that workers believe in concrete and effective changes and quickly notice if their efforts are meaningful. Confidence is also important, constituting an intangible value resulting from actions related to board efforts that focus on the quality of working life and health, as well as improvements in production quality and productivity aligned with a sustainable perspective of social, economic and environmental issues.