@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Time pressure and regulations on hospital-in-the-home (HITH) nurses: An on-the-road study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined time pressure in hospital-in-the-home nurses while they were driving.Time pressure has a negative impact on both the nurses' driving and their emotions.Time constraints are neither necessary nor sufficient to elicit time pressure.The challenges and uncertainty associated with healthcare and driving are relevant.Anticipated and in situ regulations may reduce uncertainties and negative emotions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Time pressure,Driving,Nurses,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study investigated both causal factors and consequences of time pressure in hospital-in-the-home (HITH) nurses. These nurses may experience additional stress from the time pressure they encounter while driving to patients' homes, which may result in greater risk taking while driving. From observation in natural settings, data related to the nurses' driving behaviours and emotions were collected and analysed statistically; semi-directed interviews with the nurses were analysed qualitatively. The results suggest that objective time constraints alone do not necessarily elicit subjective time pressure. The challenges and uncertainty associated with healthcare and the driving period contribute to the emergence of this time pressure, which has a negative impact on both the nurses' driving and their emotions. Finally, the study focuses on anticipated and in situ regulations. These findings provide guidelines for organizational and technical solutions allowing the reduction of time pressure among HITH nurses.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many nurses work for Hospital-In-The-Home (HITH) organizations. Although research has compared the efficacy of care between HITH and traditional hospitals (Sheppard and Illife, 1998; Macintyre et al., 2002; Crilly et al., 2011; Duke et al., 2012; Sears et al., 2013), few studies have investigated the impact of HITH organizations on nurses' well-being.HITH nurses' well-being may be reduced by time pressure, which is a widespread problem with some specificity to technologically advanced countries (Szollos, 2009). The aims of the current study were to investigate factors that elicited time pressure in HITH nurses and examine the deleterious consequences of time pressure. The present study focused on the regulations that were used to address the different types of identified constraints. Activity analyses and interviews were performed in a French HITH organization. We focused on work-related trips because driving is a major component of HITH nurses' job. It was expected that the emotional impact of time pressure would be easier to observe during driving than during care.HITH services appeared a more than fifty years ago (or less depending on the country) and have gradually been affirmed in the health care landscape (Caplan et al., 1999) because they respond to increases in the lifespan and the lack of institutional facilities available to support ageing and/or sick populations (Hyde et al., 2000). Research suggests that HITH is safe, efficacious and feasible for patients with medical illnesses who would otherwise require hospital care (Leff et al., 2005). Thus, HITH is a concrete alternative to hospitalization (Bricon-Souf et al., 2005; Montalto, 1999). However, HITH nurses are not only care providers but also travelling workers. Therefore, both activities can affect their emotional health.HITH nurses benefit from increased independence compared to nurses who work in the hospital by “moving away from the hierarchical constraints of the hospital structure” (Duke and Street, 2003, pp 855). They also benefit from a more sociable network (Purkis, 2001). Nevertheless, these nurses, similar to those who work in hospitals, encounter an unfavourable ratio between demands and resources, which increases the probability that they will experience professional stress (Garrosa et al., 2011; Lewis et al., 2010; Selye, 1976). Time pressure is one such stressor (Hasson and Arnetz, 2008; Rutledge et al., 2009), and the chronic time pressure and stress relationship may result in burnout (Demerouti et al., 2000; Teng et al., 2010).HITH nurses (and other home caregivers) encounter the same constraints faced by other workers who drive for work as a secondary task. Although driving time is often considered in the calculation of working hours, it is sometimes considered non-productive time by the drivers themselves (Gressel and Munduteguy, 2008). Consequently, drivers often simultaneously perform additional tasks, such as completing paperwork and arranging visits, thus transforming their cars into mobile offices (Eost and Flyte, 1998; Forrierre and Six, 2010). They also seek to reduce the time spent on the road by using either safe or potentially dangerous strategies, which reflects the importance that drivers give to the activities that will be performed at their destinations. Risk-taking increases under time pressure, which frequently occurs in these populations (Charbotel et al., 2010; Salminen and Lähdeniemi, 2002) and may be related to the emotional and cognitive consequences of such pressure (Cœugnet et al., 2013a, b; Naveteur et al., 2013; O'Brien et al., 2004; Sagberg, 2007). HITH nurses who prioritize patient care and time in the patients' home may be particularly affected by time pressure at the wheel.HITH nurses may encounter time pressure related to care overload and urgency or to traffic (Andersen et al., 2015). Thus, it is important to clearly define time pressure. Time pressure may result from an unfavourable contrast between the amount of time that is available and the amount of time that is required to complete a task (Rastegary and Landy, 1993; Svenson and Benson, 1993). This perspective primarily views time constraints as chronometric dynamic parameters that can be objectified (e.g., a deadline), regardless of precision (e.g., having to complete a task or a series of tasks “before 5 PM” or “as soon as possible”). However, strong time constraints cannot fully explain time pressure because it is naturally subjective. Time pressure also depends on challenges that are linked to an activity and the value that this activity has for the individual, which is called the “sense of activity” (Cœugnet et al., 2011; Daniellou, 2005). Moreover, Rastegary and Landy (1993) argued that time pressure only arises when people believe that a deadline is mandatory and that being late would result in sanctions. Thus, time pressure should be viewed in the context of activity (considered in a broad meaning) to determine how different factors affect its expression. The HITH study presented below acknowledges this broader ergonomic approach.Uncertainty is related to stress (Lazarus, 1984) and is a main characteristic of nurses' work environment (see for instance, Conley Wichowski, 1994; Cranley et al., 2009, 2012; Green et al., 2015). Research on call centre employees (Ribert-Van De Weerdt, 2011) and aircraft systems operators (Liu et al., 2015) suggests that uncertainty may contribute to time pressure, with similar effects reported for drivers (Cœugnet et al., 2011, 2013a, b). Uncertainty, which can be related to goal achievement or to available resources, can arise because an event is unpredictable or because an expected event may occur at an unknown time. Both uncertainties are applicable to nurses and may be deleterious because they prevent anticipatory regulations development (Jobidon et al., 2005).In the framework of French speaking ergonomics, regulations are mostly considered in reference to Wiener's cybernetic theory (1948), Ashby's system theory (1970), and Piaget's notion of biological regulation (1967) as “retro-active control which maintains balance relative to an organized structure or to an organization in construction” (Piaget, 1967, p.239, translation Leplat, 1994; see also Leplat, 1977, 2001, 2006). According to Leplat (2006), the human operator can not only regulate the process under control but also his own activity to optimize his well-being, his own performance and the system's performance. Two regulation modes can be used. Reactive/retroactive regulations are based on feedback about the realization of activity. Workers can also use proactive/anticipatory regulations to prevent potential difficulties and keep a sufficient amount of resources to complete actions. In the case of work activities, Leplat (1994) proposes that those regulations can be individual and/or collective.By studying a group of HITH nurses during their rounds, the present research intended (1) to provide convergent evidence that time pressure is naturally subjective and is related to unfavourable time constraints, challenges and uncertainties. This study also (2) assessed the perceived emotions and behavioural consequences concomitant with time pressure while driving. Finally, this research sought (3) to identify some anticipated or in situ regulations that could be used to address time constraints and alleviate time pressure and its consequences.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Time pressure is a subjective state. HITH nurses experienced time pressure due to (1) time constraints as well as (2) the challenges and (3) the uncertainties that they encountered during their professional activities. This time pressure resulted in negative emotions and led HITH nurses to take more risks on the road.Our quantitative and qualitative data suggests strategies for improving HITH nurses' well-being when they experience the negative effects of time pressure. An activity analysis should (1) determine whether nurses have sufficient room to manoeuvre, (2) determine whether there is enough organizational effort to reduce uncertainties, (3) qualify the available social support and, if required, examine the efficacy of conflict management within the organization. If there are weaknesses, efforts should be made to make organizational or technical improvements. These measures did not appear necessary in Santélys, where time pressure was not associated with stress and burnout. In contrast, Van de Weerdt and Baratta (2011) described this relationship in a homecare organization in which professionals had no room to manoeuvre and were not allowed to communicate with their colleagues during rounds. This contrast suggests that increasing managerial pressure, as is often done in French health services, has negative effects on occupational health. Finally, it is important to allow nurses to reduce time constraints and time pressure through anticipated collective regulation. In situ individual regulations can also be strengthened to reduce risk taking during driving. For example, a cooperative mobile application that is intended for nurses, could provide nurses with additional room to manoeuvre by indicating (1) the geographic location of other nurses, (2) the number of remaining patients to visit by the team, and (3) whether the nurses are on time, late or early. This would give nurses an opportunity to change their rounds due to new information (e.g., a patient left the hospital, additional blood tests are requested, or road work or traffic jams) and it would provide the nurse with “emotional” reassurance that a colleague could possibly visit one of her/his patients if she/he is late. According Stuckey et al. (2007), these solutions can be classified as part of the organizational environment and highlight occupational light vehicle use.