@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An ergonomics based design research method for the arrangement of helicopter flight instrument panels

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Integrated value of a display is better understood by users than the degree of importance and degree of frequency of use.UCIAM–User Centered Interface Arrangement Methodology is a new technique for user-interface arrangement.Locational Value of a Display, Sub-Areas of the Display Panel are new concepts to analyze paper prototypes.Functional Grouping of Displays is an intuitive concept for expert users.Sequence of use is not applicable in the context of display reading.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
User-centered design,Helicopter flight instrument panel,User-interface arrangement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we study the arrangement of displays in flight instrument panels of multi-purpose civil helicopters following a user-centered design method based on ergonomics principles. Our methodology can also be described as a user-interface arrangement methodology based on user opinions and preferences. This study can be outlined as gathering user-centered data using two different research methods and then analyzing and integrating the collected data to come up with an optimal instrument panel design. An interview with helicopter pilots formed the first step of our research. In that interview, pilots were asked to provide a quantitative evaluation of basic interface arrangement principles. In the second phase of the research, a paper prototyping study was conducted with same pilots. The final phase of the study entailed synthesizing the findings from interviews and observational studies to formulate an optimal flight instrument arrangement methodology. The primary results that we present in our paper are the methodology that we developed and three new interface arrangement concepts, namely relationship of inseparability, integrated value and locational value. An optimum instrument panel arrangement is also proposed by the researchers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
User-interfaces constitute the conceptual space where information and force are interchanged between the user and the machine for the operation of a man-machine system. This interaction is vital for a safe, effective and comfortable operation of every man-machine system. The goal and the structure of a user-interface varies according to the type of the product or system. With technological advancements, user-interfaces become more complex with new functions and components. In general, air transport vehicles have more complex user-interfaces than most other modes of transport due to safety concerns and the complexity of their underlying technological infrastructure. As a complex machine, the helicopter is a good example for such a transport vehicle. Lovesey (1975) defines the helicopter pilot as an operator who works under most difficult circumstances because of the helicopter's high maneuverability, instability of its technological nature and resulting control difficulties and problems.As rotary-wing aircrafts, helicopters have significant technological and usage advantages compared to fixed-wing aircraft. These advantages are the primary factors that led to their increased usage. Its vertical landing and takeoff capability and high maneuverability allows the helicopter to be used in a wide range of purposes such as search-and-rescue, firefighting, television broadcast, air-ambulance, film and documentary production and air-taxis. However, despite the wide use of helicopters, methods used in the design and arrangement of the flight instrument panels of rotary wing aircraft are old.There are three main goals in this research:▪Goal 1: To investigate the role of basic principles of user-interface design of Sanders and McCormick (1993), in the context of flight instrument panel arrangements of civil helicopters.Goal 2: To develop a new methodology to optimize display arrangements of flight instrument panels of civil helicopters, based on users' opinions and assessmentsGoal 3: To identify new concepts which will play a role in the arrangement methodology developed.Two different research methods constituted the structure of the research. In the first stage interviews were conducted individually with helicopter pilots. In this stage interface arrangement principles of Sanders and McCormick (1993) were investigated as well as pilots' personal experiences and opinions. These basic principles, which are generalized principles for all types of user-interfaces, are well established and accepted for decades in the field of ergonomics. The rationale behind the investigation of these principles is to explore their role in the arrangement of helicopter flight instrument panels as well as in the development of the new arrangement methodology. This part of the research provided verbal and quantitative data. A paper prototyping study constituted the second stage of the research. In this stage, the pilots that were previously interviewed were asked to generate their own instrument panel arrangements. The paper prototyping stage of the research provided visual and quantitative as well as verbal data. The data resulting from these two research processes was used to develop the new arrangement method, which is the primary result of the research. The arrangement method developed can be described as the synthesis of quantitative, qualitative, descriptive and visual data generated during the study.This research was conducted in part to address the design and ergonomics research concerns of “ArıKopter” Project, the civil helicopter development and production project conducted by ROTAM (Rotorlu Hava Araçları Tasarım ve Mükemmeliyet Merkezi – Rotor Aircraft Research Center) in Istanbul Technical University. The research is based on traditional flight instrument panel systems because of the budgetary limitations of ArıKopter project. Glass-cockpits are subject for a future research. Therefore, the displays used in the research phases where obtained from the ROTAM project and the instrument panel of a Bell 407 helicopter was used because of its similarity in terms of shape and dimensions to the ArıKopter Project.In general, user-interfaces can be divided in two general groups: traditional user-interfaces and graphical user-interfaces. Traditional user-interfaces are composed from separate displays and controls whereas graphical user-interfaces are computer-based systems. In graphical user-interfaces information is displayed to the user via computer monitors. This present study is based on and limited on traditional user-interfaces. An extensive body of literature can be found on graphical-user-interfaces especially in the field of computer science and human–computer interaction. Both types of user-interfaces are largely found in various types of consumer products and systems as well as in transportation vehicles and systems. Methods based on visual analysis play an important role in the design and arrangement of user-interfaces. Visual analysis is based on direct observation of user actions in the process of use of a certain product or system. Chapanis (1965) describes visual analysis methods as a data basis to refine existing products or systems. Chapanis (1965) categorized visual analysis methods into four main groups, which are concisely summarized below. These methods have advantages as well as disadvantages.▪User-opinionsThe opinions and experiences users of a current product or system are the primary source of data about the usage of a product or system. However there is the disadvantage in which a person who uses the product for a long time may not identify its usability faults. Users may be blind to faults and errors and may be reluctant for new designs and solutions. Questions which will be directed to the user must be carefully selected.▪Activity-sampling techniquesThere are three types of activity-sampling techniques in order to observe a product or system systematically: sampling of user activities, memo-motion study, unit-basis sampling. In sampling of user activities, the researcher observes and records the user activities in pre-defined time periods (10 s, 1 min, or 30 min etc.). The recorded data can be used to calculate percentage of duration of a certain step in comparison to the whole activity. McFarland and Moseley (1954) used this technique to improve dashboard design of intercity buses. In memo-motion study very short sampling intervals, shorter than 2 s, are used to record the user activities. In this case, the user activity is electronically recorded and that can be re analyzed. In unit-basis sampling, the research is focused mainly on a single type of activity that is a part of a task which consists of different activities.▪Process-analysis techniquesAlso called functional analysis, process-analysis techniques depends on to observing and to recording each step of the work studied, and is widely used to improve and to arrange user-interfaces. There are several types of process-analysis techniques. Developed by Frank Gilbreth, flow charts are used to describe various standardized sub-steps of a certain work process. They represent the whole process of the usage of a certain product or system in the form of a diagram in which, various components of the process are represented by different geometrical forms as a coding approach. They are usually utilized to analyze different steps of a process that is investigated. The diagram is generally represented in the form of a line to represent time. Flow diagrams are similar to flow charts, but they include the space, where the interaction between the user and the machine occurs, as an additional component. The visual appearance of a flow diagram is very similar to the real picture of the interaction space where the interaction occurs.Nemeth (2004) describes flow diagrams as a class of methods (FRD-functional requirements analysis, action-information analysis, decision-action analysis, FAST-functional analysis system technique) similar to flow charts in which the location of the work is included in this research. Channell (1947) used a flow diagram technique to analyze and improve the cockpit of a multi-engine military aircraft. Using this technique they divided the cockpit in seven sub-areas. Multiple process analysis technique investigate the simultaneous work process of multiple operators or components of a particular product or system. Here, data is represented in a process chart format for each operator in a single chart called multiple flow chart. Time values are also added for each action represented in the chart. A two-pilot helicopter can be a good example of problem which can be studied using this technique. Multiple flow charts were used by Chapanis (1965) to observe and study the landing process of a R5D aircraft. Time line analysis uses time line diagrams to evaluate or assess and predict the task performance of a user of system or product as well as of a user-interface. In a time line diagram each action is shown in rectangular shapes in different sizes according to its duration. The technique can be used to predict the workload levels of a solution under development, and to analyze multi-user systems. The time line analysis technique can be used as a flow analysis tool as well as a secondary technique for refinement of a task analysis. The review of the outcomes of time line diagram will allow reorganizing tasks in order to fit the time allocated for the task (Nemeth, 2004).Link analysis techniques can be considered as a variation of flow diagram technique in which the links between the components of the diagram are expressed in statistical values. It is a quantitative method to examine and assess the relationships between the components of a man-machine system and can be used to optimize the arrangement of user-interface components. Here, the link is defined as any interaction between a user and a component or between two users or between two components. Links can be hand movements, body movements or eye-movements etc. or similar actions that constitute an interaction process.The statistical value of a link can be its value of importance or value of frequency or sometimes importance and frequency individually. In contrast to flow charts and flow diagrams, link analysis techniques are most suitable for situations in which non standardized actions occur. An interaction matrix, schematic link charts, spatial-operational sequence diagram or an improved user-interface or product design are among the outputs of link analysis.Operational Sequence Analysis (OSA) combines events, information, decisions and actions involved in the use of a product into a single diagram called operational sequence diagram to explore the functional relationships among a system's elements (Nemeth, 2004). The timeline is also included in the diagram. This technique can be utilized to develop a picture of the system under investigation. Chapanis (1996) considered OSA to be one the most powerful techniques for analyzing a system. OSA is a useful technique to generate a picture of the whole system being investigated.▪Micro-motion techniquesThese methods are generally used to observe and analyze especially hand and finger movements using video recording technology in short periods of time. These are generally repetitive movements. The process is divided into its smallest time modules called Therbligs. Simo-Charts (SImultaneous MOtion-cycle Charts) are generated from video recording of the process. Simo-Charts provide a detailed picture actions generated by of both hands and/or feet involved during the interaction process of a user-interface. By using the Simo-Chart the researcher usually tries to eliminate useless motions, redistribute the workload among hands and feet or provide additional tools to simplify the operator's task (Chapanis, 1965). On the other hand, although micro-motion techniques are suitable to analyze and improve user-interfaces, they are more suitable to conduct research on the control part of user-interfaces.Although visual analysis methods are widely used to observe, analyze and improve user-interfaces, they have some disadvantages:▪The observation can affect the behavior of the observed user;It can be difficult to reach significant results;It is important to predefine what will be observed;Some observations have high costs;It can be difficult to generalize the findings;It can be difficult to evaluate changes.Linear programming techniques, also called linear optimization, are also used in studying and improving user-interfaces where the research problem can be expressed as a mathematical equation or a mathematical model. In this technique the variables of the real problem constitute the variables of the mathematical equation or model, in order to reach the desired goal. The equation may be used to minimize or maximize or optimize a goal that can be quantified. Deininger (1958) study on the cockpit design of a C-131 aircraft, Palmiter and Elkerton (1987) research on automotive plant control panels and Pulat and Ayoub (1985) research on control panel improvements are good examples on linear programming for user-interfaces.In the field of user-centered design, various techniques were widely used to analyze and improve user-interfaces of consumer products and systems. Usage scenarios, physical models, paper prototypes, interactive prototypes and computer models are modern user-centered design techniques for user-interface studies. Sanders (1992) utilized paper prototypes to study a military loader project. Sade et al. (1998) used Wizard of Oz as an interactive prototyping method to improve an aluminum can refunding-machine. Snyder (2003) gives the Dictaphone Project as an example to user-centered design study based on the paper prototyping technique.In contrast to these approaches, Sanders and McCormick (1993) defined a two step approach in the design and organization of user-interfaces, under the title of “arrangement of components in a physical environment”. These steps are:▪General location of components, which refers to general organization of interface components according to common characteristicsSpecific arrangement of components in their general location, which refers to the specific location of interface components or, individual organization of component groups described above.They also described four principles in the generation of the two steps described above:▪The degree of importance: the most important components must be located in the same group or in most convenient locations;The degree of frequency of use: the most frequently used components must be located in the same group or in most convenient locations;The principle of functional similarity: components which refer to common functions must be located in same groups;The principle of sequence of use: in some systems where operational sequences exist, these components must be located and organized with regard to these operational sequences.As a general approach, the degree of importance and the degree of frequency of use are used in the specific arrangement of components in their general location step whereas the principles of functional similarity and sequence of use are used in the general location of components step. That approach, developed by Sanders and McCormick (1993), constituted the basis of this research and is widely used and applied in user-interface design applications for various types of products or systems.In the field of aviation most of the human factors research is government and military based. Although there is a wide interest in glass cockpits and head-mounted display systems, the issue of instrument panel arrangement has not been considered in recent studies such as AGARD (1996) reports. Most commonly used and standardized arrangement methods date back to the Second World War II and are primarily developed for fixed-wing aircraft.Early studies to design flight instrument panels and to arrange displays in aircraft cockpits began in the 1930s in Great Britain. In 1937, the Royal Air Force (RAF) conducted a research on flight instrument panel arrangements of military aircraft, which were later used during World War II, and published the results of this research. Supported with visual scanning research, this basic arrangement was refined and reached its final “T” shape. This “T” shape arrangement (Fig. 1) is still being used in contemporary fixed wing and rotary wing aircrafts (Hawkins, 2002). The need to read four flying parameters, namely attitude indicator, speed, altitude and heading, quickly and correctly resulted in the modification of this basic “T” arrangement. Gray and Flower (1943) developed a model for locating flight displays in an instrument panel. In their model all displays were grouped in a 1 m sq., square-shaped space and were located in accordance with the aircraft's left-right or up-down maneuvers. Other important research for the arrangement of flight instrument panels were conducted by McFarland (1946), Freund and Sadosky (1967), Kelley (1972), Barlett (1973), Rolfe (1976) and Wierwille (1981).Wickens (1992) developed proximity compatibility principle (PCP) for display arrangements. He proposed that displays used in the same tasks must be located in near proximity to one another, and use the same information coding techniques. Andre (1992) proposed that flight task must be the primary consideration in the grouping of flight displays rather than the frequency of use. Palmer et al. (1995) assigned four different roles to the pilot, namely the team member, the commander, the individual operator and the occupant, and described the crew deck design principles for each of these roles. They also categorized guidelines related with combinations of crew issues and flight deck features and emphasized consistency in layout where similar functions should be located at the same positions. Senol et al. (2010) used multiple criteria decision making and card sorting to redesign the instrument panel of a UH-1H helicopter.The overall shape of the flight instrument panel, which results from constraints of the flight cabin design of the aircraft, has also a great influence on the arrangement of displays. This topic is deeply studied and documented by Lehman et al. (1994), Palmer et al. (1995), Abbott (2001), Rune et al. (2008). Cockpit design methods proposed by Sexton (1988), Storey et al. (1994) and Palmer et al. (1995) are among the current approaches in the field. Additionally, display technology has an important effect over the panel arrangements. Reising and Munns (1999) categorized the technology-based display era in three major parts: mechanical era, electro-mechanical era and electro-optical era.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
