@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Discomfort of seated persons exposed to low frequency lateral and roll oscillation: Effect of backrest height

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Backrests affect the discomfort caused by frequencies of vibration less than 1.0 Hz.Any benefit depends on backrest height and the frequency and direction of vibration.A high backrest reduces discomfort caused by lower frequencies of lateral and roll.A high backrest increases discomfort caused by higher frequencies of roll.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Discomfort,Vibration,Backrest,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Backrests influence the comfort of seated people. With 21 subjects sitting with three backrest heights (no backrest, short backrest, high backrest) discomfort caused by lateral, roll, and fully roll-compensated lateral oscillation was investigated at frequencies between 0.25 and 1.0 Hz. With lateral oscillation, the short backrest reduced discomfort at frequencies less than 0.63 Hz and the high backrest reduced discomfort at frequencies less than 1.0 Hz. With roll oscillation, the high backrest reduced discomfort at frequencies less than 0.63 Hz, but increased discomfort at 1.0 Hz. With fully roll-compensated lateral oscillation, the short backrest reduced discomfort at 0.4 Hz and the high backrest reduced discomfort at 0.5 and 0.63 Hz. As predicted by current standards, a backrest can increase discomfort caused by high frequencies of vibration. However, a backrest can reduce discomfort caused by low frequencies, with the benefit depending on the frequency and direction of oscillation and backrest height.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Impressions of comfort when travelling depend on both ‘static comfort’ and ‘dynamic comfort’ (Ebe and Griffin, 2000a, 2000b). Some variables influence comfort irrespective of the motion of the environment (e.g., seat ventilation). Other variables only influence comfort in dynamic conditions (e.g., the extent to which vibration is transmitted through a seat; Griffin, 2007).The motions of the body caused by low frequency acceleration experienced in vehicles (e.g., during acceleration, braking, and cornering) depend on the characteristics of a seat backrest. With lateral oscillation at frequencies less than 3.15 Hz, movements of the head relative to the seat decrease as the height of a backrest increases to 700 mm (Brett and Griffin, 1991). At frequencies between 0.2 and 16 Hz, the transmission of vibration to the head can be increased by even a short backrest, most notably with fore-and-aft oscillation (Paddan and Griffin, 1988, 1994). Backrest inclination can influence the fore-and-aft resonance frequency of a backrest and the transmissibility of the backrest at resonance (Abdul-Jalil and Griffin, 2007). These differences are thought to arise because backrests alter the transmission of vibration to the body and the transmission of vibration through the body, by changing body posture (Paddan and Griffin, 1988, 1994).Differences in body motion with different backrest conditions may be expected to cause differences in vibration discomfort, and the effects can be expected to depend on both the frequency and the direction of the vibration. With fore-and-aft and lateral oscillation at frequencies between 2.5 and 63 Hz, contact with a backrest was found to increase discomfort relative to sitting with no backrest (Parsons et al., 1982). A backrest and four-point harness reduced discomfort caused by fore-and-aft oscillation at frequencies between 0.25 and 1.25 Hz (Wyllie and Griffin, 2009), but increased the discomfort caused by lateral, roll, and pitch oscillation at frequencies in the range 0.5–1.6 Hz (Wyllie and Griffin, 2007, 2009). So a backrest with a four-point harness, which restrains the head and the upper-body, will reduce vibration discomfort with fore-and-aft oscillation but increase vibration discomfort with lateral, roll, and pitch oscillation. With horizontal oscillation (i.e., fore-and-aft and lateral) and with rotational oscillation (i.e., roll and pitch) at low frequencies, there was greater discomfort around the head, neck and shoulders with a backrest and four-point harness than when sitting without a backrest, suggesting increased forces at these locations (Wyllie and Griffin, 2007, 2009). Lateral oscillation in the range 0.2–1.0 Hz caused less discomfort when sitting with a backrest (without a four-point harness) than when sitting without a backrest (Beard and Griffin, 2013b). This suggests the additional restraint from a four-point harness can affect the vibration discomfort caused by low frequency horizontal and rotational oscillation.Tilting a vehicle ‘into’ a turn (a technique known as ‘roll-compensation’) can reduce the magnitude of the resultant acceleration imposed on passengers (e.g. Förstberg et al., 1998). When sitting with a 550-mm high backrest and exposed to frequencies of oscillation in the range 0.2–0.5 Hz, the discomfort caused by fully roll-compensated lateral oscillation was less than the discomfort caused by either the lateral component or the roll component of the oscillation (Beard and Griffin, 2013a). At higher frequencies, discomfort increased as the frequency of oscillation increased, and at 1.0 Hz there was similar discomfort with only the roll component of the oscillation as there was with fully roll-compensated lateral oscillation. The influence of backrest height on the discomfort caused by such motions has not previously been investigated.The inclination of a backrest also affects vibration discomfort. Sitting with a semi-reclined backrest (reclined to 22.5°, 45° or 67.5°) during sinusoidal vertical oscillation at frequencies between 2 and 64 Hz tended to reduce discomfort relative to sitting with an upright backrest (i.e., 90°) or lying fully recumbent (i.e., 0°) (Paddan et al., 2012). With vertical vibration beneath a seat, as a backrest reclines the proportion of vibration normal to the backrest increases (Basri and Griffin, 2011a) and the proportion of vibration parallel to the backrest decreases (Basri and Griffin, 2011b), and there are changes to the frequency-dependence of vibration discomfort in both directions. Additionally, as a backrest reclines, less weight is supported at the seat pan, and the frequency-dependence of discomfort caused by vertical vibration at the seat pan changes (Basri and Griffin, 2012).British Standard 6841 (1987) and International Standard ISO 2631-1 (1997) suggest the use of frequency weighting Wd (with an axis multiplying factor of 0.5) for evaluating lateral vibration of a backrest and frequency weighting Wc (with an axis multiplying factor of 0.8) for evaluating fore-and-aft vibration of a backrest. The standard evaluation method implies backrest vibration will always increase discomfort (the weighted components at the seat and the backrest are summed using the root-sums-of-squares). Although this may be correct for some frequencies, it seems that the effects of backrests on vibration discomfort are complex at very low frequencies (i.e., less than 1 Hz) and that backrests have effects at frequencies lower than those currently considered in the standards (i.e., less than 0.5 Hz).Evidence suggests two alternative roles of a backrest: it may increase the transmission of vibration to the head and upper body, thereby increasing discomfort, or it may offer additional postural support to the upper body, thereby decreasing discomfort. Previous research has suggested the sitting posture, the backrest height and the backrest angle can affect the transmission of motion to the upper body and head, but the effect of these characteristics on discomfort is not fully understood.The study described in this paper was designed to determine how backrest height influences the discomfort caused by lateral oscillation, roll oscillation, and fully roll-compensated lateral oscillation at frequencies between 0.25 and 1.0 Hz. Sitting with a backrest was expected to reduce the muscular effort required to maintain an upright posture during lateral oscillation, thereby reducing discomfort (Beard and Griffin, 2013b), with the reduction dependent on the backrest height. However the increased transmission of motion to the upper body and the head with a full-height backrest was expected to increase discomfort during roll oscillation, with any detrimental effects of a backrest most notable at the highest frequencies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
