@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effects of a moisture-wicking fabric shirt on the physiological and perceptual responses during acute exercise in the heat

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We explore the impact of clothing on the thermoregulatory responses.A moisture-wicking shirt lowers core temperature during exercise in the heat.Cotton shirts have higher regain properties than moisture-wicking fabric shirts.Shirts with higher air permeability can aid in lowering core temperature.Differing shirt characteristics do not alter the perceptual responses to exercise.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clothing,Heat,Exercise,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study investigated the effects that a form fitted, moisture-wicking fabric shirt, promoted to have improved evaporative and ventilation properties, has on the physiological and perceptual responses during exercise in the heat. Ten healthy male participants completed two heat stress tests consisting of 45 min of exercise (50% VO2peak) in a hot environment (33 °C, 60% RH). One heat stress test was conducted with the participant wearing a 100% cotton short sleeved t-shirt and the other heat stress test was conducted with the participant wearing a short sleeved synthetic shirt (81% polyester and 19% elastane). Rectal temperature was significantly lower (P < 0.05) in the synthetic condition during the last 15 min of exercise. Furthermore, the synthetic polyester shirt retained less sweat (P < 0.05). As exercise duration increases, the ventilation and evaporation properties of the synthetic garment may prove beneficial in the preservation of body temperature during exercise in the heat.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Strenuous exercise in combination with environmental heat stress significantly impacts fatigue, diminishing exercise performance (Gisolf and Wenger, 1984; Gonzalez-Alonso et al., 1999; Hargreaves, 2008; Sawka et al., 2011) and increasing the risk of heat-related injury (Gonzalez-Alonso et al., 1999; Hargreaves, 2008; Periard et al., 2011). Increased cardiovascular strain resulting from hyperthermia reduces maximal cardiac output (Cheuvront et al., 2010; Gonzalez-Alonso et al., 2008; Hargreaves, 2008), mean arterial pressure (Gonzalez-Alonso and Calbet, 2003; Hargreaves, 2008), oxygen delivery (Fink et al., 1975; Gonzalez-Alonso et al., 2008), overall oxygen uptake (Cheuvront et al., 2010; Fink et al., 1975; Gonzalez-Alonso and Calbet, 2003; Periard et al., 2011) and central neuromuscular drive (Cheung and Sleivert, 2004). Therefore, optimizing tolerance in the heat through attenuating heat stress by balancing metabolic heat gain with heat loss becomes a central focus in maintaining performance and safety (Cheuvront et al., 2010). One distinct method utilized in an attempt to mitigate heat stress and improve heat tolerance is the employment of clothing with properties that positively augment heat dissipation from the exercising body to the external environment (Wendt et al., 2007).The design and fabric are principal factors that influence a garment's insulation and air permeability properties, which subsequently affect heat transfer (Woodcock, 1962). The use of clothing provides a layer of insulation and a barrier between the skin and the environment (Gavin, 2003). Wool and cotton garments have high sorption properties, causing the fabric to hold sweat, which may lead to decreased comfort and impaired heat dissipation as a result of decreased evaporation of sweat (Dai et al., 2008). Conversely, synthetic polyester garments have been suggested to improve sweat evaporation, due to increased fabric permeability, possibly leading to a lower core temperature (Gavin et al., 2001; Woodcock, 1962).Athletes have utilized clothing from athletic apparel companies who market the garments' effects on limiting heat stress by keeping the athlete cool and dry, citing improved ventilation and evaporative characteristics. However, whether these synthetic polyester garments have a significant effect on the physiological and perceptual responses during exercise in the heat still remains unclear and current research has demonstrated inconclusive evidence.A study by Gavin et al. (2001) revealed no alterations in physiological or perceptual responses during exercise of eight highly trained athletes in a warm environment with clothing conditions consisting of a short sleeved cotton and synthetic polyester shirt. The researchers suggested that the exercise intensity of 70% VO2peak for 30 min may not have been significant enough to stress the highly trained participants. As a result, the exercise intensity and duration may have failed to adequately stress the participants' thermoregulatory systems, negating any impact of clothing. In a follow-up study utilizing similar environmental and clothing conditions, Brazaitis et al. (2010) found that higher exercise intensities revealed better sweat evaporation and reduced sweat sorption in participants wearing the polyester garments. However, no differences in the two garments for any thermo-physiological or subjective comfort responses were observed.While Gavin et al. (2001) reported that their study may have been limited by an exercise intensity and duration that was too low in relation to the training level of their participants, Brazaitis et al. (2010) did not measure the aerobic capacity of their participants. This would make it difficult to assess whether the assigned absolute workload was an intense level of physical activity for all eight participants. Therefore the absolute treadmill workload of 5 mph at 1% grade may have fell short of their desired intensity range. Even with each participant performing three 20-min bouts of exercise with five minutes of rest, the physiological stress of the exercise intensity would be different for each participant and highly dependent on their aerobic capacity. This would make it problematic to elucidate clothing's impact on thermoregulation at a specific intensity of exercise. For this reason, quantifying the stress relative to an individual's physiological system would better establish equivalent exercise intensities among participants (McArdle et al., 2007).Therefore, the aim of the present is to investigated the effects that a form fitted, moisture-wicking fabric shirt, promoted to have improved evaporative and ventilation properties, has on the physiological and perceptual responses during moderate intensity exercise in the heat. To the best of our knowledge, no study has explored this in recreationally active participants using a prolonged, continuous exercise protocol that establishes exercise intensity as a percent of their current aerobic capacity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
