@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Risk factors for carpal tunnel syndrome related to the work organization: A prospective surveillance study in a large working population

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The study showed the association of CTS with some factors related to the work organization.Payment on a piecework basis was associated with increased risk of CTS.Work pace dependent on automatic rate was associated with increased risk of CTS.Work organization should be an important target for the prevention of CTS.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Carpal tunnel syndrome,Work organization,Psychosocial factors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The study aimed to determine the risk factors for incident carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) in a large working population, with a special focus on factors related to work organization. In 2002–2005, 3710 workers were assessed and, in 2007–2010, 1611 were re-examined. At baseline all completed a self-administered questionnaire about personal/medical factors and work exposure. CTS symptoms and physical examination signs were assessed by a standardized medical examination at baseline and follow-up. The risk of “symptomatic CTS” was higher for women (OR = 2.9 [1.7–5.2]) and increased linearly with age (OR = 1.04 [1.00–1.07] for 1-year increment). Two work organizational factors remained in the multivariate risk model after adjustment for the personal/medical and biomechanical factors: payment on a piecework basis (OR = 2.0, 95% CI 1.1–3.5) and work pace dependent on automatic rate (OR = 1.9, 95% CI 0.9–4.1). Several factors related to work organization were associated with incident CTS after adjustment for potential confounders.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome (CTS), which is the most common entrapment neuropathy of the upper extremity in the working populations (Hagberg et al., 2005; Roquelaure et al., 2006; Palmer et al., 2007; Dale et al., 2013), represents a major occupational health problem with high social and economic implications (Palmer et al., 2007).Several personal and medical factors can increase the risk of CTS (overweight, diabetes mellitus, thyroid disorders, rheumatoid arthritis) (Stevens et al., 1992; Atcheson et al., 1998; Becker et al., 2002; Burt et al., 2011), but the most significant are not modifiable (e.g., middle age (40–60 years) and female gender). Many biomechanical (Viikari-Juntura and Silverstein, 1999) and epidemiological studies (Roquelaure et al., 1997; Leclerc et al., 1998; Gell et al., 2005; Roquelaure et al., 2001a; Nathan et al., 2005; Armstrong et al., 2008; Shiri et al., 2009; da Costa and Vieira, 2010) support the association between CTS and occupational factors, namely mechanical exposure in the workplace. Five recent systematic reviews of the literature and a meta-analysis concluded that there is an association between CTS and work-related repetitive movements, exposure to hand–arm vibration, forceful manual exertion, bending/twisting of the wrist and combinations of these factors (Palmer et al., 2007; van Rijn et al., 2009; Barcenilla et al., 2012). Most occupational factors can be modified by preventive interventions in the workplace in contrast to most personal/medical factors. Moreover, the potential impact of such intervention might be important on the prevalence of CTS in the working population (Roquelaure et al., 2009).Despite a growing number of studies on occupational stress, the relationships between CTS and work-related psychological factors at work remain unclear (van Rijn et al., 2009; Harris-Adamson et al., 2013). Work organization factors relate to the structural task and/or organizational-level aspects of the work process (Huang et al., 2002). Lean production systems and the related new systems of work organization are thought to intensify work pace and job demand and consequently to increase the risk of musculoskeletal disorders (Landsbergis et al., 1999), because of higher exposure to repetitive movements and lack of recovery time (Koukoulaki, 2014). Although no literature review has revealed work organization as a possible determinant of CTS, some epidemiological findings suggest relationships between increased risk of CTS and the characteristics of the work process. This has been demonstrated for “just-in-time” production processes (Leclerc et al., 1998), high-paced work depending on strictly quantified targets (Rigouin et al., 2013), very short cycle time and lack of change in activity or breaks during repetitive work (Roquelaure et al., 1997). The results concerning the impact of job rotation are conflicting (Roquelaure et al., 1997; Mathiassen, 2006; Maghsoudipour et al., 2008; Wells et al., 2010; Rigouin et al., 2013).Increasing understanding of the impact of work organization on the risk of CTS is a major issue in the context of globalization of the economy, rationalization of production and flexibility of employment leading to “work intensification” (Landsbergis et al., 1999; Koukoulaki, 2014). As for the other risk factors for CTS, most results on the psychosocial and organizational risk factors have been based mainly on cross-sectional or retrospective surveys (van Rijn et al., 2009). There is therefore a need for prospective studies to confirm associations in representative samples of workers and industries. A recent large prospective study conducted in industrial and service workers focused on physical exposure and showed a dose response relationship between the hand activity level (ACGIH threshold limit values) and CTS. Recent coordinated prospective studies in US workers from various industries identified high job strain as a risk factor for CTS and social support as protective from CTS. However, they did not report any association with factors related to the characteristics of the work organization (Harris-Adamson et al., 2013).The surveillance program for upper-extremity musculoskeletal disorders (UE-MSD) implemented by the French Institute for Public Health Surveillance in the Pays de la Loire region includes information on CTS, personal/medical factors and exposure to work-related factors (i.e., biomechanical, psychosocial and work organization factors) in workers of various industry sectors and occupations. Our aim in this study was to assess the effects of personal/medical factors and work-related factors on the incidence of CTS in the working population, with a special focus on factors related to work organization.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
