@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Efficacy of a rubber outsole with a hybrid surface pattern for preventing slips on icy surfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Hybrid rubber outsole was designed to provide high slip resistance without use of protruding studs or asperities.Slip resistance of hybrid rubber sole was examined on dry and wet icy surfaces.Drag tests and gait trials were performed on dry and wet icy surfaces.Hybrid rubber sole exhibited high SCOF and DCOF values on both icy surfaces.Hybrid rubber sole showed comparable slip resistance to anti-slip winter footwear devices.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hybrid rubber sole,Slip and fall,Ice,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Conventional winter-safety footwear devices, such as crampons, can be effective in preventing slips on icy surfaces but the protruding studs can lead to other problems such as trips. A new hybrid (rough and smooth) rubber outsole was designed to provide high slip resistance without use of protruding studs or asperities. In the present study, we examined the slip resistance of the hybrid rubber outsole on both dry (−10 °C) and wet (0 °C) icy surfaces, in comparison to three conventional strap-on winter anti-slip devices: 1) metal coils (“Yaktrax Walker”), 2) gritted (sandpaper-like) straps (“Rough Grip”), and 3) crampons (“Altagrips-Lite”). Drag tests were performed to measure static (SCOF) and dynamic (DCOF) coefficients of friction, and gait trials were conducted on both level and sloped ice surfaces (16 participants). The drag-test results showed relatively high SCOF (≧0.37) and DCOF (≧0.31) values for the hybrid rubber sole, at both temperatures. The other three footwear types exhibited lower DCOF values (0.06–0.20) when compared with the hybrid rubber sole at 0 °C (p < 0.01). Slips were more frequent when wearing the metal coils, in comparison to the other footwear types, when descending a slope at −10 °C (6% of trials vs 0%; p < 0.05). There were no other significant footwear-related differences in slip frequency, distance or velocity. These results indicate that the slip-resistance of the hybrid rubber sole on icy surfaces was comparable to conventional anti-slip footwear devices. Given the likely advantages of the hybrid rubber sole (less susceptibility to tripping, better slip resistance on non-icy surfaces), this type of sole should contribute to a decrease in fall accidents; however, further research is needed to confirm its effectiveness under a wider range of test conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Slip-and-fall accidents are a major concern because of the severity and costs associated with the injuries incurred. Human factors such as gait biomechanics and extrinsic factors such as footwear influence the occurrence of slips and falls (Gao and Abeysekera, 2004). A large number of slip-and-fall accidents are experienced during the winter on icy or snow-covered surfaces (Gao et al., 2008; Grönqvist and Hirvonen, 1995). Poor grip or low friction between footwear and the underfoot surface on ice and snow is a primary risk factor; hence, winter footwear design is recognized as a key factor that requires more attention (Bentley and Haslam, 1998).The coefficient of friction (COF) between footwear and the underfoot surface is widely used as a measure of slip resistance; however, the choice of either static COF (SCOF) or dynamic COF (DCOF) as a critical frictional parameter for preventing slip-related falls is controversial (Ekkubus and Killey, 1973; Tisserand, 1985; Pilla, 2003; Yamaguchi and Hokkirigawa, 2008). One could argue that both parameters are important, with high SCOF helping to prevent slip initiation and high DCOF helping to stop the slip; therefore, both SCOF and DCOF values should be evaluated (Yamaguchi et al., 2012a). Generally, previous studies have found that DCOF values in the range of 0.2–0.4 are required to arrest slips during level walking (Grönqvist et al., 1989, 2003; Redfern and Bidanda, 1994; Strandberg, 1983). As for the safe limit of the SCOF, Nagata et al. (2009) indicated that SCOF values around 0.4 are required to prevent slips.Friction force is expressed as the sum of an adhesive term and a deformation term (Bowden and Tabor, 1950). Adhesive friction results from contact and subsequent shearing of the contact interface, whereas deformation friction occurs when hard protrusions on the bottom of the footwear (e.g. studs or asperities) “plough” through a softer support surface (e.g. ice). The frictional characteristics of icy surfaces are influenced by temperature, and melting (warm) icy surfaces are extremely slippery compared with dry (cold) icy surfaces due to the formation of a water layer (surface melt water due to localized frictional heat, rises in air temperature, etc.) which reduces adhesion friction between the footwear outsole and the icy surface (Oksanen, 1983).Many winter footwear designs and winter anti-slip devices are available and are becoming more popular. Most anti-slip devices, such as crampons (Bruce et al., 1986), are meant to work on icy surfaces under wide temperature conditions by using hard studs or steel coils that penetrate the icy surface, resulting in increased friction due to ploughing of the studs or steel coils through the ice surface. However, these types of anti-slip devices may fail to prevent slips on surfaces that are too hard to allow penetration, or may cause trips to occur when walking on uneven surfaces, e.g. due to “snagging” of the crampons on surface irregularities (Bruce et al., 1986; March and Birkett, 1997). In contrast with the anti-slip devices that rely on ploughing friction, tread rubber footwear can help to prevent slips via increases in contact area, which can increase adhesion friction when the icy surface is dry. However, if the icy surface is wet, tread rubber footwear will produce low adhesion friction if the tread pattern cannot disperse the water film from the interface between the footwear and the ice. In this situation, the frictional force is small and caused mainly by viscous shear in the water layer (Chang et al., 2001).Yamaguchi et al. (2012a) found that a rubber block with a smooth surface had low SCOF (<0.2) and high DCOF (>1.0) values on a smooth stainless-steel surface covered with a very slippery glycerol water solution, whereas a rubber block with a rough surface had high SCOF (>0.8) and low DCOF (<0.2) values on the same surface. On the basis of these findings, they developed a hybrid (rough and smooth) rubber surface. The hybrid pattern provided SCOF and DCOF values of ∼0.5 on a glycerol-lubricated surface.Subsequently, Yamaguchi et al. (2014) developed footwear with an outsole that incorporated the hybrid rubber surface pattern, as shown in Fig. 1(a). In this outsole, slip resistance was further enhanced by designing the surface pattern to increase adhesion friction by dispersing the liquid film from the contact interface, as detailed in Fig. 1(b). Gait trials on a stainless steel floor covered with a glycerol solution demonstrated that this footwear sole has superior slip resistance at both slip initiation and during sliding, and significantly decreases the risk of falling compared with conventional commercial rubber footwear used in food factories and restaurant kitchens (Yamaguchi et al., 2014).The purpose of the present study was to determine whether the hybrid rubber surface pattern sole, which relies on adhesion friction, is effective in preventing slips on dry and wet icy surfaces. Footwear incorporating the hybrid rubber sole was compared to conventional anti-slip devices, which rely on ploughing friction, by means of drag tests and gait trials. We hypothesized that the hybrid rubber sole would provide high (>0.3) static (SCOF) and dynamic (DCOF) coefficient of friction on both dry (−10 °C) and wet (0 °C) ice due to increased adhesion friction, as measured in the drag tests. We further hypothesized that the frequency and severity of slipping during the gait trials when using the hybrid rubber sole would be equivalent to, or less than, that occurring when using the conventional anti-slip devices, on both dry (−10 °C) and wet (0 °C) ice.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Our drag-test and gait-trial results obtained on wet and dry icy surfaces indicated that the hybrid rubber sole showed a slip resistance that was comparable to that of conventional winter anti-slip devices. The hybrid rubber sole exhibited relatively high SCOF (≧0.37) and DCOF (≧0.31) values on the drag test, and no significant differences in the SCOF and DCOF values were observed when the environmental temperature changed. The other three footwear devices had substantially lower DCOF values (0.06–0.20) at 0 °C compared with the hybrid rubber sole. Analysis of the frequency of slipping while walking on level and sloped icy surfaces provided no evidence that the hybrid rubber sole was any less effective than the other footwear devices in preventing slips, and in fact showed significantly fewer slips than the metal-coil device. These results suggest that the hybrid rubber sole may be a viable approach to decreasing slip-and-fall accidents on icy surfaces. In addition to providing good slip resistance on icy surfaces, the hybrid rubber outsole may have a number of advantages over anti-slip devices that rely on ploughing friction, including reduced susceptibility to tripping (Bruce et al., 1986), better slip resistance on non-icy surfaces (Yamaguchi et al., 2014), and more comfortable walking on non-slippery surfaces. On the other hand, the low-hardness rubber used in the hybrid insole may be more susceptible to wear when walking on concrete pavement or other non-slippery surfaces (Gore and Gates, 1997). Further studies are needed to confirm the effectiveness and wear resistance of the hybrid rubber sole under a wider range of test conditions.None of the authors has any conflict of interest, including specific financial interests, relationships, and/or affiliations relevant to the participant matter or materials included in this manuscript.