@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effects of sign design features on bicycle pictorial symbols for bicycling facility signs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined two different designs (inanimate symbol vs. animate symbol) on bicycle pictorial symbols.The alternative designs (animate symbol) performed better in both the preference test and the glance legibility test.The alternative designs (animate symbol) showed better conceptual compatibility for bicycling facility signs.The alternative designs (animate symbol) were more legible than the current sign (inanimate symbol).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bicycling,Preference,Glance legibility,Signs,Symbol,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The inanimate bicycle symbol has long been used to indicate the animate activity of bicycling facility signs. In contrast, either the inanimate bicycle symbol or the animate bicycle symbol has been used interchangeably for the standard pavement symbols in bike lanes. This has led to confusion among pedestrians and cyclists alike. The purpose of this study was to examine two different designs (inanimate symbol vs. animate symbol) involved in the evaluation of perceived preference and glance legibility, and investigate sign design features on bicycle pictorial symbols. Thirty-five participants compared current bicycle signs (inanimate symbols) to alternative designs (animate symbols) in a controlled laboratory setting. The results indicated that the alternative designs (animate symbols) showed better performance in both preference and glance legibility tests. Conceptual compatibility, familiarity, and perceptual affordances were found to be important factors as well.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Bicycling is one of the most popular recreational activities and is also an important method of transportation for local commuting. Compared to the use of motor vehicles, bicycling has many advantages such as low cost and significant health benefits. Importantly, bicycling also produces zero pollutants and helps reduce traffic congestion. However, increasing numbers of bikes on the road have heightened the need to make bicycling safer and more accessible. The national government's Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) has promoted various programs to increase bicycling safety and accessibility, including shared-use paths, pedestrian and bicycle information centers, and via the establishment of the National Center for Safe Routes to School. In particular, the “shared-use paths program” is expected to increase bicycling opportunities through the more than 11,000 miles of paths superimposed on railroad corridors that continue to expand across the nation (Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center, 2010).In 2009, 630 bicyclists were killed and an additional 51,000 were injured in motor vehicle traffic crashes (NHTSA, 2009). Although these numbers have decreased from a 2005 high of 786 fatalities, and given the underreporting of bicycle accidents and injuries (Elvik and Mysen, 1999), continuous efforts are required to make roadways safer for bicyclists (Paustenbach, 2009). Since bicycle-related signage plays an important role in providing traffic information, the current standards should be assessed and validated for their efficacy. Up to now, roadway signs have featured the inanimate bicycle symbol (the “riderless” bicycle) for portraying the animated and vigorous activity of bicycling. In the case of standard pavement symbols in bike lanes, both the inanimate bicycle symbol and the animate bicycle symbol (bicycle with a rider) have been used interchangeably. This variability has led to a lack of cohesion and consistency in bicycle-related signs, which could result in a failure to communicate the desired information.Traffic signs are one of the most important components of a transportation system in that they help guide, regulate and warn road users—drivers, bikers, and pedestrians—of possible hazards. Pictorial symbols have been widely used in traffic signs since they can effectively convey complex information using limited resources, for example, shape, size, and color. Moreover, as research has confirmed, pictorial symbols are more easily identifiable than words from a greater distance (Collins and Lerner, 1982), and support better performance of memory tasks compared to text (Paivio, 1986). Pictorial symbols also provide safety and risk information that is more inclusive, providing cyclists with graphical cues rather than verbal cues (Smith-Jackson et al., 2010). Similarly, well-designed pictorial symbols convey hazard information rapidly and with less mental workload on recipients (Smith-Jackson, 2006).However, pictorial symbols are not always designed to be easily understood and recognized (Collins et al., 1982; Wolff and Wogalter, 1993). In fact, pictorial symbols that are poorly designed can actually convey misleading information, resulting in frustration or even more serious consequences such as threats to safety and health (Laughery and Wogalter, 2006; Rogers et al., 2000). A number of studies of these symbols have investigated issues of comprehension and legibility, particularly with respect to the effects of various factors, e.g., driver characteristics, sign design features, cultural differences, and the ergonomic principles of the design (Ben-Bassat and Shinar, 2006; Ng and Chan, 2008; Shinar et al., 2003; Young and Wogalter, 1990).With regard to current problems in bicycle-related signs, the most critical aspect is that the pictorial symbols in use today do not always correspond to the intended message of the sign. In other words, a bicycle symbol depicting a bicycle without a rider could be interpreted in several ways depending on the symbol used and the location. While it could indeed convey the intended message—that a driver should expect to share the road with bicyclists—it could also be interpreted as a location for a bicycle parking place, or a bicycle store or repair shop. Several studies have explored the importance of context in pictorial symbol design. Bazire and Tijus (2009) proposed a framework for understanding road signs, and showed that natural categories (categories used by drivers) are not consistent with legal categories (categories defined in legal texts about driving), thus pointing to the confusion that can result from context-related issues. Wolff and Wogalter (1998) also emphasized the effect of context in the evaluation of pictorial symbol comprehension, with the primary variable being either the absence or presence of photographs depicting the probable environments where a symbol would be seen. Their study confirmed that context is important for providing important cues that result in increased comprehension. Therefore, given the rising popularity of bicycling, it is imperative to assess current bicycle pictorial symbols to ensure the efficacy of these signs.The purpose of this study was to investigate the effectiveness of sign design features that comprise bicycle pictorial symbols for bicycling facility signs. Current bicycle signs were compared to alternative designs regarding perceived preference in a controlled laboratory setting. Glance legibility was also examined. These findings are expected to provide useful information and recommendations to design more effective bicycle signs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
